

Chemistry IN BRITAIN PROFESSOR JOCELYN PEABODY!
MY FAVOURITE BOFFIN!
I PREFER TO BE CALLED A SCIENTIST, COLONEL DARE!
Front cover: Science helps Dan to save the world once again(see p 30).
(Reproduced from The best of Eagle annual 1951–59; used with permission of Fleetway 1991.)
Talking Points
The Society is not responsible for individual opinions expressed in articles and reviews or in reports of any kind.
Editorials do not necessarily express the views of the Council.
Negotiating the environmental responsibility maze
As environmental legislation has become more sophisticated, the duties laid on the chemical industry have grown more complex.
No longer is it adequate simply to maintain discharges within consent levels: now companies have to worry about environmental audits and integrated pollution control (IPC).
With the number of environmental regulations escalating, companies have naturally turned to outside services for help and advice.
The business of environmental consultancy has evolved rapidly over the past decade, with the number of UK firms involved jumping from 100 to 225 over the past couple of years alone.
The range of environmental services on offer is seemingly endless — from environmental auditing to public relations.
The range of suppliers is also wide — from public agencies through major commercial operations to one-man consultancies.
AEA Environment and Energy, based at Harwell Laboratory, is one of the UK's more well established environmental consultancies.
It offers to help companies meet the demands of new regulations and gives technical advice on how to implement pollution management in the light of IPC.
As an example of AEA's capabilities, its Environmental Safety Centre has almost 20 years' experience in all aspects of disposal and treatment of domestic, industrial and toxic wastes, as well as providing consultancy, research and technical services, including environmental audits and assessments, waste management and environmental pollution research on an international basis.
It lists BP, Shell, the Chemical Industries Association and the World Health Organisation among its many clients.
Examples of AEA's work include the environmental assessment of potential major chemical hazards from a planned industrial development for a Middle East State; environmental assessments of derelict contaminated sites and their proposed redevelopment options; and review of an environmental assessment conducted for a proposed UK chemical waste incinerator.
It has recently been involved in an international mission sent to Romania by the UN International Development Organisation to advise on pollution clean up.
This involved investigating the environmental impact of industrial activities in the Copsa Mica area of Romania, including the Carbosin carbon-black plant (motor tyre industry) and Sometra zinc smelter.
Cory Environmental offers a different type of service.
Its primary business is industrial waste collection, treatment and disposal services.
With over 15 years' experience in waste management, it can sample, analyse, treat using chemical fixation and dispose of wastes at its own treatment plant, transfer stations and landfill sites.
Cory Environmental also offers general consultancy and an emergency service.
National Environmental Testing (NET)(UK) is Cory Environmental's newly-launched environmental testing arm.
NET (UK) has acquired SAC Scientific of Dunton, South Bedfordshire, and like its US counterpart NET, which operates the largest network of 18 independent environmental testing labs and three mobile labs in the US, it hopes to expand further into the market of environmental testing.
The lab offers a range of environmental analytical and toxicology tests, particularly in the areas of water testing and pesticide and herbicide detection.
An example of the lab's work in herbicide detection involves British Rail.
Following the occurrence of triazine herbicides in ground and drinking water, British Rail — which used triazines to control weeds on railway lines — has switched to diuron, imazapyr, triclopyr and, in E Anglia, glyphosate.
The lab developed analytical methods for these compounds, so that they can be detected and quantified should they appear in ground water.
NET (UK) sees the opportunity to expand into a variety of environmental testing sectors including solid wastes, air, soil, and man-made products such as food.
The PA consulting group works in two areas — technical consulting and management consulting — with environmental services falling into both areas.
PA provides environmental impact analysis, legal representation through an associated firm of solicitors and project management.
Typical projects recently carried out by PA involve the companies BP and Fort Sterling.
PA has developed and is installing a real-time expert system to monitor the operation of BP Chemicals' butadiene plant at Grangemouth in Scotland, to provide operators with advice and priorities for corrective action.
Early warning and fault recovery functions of the system also provide a safeguard against operational crises and the risk of human error.
Fort Sterling has recently introduced toilet tissue and paper towels made from 100 per cent recycled paper.
Brand New Product Development, PA's partner in its ‘springboard’ product development service, commissioned and interpreted the positioning market research for the project and carried out the brand design concepts for Fort Sterling.
Life cycle analysis
Life cycle analysis is a cradle-to-grave study of the materials and energy used and release during a product's lifetime — including its production, use, transport and disposal.
Companies are finding that life cycle analysis is a valuable tool for measuring the environmental effects of products, but this technique is not without its critics.
The Women's Environmental Network (WEN) has recently disputed the results of two studies commissioned by Procter and Gamble, which compared the environmental impact of disposable and terry nappies, with terry nappies coming off worst (Chem.
Br. , 1991, 27, 776).
An independent consultant looked at the studies for WEN and reported flaws and a lack of objectivity in the use of raw data, statistics and language, although Procter and Gamble has refuted these allegations.
Even management consultants have found a role in environmental consulting.
In 1989 KPMG Peat Marwick set up a separate environment unit to help its clients become more aware of environmental responsibilities, problems and opportunities.
It believes that companies need to integrate environmental management with existing managemental structures and practices.
The environment unit comprises seven staff and includes specialists in environmental sciences, economics and legislation/regulation.
KPMG Peat Marwick introduced a ‘green code’ in August 1990, as part of the company's commitment to improving its own environmental performance.
Schemes include using environmentally friendly products, reducing paper consumption, recycling waste paper, using unleaded fuel in company cars and reducing energy consumption.
Although it has been difficult to achieve improved performance, Martin Houldin of KPMG's environment unit, remains confident that the initiative is progressing well.
Auditing
The firm of solicitors, Shindler, has formed an environmental law unit to help steer its clients through the maze of environmental regulations.
Shindler will carry out an environmental compliance audit, to establish how well a company is complying with existing legislation.
This audit can be extended to anticipate future legislation, to help companies avoid possible future costly litigation resulting from unforeseen environmental consequences.
Major multinational manufacturers have pioneered the field of environmental auditing.
Companies such as BP, Union Carbide, 3M and Ciba Geigy have had environmental audit programmes in place for several years.
Environmental auditing was first developed in the US in response to the increasing pressure of legislation and fear of expensive litigation.
Consequently, environmental auditing in the US has an emphasis on compliance with regulations.
A well established environmental consultancy based in the US is Ecology and Environment.
Founded in 1970, the company reported a revenue of over $80m in 1989, with environmental audits among the most rapidly growing aspects of its business.
The company has conducted audits for industrial clients, government agencies and law firms at more than 6000 sites affected by chemical, physical (asbestos), or radioactive contaminants.
Apart from environmental auditing and impact assessments the company offers other environmental services — air, water and groundwater monitoring; analytical laboratory services; hazards and risk analysis; quality assurance/quality control plans; as well as arranging public meetings and press conference for clients.
Environmental auditing is now the fastest growing management tool used by industry in Europe to solve its environmental problems.
This upsurge is reckoned by the environmental consultant Ecotec to be growing at 17 per cent a year, and to be worth 108m currently.
Environmental audits are certainly not cheap, so how can companies ensure that they are getting good value for their money?
What regulations, rules or guidelines do environmental consultants have to abide by?
One way is to check whether a consultancy has its own guidelines, aims and objectives for the audits it is offering.
Currently there are no universally accepted standards for environmental auditors to work toward, although they are beginning to be developed.
For example, the Association of Environmental Consultancies was established in 1991 by a group of 20 European environmental consultancies, in an attempt to dispel some of the uncertainties surrounding the professional standards of consulting firms.
Criteria for membership of the association — consultancies must have at least 10 members of staff, have been around for at least three years and earn most of  its income from environmental management — have understandably caused controversy.
A working party, chaired by Robin Bidwell of the consultancy Environmental Resources, sets out proposals for a scheme to provide (i) a framework within which environmental consulting groups can declare their competence for carrying out environmental auditing and (ii) a code of practice to be followed when undertaking environmental audits.
Bidwell believes that a group of about 50 consultancies will make up the final membership.
The Institute of Environmental Assessment (IEA) was set up by Dr Tim Coles, who worked for the National Rivers Authority, to act as an impartial and independent watchdog and to raise the standard of environmental impact assessments and statements, which — under European law — must be submitted to planning authorities with planning applications.
It has a structure similar to the Dutch Environmental Impact Commission.
However, the IEA is now turning its attention to environmental auditing and has launched a national Environmental Auditors Registration Board to provide professional accreditation for environmental auditors along with a set of draft criteria against which the quality of the environmental statements produced for the EC eco-audit scheme can be measured.
Companies wishing to register on the EC eco-audit scheme will have to lodge an externally verified environmental statement with a competent body and Coles is hoping the IEA could take on the role of approving accredited verifiers.
•Many environmental consultancies produce publications to help clients keep up with the fast changing world of environmental legislation and regulatory affairs issues.
For example, the solicitors firm Nicholson Graham & Jones produces an Environmental Bulletin and the consultancy Franklin, based in Washington DC, periodically publishes the Franklin Report , available on a subscription basis.
Recent topics have included updates on how European countries are handling the environmental labelling issue and proposals for a comprehensive EC labelling system.
Franklin provides services other than its report,eg life cycle energy and environmental impact; regulatory analysis, and environmental training and seminars.
Kathryn Sims
Pollution smog and blackened buildings investigated by AEA in central Romania.
Treating hazardous waste at Cory Environmental's West Thurrock plans.
Science for art's sake
Throughout history, man has always saved his best skills for the creation and protection of works of art — the objects and artifacts that are tangible proof of the intellectual, artistic and social life of our ancestors.
Over the past few decades, however, the approach to conservation and protection of our cultural heritage has changed.
New issues are being considered, such as: should preservation be done at all ?
Are the high costs and time consumption justified?
How much time can preservation win for the object — is it worth it?
There are also purist considerations: should the integrity of the original object be maintained, or may it be tampered with to display it to its best advantage?
To preserve authenticity any treatment should be reversible.
Thus conservation has become a much more difficult and demanding area, but this has been made up for by an improvement in the scientific knowledge now available to the conservator.
It is much more important to blend scientific know-how with humanistic skills to achieve the best results.
Scientific methodology is an integral part of the approach used by scientists.
Applying scientific methods to art conservation is easy for them to cope with.
However, for those who have received an arts education, such as the people who are likely to be responsible for restoration, this type of thinking must be assimilated and understood.
The lack of specialist knowledge on the part of art historians no longer justifies ignoring certain important scientific techniques given that consultants are available in universities and the chemical industry.
However, because this ‘Galilean’ mentality has not yet been fully understood and absorbed, errors can still be made and damaging operations done.
The chemical industry must take a more active role instead of just being a supplier or involved in sponsorship or patronage.
Several European countries have a rich tradition of master painters and sculptors and vast collections of works of art have undergone extensive restoration over the centuries.
However, restoration of priceless cultural objects needs the continued input of advanced technology.
Frescos
Fresco painting, one of the oldest pictorial techniques, also presents one of the most difficult restoration and preservation challenges.
This is particularly true when there is a lack of cohesion between the external plasterwork and the base material (arriccio ).
Humidity and mineral salts are the main culprits.
Another major problem is sulphation, caused by sulphurous compounds in the air —eg SO 2 produced from combustion, particularly in large cities.
Once in contact with humidity, sulphur dioxide can react with calcium carbonate in the plaster to form calcium sulphate —ie gypsum.
This crystallisation develops into what has been called ‘fresco cancer’.
The surface is physically modified, and the painting becomes practically illegible.
The greater solubility of these new crystals leads to the formation of a material which, in humid environments, softens and fixes dust and carbon particles from the air onto the surface.
This causes darkening and increases illegibility.
Coloured pigments also vary with time, especially if the fresco is not maintained under optimal conditions: white may change to brown (lead white to lead oxide) and blue may turn to green (azurite to malachite).
Increasingly sophisticated techniques have been used to solve these problems.
For example, a non-destructive technique for measuring sulphation levels of frescos was developed in the 1980s.
The study of frescos is very complex from the technical-scientific viewpoint because the painting is executed on a composite material that easily deteriorates under certain conditions.
The analysis of the fresco's condition and the restoration procedures require extreme delicacy.
Syremont, a subsidiary of the Italian chemical company Montedison, began this type of research over twenty years ago.
It undertook feasibility studies to determine the usefulness of various techniques as applied to frescos and plasterwork.
These tests included chemical examination of the pigment structure (by X-ray diffraction, X-ray fluorescence, and X-ray microprobe) and optical and morphological observations at various levels.
The important physico-chemical properties of the plasterwork were identified and both the analytical procedures and the correlations among the various parameters (thermal expansion coefficient, thermal conductivity, vapour permeability, strata adhesion, cohesiveness, strength etc ) were explained, as well as the conditions for its reinforcement and reconstruction.
Studies on a series of 15th century frescos from the Benedictine Abbey of SS Nazario e Celso in Sesia covered a wide range of deterioration problems.
The analyses that were constructed for these frescos were found to be useful in the examination of more famous works.
In the Benedictine frescos there was good adherence of the painted strata in the dry areas, scaly separation in intermediate humidity zones, lack of colour, missing pieces and evidence of previous restoration attempts.
These analyses also showed high sulphate levels.
Syremont also analysed the Masaccio, Masolino and Filippino Lippi frescos of the Cappella Branacci cycle at the Chiesa del Carmine in Florence.
This examination included an environmental analysis, measurement of sulphation, possible presence of organic residues from previous restorations and the level of cohesion of the arriccio .
Low level environmental pollution was detected —ie sulphates and nitrates.
The frescos also had high carbon levels, and these were responsible for the darkening of the paintings.
The carbon deposit was thought to come from car exhaust fumes from a large car park close to the church.
Apart from this the frescos were particularly well preserved.
One of the most important contributions that Syremont has made to art conservation is that of Leonardo da Vinci's brilliant masterpiece the Last Supper on the wall of the church of Santa Maria delle Gracie in Milan (Chem.
Br. , 1989, 25, 7).
Dutch conservation
In The Netherlands the chemical group DSM is heavily involved in art research, both on a purely scientific level — researching the techniques used by master painters from centuries ago — and also using this information to help its efforts in conservation.
DSM is currently providing scientific and financial support for a five year project concentrating mainly on the painting techniques of Rembrandt.
The project, which was started in September 1990, is tracing the sources and composition of the pigments and binding agents used by Rembrandt.
It forms part of  the so-called Rembrandt Research Project; a study stretching over several decades and encompassing the complete oeuvre of Rembrandt.
The work has proved valuable in rejecting some paintings which had been previously been attributed to Rembrandt.
Although Rembrandt signed every painting that was produced in his studios a large number were actually painted by his students.
Differences in technique were identified and paintings previously attributed to Rembrandt himself could be discounted.
The research is being done primarily in the physical and analytical chemistry department within DSM, using modern techniques such as NMR, mass spectrometry, electron probe microanalysis (SEM/EDX), electron spectroscopy for microanalysis (ESCA), HPLC, X-ray fluorescence analysis and GC.
These techniques now provide the analyst with a formidable armoury with which to attack the many scientific problems associated with art research.
Church restoration
St Servatius church in Maastricht was restored for the first time in AD 725.
Centuries of further wear and tear have now meant that a thorough restoration is needed again.
In 1981 DSM began a restoration project, costed at Dfl50m (15m).
DSM's work has two purposes: to attempt to solve some of the practical difficulties associated with successful restoration, such as dampness and the type of pigments used in the paintings; and to judge some the hypotheses put forward by art historians on their scientific merit (this is being done with the plasterwork from St Servatius).
Moisture damage is one of the major problems facing the scientists and is the major cause of interior stonework damage.
Moisture finding its way into porous stone can now cause more damage than it used to.
This is because of the original concentrations of salts (sulphates, nitrates, phosphates and chlorides) in the limestone that was frequently used as a building material.
These salt concentrations may have been increased due to air pollution and ‘salty’ mortar used during earlier restoration work.
One of the reasons for the increased moisture content is that churches such as St Servatius have been sealed tight with all cracks and openings filled in.
Thus the moisture evaporating from churchgoers condenses on the walls.
Although these factors are important they are not disastrous in themselves as long as the walls are allowed to ‘breathe’.
However, layers of paint and plaster applied to the church walls during the 19th century have sealed the walls, thus disturbing the breathing process.
The physical and analytical chemistry department at DSM has looked at the distribution and migration of salts in limestone.
Under normal conditions limestone allows aqueous salt solutions to move constantly through the stone.
However, when solubility limits are exceeded the salts crystallise out and the sharp, angular crystals undermine the basic limestone matrix causing the stone to crumble.
In St Servatius this phenomenon has meant that large areas of the interior walls have been eaten away to a depth of more than a centimetre and the paint layers on the walls are beginning to peel off.
To restore the walls to their former glory they are being completely stripped and cleaned, with the plasterwork and paintings being reapplied, now using only material that will breathe.
Adequate ventilation is also needed.
The DSM laboratory has also shed light on areas such as the composition of the plasterwork and authentic binding agents (organic compounds such as gelatin prepared from animal bones) and the pigments used in the centuries old paintings and frescos: vermilion (crimson); malachite (green); azurite (blue); or carbon (black).
X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy can detect these pigments and paints where the ‘holy eye’ is no longer able to do so.
The art historians and restorers dealing with the St Servatius restoration are pleased with the expertise DSM has brought to the project.
Although techniques such as infrared spectroscopy and atomic spectroscopy are alien in the world of art it is becoming increasingly accepted that scientists have a major role to play in art research.
Impressionism
The early 19th century saw a chemical revolution in the emergent paint industry, inspired by experiments subsidised by the French government, resulting in colours that had never been manufactured before.
The range of the artist's palette widened to include cobalt blue, ultramarine, chrome yellow and viridian green.
Inorganic chemistry in particular provided the bulk of new pigments based on chromium, cadmium, cobalt, zinc, copper and arsenic.
Pigments such as ultramarines and chrome yellows and oranges along with the invention of paint tubes encouraged the revolution of the 19th century impressionists with their vivid, colourful canvases.
Guyton de Morveau and L. J. Thénard were among the unsung heroes of 19th century painting.
For example, Thénard's research into the chemistry of cobalt revealed the possibility that an artist's pigment could be made from the metal.
Cobalt oxide was calcinated with alumina to form the binary oxide cobalt aluminate (Co.Al 2 O 3 , known to artists as cobalt blue.
Cobalt blue is a pure blue, lacking the greenish undertone of previous artists' blues like azurite, Prussian blue and indigo and it is far less expensive than the natural ultramarine, extracted from lapis lazuli, used by artists in earlier centuries.
Last year an exhibition was mounted at the National Gallery, which showed how impressionist paintings were actually made, and investigated the materials and techniques used.
The exhibition put to rest some of the myths surrounding impressionist paintings.
Impressionist painting has always been associated with spontaneity with the artist standing on a river bank, or in a field in the countryside; painting en plein air .
The laboratory at the National Gallery, under the direction of Dr Ashok Roy, used some of the most sophisticated analytical techniques available to reveal the ‘secrets’ of these great painters.
Using pigment analysis, cross-section analysis, energy dispersive X-ray microanalysis (EDX), laser microspectral analysis (LMA) and X-rays among other techniques, Dr Roy and his colleagues were able to show how these great paintings evolved, from the type of canvases used to the pigments and the painting techniques themselves.
Studies using X-ray analysis have shown that some paintings, such as Renoir's The umbrellas , were painted over a period of years, with several definite alterations and distinct stages involved in the painting.
In Monet's The Gare Saint-Lazare pigment and cross-section analyses have shown how he built up the layers and how he achieved the dark tones using the bright colours of the impressionist palette; no black was used.
Cross-section analysis involves examining minute samples of paint in cross-section under the microscope.
Samples are mounted in a block of cold setting resin and then ground and polished to reveal the edge of the sample.
The normal magnification range is 60–800x.
Pigment analysis also involves studying a cross-section under magnification, and optical examination can be backed-up by using LMA, EDX etc .
In this way modern analytical techniques are providing the basis for greater appreciation of some of the world's greatest painters.
Damaging science
Science may not always provide the answers to the problems of studying  artists' techniques, or conservation.
Recently, concern has grown that Michelangelo's ceiling of the Sistine chapel in Rome has been irreparably altered by the Vatican conservation team.
Using a solvent called AB57 — which was originally developed for cleaning marble and is a mixture of sodium and ammonium bicarbonates suspended in a cellulose gel — the conservation team has drastically altered the previously perceived tonal representations and, as one expert put it, the fresco ‘has been reduced to a smudged painting with Disney colour’.
However, others view the scheme as a success; ‘it is one of the greatest revelations of our time’.
Critics argue that the solvent was too fierce to use on such a delicate painting.
The team at the Sistine have admitted that the cleaning techniques used involving removal of the solvent gel with large amounts of water  has introduced solvent into the fabric of the fresco.
The solvent is activated by water and will remain harmless unless moisture levels build up.
If this happens the frescos could be damaged by salt formation and solvent corrosion.
Recent controversies have resulted in the hearing of a court case against the art historian Professor James Beck from Columbia University in the US, for remarks he made about recent restoration work on a famous Italian sculpture.
Beck was acquitted of criminal slander and this has far reaching consequences.
It now leaves him free to criticise other results of the massively funded but unregulated conservation industry.
One other significant point to emerge from this prosecution was the reluctance of art historians to support Beck and to call into question the techniques used to restore some of the world's most priceless art treasures.
An important lesson that has been learnt from the Beck case is that it is time for art historians to stop standing by in cowardice and make responsible evaluations of the restoration techniques used.
Only when this is done can modern scientific technology be used to its best advantage.
John Johnston
Creation of Adam (Sistine Chapel).
Before the controversial restoration.
Unconventional quality control
M. J. Gardner and A. M. Gunn of WRc, Medmenham, write : There is wide recognition of the need for quality control (QC) in analysis and the approaches to implementing such control in routine analytical work are well established.
These are based on the idea of choosing a sound (unbiased) analytical technique and establishing that the performance of the analytical system, once it is set up, meets predefined accuracy requirements.
This involved initial tests of short and longer term random error and spiking recovery.
The performance is then monitored and maintained in routine use by means of control charts.
However, some forms of analysis — those carried out infrequently or for which the determinand is especially complex or poorly defined — are not amenable to conventional approaches to analytical quality control (AQC).
Analytical work carried out as part of environmental research often falls into this category.
Analysis that is performed only occasionally or perhaps in one batch does not lend itself to the statistical interpretation underlying conventional QC systems.
Often, the determinand is such that there is no appropriate certified reference material — for example metal complexation by natural ligands or adsorbed or exchangeable pesticides — and artificial surrogates are insufficiently realistic.
Yet the accuracy requirements for research are just as stringent as those relevant to routine monitoring.
The issue of accuracy is being brought into sharper focus by the increased pressure on researchers to have their analysis done more efficiently — that is more cheaply — perhaps by contract analytical laboratories.
A good deal of thought has gone into devising various practical steps to check on the accuracy of analysis not carried out under the data user's immediate control.
These are invaluable and should be resorted to wherever applicable.
However, it is worth considering the less easily defined aspects of analysis which might contribute to the validity of results.
If we can recognise such features and foster them, we may be able to make a wiser choice in obtaining analytical data.
Imagine (or, if you are old enough, remember) a situation where there is no formal AQC.
As we have seen, this may apply for perfectly sound reasons to research where the determinand or matrix is especially exotic.
In such a situation, what factors might influence data quality?
In the absence of a formal QC system we are forced to consider informal or intuitive approaches or factors that might ensure that a failure of the analytical system is detected and thus prevent seriously erroneous data being reported.
There are three principal factors which might contribute to the success of an informal approach to AQC:
Obviously, it is essential that the analyst possesses the skill and experience to recognise a failure of the analytical system.
This entails not only familiarity with the instrumentation used and experience in application of the method but also an appreciation of the basics of analysis — calibration, control of contamination, the proper use of blanks, sample preservation etc .
The analyst ought to have sufficient time available to be able to adopt a critical approach to the task.
He or she must be free to keep a careful eye on the operation of the analytical system and the data it produces.
There must also be the motivation to take advantage of these factors.
This may be derived from purely professional considerations but, realistically, it is best reinforced by the analyst having a direct (but objective) interest in the outcome of the analysis and the interpretation of the data.
This is important because it emphasises the purpose of analysis and will imply a desired standard of accuracy to be achieved.
There is also the additional factor that the analyst who has an interest in the data will often have some idea about values expected for at least some of the samples analysed.
This may be a means by which a malfunctioning analytical system may be recognised.
Here we are on dangerous ground, though.
Just because data satisfy expectations does not mean that they are correct.
Nevertheless, wild deviations from the norm may be an indication of problems and prompt a review of the data.
To what extent are these factors likely to be present in modern analytical laboratories?
It is difficult to be sure, but we might guess that they are becoming increasingly rare.
The pressure of commercial competition for analytical business has led to the use of cheaper, less experienced staff.
It has also prompted laboratory managers to volunteer to carry out unfamiliar analyses, where the techniques involved are not well established.
The pressure on the analyst to increase productivity — to report more results — leaves little or no time to monitor the system.
This is made more difficult by the almost complete anonymity of the modern laboratory.
The sample often arrives at the point of analysis marked only with a code number.
The data are reported without any appreciation of their origin or fate.
We might draw three broad conclusions in relation to ensuring the accuracy of research data:
First, we must take care to be clear in our own minds as to the accuracy we require for our research.
We are then in a better position to take steps to see that it is achieved.
The primary consideration should be to select an analytical laboratory where there is a formal, statistically based AQC system; one that operates routinely for exactly the type of analysis we require.
Secondly, if this is not possible, we may have to rely on whatever practical measures we may be able to adopt.
As a minimum, these should always include: recovery checks in the matrix of interest, replicate determinations on some samples, use of fixed and procedural blanks and independent confirmation of calibration.
Reference materials should be used where possible as blind controls.
Finally, in situations where the conventional statistical approach cannot be applied, and provided suitable skills are available, there is a strong case for carrying out the analysis in conjunction with the research itself, rather than contracting out.
This at least will tend to improve informal quality control and provide the care and attention to the goals of the work that may be missing from contract analysis.
The answer's in the water
Water molecules are made of one hydrogen and two oxygen atoms and, apart from distilled water, countless traces of ions and salts.
It is these minerals and whether the water is hard or soft that determine the taste of beer.
Birmingham has two kinds of water.
There is the Severn Trent version, mainly from reservoirs in Wales with added fluoride and there is a hidden source underground which rolls down from the Derbyshire Peak District.
This is the stuff from which good beer is made as it is hard and has absorbed a tangy flavour.
The water soaks into the ground and becomes sucked in to a sandstone strata, which holds it like a sponge under the city.
When Aston Manor brewery pumps it out of wells about 450ft 
Reader K. E. Langford found this gem in the Birmingham Post .
‘Having studied my chemistry in the steam age’, he writes, ‘presumably I have missed out on the new ‘water’.
The cutting comes from a feature on breweries, and it seems that HO 2 has a lot to answer for: ‘although TT myself, my lab friends frequently described local beer as rodent or feline effluent.
I now realise that this strangely formulated substance with weird physical properties may have been the culprit’.
PERSPECTIVES
Autopoiesis —‘living’ micelles
Perhaps the most fundamental characteristic of a system that can be said to be ‘living’ is its ability to self-replicate.
Creating synthetic chemical structures that can reproduce themselves represents not only an intriguing intellectual challenge, but also a possible way of illuminating one of the most basic processes of a living cell.
Various chemical systems have been demonstrated over the years that can self-replicate, some in a way analogous to the replication of genetic material, using nucleotides as basic units that assemble themselves upon a template.
A team of Swiss researchers, however, has been focusing its efforts on the self-replication of closed, spherical structures by developing a so-called ‘autopoietic’ system.
The term autopoiesis was coined in the mid-1970s to characterise a ‘living’ system as a structure defined by a boundary within which occurs a series of interdependent reactions that regenerate the boundary and its components, which then assemble in the structure itself.
By this definition, autopoiesis is broader than simple ‘self-replication’, and none of the earlier systems could be classified as autopoietic.
Pascale Bachmann and colleagues, of the Institut fur Polymere in Zurich, have apparently successfully devised a series of elegant systems that would appear to fulfil the criteria of simple chemical autopoiesis.
The structures are based upon organic droplets in an aqueous medium, stabilised by a layer of surfactant, termed micelles; or water droplets stabilised in organic solvent — reverse micelles.
The first system that Bachmann's team devised (J. Am.
Chem.
Soc. , 1990, 112, 8200) is of reverse micelles: droplets of water containing dissolved lithium hydroxide, stabilised by octanoic acid sodium salt as surfactant.
The bulk solvent in which the reverse micelles exist is a mixture of isooctane and 1-octanol.
The alcohol acts as a co-surfactant, partitioning between the micelle layer and the bulk solvent.
By using quasielastic light scattering, the micellar system can be shown to contain monodisperse, spherical aggregates with an average radius of 22.7Å.
The other ingredient in the system is octanoic acid octyl ester, which acts as ‘substrate’ for the creation of new structural components.
This molecule, because of the partly polar nature of the ester bond, is present at the micellar interface, but preferentially located in the bulk solvent.
The secret of the system is a central reaction whose products are the system's constituents.
For the system to obey the rules of autopoiesis, the reaction must occur at the appropriate location at the interface between the structures and the medium.
The sequence of events is as follows.
The ester is hydrolysed, a reaction catalysed by LiOH.
Hydrolysis yields the octanoic acid salt (the surfactant) and 1-octanol (the cosurfactant).
Because the lithium hydroxide is insoluble in the organic phase, it remains within the micelle.
Thus the reaction occurs within the boundaries of the structure.
The micellar structures are dynamic and constantly colliding with one another, exchanging contents.
This ensures a homogeneous distribution of all materials among all the micelles.
Thus, with the creation of new surfactant by ester hydrolysis and the constant collision of micelles, daughter structures are produced.
The Swiss experiment used an original concentration of 50mM of the sodium salt; when equilibrium had been reached 18mM of ‘fresh’ octanoic acid salt had been produced.
Light-scattering measurements showed that the concentration of the micelles had been increased by 60 per cent.
However, because ‘newly-born’ micelles can only arise at the expense of the preexisting ones (there is a finite amount of water in the system that must be shared between all the micelles), the average radius of the micelles decreases.
Despite the imperfect fidelity of replication of the micelles — the average size decreases with time — the Swiss researchers believe that they have demonstrated the suitability of the micellar model as a simple chemical autopoietic system.
Now they have demonstrated that such systems can be modified and made more complex.
Writing in J. Am.
Chem.
Soc. (1991, 113, 8204), Bachmann and his co-researchers describe new systems of self-replicating aqueous and reverse micelles and enzymatically-driven reactions in reverse micelles.
The aqueous micelles comprising droplets of 1-octanol stabilised by octanoate (surfactant is generated upon addition of sodium permanganate, which oxidises the alcohol to give the salt), could have biological relevance, because these may have been among the first prebiotic structures able to self-replicate.
However, the reverse micellar systems are easier to manipulate.
The researchers believe that supramolecular structures such as micelles will prove particularly useful for the study of autopoietic phenomena because they allow extensive variation in structural organisation and can thus have a higher degree of functional complexity, for example being able to act as hosts to guest molecules, such as enzymes.
Simon Hadlington
Solar energy on the cheap?
A Swiss chemist has announced a new, low cost route to solar generated electricity.
After more than a decade of research (see, for instance,Chem.
Br. , 1982, 18, 775), Prof Michael Grätzel of the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Lausanne has managed to construct a photovoltaic cell out of cheap materials, and with an energy conversion efficiency that is commercially realistic (Nature , 1991, 353, 737).
Cheap solar energy conversion has been a dream of some scientists since the first oil crisis back in the late 1970s.
No more low-tech warming of domestic water supplies — these scientists were trying nothing less than to mimic the early stages of photosynthesis,it collecting solar photons and trapping their energy in an act of electronic charge separation.
The energy could then be used either to generate electricity (eg in a photoelectrochemical cell equipped with a light-sensitive semiconducting electrode) or chemicals (eg by photochemically splitting water into hydrogen and oxygen).
To a certain extent they succeeded.
 Gratzel was one of the first chemists to split water using light.
But low hydrogen yields and poisoned catalysts soon had these systems grinding to a halt.
The first photoelectrochemical cells also had low efficiencies and stopped working after a few  hours — this time due to light-induced erosion of the semiconducting electrode.
Now photoelectrochemical cells can be (expensively) protected against light corrosion and give reasonable efficiencies.
But how soon they could be made into practical (let alone commercial) devices is anybody's guess.
Through all this, it was the photovoltaic cell that set performance standards for other solar technologies to reach.
Developed during the space race for use in solar energy panels, the best photovoltaic cells can now deliver energy conversion efficiencies in excess of 25 per cent.
The reason they have not been put into wide scale use is their cost electrical power generation from current photovoltaic devices is still 10 times more expensive than from more conventional sources.
To work efficiently, photovoltaic devices depend on a precisely engineered piece of semiconducting material (eg gallium arsenide or cadmium sulphide) called a p-n junction.
When light shines on it, electrons are excited out of the material's valence band into the conduction band.
This leaves a positive ‘hole’ in the valence band.
Both excited electron and hole are charge carriers and move in opposite directions in an electric field.
If the junction is faulty in any way, the electrons and holes recombine and conductivity ceases.
Grätzel has turned this precise, and expensive, physicist's approach to solar energy conversion on its head.
As semiconducting material, he uses a thin transparent film of not particularly pure (and cheap) titanium dioxide particles, each no more than a few nanometres in size.
The particles are coated with a single molecular layer of a dye (a not particularly cheap complex of ruthenium — but since so little is used, it hardly adds to the expense).
The film has a large surface area and the dye absorbs much of the visible light shining on it.
This excites electrons in the dye, which are then pumped into the conduction band on the semiconductor electrode (so oxidising the dye).
The electrons are collected at the back of this electrode.
Meanwhile, electrons from the electrolyte replenish those lost by the dye, while a second electrode, made of conducting glass, completes the circuit.
Over 80 per cent of the incident photons are converted to electric current, which gives an overall light-to-electric energy conversion yield of up to 8 per cent.
In diffuse daylight this figure climbs to 12 per cent.
On top of this, the cell delivers large current densities (more than 12 mA cm -2 ), is highly stable and is cheap, making practical applications at last feasible.
It could be that Grätzel's attempts to harness cheap solar energy may finally have hit the jackpot.
Lionel Milgrom
Unleashing Bt's secrets
Probably the most successful ‘biopesticide’ so far is the family of Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt) toxins (see p44).
For some 30 years the toxins produced inside the Tb bacterium (δ-endotoxins) have been used in commercial insecticides.
Now plants are being genetically engineered to make Bt toxins for themselves.
The advantages of Bt toxins are obvious: not only are they natural proteins that readily degrade in the environment, but they are highly specific for crop-destroying caterpillars (Lepidoptera), flies (Diptera), or beetles and weevils (Coleoptera); they do not harm vertebrates.
But only now is a detailed understanding of the toxins' chemistry becoming possible.
Previous research has shown that the δ-endotoxins are produced as protoxins of mass 70–135 000, which forms a microcrystal approximately 1μm in size.
If this is eaten by an insect, the alkaline conditions in its gut cause the crystal to dissolve, allowing gut enzymes to cleave the protoxins and release the active toxins of mass 60–70 000. δ-Endotoxins bind specifically to receptors found on the gut cell membranes of the susceptible insects.
These cells then swell and burst, killing the insect.
New work has looked more deeply into the toxins' structure to find out how they do their job so specifically.
Jade Li from the Medical Research Council's Laboratory of Molecular Biology (LMB) at Cambridge, together with Joe Carroll and David Ellar of Cambridge University's biochemistry department, employed papain to cleave the protoxin and crystallised the active protein (the specific beetle toxin CryIIIA from the tenebrionis subspecies of Bt) for X-ray analysis.
Li carried out the X-ray work at LMB, the European Molecular Biology Laboratory outstation in Hamburg and on the Synchrotron Radiation Source at Daresbury.
This gave the group a crystal structure at a resolution of 2.5 Å.
The results (Nature , 1991, 353, 815) reveal that the wedge-shaped toxin molecule comprises three domains.
Domain I, from the N terminus (residue 61) to residue 290 is a seven helix bundle, with one central helix (α 5 ) completely surrounded by a ring of six others.
In this bundle, all the hydrophobic surfaces are hidden and the researchers surmise that this makes a water-soluble package for a hydrophobic part of the molecule, which actually creates the hole in the insect's gut.
Domain II (residues 291 to 500) consists of three β sheets, composed of four, four and three strands respectively, packed around a triangular core.
Domain III (residue 501 to the C terminus, residue 644) together with Domain I, makes up the bulky end of the wedge-shaped molecule.
Parts of the polypeptide sequence of the toxins are ‘conserved’(ie highly similar in all the toxins), while other parts differ characteristically from one toxin to another.
This sequence difference seems to correlate with their target specificity.
For instance, the toxin named CryIIA has dual specificity for Lepidoptera and Diptera, while the closely related CryIIB is specific for Lepidoptera.
Li and her coworkers have been able to locate these sequence variations (which geneticists have identified in amino acid sequences as important for target specificity) in the three-dimensional structure of the toxin, and found them to be concentrated in the β sheets of domain II.
By contrast, α 5 is highly conserved.
The mode of action of the toxin appears to be for the non-conserved sequences in Domain II to bind specifically to a glycoprotein on the target insect's gut membrane.
This triggers a conformational change of the toxin, revealing the hydrophobic core of Domain I α 5 (which is apparently the ‘business end’ of all the δ endotoxins) and causing the helices to penetrate the membrane.
This causes a pore about 10–20 Å in diameter to form.
It is these leakage channels into the gut cell walls that cause them to swell and burst the gut wall and lead to the death of the insect.
Intellectually and environmentally satisfying though these precisely targeted insecticides are, a problem has begun to emerge.
As with synthetic insecticides, natural selection can throw up a strain of resistant insects.
This has now been found with diamondback moths in Hawaii and potato beetles in Florida.
Similar reports have come from Japan, the Philippines, Thailand and Taiwan.
The problem appears to be reduced affinity of the receptor for the toxin.
The fear is that indiscriminate Bt spraying and widespread use of genetically transformed crops that make their own Bt toxin will reduce the product's effectiveness and accelerate the spread of resistant strains.
Strategies to get round the problem could include selective spraying with conventional insecticides, including two different insecticide genes in plants, or even planting ‘sacrificial’ pesticide-free crops to attract some of the susceptible insects away from the protected crop and keep them in the breeding population.
Crop rotation can also help reduce the opportunity for resistance to develop in the insect population.
A better understanding of the toxin's mode of action at the molecular level could lead to other strategies to circumvent resistance, for instance by redesigning the target-selecting region of the toxins.
Reverse micellar reaction system used; R = (CH 2 )6 CH 3 and R' = (CH 2 )7 CH 3 ; tint indicates isooctane R' — OH bulk solvent.
‘daughter’ micelles
Source: J.Am.Chem.Soc.
Ribbon diagram of Bt beetle toxin; the polypeptide is coloured in rainbow order, red at the N terminus to blue at the C terminus.
news review
The good, the bad and the ugly
The petrochemical industry's current and immediate future state is a ‘classic example of the good, the bad and the ugly’, Doug Campbell, deputy chief executive of BP Chemicals, told the Financial Times petrochemicals conference in London recently.
‘The bad is that we cannot expect sharp short term demand recovery, certainly not recovery pulled through by exports’, he explained.
‘The ugly is that we are left with an element of structural overcapacity.
The good prospect’ he added, ‘could arise if, as individuals, we felt able to resist the temptation to produce when that production does no more than fill up warehouses and to resist the temptation to chase prices down with what I can only assume is the objective of preserving a small bit of market share’.
The conference theme was the Petrochemical industry: prospects for the 1990s , and, inevitably, speakers focused on the current dire state of the industry.
Andrew Butler, president of Dow Europe, described the past 12 months as ‘a more painful phase of the business cycle, with current margins in many sectors barely covering interest costs, let alone generating any return on equity capital’.
John Akitt, vice president of Exxon Chemicals, agreed.
‘It is evident that we are once again on the downslope of one of our business cycles in our notoriously cyclical industry’.
Just as the current crisis has a distinctly familiar ring to it, so too do the solutions being offered.
Butler told delegates that cyclicality is a ‘characteristic of our industry’, but while it cannot be eliminated, it ‘surely can be better managed’, he said.
What will ultimately determine the profitability of the industry, he believes, is how well it copes with the factors affecting the bottom line: feedstock costs; overcapacity and the economic conditions.
One of the most critical problems is overcapacity, believes Butler.
The petrochemical industry has a tendency ‘to rush head-on into investing in more petrochemical plants during the ‘good times’, with wanton disregard for the impact this new capacity will have on the downside leg of the cycle’.
He went on to say that the solutions are diversification, restraint, restructuring and strategic alliances.
Self-restraint, followed by rationalisation, are necessary and healthy for the industry, he said, while joint ventures and strategic alliances will be essential to the industry's survival.
If we are to prevent the industry from repeating the mistakes of the past, we should seek ‘more imaginative investment strategies that promote the more efficient use of capital’.
Akitt was uncertain about the timing of the recovery.
Ethylene overcapacity may extend over the next 3–5 years and ‘potentially could be with us throughout the decade if many of the plants now under study phase come to fruition’.
The latest figures show that 16 new crackers are currently under construction, and at least 15–20 under serious study, according to Akitt.
Nevertheless, he added, the outlook is ‘far healthier’ than during 1982–83.
However, world economic recession in Europe and N America may drag out recovery in demand growth into 1992–93.
Additional factors influencing the industry include a shift in the balance of trade towards Asia Pacific and other traditional import markets, away from N America and W Europe, and growing environmental legislation.
Integration is the challenge for the industry in the 90s, believes Akitt.
‘Companies need to focus less on dividing their refining and chemical interests and more on capitalising on the tremendous synergies from integration’.
Some unilateral plant closures can be expected, Campbell predicted — if the crisis goes on for long or gets worse.
‘But perhaps’, he added, ‘there are, in some cases, less draconian alternatives’, such as reduced production rates and the imaginative use of temporary mothballing.
‘Further concentration of the industry is vital in the longer term’, he said, and mergers and alliances will have a part to play.
He noted that the top 15 oil companies represent about 60 per cent of the industry's turnover, while in chemicals the top 15 represent only 25 per cent.
Alliances, mergers and JVs will have a part to play in the route to concentration.
Campbell concluded that we may not see the effect of economic recovery for at least a year — perhaps not until 1993.
But, he warned, ‘when we recover from the present recession, we had better be aware than another one lurks on the horizon’.
The struggle continues
The past year has been a vexing time for most research councils finding themselves in the situation of having to reduce their volume of activity within a failing budget.
The Science and Engineering Research Council (SERC) has been no exception.
A bad public expenditure allocation in April 1991 meant that there was a potential for overspending, with the volume of activity hither than could be funded.
At the publication of its annual report SERC chairman, Sir Mark Richmond, said that even against this financial backdrop ‘90 per cent of the Council's programme remains intact…and the output has been extremely impressive’.
The general strategy was to make a 10 per cent cutback in all board activities, with the Council's highest priority being the protection of support centred on scientists and engineers in universities and polytechnics.
Sir Mark stressed that ‘SERC's first priority was its direct support by grants and studentships’.
In the past year there was a five per cent cutback in studentships, which was exacerbated by the recession.
It was initially feared that the number of grants would be cut to 50 per cent of the normal level; however, the Council was able to allocate 65 per cent.
As part of a reassessment of its priorities, SERC has had to look at the balance of its forward planning, in particular to ensure that the funding of grants can recover from necessary short-term stringencies.
The situation now is that SERC is within its spending profile.
However, there is a maldistribution of funds —ie a greater cutback in some areas — and this problem needs to be addressed.
With an improved public expenditure allocation for April 1992, the future is looking considerably better.
Sir Mark was careful to keep his feet firmly on the ground.
‘We need every penny we have got.
If we want to start new projects there will not be much money in the new expenditure.
New projects will mean having to stop old projects’.
He went on to add, ‘If we have level funding in real terms at least we have a stable situation.
However, we need reallocation’.
SERC decided earlier last year to cut its budget for neutron sources by £5m and it was announced last November that the government would be renegotiating its contribution to the neutron source at the Institut Laue-Langevin (ILL) in Grenoble, France.
(News that funding for Isis, the complementary neutron source at Rutherford Appleton Laboratories, would stay fixed until 1997 came as a great relief to scientists in the UK.)
The decision was taken as part of an initiative to cut funding of ‘big’ projects and put this money back into funding grants and studentships.
Sir Mark summed up the mood of SERC when he commented that ‘despite a difficult climate, SERC had been able to respond imaginatively to the financial situation.’
Profits slide for German three
The poor state of the German chemical industry was confirmed recently when the country's three major chemical companies announced falls in profits for the past nine months.
BASF blamed the high costs of restructuring for a 16 per cent fall in pre-tax profits for the first nine months of 1991, from DM 2336m (£1 = DM2.85) to DM 1962m.
The costs of shutting down production lines, for example, as a result of German environment protection regulations and current or anticipated levies, could not be passed on.
Sales volumes remained satisfactory at DM 35 096m, 1.2 per cent higher than in 1990.
BASF AG fared worse than last year, according to chairman Dr Juergen Strube.
Pre-tax profits fell 20.9 per cent to DM 13 100m, while turnover fell 3.8 per cent to DM 15487m, due to the transfer of the magnetic tape activities and printing system to other companies within the BASF group.
Hoechst reported a 22 per cent slide in pre-tax profits during the period to DM 1900m.
The figure was worse than expected and the company does not anticipate any improvement in the overall year results.
Turnover was 4.8 per cent higher at DM 34 800m.
Bayer fared slightly better than its rivals, turning in a 4 per cent drop in pre-tax profits during the first nine months of the year — from DM 2750m to DM 2640m.
Turnover rose 3.1 per cent to DM 32 520m, with acquisitions accounting for about two thirds of this increase.
According to the company, exchange rate factors had a favourable effect on sales, especially in the third quarter.
Sales of polymers, healthcare products and agrochemicals improved over the nine months, while sales of organic and industrial products and imaging technologies fell.
Bayer expects the current trend to have continued in Q4 of 1991.
Big plans for global resources
A $1500m ‘global initiative for the security and sustainable use of plant genetic resources’ is needed in 1993–2000 according to a new report from the Keystone Centre.
*
The money would support action at four levels: in the community to improve and preserve plant genetic resources (PGR) in the field; nationally to stimulate and support such work and run gene banks; regionally to allow collaboration across borders; and globally to set policy, mobilise and distribute funds and promote a plan of action through an intergovernmental council, with executive board, scientific and technical advisory committee and PGR trust fund.
Conserving the total estimated world collection of 4 million unique plant samples in gene banks would cost $200m pa according to the report.
Only $75m pa is spent at present and less than half the world's plants — potential sources of food, drugs or other chemicals — are in gene banks.
These costs compare to an estimated annual world seed value of $50 000m in the mid-1980s.
‘Of this, $13 billion was from farmer-saved seed, the public sector contributed $17 billion and the private sector $15 billion’ notes the report.
The seed industry is behind the initiative, says Tim Roberts, intellectual property manager for ICI Seeds.
He was one of the 41 high level individuals drawn from industry, government, international and non-governmental organisations in 22 countries by the US based Keystone Centre to produce the report.
‘We think the Keystone dialogue has the right approach, but governments must support it’, he says.
There was controversy over who should pay.
Some industry people worried they would have to, others were willing to subscribe what was reasonable but all the industry opposed a levy on traded seed.
Some of the group feared that genetic engineering and patenting of the resulting plants would threaten diversity and native varieties in the Third World.
‘While this is potentially extremely true, it is not an effect of intellectual property rights but the availability of improved uniform varieties’, says Roberts, pointing to the experience of India and Pakistan in the Green Revolution.
There, uniform high-yielding varieties were adopted in preference to more varied native ones.
Others feared the control of biotechnology and genetic engineering by large companies.
Dr Ed Dart, director of research at ICI Seeds, which has become a major international organisation since it started in 1985, plays these down.
‘Since the reforms from Third World markets are so small, it doesn't matter if they don't come, therefore we could donate these genes to the Third World’, he says, and supports a new initiative by a former deputy director of the International Wheat and Maize Centre (CIMMYT) to set up a gene brokerage between the rich and poor nations.
Whatever the disagreements, the challenge is now for governments to take genetic resources seriously enough to act.
Geoff Tansey
Interox to be split up
Laporte of the UK and Solvay of Belgium are discussing a breakup of their Interox joint venture.
The plan is for Solvay to take over the hydrogen peroxide and persalt business, with turnover of £340m pa, while Laporte takes the organic peroxides and persulphates, worth about £65m pa.
A joint statement said that ‘For Laporte, the reorganisation would provide a unique opportunity to expand its speciality chemicals activity, while at the same time continuing to reduce its involvement in the more capital intensive elements of the chemical industry’.
Solvay, a major producer of bulk inorganic chemicals as well as plastics and pharmaceuticals, would be gaining full control of the expanding hydrogen peroxide business, with its ‘green’ credentials and high margins.
The joint venture was set up in 1971, following Burmah's failed takeover bid for Laporte which had led to Solvay taking a shareholding in Laporte.
Interox has manufacturing sites in many parts of the world, with capacity currently being increased in Belgium, Spain, Thailand, the US and UK.
Interox was also planning a new 50 000 tonne pa hydrogen peroxide plant at Bernburg, the site in the former East Germany that was recently returned to Solvay.
The businesses that Laporte is acquiring are mainly in Germany.
The likely terms of the split are that Solvay will take over sole ownership of Interox, the price being Laporte's takeover of the organics and persulphates and cancellation or sale of most of Solvay's shareholding in Laporte.
New lime kiln for Rhône-Poulenc
Tony Baldry, parliamentary under-secretary of state for the environment, recently opened Rhône-Poulenc's new £4m lime-burning kiln at its Sturge Lifford site in Birmingham.
The kiln, which is the only one of its kind in the UK, will generate less dust, less noise and considerably less emissions than the previous plant.
The design of the kiln has significantly reduced the amount of energy used in the lime burning process and the combustion gases are recycled.
The Lifford site produces precipitated calcium carbonate from Derbyshire limestone, which goes into the manufacture of a wide variety of products from toothpaste to paper.
Dow invests £150m
Dow Corning plans to invest £150m over four years at its basic silicone intermediates facility in Barry, South Wales.
The expansion will more than double the plant's manufacturing capabilities, making it one of the world's largest silicone plants.
It will create about 100 new full-time jobs.
Richard Hazleton, president of Dow Corning Europe, said in a statement that the decision ‘reflects Dow Corning's optimism that the long term growth and expansion of the markets and applications for silicones is undiminished’.
results
Rhône-Poulenc announced net profits of FFr 731m (£1 = FFr 9.75) in the third quarter of 1991, compared to a loss of FFr 208m in 1990.
This increase reflected progress in the health sector — particularly Rhône-Poulenc Rorer — as well as in the speciality chemical and agrochemical divisions.
Turnover rose 7.5 per cent to FFr 62800m.
Amersham reported a 17 per cent rise in pre-tax profits during the six months ended 30 September 1991, to £8.4m, following restructuring of the group since 1990.
Turnover was £136.5m, 18 per cent higher than in the same period last year.
Courtaulds turned in pre-tax profits of £96.4m for the six months ended 30 September 1991, up from £87.1m last year.
turnover rose from £947.8m in 1990 to £968m.
Rohm and Haas announced a 14 per cent fall in net profits in Q3 of 1991 to $39.5m (£1 = $1.80), on a turnover of $672.1m ($683.6m for Q3 1990).
For the full nine months the company saw profits decline 21 per cent to $133.6m and turnover fall 2 per cent to $2104.7m.
Ares-Serono saw net profits rise 7.3 per cent to $15.8m for Q3 ending 30 September 1991, on a turnover of $169.2m ($150.9m in 1990).
During the full nine months period, pre-tax profits rose 5.8 per cent to $47.4m and turnover was up 17.7 per cent to $533.5m.
Wellcome announced pre-tax profits of $413m during the 13 months ended 31 August 1991, 28 per cent higher than in the previous year.
Turnover rose 9 per cent to £1606m, of which 77 per cent was accounted for by prescription drugs, and 13 per cent by consumer healthcare products.
Antiviral products, including Zovirax and Retrovir, accounted for 41 per cent of turnover.
Bio Research Ireland , a division of the Irish Science and Technology Agency, exceeded its targets for 1990, with actual income of IR£1.06m (£1 = IR£1.04), 64 per cent higher than in the previous year.
Revenue totalled 30 per cent of expenditure during 1990, compared to 21 per cent in 1989.
ICI announced pre-tax profits of £196m in the third quarter of 1991, 22 per cent higher than in Q3 1990.
Turnover rose 2.6 per cent to £3074m.
For the first nine months, pre-tax profits were £703m, representing a 21 per cent fall on the same period in 1990, while turnover fell 3.8 per cent to £9442m.
Pharmaceuticals had a record quarter, and profits for agrochemicals and seeds improved, while chemicals and polymers suffered from lower demand and pressure on margins.
Neste posted a 76 per cent fall in pre-tax profits to FIM 399.2m (£1 = FIM7.07) during the first eight months of 1991, compared to the same period in 1990.
Turnover rose 30 per cent to FIM 36 100m.
Quadruple first for Blackley
Hundreds of chemical manufacturing, storage and distribution sites around the world have now achieved ISO9001 certification through their national standards (BSI's BSS750 in the UK).
But ICI's Specialties Research Centre (SRC) at Blackley, Manchester, has gained a quadruple first.
It is the first stand-alone research lab to be registered to ISO9001.
It has the first analytical group to hold Good Laboratory Practice (GLP), National Measurement Accreditation Service (NAMAS) and ISO9001 certificates simultaneously.
It has the first research information and library service to be registered to ISO9001.
It provides the first example of BSI and NAMAS cooperating on a joint registration.
SRC Blackley is proud of its status as one of the powerhouses of ICI innovation, responsible for developing many new products in the past.
But as R & D general manager Alan Calder cautions, in the tough competitive world of today's ICI ‘you're only as good as your last few molecules’.
The point is that SRC's customers are the individual businesses in Specialties and other parts of the ICI group, and they can take their work elsewhere.
The way to get a high success rate, according to Calder, is to ensure close collaboration with the customer, to make sure that the project is properly defined.
New lab and old tyres for Leigh
Tony Baldry, under secretary of state for the environment, opened Leigh Environmental's new tyre recycling facility and group laboratory at its Four Ashes site near Wolverhampton.
The plant will recycle more than 40 000 tyres per week in a two stage process — shredding the tyres and then crumbling the rubber to provide the raw material for products such as carpet underlay, car mud flaps and bumpers and playground safety surfaces.
Phil Howard, project director, said that the plant had a different potential to the nearby Elm Energy project which will incinerate whole tyres to produce energy.
The Leigh plant, which uses French equipment, can cope with large lorry tyres and so will work in ‘a complementary manner’ to the Elm Energy plant.
The new purpose-designed laboratory on the site will satisfy all of Leigh's analytical needs, and its services will also be marketed to other companies and organisations.
Taken to the cleaners
Two great problems afflict the chemical industry at the moment, according to Ray Knowland, managing director of BP — the environment and the recession.
‘We're getting cleaned up…and we're getting cleaned out!’ he said.
Speaking as president of the Chemical Industries Association at its annual dinner, Knowland said that ‘much of this huge industry of ours…is in trouble.
And I'm afraid that it's all your fault!’
What is the problem?
Knowland analysed it thus: ‘Margins are eroding.
Costs are rising, even as demand for many of our products hesitates.
And most of all, new capacity keeps coming on stream.
For an industry led by the most highly educated, best qualified executives in the world, we are worse than schoolboys at passing the primary economic test!
Added to which, the world insists on greater attention to environmental performance, ‘and that means our operating and capital costs are rising every day’.
Not that he begrudged it: ‘despite our hard times, we're not quibbling about when to do it.
UK chemical industry investment on environmental protection has doubled.
From 1990 to 1992 it is running at between 20 and 25 per cent of our total investment’.
This, he said, is the expensive bit of Responsible Care.
The other part, communication, still has a long way to go.
‘It pains me that the public hold chemical company executives in no higher esteem than estate agents, lawyers or even sitting members of Parliament’.
Only by living up to Responsible Care and satisfying society's continuously growing demands can the industry improve its image.
Clearly, Knowland agreed with BP colleagues (see p 13) who have taken to lambasting the industry for its inability to plan.
‘Even as the world developed its enormous appetite for our end-products and chemical building blocks, we had this habit of building capacity faster than demand.
Like lemmings, we raced each other to leap over the cliff.
And here we are today, doing it again.
‘When times are good in chemicals, we all announce capacity increases.
We're trying, of course, to position ourselves so as to fool our competitors into delaying or cancelling their capacity increases.
Truth to tell, more often than not, we don't fool our competitors.
We only fool ourselves because — dammit — we actually go ahead and build the things!’
Ciba-Geigy sells UK site to FMC
Swiss group Ciba-Geigy is selling its flame retardant and water treatment businesses based at Trafford Park, Manchester to FMC of Chicago.
Ciba-Geigy had decided that it could ‘no longer aim towards a global position in the phosphate ester business’, according to Klaus Grundmann, head of the company's Additives Division.
FMC already sells its own range of triaryl phosphate flame retardant plasticisers under the Kronitex tradename, manufactured at Nitro, West Virginia.
Gaining the Ciba-Geigy products, which include the Reofos range and the new Reogard STG smoke suppressant, expands this range.
It will also help the US company's plans to focus on international markets and ‘position us for faster growth, particularly in Europe and the Asia/Pacific region’, said FMC chairman R. N. Burt.
The water treatment polymers will open up new markets for FMC, which at present only has a small business in this field based on commodity chemicals.
FMC has a regional office for Europe in Brussels and various sales offices and a food machinery business in the UK.
However, its only chemical manufacturing plant in the UK is a lithium chemical operation on Merseyside.
results
Akzo reported net profits of Dfl 161.5m (£1 = Dfl 3.2) in the third quarter of 1991, down from Dfl 165.8m in 1990.
Turnover fell slightly from Dfl 4142m to Dfl 4117m.
For the nine months, profits fell 5 per cent to Dfl 544.2m, while turnover fell 3 per cent to Dfl 12653m.
Pfizer reported net profits of $274.7m for the third quarter of 1991, 13 per cent higher than in the same period in 1990.
Turnover rose 8 per cent from a $1643m to $1773m (excluding the sale of the company's citric acid business in 1990, sales rose 11 per cent).
DSM turned in net profits of Dfl 117m in Q3 1991, down 38 per cent on Q3 1990, on a turnover of Dfl 2196m (Dfl 2369m).
For the nine months January to September 1991, net profits were Dfl 451m, down 33 per cent on the previous year, while turnover fell 7 per cent to Dfl 7260m.
Deterioration of market conditions and higher fixed costs were blamed for the decline.
Sabic announced a SR 1952m ($521m) net profit for the first nine months of 1991, on a turnover of SR 6391m.
Profits were virtually unchanged on the 1990 figure, although turnover had fallen 5 per cent from SR 6744m.
Hydro reported that net profits in the third quarter of 1991 were NKr 39m (£1 = NKr 11), compared with NKr 101.4m in the same period in 1990.
These results include a charge of NKr 500m to cover restructuring costs.
In the first nine months of the year, net profits were NKr 1041m (against NKr 1897m in 1990).
Unilever saw a 12 per cent rise in net profits during Q3 1991 to £325m, on a turnover of £6024m (£5783m).
For the first nine months of 1991 net profits rose 3 per cent to £857m and turnover rose 3 per cent to £1545m.
Bimec turned in net profits of £2.4m during Q3 of 1991, a rise of 78 per cent over the previous year, on a turnover of f£53.2m (£24m).
The improvement reflects Bimec's acquisitions of Dewey Waters and Co and Three Star Engineering.
BP announced pre-tax profits of £156m, on a historical cost basis, during Q3 of 1991, compared with £822m in 1990.
For the first nine months of the year profits were £409m, against £1219m in the previous year, reflecting oil price changes and therefore stock holding.
BP Chemicals showed a loss in Q3 of £20m, against a £20m profit in 1990, the result of particularly adverse UK trading conditions.
SmithKline Beecham announced a 16 per cent increase in pre-tax profits for Q3 in 1991, over the same period in 1990, to £252m.
Turnover rose 9 per cent to £1170m.
For the nine months ended 30 September 1991, profits were £735m, up 16 per cent on the previous year, and turnover rose 2 per cent to £3435m.
environment
CO 2 tax issue warms up
One of the environmental challenges facing the chemical industry today — its role in global warming — is hotting up as the European Commission's proposal for a carbon tax proceeds.
EC environment ministers recently supported the commission's proposed tax, which is designed to persuade energy-intensive sectors such as the chemical industry to curb emissions of carbon dioxide.
The move reflects growing concern about the effect on the Earth's temperature of increasing emissions of spent hydrocarbons,eg CO 2 and CH 4 .
The chemical industry, however, is opposed to a carbon tax for several reasons.
One of its primary concerns is that any regulations should not upset the competitive trade balance, for example by applying solely to one type of fuel.
As Peter Vogtlander, chemicals coordinator for the Royal Dutch/Shell group, said at the ECMRA meeting in September, ‘to introduce, say a carbon tax while still maintaining subsidies on some fuels, such as coal, is plainly inconsistent’.
A general energy tax, on the other hand, would not be desirable because it would tend to minimise fuel switching.
In addition, Vogtlander argued, CO 2 emissions are a ‘global problem’ and they should be tackled globally to be effective.
The effect of imposing taxes unilaterally rather than globally (for example, within the EC but not in the US or Japan), would mean that countries less stringent in their environmental policies may become more attractive as locations for production.
A further fear of industry is that the monies raised by carbon taxation will not be channelled into research or development of energy efficiency but will simply be used to line government coffers.
Vogtlander added, ‘any new tax should not just be a means to raise additional revenues as an easy way out for governments with budget deficits’.
EC plans for a carbon tax have been the cause of prolonged infighting within the commission and several member states as well as European industry.
The EC unveiled its plans in September and called for member states to respond.
This was followed in October by a meeting at which environmental ministers gave the go-ahead to produce a policy proposal.
The aim is to stabilise CO 2 emissions at 1990 levels by 2000, with a tax equivalent to $10 on a barrel of oil, beginning with an increase of $3 in 1993 and then a further $1 a year until 2000.
The plans include proposals for two taxes: a uniform energy tax on all non-renewable sources, and a graduated tax according to carbon content of individual fuels.
So even nuclear energy will be taxed, but not renewable sources such as windmills or burning vegetation (biomass)— a crop from which French farmers hope to profit.
Fuels that emit a large volume of CO 2 for each unit of energy produced will attract a high tax.
The proposed tax would bring carbon-rich fuels in line with natural gas, which is taxed in some countries but not others.
No EC country currently taxes coal, the most carbon-rich fuel, which also gives off SO 2 , one of the main causes of acid rain.
The commission's tax, if agreed, would raise the price of coal by 30 per cent over three years.
The commission has already promised the chemical and other energy-intensive sectors that they will be given ‘special treatment’— they will be asked to enter into voluntary agreements to cut energy consumption.
However, the deal is not likely to appease European industry.
The US, which is responsible for 23 per cent of world CO 2 , against 13 per cent from the EC, has already refused to make a similar policy commitment.
Views on environmental compliance
The House of Lords EC sub committee on the environment has been hearing evidence on the implementation and enforcement of Community environmental legislation from MEPs and the UK Department of the Environment (DoE).
Ken Collins, MEP, says that there is not much evidence to show that compliance with legislation is improving, partly because there is little information to indicate what the state of the environment actually is.
The Community, he says, depends on information from member states and has no way of checking the information that it receives.
Problems also arise in countries such as Belgium and Spain, where implementation may be carried out by national or regional government.
When asked about the possibility of a Europe-wide inspectorate, Collins advocated the setting up of an ‘inspectorate to inspect inspectorates’ in member countries.
The DoE suggested that the EC environment committee should establish a network of enforcement agencies.
Such a network, says the DoE, should be involved in data collection with a team of senior inspectors in each of the member countries.
Dr Caroline Jackson, MEP, said that the European Parliament would prefer to see an environment agency as opposed to the ‘network’ suggested by the DoE.
As regards the possibility of sanctions on member states, Collins said that the Community views financial sanctions as an important potential weapon.
Such sanctions could be implemented either by insisting that before receiving funds form the EC for a particular project the member country must ensure that the project in question complies with environmental legislation, or if a member country does not comply with environmental legislation across the board, the EC could withhold funding.
When questioned over the possibility of the EC issuing regulations (which must be followed exactly) as opposed to directives (where the result must comply, but the means by which the result is obtained is not stipulated) 0, the DoE pointed out that although there was ‘a greater certainty with regard to regulation’ it was important to bear in mind that different countries have different administration regimes and that directly applicable regulations could, therefore, cause problems.
Collins said that he was ‘not arguing for a regulation’ because it would not overcome the problems being encountered.
Jackson agreed, saying that a regulation only gave the illusion of application and that a directive ‘gives national flexibility which is very necessary’.
She added that the translation of a directive into national law gives rise to difficulties and suggested that there should be an open period for the EC and national governments to argue out any differences that arise.
Incinerator refusal
Michael Heseltine, secretary of state for the environment, has refused Leigh Environmental planning permission for its proposed £20m waste incinerator near Doncaster.
Heseltine's decision was influenced by the possible risk to public health and food contamination by emissions.
However, the primary reason for the refusal, said Tony Baldry, under secretary of state for the environment, was the fact that the site for the proposed incinerator was over the South Yorkshire aquifer.
The aquifer has no shield of impermeable clay and the proposed artificial barriers would not guarantee success.
Baldry said that the refusal has no bearing on the six other planning applications for toxic waste plants being considered by the Department of the Environment, ‘each site will be considered on its own merits’.
The government is in the process of producing extra guidelines on waste management proposals and the creation of a new national environment agency might mean a shift of responsibility for waste regulation functions.
Leigh Environmental says that it has considered the inspector's report on the Doncaster site and has ‘nothing more to say’ on the matter.
The site already has a licence for waste disposal, but Leigh says that it is now considering the future of the site.
industry
Wellcome , the pharmaceutical company, is negotiating the sale of its two remaining non-pharmaceutical businesses — its environmental health division to Roussel-Uclaf, France, and its diagnostics division to Murex Technologies, Canada.
Schering , Germany, is looking for partners for three of its divisions — natural substances, industrial chemicals and electroplating.
The partnerships will allow Schering to focus on its core pharmaceutical and agrochemical businesses.
Warwick International , the TAED products manufacturer, has spent a further 140m on its Mostyn site.
The investment increases production capacity by over 10 000 t pa.
Akeler , the waste management, property and steel group, has bought Envirocor, a specialist asbestos removal and land decontamination company based in the Midlands.
MTM has bought John Ross Chemicals , Cornwall.
The acquisition will  strengthen MTM's capability in research chemicals, reagents and specialist pharmaceutical and performance chemical products.
Brent Chemicals is raising £15.6m from a one-for-four rights issue and is using the money to buy a 75.1 per cent share in the German metals finishing chemical supplier,Hebro , for £10.2m.
Dow Europe has bought 51 per cent of the Czech chemical company, Chemicke Zavody Sokolov, and has an option to increase its share to at least 90 per cent within three years in a deal worth $100m (£50m).
CHZS produces acrylic acid and esters, acrylate latexes and hydrogen peroxide.
Du Pont is building a new Tynex nylon monofilament plant at Landgraaf, the Netherlands.
The plant is scheduled to come on stream in the spring of 1992.
Courtaulds , the speciality material company, and SNIA Fibre , Italy, have agreed to merge their acetate yarn interests into a single company, Novaceta.
Monsanto Chemical has relocated its resin division headquarters from St Louis, US, to Brussels, Belgium.
Shell UK has started up the new ethylbenzene production unit at its Stanlow manufacturing complex.
The unit, which will produce 160 000 t pa, is the first installation of the Mobil/Badger ethylbenzene process to use dilute ethylene as a feedstock.
The fibre and polymer sector of Rhône-Poulenc is investing FFr120m (£12m) in its adipic acid plant at Chalampé, France.
The money will be used to restructure workshops, improve site safety and increase environmental protection.
ICI Colours is selling a subsidiary company producing premetallised dyes for textiles to Crompton and Knowles , US.
The sale involves production facilities at Oissel, France, as well as several trademarks.
profile
Medeva — winning at double or quits
Britain's biggest manufacturer of generic pharmaceuticals was only formed two years ago and it has not yet become familiar within the business, let alone a household name.
Yet despite its breakneck evolution, Medeva has been put together in pursuit of a definite strategic plan, and it looks as though the pharmaceutical world will become very familiar with it in years to come.
The story begins in the late 1980s, with a small high-tech pharmaceutical firm — Medirace —on the campus of Brunel University.
Medirace's business was researching a range of potential anti-cancer products including Contracan.
The problem with a high-tech start-up is that you have a net cash outflow.
Medirace needed a trading vehicle to give it some cashflow to stay in business.
It bought a couple of small diagnostic manufacturers to try to do this.
But in January 1990 Medirace secured its future in a spectacular way — it carried out a reverse takeover of the much larger Evans Medical to form a new entity called Medeva.
Evans was a product of another classic 1980s business — the management buyout.
It had been a longstanding subsidiary of Glaxo, based in Speke, Liverpool, making a variety of products, mainly generic pharmaceuticals.
In the mid-1980s Glaxo put all its generic and vaccine businesses into Evans, including a former A. H. Robins site at Horsham, and subsequently allowed the management to negotiate a buyout.
Soon after Medeva was formed from these two diverse parents, Bernard Taylor joined as chairman.
He had been chief executive of Glaxo — and ironically had been responsible for selling Evans to its management.
His first task was to give the new group a strategic thrust.
The plan adopted was to focus on Medeva's strengths: vaccines, generic pharmaceuticals and sterile injectables (mainly products used in hospitals to treat severe pain), and to add a range of branded prescription products.
The latter could be marketed through the existing sales forces — those promoting vaccines to GPs and hospital sales through those dealing with the sterile injectables.
Diagnostics and the small over-the-counter (OTC) medicines would have to go.
Steve Harris, a director who joined Medeva soon after Taylor, had experience of OTC and explained to Chemistry in Britain the rationale for this decision.
To promote OTC products successfully through the high street chains nowadays, you have to have a substantial turnover (£10–15m or so) to be able to afford the TV advertising.
Medeva's OTC products were only turning over £4–4.5m including exports, so they were not viable in this cut throat business.
Generics, too, need a large base.
Evans had about 15 per cent of the UK market, but was one of five companies with equivalent market share.
Taylor and his managers decided that it had to be ‘double or quits’ if the business was to be a success.
So they negotiated a takeover of Thomas Kerfoot, a well-established supplier of generic products, which instantly gave Medeva the largest market share in the UK.
The merged generic businesses now trade as Evans-Kerfoot, with main manufacturing facilities at Bardsey Vale in Stockport.
Meanwhile, Wellcome was undergoing its own strategic review and had decided to get out of making vaccines.
Once again, Medeva stepped in, and bought the business (for £20m), thereby becoming the only commercial manufacturer of vaccines in the UK.
The Evans and Wellcome vaccines, together with sterile injectables and branded pharmaceuticals, are now traded under the Evans Medical name from Speke, where a three-year £11m investment programme is under way.
Even with delays while the Office of Fair Trading considered whether to refer these takeovers to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission (it did not in the end) the whole process had taken only until the spring of 1991.
Within about a year of the company's formation and Taylor's strategic review, Medeva had become the UK market leader in two of its four chosen fields and one of the top 10 suppliers to the NHS.
But where to go next?
The UK market is small (4 per cent of the world) and as Taylor said last year, ‘we must now look overseas for opportunities if we are to continue our vigorous growth’.
The benefits of consolidating the businesses also had to be brought through — the Horsham site is now up for sale.
Lastly, Medeva had to secure a stream of new products which, as a small company, it could not do through research but had to do by acquisition and development.
So that has been the company's three-pronged strategy in the past year.
Internationalising the business began from a small export basis (15 per cent of sales), together with continued use of Wellcome's sales force in Ireland and elsewhere as the vaccines were transferred to Medeva.
It has created a joint venture from Wellcome's vaccine business in Spain and Spanish manufacturer Llorente, making Llorente-Evans the leading supplier of vaccines in that country.
But Medeva also began a series of US acquisitions.
First (for $74.4m or £43m) came MD Pharmaceuticals, a generic drug manufacturer in California.
MD's principal product is methylphenidate, a niche drug used to treat attention deficit disorder in children (a condition that is barely recognised in the UK).
This is a schedule II controlled drug that is closely regulated by the US Drugs Enforcement Administration, but it provided 80 per cent of MD's $15.5m turnover ($8.4m profit) in 1990, so it is a profitable niche.
Later in 1991 came Adams Laboratories (at $77m), with a series of branded prescription drugs, especially for respiratory disorders, but even more importantly a sales force throughout the US.
‘Although the sales force is relatively small’, Harris said, ‘one of the things that Adams has been careful to do is to focus the activity so that it would actually compete with the majors in its field of respiratory medicine’.
Medeva can expand this sales force and use it to develop US sales of its other products.
In building up its stable of branded prescription drugs, Medeva has bought a number from SmithKline Beecham, including Dexedrine, which can be regarded as a UK equivalent of methylphenidate, and the products Normax and Micralax, which are used to treat constipation arising from use of opiates in severe pain cases.
A serious problem for Medeva is that it is too small to maintain a research programme of its own.
A small group of vaccine researchers came from Wellcome, and the company plans to rehouse these on a university campus where collaboration and access to research equipment will be possible.
This is important, because the European vaccine market is changing rapidly, and Wellcome had not put much emphasis on this area in recent years.
Medeva will have to license in vaccines to provide the full range required in the 1990s.
But in pharmacological products a pure research programme is impossible given the size of the company.
Medeva does however have a development laboratory capable of formulation, stability and analytical work, which is being expanded.
Harris, whose responsibilities include R & D, hopes that the group will allow Medeva to become involved with other companies' products in late Stage II or early Stage III trials, either through acquisition or collaboration, and bring them to market.
By comparison with its research base, Medeva's manufacturing capability is large — Evans-Kerfoot is probably the largest supplier of solid dose pharmaceuticals in the UK.
Generics may only represent 10 per cent of prescriptions by value, but 40 per cent by volume, and Evans-Kerfoot has 30 per cent of that market, not to mention its contract manufacture for other companies.
Hundreds of different products are or have been manufactured there, and the capacity and capability is impressive.
Of Medeva's 600 UK staff, a high proportion are scientists in quality control and related fields in the manufacturing operations.
Clearly, this is a major player in this branch of the pharmaceutical business.
But what happened to Contracan?
Sadly, the one product that Medirace was developing turned out to be a dud.
After two passes through the US National Cancer Institute screen it did not show enough activity to be worth developing further.
In retrospect, the company's decision to expand through acquisition seems positively inspired.
europe
Brain chemistry
Chemicals present in the working environment could have neurotoxicological effects on behaviour, memory and thinking, according to Leif Simonsen, of the Danish National Institute of Occupational Health.
In the EC Health and Safety Directorate's publication,Janus , Simonsen called for more research into such chemicals, arguing that clear international criteria and screening tests for neurotoxicity are needed.
‘There is now not the slightest doubt that a part of the increased number of cancer cases can be attributed to the effects of the many new chemicals present in the environment’, he reported.
It is also well-known that long-term exposure to certain organic solvent fumes could cause permanent brain damage, he added.
‘However, recent research into brain chemistry and physiology indicates that organic solvents and other neurotoxic substances, even at low concentrations, can have an effect on the brain in a way that corresponds to the impressions gained from the sensory organs, thus affecting the balance of biochemical processes within the nerve cells.
The effects are not produced via the sensory organs as electrical impulses, but through the blood vessels as foreign substances absorbed, for example, by inhalation.
The substances pass from the blood vessels into the cells of the brain, where they affect the delicately balanced chemical processes on which the functioning of the brain is based.
One of these functions is the recollection of impressions.
The action of the chemical substances will accordingly include leaving a permanent trace in the brain by affecting the processes of recollection’.
Simonsen continued, ‘Given that the impressions from the chemical substances are not obtained from the sensory organs, they do not have a pattern that is correlated with the environment in a logical way.
One can therefore assume that the impressions will be embedded in the brain in nonsensical recollections quite unconnected with the structure of the environment’.
Daily, repeated exposure might not become apparent until years later, in one or another form of damage to the nervous system.
‘While researchers can as yet give us no clear answers as to what this signifies’ he said, ‘it is probable that the brain will be affected by the chemical working environment as we nowadays know it in factories, office buildings with an unhealthy internal climate and polluted city air’.
Research is therefore required, believes Simonsen, not only into the impact of the working environment on brain chemistry, but also to assess the extent to which internal brain processes can modify these effects.
Such research should also consider whether there is a link between long-term exposure to low concentrations of organic solvents and other neurotoxic substances and the appearance of early senile dementia and other brain damage.
Environmental testing plans
Members of the European Parliament have endorsed EC Commission plans for an ‘immense’ programme for testing chemicals for their environmental risks — but they fear that this will lead to a proliferation of tests involving animals.
In an attempt to reassure them, EC Environment Commissioner Carlo Ripa di Meana announced at the October session of the Parliament in Strasbourg that he hopes to announce ‘soon’ firm plans for an EC centre for alternative testing — including an opening date.
He pointed to commitments by the Commission and member states to avoid unnecessary testing through agreements on mutual recognition of test results, and the Commission's support for ‘fixed dose’ testing as opposed to the LD50 approach.
Nevertheless he also reminded MEPs that there were many toxicological effects that could not be established without resorting to testing on animals.
The Commission proposed a long-term programme to evaluate the environmental risks of substances that were in use before 1981 when EC legislation ruled that all new chemicals should undergo ecotoxicological evaluation before being licensed for marketing.
Having studied the proposals on behalf of the assembly's Environment Committee, German MEP Mrs Ursula Schleicher said: ‘The problem is immense, the substances involved — approximately 100 000 — are produced in anything form massive to minute quantities, dangerous to widely varying degrees and either known to possess dangerous properties or else shrouded in mystery on that point.
Divergent estimates as to how many substances would need to be tested in more detail put the figure at between 5000 and 30 000’.
The programme will be organised in two phases, beginning with a data collection programme in which priority will be given to substances produced in quantities of over 1000 tpa.
Over a longer period, substances produced in quantities of between 10 and 1000 tpa will be covered, while substances of which less than 10 tpa are produced annually will not come within the scope of the programme for the time being.
In the second phase, evaluation tasks will be assigned to laboratories throughout the 12 member states.
Findings will be presented to an EC management committee which will produce any recommendations for action throughout the Community.
Research probity
EC requirements that research projects must involve scientists from at least two different member states to qualify for Community support may be helping to avoid errors and falsification, according to Filippo Pandolfi, the Commissioner responsible for science and research.
He was answering a question in the European Parliament on controversy in the US on the credibility of published scientific results.
A Spanish MEP who had drawn attention to the large number of programmes being financed by Brussels, queries whether Community assessment and control procedures were adequate.
Pandolfi replied that the US debate served to underline that ‘intentionally or unintentionally, false scientific results are discovered and corrected by peer discussion and review’.
The very fact that joint participation was a condition of EC support, he said, ‘creates particularly favourable conditions for ensuring that errors in the scientific works are avoided by mutual scientific control’.
Hazards agency
UK research centres studying hazards in the workplace will get the chance to bid for EC research contracts under plans unveiled by the EC Commission for a European Community agency for health and safety at work.
The Commission foresees the agency playing a key role in collecting and distributing technical, scientific and economic information already being generated by existing national organisations.
The organisation would have legal autonomy in monitoring the application of EC health and safety legislation in member states — and helping to shape future legislation.
Experience would be shared through a network, and links would be established through national organisations.
While early agreement in principle on the agency is likely, the actual launching of the agency may run into the same difficulties that have beset the European Environment Agency — this has been stalled for more than a year in an acrimonious ‘who-gets-what’ dispute over the sharing-out of the prestige, finance and jobs that flow from ‘hosting’EC institutions.
The best hope of breaking the current deadlock may lie in a threat by the European Parliament to take legal action against the Council of Ministers in the European Court of Justice.
industry
BP Chemicals has set up a trading company to pursue opportunities in international chemical trading
National Fertilizer Chemical , Saudi Arabia, part of Sabic, has started commercial production of compound and phosphate fertilisers.
Neste Thermisol , a subsidiary of Neste Chemicals, has opened a new expandable polystyrene plant in Hedensted, Denmark.
Dow Europe has started operating its new styrene-4 complex in Terneuzen, The Netherlands.
The capacity of the new plant if 450 000 tpa.
Eastman Chemical is buying the Lucky Polymers polyester plant in Hartlepool, UK, from the Thakral Group, Eastman will modify the unit to produce packaging plastics and increase capacity.
Neste North Sea has bought half of BP Exploration 's share of the Nelson Field in the North Sea.
Distillers MG and AGA Gas are building an air separation plant near Sheffield.
The 350 t per day plant will cost £20m and will be commissioned at the end of 1993.
South West Water has bought COPA Holdings for £19.5m.
COPA makes products used in the treatment of effluents and for controlling the discharges within waste water treatment works.
TSI Corporation , Massachusetts, US, has bought GDRU , UK.
GDRU is a leading provider of Phase I human clinical contract testing services in the UK.
The acquisition is TSI's first in the human clinical trials area.
Air Products , UK, is to build a 1710 tonne per day oxygen plant for the German company Messer Griesheim .
The plant, located at Duisberg, is due on stream in July 1993.
Neste Chemicals is upgrading its polyethylene production at Porvoo, Finland, by building a new low-pressure unit at the site.
The new £78m plant will have a capacity of 120 000 tonnes per annum and once the plant is on stream (early 1994) Neste plans to close some of the existing high pressure polyethylene capacity.
UCB , Belgium, has sold its stake in the BP Chemicals/UCB maleic anhydride fluid bed process technology to BP Chemicals .
BP Chemicals Nitriles and Nitrogen Division now has sole rights to the process.
Dow Chemical has started operations at its first European polycarbonate plant.
The plant, which makes Calibre polycarbonate resin, has a capacity of 36 000 tonnes pa.
Mitsui Toatsu Chemicals , Japan, and ICI Resins have set up a joint venture for the marketing and production of styrene acrylic and polyester photocopier toner resins.
The JV,Image Polymers Europe , will be based at Waalwijk, The Netherlands.
research
ACOST: internationalisation the key
The UK needs to become more international in its outlook on science and technology (S & T), and should ignore historical straitjackets, according to a strategic review by the government's Advisory Council on Science and Technology (ACOST).
Not only are problems becoming more global in nature — such as atmospheric pollution — but international collaboration can be a more effective use of national resources.
In addition, multinational companies are tending to optimise their operations worldwide, and scientists are becoming more mobile.
Because of these factors, ACOST recommends that government departments and other institutions should become more international in their outlook on S & T.
As a result, ACOST wants Britain to be more active in developing European and international collaborations, rather than coming in late.
This includes EC research programmes, the Eureka initiative, and formulating international standards, which can give competitive advantage.
The world is changing, and just because defence, nuclear energy and agricultural research have been done in certain ways in the past does not mean that that is the best way now.
‘Would you do it this way if you were starting off from scratch?’ was the question posed by ACOST chairman Sir Robin Nicholson.
He included government, companies, research councils and industry among those who ought to review whether their research was done cost effectively.
Part of the ACOST review is devoted to what it should itself be looking at.
One area that is already being studied, with a report due soon, is the overhead situation in higher education institutions (HEIs).
For the past 15 years, according to Nicholson, HEIs have been increasing the proportion of their research money coming from outside the dual support system.
But government departments, medical charities, industry and so on generally baulk at paying full overhead costs, arguing that providing the ‘well found lab’ is the job of the universities (the ministry view) or that ‘we have already paid the overheads through our taxes’(the industry view).
HEIs have been tempted to take on more research than perhaps they should have done.
This has led ‘to a fundamental mismatch between what people wanted to do and the facilities available’, said Nicholson.
The result?
Ageing, inadequate labs and equipment serving too many short term researchers.
Science and technology issues: a review by ACOST is available from HMSO, price £8.95.
Boost for Swiss science
‘Switzerland is tooling up to be part of Europe’, according to Prof Heinrich Ursprung, director of the Science Agency of the Swiss Federal Department of the Interior.
Ursprung told a joint meeting of the Royal Society and the Foundation for Science and Technology in London that the Swiss federal government has decided to reverse 17 years of neglect and give basic science a hefty financial boost.
Subject to budgetary approval, the plan ratified by both houses of the federal parliament will mean growth of 16 per cent pa in the science budget for the next four years.
For the period 1992 to 1995 the research budget will be SFr2100m (£1 = SFr 2.54) compared with SFr1200m spent in the past four years.
In addition, the cantonal universities will see their federal research subsidies increase at 11 per cent pa, from a total of SFr1700m in 1988–91 to SFr2400m in 1992–95.
The extra money is being earmarked for a number of key basic research areas that were identified by the Swiss Science Council and the professors of the research universities:
Computers.
Materials.
Environmental science.
Some areas of biotechnology.
Optoelectronics.
Power electronics.
These were chosen to fill gaps in Swiss expertise — for instance, although the country is strong in basic molecular biology, process biotechnology had been neglected.
Since these are being funded from new money (the National Science Foundation will continue to fund basic research from its existing money), the reaction of the Swiss research community has been broadly favourable to these plans for oriented research.
However, Ursprung believes that some other structural changes are needed.
He identified pharmacy, high energy physics and architecture as being over-represented in the universities.
With 800–900 of Switzerland's 2300 professors due to retire before the end of the decade, the Swiss have taken a leaf out of Britain's book and set up a scheme for appointing ‘new blood’ assistant professors at the rate of 300 in each of the next two four-year planning periods.
A third of these posts are earmarked for women, and Ursprung is confident that enough suitable candidates will be available to fill them.
He sees the new blood scheme as one way to redress the balance against over-represented subjects like particle physics.
Another theme of Switzerland's new science policy is collaboration.
Now EFTA has joined the EC to form the European Economic Area, Switzerland is a member of the EC Framework programme, and will be responsible for funding 4 per cent(about SFr100m pa) of the four-year Third Framework plan.
Ursprung is hoping that the Federal Treasury does not copy its UK counterpart and withdraw an equivalent sum from existing science to pay the bill.
Swiss researchers will be encouraged to take part in many more such collaborations.
However, federal research funding in Switzerland is small compared with industrial research spending, particularly by the chemical giants.
Ursprung warned that companies can switch sites from one country to another more easily nowadays, and researchers are increasingly mobile, so the federal government must make the country attractive to industrial research.
Switzerland is famously ‘a country whose only raw material is brains’, and it cannot afford to upset the chemical and pharmaceutical industries.
IPMS speaks out
The Institution of Professionals, Managers and Specialists (IPMS) has attacked next year's public spending plans for science, in its policy document Science in crisis — a trade union response .
Launching the document, Bill Brett, general secretary of IPMS, said ‘already the UK is being driven down the league table of industrially developed countries.
Where we should expect to match France and Germany for industrial growth, we are about to fall below the levels of Greece and Portugal’.
He went on to warn that next year's public spending plans for science will only accelerate the decline with dire consequences for Britain's ability to compete internationally.
The IPMS, which represents 75 000 scientists, engineers and technical officers, is calling for an emergency package of:
£460m extra public funding to arrest the deterioration in the UK's science infrastructure.
a halt to the reduction in science spending commissioned by government departments, down £154m since 1987.
publication of the annual funding recommendations made by the government's Advisory Board Research Councils.
diversification of the skills and facilities tied up in defence — half of Britain's publicly-funded R & D — into civil work.
fewer short term contracts, improved career developments and increased salary levels to restore morale.
Brett cited SERC's announcement that the nuclear structure facility at Daresbury is to be closed in December 1992, as evidence of the damage being done to research in the UK by underfunding.
In the long term, the report advocates a cabinet minister for science, a national science strategy and reforms to government accounting procedures which discriminate against science funding.
Pollutant report
A £1m five-year research project into the effects of atmospheric pollutants on forest and crops has suggested that pollutant gases in the atmosphere are causing damage to trees by triggering aphid attacks.
The research, co-funded by the National Environment Research Council and Central Electricity Generating Board (since privatisation by the National Power/PowerGen Joint Environmental Programme), also addressed issues such as how pollutants affect the structure and processes of plant cells, and how ozone in the lower atmosphere causes abortion of oilseed rape flowers, reduces clover in grassland and may cause premature dropping of tree leaves.
safety
Courtaulds' acetate plant
Following two incidents in 1991 at Courtaulds' acetate works at Spondon, Derby — an explosion on 13 January and a fire on 24 June 1991 — Courtaulds set up a review panel to examine the plant's site safety in manufacturing and distribution.
The panel's report, which has now been published, concludes that the process operations are not unsafe.
However, it added that whilst the higher hazard operations are recognised, the more mundane issues and the causes of minor incidents do not receive sufficient attention.
It therefore called for safety auditing and an acceleration of the initiatives already taken at Spondon, including the implementation of a safety programme within each business unit.
Courtaulds recently announced a £20m investment programme for its acetate plant in Spondon, which includes expansion and improvement of the flake plant, which transforms woodpulp into cellulose acetate flake, the raw material for yarns, filter material, film and plastics.
HSE specialist work
New areas of safety responsibility transferred to the HSE within the last 12 months have increased and influenced its specialist research work.
Total expenditure on all research and related work carried out and commissioned by the HSE during the year amounted to £32.9 million.
In-house work, which included scientific support projects as well as research, accounted for just over a quarter of the expenditure.
£17.5 million was spent on a nuclear safety research programme following the transfer of responsibility of this area from the Department of Energy to the HSC.
The Commission's responsibilities were also increased with the transfer of offshore safety from the Department of Energy and the transfer of the Railway Inspectorate into the HSE is also expected to have an influence on research activities.
This information can be found in the HSE annual report —Research and technological services 1990/91 , price £12.50, available from HMSO or booksellers.
GRP vessels
A guidance note aimed at reducing the chances of failure of glass reinforced plastic (GRP) vessels and tanks, and at minimising the consequences of such failures, has been published by the HSE.
GRP tanks and vessels are gaining in popularity, particularly in the chemical, food and drink industries.
The guidance note aims to provide advice on the advantages and limitations of GRP vessels, indicate some of the potential problems that might be encountered, outline some of the considerations to take into account and advise on precautions.
Glass reinforced plastic vessels and tanks: advice to users is available from HMSO and booksellers, price £2.50.
COSHH amendments
Schedule 1 of the Control of Substances Hazardous to the Health Regulations 1988 (COSHH) has been amended to include new maximum exposure limits for grain dust, respirable crystalline silica, nickel and chromium.
The HSC has also agreed changes to the list of substances and processes covered by the Carcinogens Approved Code of Practice which will now show two processes involving chromium, one a revision of the existing entry on bichromate manufacture, the other a new entry for electrolytic processes involving hexavalent chromium compounds.
There are also changes to COSHH Regulation 4 and Schedule 2, the main effect of which is that the use of benzene is prohibited except in industrial processes or for the purposes of research, development and analysis.
Chemical additive safety
The misuse of chemical additives can result in loss of product quality and can cause serious explosions.
The Institution of Chemical Engineers has launched a new safety training package to promote the safer use of reactive chemicals through the correct utilisation of additives.
Safer use of chemical additives — Storage and distribution of reactive chemicals explains what additives are, how they work and what may happen if they are misused, using case studies to demonstrate to trainees the implications of their actions.
Inhibitors to prevent polymerisation, stabilisers to prevent decomposition, antioxidants to prevent oxidation reaction and preservatives to prevent bacterial of fungal attack are all covered.
Explosives
The HSE has published a guidance document on the Control of explosives regulations 1991 (COER), which came into force in November last year.
The regulations, which are mainly concerned with the security of explosives, will make changes to the types and quantities of explosives that can be kept for private use without the need for a licence or registration.
Explosives used in commercial, military or leisure activities, including blasting explosives, detonators, fuses, small arms ammunition, black powder, smokeless powder, pyrotechnics and fireworks, will all be covered.
A guide to the control of explosives regulations 1991 , and The control of explosives regulations 1991 , both price £3.00, are available from HMSO.
Publications
Personal equipment .
A consultative document containing proposals for draft regulations and guidance to implement the Use of personal protective equipment at work directive has been published by the Health and Safety Commission.
The proposals could affect any industry or service occupation, and would mean that, for the first time in Britain, all types of PPE will be covered by comprehensive regulations.
Copies of the document are available from HSE,.
Handling loads .
Over a quarter of all accidents reported each year to the HSE and local authorities are associated with manual handling at work.
With this in mind, a general guide to the assessment and control of such risks has been published by the HSE.
This consultative document explains the regulations and describes the making of an assessment and the measures that may be taken to remove or reduce the risk of injury.
Copies of the document,Manual handlings of loads: proposals for regulations and guidance (ref CD36), are available free from the Sir Robert Jones Memorial Workshops,.
Management .
The Health and Safety Executive has launched the Successful health and safety management manual.
The publication details major financial losses and fatalities caused by minor events and provides a prescription for reducing these losses, which account for many millions of working days lost each year.
copies are available from HSE Public Enquiry Point .
Legislation monitor .
Health and safety monitor is a monthly newsletter that distils into 8–10 pages the essential facts about the latest statutes, regulations, directives, consultative documents, and codes of practice etc on health and safety issues.
The monitor aims to bring managers up to date with legislation and their responsibilities.
Copies are available by subscription, price £104 pa, from Health and safety monitor .
Flammable solids .
A new guide on the storage and handling of flammable solids at work has been prepared jointly by the HSE, the Home Office and the Scottish Office.
The guide is aimed at those responsible for the manufacture, supply, handling, storage or use of flammable solids in buildings such as factories and warehouses.
The booklet Assessment of fire hazards from solid materials and the precautions required for their safe storage and use , ISBN 0 11 885654 5, is available from HMSO, price £3.00.
Pesticides
The Health and Safety Commission (HSC) has produced a new Approved Code of Practice on the safe use of pesticides for nonagricultural purposes.
The code is aimed at all those involved in the use of nonagricultural pesticides, including those engaged in amenity horticulture, wood preservation, the application of anti-fouling paints, public hygiene pest control and commercial forestry.
It covers topics such as undertaking a COSHH assessment, prevention or control of exposure, use of control measures, health surveillance and information, and instruction and training for operators.
The code on the safe use of pesticides for non-agricultural purposes , price £4.00, is available from HMSO and booksellers.
Equipment
Skin protection .
Solent Diagnostics has introduced a new non greasy, non toxic, barrier cream skin protection product that will give full protection for four hours with one application.
It is invisible once applied and users retain full sense of touch and natural mobility of hands.
It provides protection against acids such as hydrochloric, citric, nitric and others, caustic sodas, petrol, disinfectants, and solvents including trichloroethylene.
Circle 153 
Personal sampler .
The AFC124 high flow personal sampler, from Casella , has a flow range of 0.5 to 2.5 l min -1 and is ideal for the collection of virtually any industrial contaminant such as dusts, fibres, fumes mists, vapours and gases.
Features include a flow fault indicator, an elapsed time indicator, automatic shutdown and a battery low indicator.
Circle 154 
Monitor .
New from Neotronics is Safe-T-Cube which enables a Neotronics personal gas monitor to become an area monitor without any change to the instrument itself.
Audible and visual warnings will attract  workers' attention over a wide area to a potential or actual hazard.
It is designed to accommodate the Exotox 60, 70 or 75 and MiniGas multi-gas monitors which give protection against up to five gases (oxygen, flammable and toxic gases) and also monitor temperature and relative humidity.
Circle 155 
Personal monitor .
The Analox protector personal hazard monitor, from Biosystems , is now available from Scottish Anglo Environmental Protection .
This range of portable gas detectors has a choice of sensors including CO, SO 2 , H 2 S, O 2 , and combustible gases.
A single pushbutton allows easy operation and gives time, peak, STEL (short term exposure limit) and TWA (time weighted averaged) modes.
Circle 156 
Coverall .
Dage has introduced an improved version of its disposable user comfort and increased protective coverall, offering enhanced protection for a variety of industrial and commercial applications.
Improvements include a re-shaped hood, manufactured using a three-piece construction to reduce strain on seams, and a re-shaped under-arm area to allow increased mobility.
Elasticated waist, wrists and ankles improve the fit and security and a new full length zip eases fitting and gives better protection against wear and liquid intrusion.
Circle 157 
Combustible gas indicator .
A new kit from MSA International can be used to detect explosive vapours in underground storage tanks prior to removal, repair or transport.
The Explosimeter Combustible Gas Indicator Kit consists of the Model 2A Explosimeter Gas Indicator and special accessories including two 10 foot lengths of sample line, a 20 inch sample probe, an aerosol type calibration test kit, two types of filters, a filter holder and a training videotape.
Circle 158 
Eyewear.
Pulsafe Safety Products has launched a new Prescription Safety Spectacle Service to benefit laboratory staff.
A turn-round time of 24 hours for 90 per cent of prescriptions is guaranteed and an extended range of frames offers a greater choice of fashionable designs and colours.
Circle 160 
awards
Natwest/BP award
Laureate Instruments has won a £1000 NatWest/BP award to help develop an invention to simplify and speed up melting point measurements in chemistry laboratories.
The new invention is called MAX 10 and will determine a melting point in an average of three minutes compared to about 15 minutes using conventional methods.
It uses an optoelectronic sensor system and a microcomputer unit that tracks the temperature accurately.
R & D 100 awards
Among the winners of last year's prestigious R & D 100 awards in the US was Bradtec for developing the ELOMIX process — an electrochemical ion exchange technique for continuously removing radioactive elements from chemical decontamination solutions used in nuclear power plants.
The process produces a much smaller volume of chemically inert radioactive waste than conventional ion exchange techniques.
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory researchers are also winners of six of the R & D 100 awards.
Their inventions include:; chromium doped lithium-strontium aluminium fluoride (Cr:LiSAF) and chromium doped lithium-calcium aluminium fluoride (Cr:LiCAF) lasers; a hard X-ray lens and a semi-insulator detector.
DSS awards
The 1991 DSS (Decision Support System) Outstanding Achievement Award has been awarded to academics from Manchester Business School for their paper Modelling strategic decision making and performance measurements in the chemical industry .
The report looked at the use of DSS to support R & D project selection over a 10 year period for ICI Pharmaceuticals.
Recycled sludge
B. Y. Yeong of ICM Chemical in Malaysia has won first prize in the utility innovation category at last year's Malaysian Invention and Design Society exhibition.
Yeong's invention is a wastewater treatment system, mainly aimed at the textile industry, which converts petroleum-based waste sludges into fertiliser.
markets
Bad news from a far country
Zaire is one of those faraway countries about which we know very little — but last year its turbulent politics caused panic in the market for one of the world's key raw materials.
Zaire is the world's largest supplier of cobalt.
In the late 1970s cobalt consumers reacted to a rebel invasion of the mining region with panic buying that sent prices rocketing — even though production was never curtailed.
Last autumn's riots against President Mobutu saw a repetition of this panic.
At one point the world's biggest cobalt producer, Gécamines, had to shut down because its Belgian expatriate managers had been evacuated.
During October the European free market price for 99.5 per cent pure cobalt, which had been £15 per lb (roughly $33 000 per tonne; £1 = $1.80)— or as low as $11 per lb for long term contracts direct with supplier — shot up to around $30 per lb.
As Chemistry in Britain went to press in December it had settled back to around $25.50–27.50 per lb.
Cobalt is a high value, low volume commodity — just over 20 000 tonnes are mined each year — but is of high strategic importance.
The US Office of Technology Assessment classified cobalt as a first tier strategic material, alongside chromium, manganese and the platinum group metals.
It was the first metal on the shopping list when the US Federal Emergency Management Agency began increasing strategic stockpiles in the early 1980s.
Soon after the Falklands War the Department of Trade and Industry began to build a small strategic stockpile of its own.
Zaire supplies about 51 per cent of the world's cobalt, followed by neighbouring Zambia (14 per cent) and the former Soviet bloc countries (15 per cent ).
Canada and Australia account for about another 10 per cent, producing cobalt as a by-product of nickel.
Cobalt's strategic uses include superalloys for jet engines (about 100 kg of cobalt per engine), and cemented carbides for specialist cutting tools.
Chemical uses include catalysts and reagents for organic reactions, pigments for paints and ceramics, and driers and bleaches in coatings.
Cobalt compounds are also used in semi-conductor manufacture and to coat storage battery electrodes.
A major use is in making permanent magnets.
Give time, cobalt users could develop ways to recycle cobalt from superalloy scrap (little of this is done because of the industry's strict purity specifications).
If prices remained high for a number of years it would become economic to develop marginal deposits in other parts of the world, such as Indonesia, New Guinea, New Caledonia, Peru and the US.
However, until then users would either have to bear the increased cost or find replacement materials.
Manufacturers have been particularly active in finding new permanent magnets, spurred both by the cobalt crisis in the late 1970s and by the need to reduce the weight of the materials — dozens of magnets are hidden away in cars, electronic devices, computer disc drives etc .
Alnico, the workhorse nickel-cobalt-iron magnet, was first launched in the 1930s, followed by samarium-cobalt in the 1960s, which allowed greater miniaturisation of electronics.
Ferrite, the low-cost non-cobalt material made of ferric oxide and barium or strontium carbonate, was launched in the 1950s.
Matsushita began work on cobalt-free magnets in 1968 and came up with a manganese-aluminium-carbon material in 1979.
This was followed by neodymium-iron-boron from General Motors and Sumitomo in 1983.
According to Magnet Applications, the Berkhamsted-based Cookson subsidiary, the number of magnets used in cars has risen from a handful 20 years ago to about 80 now, rising to perhaps 200 in a couple of years' time as automatic windows and sunroofs etc become more widespread.
Last year Cookson announced a new bonded rare earth ceramic magnet (Bremag) offering greater power-to-weight ratios and lower cost than equivalent Sm-Co materials.
The instability of Zaire, now going through its third major political upheaval in the three decades since independence, will probably encourage this kind of research into substitute materials to reduce the western world's dependence on this critical metal.
Recovering plastics
The Plastics Waste Management Institute (PWMI) of the Association of Plastics Manufacturers in Europe recently set out to discover how much plastic is consumer in Europe and where it ends up.
Its report shows that some 26m tonnes of plastics (excluding textile fibres) are consumed annually in Western Europe, with the EC accounting for about 23m tonnes.
This would be an enormous waste management headache if all of this went into ‘throwaway’ products, but luckily this is not the case: although packaging is the biggest single consuming sector, accounting for 33 per cent, construction materials take out 20 per cent of the total.
Medium term uses such as electronics (10 per cent) and cars (7 per cent ) take up a proportion, while other consumer durables and mechanical engineering uses are included in the 25 per cent going to ‘other sectors’.
PWMI has studies these sectors to work out the average lifetime for the material in the market.
This comes out at less than 2 years for food packaging, 2–10 years for many domestic articles, cars etc , and over 10 years for construction materials and household fittings and appliances.
PWMI has looked in detail at different sectors to estimate how much is entering the waste stream and is thus potentially recoverable.
The amount that is actually being re-used is perhaps rather larger than the public realises: PWMI estimates that 7.6 per cent of the EC's total plastic waste of 10.7m tonnes is recycled, while the calorific value of a further 12.8 per cent is recovered by using waste as fuel.
Thus 20 per cent or more of plastics are reclaimed in one form or another.
PWMI comments that plastics from municipal solid waste would be more easily recovered if they were segregated prior to collection.
Pharmaceutical intermediates
Frost & Sullivan's new report on the US market for key pharmaceutical intermediates studies the complexity of the pharmaceutical industry.
Who does the production, and where, varies considerably.
Some ingredients may be produced under contract by another chemical company, some may be purchased on the open market, and often companies produce in-house in another country for compounding in the US.
All the major multinational companies have facilities in Western Europe, due to the ability, in most cases, to introduce the new drugs in the European market far sooner than the American market.
The US market for key pharmaceutical intermediates (A2431)is available from Customer Service, Frost & Sullivan,.
Research biochemicals
Pan-European sales of research biochemicals had reached an estimated $536.4m by the end of 1990 with over a third of sales made in Germany, where the market is forecast to climb to $319m by the close of 1996.
These are the findings of a new report from Frost & Sullivan.
Although the major national markets covered by the report are expected to change little during the years up to 1996, the impact of the Swiss healthcare industries will be seen and Switzerland will become a leading market, forecast to be worth $116m by 1996.
The report suggests that Europe's universities, which were the venues for the bulk of research biochemical use in 1990, will find that this will decline due to limited funding and greater emphasis on teaching.
Academic research will become more concentrated in institutes and growth will also be seen in the industrial sector.
The report is available, price $3850, from Customer Service, Frost & Sullivan .
Fluid glues
A new sector analysis by Precepta shows that the adhesive and sealant sector is in a fluid state of transition.
The report points out that the sector is highly diversified: worldwide, the 10 largest companies only account for one third of production, while in Europe a large number of small and medium sized firms operate alongside 15 or so multinationals.
The sector's growth — faster than the economy in general in recent years — and the relatively low entry costs for new manufacturers have contributed to this situation.
Niche marketing and tight product-market pairings have also helped.
However, the sector faces two major constraints in Europe.
First is the manufacturers' close dependence both on their upstream suppliers (being part of a vertically integrated chemical group is a competitive advantage) and on their downstream customers who call the tune.
Second, there is growing environmental pressure, particularly on organic solvents.
The first constraint is likely to lead to more takeovers within the fragmented sector, while customer power and the environmental imperative together will require companies to innovate.
Details of Adhesives and sealants in Europe from Precepta .
Unsaturated polyesters
A new report has been published by IAL Consultants on the European market for unsaturated polyesters.
It suggests that the market will continue to show growth of 2.9 per cent pa over the next five years despite the major question mark over recyclability and solvent emissions.
The fastest growth will occur in the electrical sector, with overall rates of 7 per cent pa, but uncertainty over recycling will damage prospects for the automotive polyesters — annual growth is forecast to be as low as 2 per cent for cars and 1.7 per cent for commercial vehicles.
According to the study the European market totalled 480 000 tonnes in 1990, accounting for 34 per cent of world consumption.
However, Europe's per capita consumption is still less than half that of the US or Japan, showing that there is still considerable scope for further growth.
Details from John Marcantonio, IAL Consultants .
new on the market
Labex
Completing our coverage of the Laboratory exhibition, held at Earls Court in November, below are some further items of equipment launched at the exhibition.
New instruments and software packages from Perkin Elmer included the System 2000, a new concept in FT-IR spectroscopy, designed to meet the changing requirements of analytical and research chemists.
Also the 1020 LC Plus Controller, providing single-point control of an LC system at the local level, with real-time display of chromatograms and system status; the Model LS-50B luminescence spectrometer offering high sensitivity and selectivity in the measurement of fluorescence, phosphorescence, bio and chemiluminescence; and the Harwell Matchfinder for chromatographic pattern recognition or fingerprinting.
Circle 121 
A new high-grade fluorescence spectrophotometer from Hitachi Scientific Instruments made its first appearance.
The F-4500 has a scan speed of 30 000 nm per minute and a slew rate of 60 000 nm per minute, thus accelerating the acquisition of data for many applications including three-dimensional measurements.
Circle 122 
GBC Scientific Equipment demonstrated its GBC 950 series of ICP optical emission spectrophotometers.
They are fully computer controlled, from plasma ignition to results printout.
Circle 123 
LOT-Oriel launched the Zeiss MCS series of diode array spectrometers.
They cover the wavelength range 200–1010nm and interchangeable spectrometer modules cover any wavelength span of 420nm throughout the full spectral range.
Circle 124 
The Monarch, the Ensign II and the Sentinel, from Rodwell Scientific , are all space saving, top loading autoclaves designed for sterilising the wash-up area.
They provide chamber capacities from 50–125 litres with large stainless steel chambers in relation to their footprint.
Circle 125 
Jasco launched its new LC-900 range of the HPLC pumps and detectors.
The UV-975 variable wavelength detector has a tapered flow cell giving reduced refractive index effects.
The PU-980 intelligent pump has built-in system controller functions for complex ternary low pressure and binary high pressure gradients.
Circle 126 
CryoService introduced its new range of CryoSpec calibration gas standards together with a range of accessories and an increased variety of cylinders, including disposables.
Circle 127 
New from Ion Science was Labflow, a digital gas flow calculator which is calibrated to NAMAS/NBS to a precision of 2 per cent over the range of 0.1 to 500ml min -1 , providing a low cost solution to the measurement and setting of gas flows.
Labflow can also store and calculate flow differences.
Circle 128 
Sartorius launched several new products including the RC210S balance, a high capacity 210g analytical balance with accuracy to five decimal places, an RC balance with a remote display ideal for use in robotic applications; the LCR200S with built-in magnetic stirrer designed for weighing reagents and solutions where additions are weighted directly into the liquid; the LC3200D balance, a dual range balance; and the QS16–000VI, a high capacity QS scale.
Circle 129 
Several new products were exhibited by TechGen International .
The Proteus Integrated Bioreactor from Wheaton Instruments is a benchtop stirred tank unit and is suitable for continuous or batch cultivation of anchorage-dependant or suspension cultures.
New products for molecular biology research included a pipette for DNA amplification procedures and the Bioprobe Systems' products for hybridisation, electrophoresis and DNA sequencing, chromogenic reagents and specialist membranes.
Limusate, a new product for endotoxin testing, and the AIS MicroCELLector, phenotype selection, cell culture flasks for cell biologists were launched.
Circle 131 
New from Axxiom Chromatography was Pyramid, a user-configurable data acquisition and analysis system.
It runs under Windows 3.0 and combines Axxiom's 700 series data systems with a mouse-driven graphic interface for programming and editing.
Also launched was Peaktrak — a simple peak logic device for use with any detector and data system to provide contact closures and/or autozero capability with logic determined by either time or the  presence of a peak.
Circle 132 
On display from Cecil was the 3000 Series UV-visible scanning and routine spectrophotometers.
They are fully microprocessor controlled and can be used for both scanning and non scanning applications.
Circle 133 
Hewlett-Packard announced an electronic-pressure control (EPC) for the HP 5890 Series II split/splitless capillary inlet which improves the chromatographic performance with reduced sample discrimination and degradation especially with high molecular weight compounds.
The company also announced the HP 3365 Chemstation for chromatographic data acquisition and instrument control, new Enviroquant target compound software for DOS GC-MS chemstations, a new on-line degasser for HPLC, called the HP G 1303A, and the new HP1050 series variable wavelength detector.
Circle 135 
Optical Activity launched a new high performance polarimeter — the PolAAr 2001 — with the ability to measure dark samples to a high accuracy.
It absorbs up to 99.9 per cent(3.0D) of the source beam.
Other features include six measurement scales and calibration standards traceable back to International Standards Organisations.
Circle 136 
A personal oxygen monitor which is switched on constantly and helps protect the wearer against oxygen-depleted atmospheres was launched by BOC Cryospeed's audible alarm and flashing red light are activated when oxygen levels fall below 18 per cent or rise above 22 per cent.
Circle 137 
A new process control refractometer which gives continuous online analysis was launched by Index Instruments .
The PCR11–36 fits directly into an industry standard 32mm diameter pipeline or, with a flange fitting, to a vat sight glass.
It has an external control unit, which can be sited up to 30 metres from the detector, and an automatic prism wiping device.
Circle 138 
Aber Instruments displayed its new research and industrial biomass monitors.
The model 214–2F research biomass monitor has increased sensitivity, improved  long-term stability and reduced effect of gas hold-up in fermenters.
Circle 139 
Precision water baths, high and low temperature baths, shaking baths, block thermostats, flow heaters and flow coolers were all demonstrated by Grant .
Also on show was the Grant portable incubator, specifically designed for use in IVF and GIFT applications.
Circle 140 
Roth Scientific introduced two new products for automated, quantitative sample preparation.
Prepmaster is a dedicated SFE system designed for analytical and semipreparative extractions which can be used on-line, directly interfaced to any GC or SFC, or off-line with the new Accutrap cryogenic collection module.
The Accutrap SFE collection module is a stand alone module for off-line SFE.
Circle 141 
A new ‘Euro’ bottle was on display from BDH Laboratory Supplies .
It has many advantages over the traditional ‘Winchesters’ with a lower centre of gravity and a carefully controlled flow of glass within the mould so that there are no weak spots or pressure-vulnerable areas.
From March 1992 all bottles of acids will come with the proven ‘safe-break’ plastic coating, designed to keep splashing to a minimum if the bottle is dropped or broken.
Circle 142 
A new range of hydrogen generators was introduced by Jun-Air which can produce between 200 and 1600 ml min -1 from the six models in the range.
The company also announced a new system to produce H 2 , air and N 2 from one compact generator.
The system is completely automatic and produces high purity gases to 99.999 per cent.
Circle 144 
A new company,Lawes Vacuum , demonstrated a range of vacuum pumps and associated products from Galileo Vacuum , Italy.
The rotary pumps have a maximum displacement of up to 80m 3 h -1 .
Circle 145 
The SM2000 fume cupboard safety monitor was launched by Contronics .
By independently monitoring the temperature of a chemical reaction, it can activate an internal alarm should an experiment exceed a pre-programmed safety limit.
If the temperature continues to rise above a pre-set critical level the power source will be shut down completely.
Circle 146 
Marlin Scientific announced two new thermal analysis systems.
The systems are based around the TA Instruments DSC 10 Differential Scanning Calorimeter and the TGA Thermogravimetric Analyser.
Each system is a complete package including hardware, software and consumables.
Circle 147 
Fisons Laboratory Systems announced Easytalk, a natural language query system, which enables the user to query the VG Lims database using simple conversational English.
The package is intended for use by laboratory staff or management who do not have a computing education and find SQL too complex to use.
Labstation, a PC-based product, which improves the automation and management of data and method from laboratory instruments was also launched.
Labstation can acquire raw data and results from any laboratory instrument, irrespective of manufacturer (as long as it has a communications interface).
Circle 148 
Fisons Instruments launched the new 8000 series gas chromatographs, which feature side by side column mounting, new optimised injectors, detector modularity with stacking, synoptic display and intuitive keyboard and full control from any PC data station.
Circle 149 
VC Data Systems introduced the Minichrom V1.6 PC chromatography system and the two channel Chromatography Server data acquisition unit.
The two channel version of the Chromatography Server provides 1 Mb of RAM for data storage in the event of network or host computer malfunction.
Circle 150 
V. A. Howe introduced several new products from Metrohm .
The 708 sampling unit is suitable for use in fully automated Karl Fischer determination, direct sampling for online analysis and automatic sampling of a mixture of products.
The new 725 Dosimat can dispense, dilute and, with a special accessory, pipette.
It does not perform as a titrating dosimat or have the RS 232C interface for the attachment of a balance, printer or PC, like the 665 Dosimat, but the 725 is available for about half the price of the 665.
The new 715 Dosimat offers high accuracy dispensing and the possibility of using modern exchange units with flat ceramic stopcocks, at about a quarter of the price of the 665.
Metrohm's new Vesuv software allows the collection and storage of results and data from up to 8 Metrohm titrators connected simultaneously.
It also allows reprocessing of data, enlargement of curve sections, superimposition of titration curves, first and second differential plots and exporting of data files to Lims or other software formats.
Circle 151 
V. A. Howe also introduced tow new products from Shimadzu .
The FTIR 8101/8101M spectrophotometer is capable of data processing, multitasking and can produce data reports on a standard parallel head printer.
It has good optical stability and a wide range of accessories, including IR microscopy, enabling extensive upgrading.
The Shimadzu CS9001PC computer controlled scanning densitometer has all the major features of the Shimadzu CS9000 with the added benefits of direct computer control.
Among the other benefits are database storage and simple recall of methods, spectra or data, multi-wavelength scanning (left to right or right to left), multi-standard calibration, statistical analysis of calibration data, molecular weight determination and positive or negative polarity options.
Circle 152 
chemicals
Paar Scientific has launched a liquid density standards service for density meter users.
Liquids available from stock include cyclohexane, 41 per cent and 8 per cent ethanol in water, paraxylene and dimethyl phthalate.
Camlab has announced a new ready to use system for discontinuous, denaturing polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis of proteins.
Amresco pro-Page is premixed with Tris and 0.1 per cent SDS for denaturing electrophoresis.
Witco 's organic division has introduced a series of Formez ester and ether polyols for the manufacture of polyurethane oligomers used to formulate coatings for radiation curing systems.
Degussa has announced the development of a new hydrophobic molecular sieve, Wessalith DAY, from a Y zeolite dealuminated using a Degussa procedure.
The zeolite is used for solvent recovery and waste gas purification.
Borden has introduced several new products in its Cascomelt HMR series of hot metal adhesives for the furniture manufacturing industry.
These include HMR50, HMR51 and HMR58.
Cloud One has introduced a new concept in unit dose packaging.
Cloud is a water soluble sachet which offers portion/dose control in a convenient, flexible, transparent pack.
Neste Chemicals has developed a new polypropylene grade with an extremely high degree of clarity.
Transpalene is suitable for blow moulding, injection moulding and thermoforming.
DSM Polymers and Hydrocarbons has introduced a range of Xantar polycarbonate grades, based on chlorine- and bromine-free additive systems.
Borden has added a new grade to its range of bottle labelling adhesives.
The product, CLP 23, has exceptionally clean running properties coupled with a strong wet tack.
Rohm and Haas has introduced a new range of floor polish polymers which are zinc-free and thus free of the high levels of ammonia required to complex the zinc.
The range, Primal NT, is composed of 14 formulations of four different polymers.
Serotec has developed a new range of unlabelled and conjugated monoclonal antibodies.
Amersham International has launched a new range of sensitive, ready to use substrates for horseradish peroxidase and alkaline phosphatase based western blotting detection systems.
Surfachem has introduced a new predispersed water soluble carbomer resin, Gel-Sperse 50 GP.
It is designed for use where high viscosity gels are required and where clarity is an important factor.
conferences
Testing.
The first European symposium on Quality management and assurance in testing laboratories will be held in Strasbourg, France, on 28–30 January 1992.
Details from Dr J Wilson 
Aromatic substitution.
Novel methods of aromatic substitution in synthesis will be held at the Scientific Societies' Lecture Theatre in London on 29 January 1992.
Details from Dr S. M. Brown 
Safety datasheets.
This SCI industrial health and safety group discussion forum will be held in London on 29 January 1992.
Details from SCI Conference Secretariat 
Asia-Pacific.
The 1992 Asia-Pacific conference will be held on 16–19 February 1992 in Hong Kong.
Details from Conference Department,Chemical Week ,.
Oils and fats in the nineties.
This conference, which will discuss the availability of natural and modified oils and identify future developments, will be held in Denmark on 23–26 March 1992.
Details from E. Bisbo 
Respiratory pharmaceuticals.
This conference entitled Worldwide business opportunities in respiratory pharmaceuticals will be held in Boston, US, on 26–27 March 1992.
Details from Technology Management Group 
Cosmetics.
The Society of Cosmetic Chemists will be holding a symposium,Effective skin and body care formulations , on 6–7 April 1992 in Chester.
Details from Society of Cosmetic Chemists 
Titanium dioxide.
The global outlook for TiO 2  will be held in Chicago, Illinois, on 7–8 April 1992.
Details from Intertech Conferences 
Water and environment.
This exhibition will take place at the International Convention Centre, Birmingham, on 28–30 April 1992.
The Institute of Water and Environmental Management will be holding its annual conference concurrently.
Details from B. Campbell 
Formaldehyde 92.
The third international conference on the Role of formaldehyde in biological systems — methylation and demethylation processes will be held in Sopron, Hungary on 17–22 May 1992.
Details from Dr E. Tyihák, Plant Protection Institute 
Polymers.
The 14th international conference on Advances in stabilisation and controlled degradation of polymers will be held on 20–22 May 1992 in Lucerne, Switzerland.
Details from Dr N. C. Billingham 
Trends in drug research.
The ninth Noordwijkerhout-Camerino symposium will take place on 23–28 May 1993 in Noordwijkerhout, The Netherlands.
Details from Prof H. Timmerman 
Canadian chemical conference.
This conference and exhibition, sponsored by the Canadian Society for Chemistry, will take place in Edmonton, Alberta, from 31 May until 4 June 1992.
Details from M. Cowie 
Surfactants.
The third Cesio international surfactants congress and exhibition, with the theme A world market , will take place in London on 1–5 June 1992.
Details from G. Bergin 
Tech Trans Centre 92.
This international exhibition, contact forum and conference on intelligent products, new technologies and technology transfer, will be held at the Exhibition Centre Herning, Denmark, on 2–4 June 1992.
Details from Exhibition Centre Herning 
Reaction mechanisms.
This conference will be held at the University of Maine, US, on 7–11 June 1992.
Details from Prof U. H. Brinker 
Electrophoresis.
The annual meeting of the US Electrophoresis Society will be held in North Carolina, US, on 22–24 June 1992.
A call for papers has been issued.
Details from J. Cunningham 
Environmental legislation for the 1990s
will be held on 25–26 June 1992.
The theme of the conference, which will take place at  Queens's University, Belfast, will be Implications for the business life of Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland .
Details from MarEnCo Environment 92 
Corrosion.
A conference entitled Advances in corrosion and protection will be held at UMIST, Manchester, from 28 June until 3 July 1992.
Details from Conference Secretary, Corrosion and Protection Centre, UMIST 
Sulphur.
The 15th international symposium on the Organic chemistry of sulphur will be held from 29 June until 3 July 1992 in Caen, France.
Details from S. Masson 
Carbohydrates.
The 16th international Carbohydrate symposium will be held in Paris, France, on 1–5 July 1992.
Details from Prof J.-C.
Depezay 
Ethnopharmacology
Uppsala, Sweden, is the venue for the second international congress on this subject, which will be held on 2–4 July 1992.
A call for papers has been issued and the deadline for abstracts is 3 April 1992 .
Details from Swedish Academy Pharmaceutical Sciences 
Micro 92.
This major microscopy conference and exhibition, organised by the Royal Microscopical Society, will be held in London on 7–10 July 1992.
Details from RMS 
Field flow fractionation
The third international symposium on this subject will be held on 5–7 October 1992 in Park City, Utah.
A call for papers has been issued and the deadline for abstracts is 1 April 1992 .
Details from J. Westwood 
Chemical engineering.
The theme of the Canadian Society for Chemical Engineering's 42nd annual conference is Progress through innovation .
The conference will take place on 18–21 October 1992 in Toronto.
A call for papers has been issued and the deadline for abstracts is 14 February 1992 .
Details from Dr N. Anderson 
in brief Outukumpo Electronics has appointed Hobre Instruments as sole UK agent for its Courier range of X-ray fluorescence analysers and samplers for on-line elemental analysis in process streams.
Ohaus , Cambridge, plans to introduce new ranges of analytical balances, platform scales, general purpose bench scales, industrial indicators and higher capacity industrial balances with a resolution of 1g during 1992.
Teknivent , US, has announced the addition of an electrospray option to its Vector/two GC/LC-MS data system.
The package provides state of the art instrument scan and parameter control as well as averaging of raw scan profiles and fast deconvolution to calculate molecular weight.
General Controls and Automation , Co Dublin, has appointed Isis Products , Bradford, to handle its range of intrinsically safe computers for use in hazardous areas.
Whatman Scientific has amalgamated its Anotec membrane manufacturing facility with its Anotec assembly and product development teams in a new unit in Banbury, The address is Whatman Scientific .
Applied Chromatography Systems is now offering the ABI range of UV detectors in the UK.
The range comprises the 759A UV/Vis detector, the 785A for trace analysis and the 1000S photodiode array detector.
Ai Cambridge is offering the Tekmar Aerotrap 6016, a new thermal desorber, for use with a Tekmar 2000/2016 purge and trap autosampler to enhance the capabilities of gas chromatographs.
Quatro Biosystems , Manchester, has acquired LEP Scientific from the LEP Group.
The acquisition will allow Quatro to widen its product portfolio and develop its strengths in the clinical sector.
Comus has launched a low cost data system, the CZE300, which is designed to operate with all capillary electrophoresis analysis systems or other chromatography systems equipped with on-column detection.
Amdel , Australia, has appointed Alrad Instruments , Newbury, as its UK representative.
Amdel supplies in-stream and on-line X-ray fluorescence elemental analysis systems and associated process control systems.
BSS , the industrial heating and pipeline supplier, has set up a common support function for commercial and distribution activities.
IVCO Process Valves will be known as IPV, the specialist process valves division of BSS, and together with AMS, the specialist pump division of BSS, will process documentation through a central computer to improve customer service.
Evans Medical's vaccine production plant at Speke.
A combination of iron contamination and too little inhibitor caused the explosion below, damaging power lines and tanks.
Air masks.
Firefighters and HazMat responders can now position Quick-Fill systems fittings on either the shoulder or waist best of MMR (mask-mounted regulator) air masks from MSA International.
Users can refill and transfill air cylinders while the air mask is worn without the need to remove the air cylinder.
Circle 159
Frank Page of Loughborough University won first prize in the materials science category of the tenth annual Polaroid international photomicrography competition, for his micrograph (above) depicting ultra high velocity jet plated gold.
His entry was produced with a Cambridge microscope and magnified 130×.
Of the 25 winners worldwide, six are UK scientists.
For details of the 1992 Polaroid micrography competition, contact Pat Wallace .
Nicolet announced the new 740i research grade FTIR system which expands the System 740's frequency range from near through far IR.
Also new was the FT-Raman spectroscopy accessory for the Research Grade 800 System, the 680D advanced mini computer, the IR micro S /SIRM scanning IR microscope and an MCT detector for the 205 Routine FTIR system.
Circle 130
A & Instruments launched a new range of high performance, top pan balances — the HX Series — offering fast weighing response, high accuracy and fully automatic calibration.
The company also announced the HA-M Series analytical balance.
It has a cylindrical and pillarless weighing chamber comprising three circular weighing chamber doors which rotate to give the user a 200° panoramic access.
Circle 134.
The new density meter from Paar Scientific is designed for industrial production environments such as breweries, food and beverage, pharmaceutical, cosmetics, polymer, nuclear and petrochemical industries.
The DMA 58 is easy-to-use and accurate — measuring to 5 decimal places — and is particularly useful for quality control.
A digital display reads true density, concentration, specific gravity, API and density related values.
Temperature is accurate to  0.005°C with a range of -10°C to +70°C.
An optional Paar SP3 sample changer allows fully automatic operation.
Circle 143 
LETTERS
Robert Boyle memorial
From Shaun Mesher
I recently visited St Patrick's Cathedral in Dublin and inside was a monument — 25 feet high by 12 feet wide — dedicated to Robert Boyle and his family.
The monument itself was in a poor state of repair and suffering the effects of age.
I questioned the bishop about this and found that the monument needed immediate attention but was not of a high priority and no funds were available.
He mentioned that the sum required for restoration of the monument would be in the range of £20 000 to £30 000 punts.
Would it be possible for members of the RSC to set up a special fund to restore this treasure to the chemistry world?
I myself would be proud to donate to a fund of this kind, as I think a lot of people would.
For a man who has contributed so much to the world of chemistry, could we do any less?
Encouraging new discoveries
From Stanley Shoop
Some of those who comment on subjects such as the safe disposal of nuclear wastes seem to work on the assumption that the relevant sciences and technologies are standing still.
If there are any shortcomings, these will remain indefinitely and show up sooner or later.
If something is constructed today with a latent fault, that fault will be there — uncorrected — indefinitely.
I have the impression that in some quarters no thought is being given to what discoveries might be round the corner and in others no provision is being made to take advantage of them.
On the other hand, in many other spheres, the most amazing developments that have taken place in just a few decades are taken completely for granted and even more is expected.
So, for all we know, what worries us today could be resolved well within our lifetime.
With this in mind, when considering situations where there are questions about very long term service lives, I suggest that current construction methods should not make it too difficult to incorporate any presently unthought of developments that might materialise in the future — be this in 20 or even 100 years time!
Would it be worthwhile for each discipline to set up think tanks — if one does not already exist — of their most imaginative scientists, engineers etc , with, perhaps, three remits:(i) to identify major problems for which current and  foreseeable knowledge offers no solution;(ii) to pinpoint what basic knowledge is needed, what would be the characteristics of the ideal chemical or other material, together with the relevant techniques for using them;(iii) recognising that what is being considered may be so far out of sight as to be beyond worthwhile research based on existing knowledge and know-how, to organise a system that will recognise the first appearance of the new knowledge and then steer research in the right direction without delay.
In this I would admit to a personal bias toward flexibility and a lateral approach.
There is a saying about there being more than one way to skin a cat: in the case of toxic wastes they could be contained in an indefinitely leakproof box.
Failing that the surrounding soil could be made either impermeable or capable of neutralising the effects.
Alternatively, the future may bring chemicals that could protect us from any gas, liquid or radiation, not to mention environments in which future generations may live that will separate them from any hazardous source.
It would be up to the scientists to decide which is the viable option and which belongs to the realm of science fiction.
But we must think ahead now.
A-level chemistry syllabus
From Dr M. T. Robinson
John Holman's article A new look at A-level chemistry (Chem.
Br. , 1991, 27, 813), prompts the following question.
Will the Salters' chemistry A-level syllabus form a reasonable basis for those students going on to read for a chemistry degree at university or polytechnic?
I would appreciate opinions on this point, particularly from staff teaching in university/polytechnic chemistry departments.
At Bilborough we are currently discussing possible changes for the education of the 16–18 cohort.
We have a respectable reputation for producing future chemistry graduates — including Oxford and Cambridge — and would not wish to lose that good name by adopting a ‘less appropriate’ A-level chemistry syllabus.
John Holman replies : This question has been foremost in our minds throughout the Salters' development.
The answer is a clear ‘yes’, for the following reasons.
1.
We have consulted closely with academic chemists in universities and polytechnics, throughout the development of the course.
2.
We have an Academic Advisory Group, chaired by Lord Lewis, which has given us access to professional expertise at the highest level.
3.
The syllabus has been approved by the School Examination and Assessment Council, using the same criteria applied to any other A-level chemistry syllabus.
4.
The syllabus includes the ‘core’ of chemistry drawn up by the Standing Conference on University Entrance in 1983, and as far as we can tell is also likely to include the new chemistry core under construction by the School Examination and Assessment Council.
Inspection of a copy of the syllabus for Salters' A-level chemistry (obtainable from the Oxford and Cambridge Examinations Board) will demonstrate how appropriate the course is as preparation for a chemistry degree.
To cap it all…
From Dr David A. H. Taylor
The story by Alec Campbell about William Murdoch's hat is unfortunately not quite true (Chem.
Br. , 1991, 27, 842).
Murdoch had turned his hat on a lathe, thereby inventing a method of turning oval objects.
It was for this very remarkable invention that he was employed.
Though the turning of oval objects is routinely employed now, it is remarkably difficult to find a textbook that describes how it is done, or a mechanical engineering department that can teach it.
Using recycled paper
From John Boler, head of communications
I concede that the Chemical Industries Association could have done better and am grateful for the extra publicity (Chem.
Br. , 1991, 27, 701).
However, our Chemicals and the quality of life booklets would certainly not have been improved by the use of recycled paper, the environmental benefits of which are not unalloyed, according to chemists and papermakers.
The chemical industry makes a crucial contribution to our health and prosperity and to protection of the environment.
In Chemicals and the quality of life we set out to illustrate these achievements in the most effective way possible, consistent with prudent use of our members' funds.
There is much ignorance among the public about these issues and it would have been helpful  to see a sensible letter about this problem in the context of our literature.
We will use recycled paper for our high quality literature when it achieves the cost and performance levels of ‘virgin’ materials.
In the meantime, let recycled papers be conserved for the many purposes they are more fit for.
Good Laboratory Practice
from Graham F. Moss
I was interested to read the letter from Dr R. C. Price in the August issue (Chem.
Br. , 1991, 27, 701) on the introduction of Total Quality Management (TQM) into R & D laboratory work and I fully agree that such quality standards should be introduced.
However, this is not a new idea.
Good Laboratory Practice (GLP) principles have been applied to many R & D establishments since their introduction by the Food and Drug Administration in the US.
Initially they were applied to facilities working on the development of new medicinal products but fairly quickly they were applied to safety development work for most environmentally important chemicals.
GLP principles are essentially identical in their aims to those of TQM.
They require a basic standard of quality procedures and practices with full authorised documentation.
The documentation of procedures is drawn up by discussion and consultation with all relevant laboratory staff, the aim being that all procedures are fully reproducible and conducted to the highest standard attainable.
The practices in these laboratories are monitored by an independent Quality Assurance Unit that assures management the work is complying with the required standards.
Within the UK there is an organisation of representatives from the industries affected, the Quality Assurance Group (QAG)(UK).
I suggest those interested in the proposed network for TQM might find it beneficial to contact the QAG, because a considerable amount of knowledge and experience in applying such principles to laboratory work is available to this group.
Principal component analysis
From Dr J. P. N. Haxell
In common with some of my colleagues, I scanned the introduction and looked at the pictures and summary of the article Principle component analysis (PCA)(Chem.
Br. , 1991, 27, 821), and believed that there was something important for us there.
In common with the authors, our industry is often faced with a complexity of data and we ponder how to characterise it all.
PCA sounded like an ideal way for us to handle some of these.
The simple diagrams clearly showed the differences between Volvic and Spa water but nowhere could I find how actually to construct these dramatic demonstrations.
I showed the article to my wife — a mathematician — and asked her to remind me about ‘eigen analysis of the covariance matrix [z]’etc , but I gather that such analysis is not exactly commonplace or entirely obvious!
No doubt I will request our librarian to get me some of the original references cited but my point is that surely Chemistry in Britain is written for the general interest and education of chemists and ought to be comprehensible to the reasonably trained chemist.
This particular article was way over our heads.
If only there had been some worked examples, we may have been able to follow the article.
R. A. Aries, D. P. Lidiard and R. A. Spragg reply:
Dr Haxell's criticism is well taken.
However, the purpose of the article was not to provide a step by step guide to the workings of PCA (see reference 1), but rather to stimulate interest in the application of the technique.
In this respect the article would appear to have been a success.
There are several commercially available PC-based software packages for PCA and subsequent graphical display of the results.
Each has its relative merits depending on the application in mind and it is difficult to recommend any one package in particular.
We would be pleased to give advice and guidance on the alternatives available.
We would also like to suggest that interested readers attend meetings organised by the RSC Chemometrics Group or UK Chemometrics Discussion Group, which are regularly advertised in Chemistry in Britain .
Kuwait oil fires
From Dr L. Appleby and Prof Roy M. Harrison
In view of the predicted climatic perturbations due to smoke produced by a major nuclear exchange, Dr Carty questions whether the burning of oil from Kuwait wells might contribute significantly to climatic cooling (Chem.
Br. , 1991, 27, 896).
Heat and smoke release rates in the Kuwait situation were far less than those predicted for urban firestorms after a nuclear exchange.
Consistent with this, the results of recent research on Kuwait oil fires indicate that the smoke did not appear to be rising high enough to reach the stratosphere, where transport may occur over considerable distances with soot particles remaining for months.
Hence, although weather in the Gulf region has been affected, no significant effect on weather or climate outside this region is expected to occur.
Having your cake and eating it
From Dr Ernest C. Lucas
Ron Rooney objects to Dr Mitchell setting himself up as a moral censor (Chem.
Br. , 1991, 27, 896).
He then does just that very thing himself!
He says that it is unethical to produce and market a drug which would harm the patient or a foetus.
Rooney cannot have it both ways.
Either chemists, pharmacists and medical practitioners should be totally amoral and provide patients with any drug they want — including fatal poisons — to use as they wish, or else we have got to be prepared to take the moral stands our consciences and beliefs press on us.
If Rooney is to have the right to do this, and express his views publicly, then so is Mitchell.
To refuse to at least debate the moral issue raised by Mitchell is to operate a form of moral censorship.
Of course the difference is that Rooney's view — that it is wrong to knowingly give the patient a drug that will harm her — probably has universal support.
Mitchell's view is, possibly, a minority one.
However, the minority views deserve serious consideration.
Sometimes they have proved to be persuasive and have become the new majority view.
After all, there was a time when those who believed that abortion — by whatever means — should be legalised, were in a minority.
While they were still in the minority one could, on the basis of Rooney's attitude, accuse them of moral censorship when they opposed those who argued that abortion was unethical because it harms the foetus.
Polysaturates and polyunsaturates
From Dr C. K. Warren
I would like to reply to two letters published in the November issue (Chem.
Br. , 1991, 27, 1006).
Leslie Rose suggests that I defined a non-existent type of fat, namely a polysaturate.
Actually, I made no attempt to define anything.
All I did was to use a term to convey a meaning.
Is Rose suggesting that a molecule must contain double bonds in order to be a polymer?
How then does he classify polyethylene?
Dr Howard Jones should take more care when criticising someone else's humble writings.
At no point did I ‘assert’ that polyunsaturates were no better in diet than polysaturates.
I merely stated that ‘to my knowledge’ there was no convincing evidence either way.
He mentioned studies over the past two decades — this is far too short a period to obtain real evidence in such matters.
As someone who has suffered several heart attacks, I eat polyunsaturates, although I prefer butter, but I cannot convince myself that it really matters.
I am much more concerned at my apparent lack of ability to convey what I mean.
Zeolites and caesium isotope contamination
From Dr Alan Dyer, reader in chemistry
The legacy of Chernobyl by Segal and Morris  mentions the well-known selectivity for caesium displayed by synthetic and natural zeolites.
This preference is said to arise ‘because the [zeolite]cage is too small to admit larger ions and too large to bind smaller ones strongly.’
It would be difficult to construct a more misleading description of zeolite ion-exchange  selectivity!
Caesium is, of course, the largest simple cation in the periodic table and zeolites are widely used as detergent builders to ‘bind’ smaller ions,eg Ca 2+ .
The true basis of the cation selectivity of zeolites is not completely understood but can usually be explained in terms of the specific molecular architecture of the zeolite frameworks (always large enough to accommodate caesium), the relative amount of silicon and aluminium in the zeolite framework, and the hydration state of the cations.
The authors should not that, contrary to their assertion, there is a large literature on the use of zeolites to amend soils, including evidence of useful caesium binding.
It is also relevant to cite the extensive literature describing the advantages of zeolites as food additives for poultry, pigs, beef cattle and other animals.
Included in these publications are records of the removal of radiocaesium from beef cattle, rats and goats and lambs.
It is true that removal of radiocaesium by clinoptilolite seems to be less effective than by bentonite or a hexacyanoferrate II but this may well be because a zeolitised tuff has been used (40–60 per cent zeolite content), or that the clinoptilolite used is potassium rich.
Early development studies in SIXEP (site ion exchange effluent plant) at Sellafield showed that the sodium form of clinoptilolite had the highest preference for caesium and this has been confirmed by work at this university on both US and Indonesian natural clinoptilolites.
I suspect that most chemists will experience a twinge of alarm to hear that ammonium ferric hexacyanoferrate II is an approved feed additive in Norway for animals destined for human consumption and wonder why this expensive synthetic material is being studied in the UK as a way to reduce the transfer of caesium from feed to animal, rather than cheap, naturally occurring, widely available alternatives like bentonites or zeolites.
M. G. Segal and C. C. Morris reply : We welcome Dr Dyer's comments on the mechanisms of metal ion binding to zeolites, although his use of the word ‘misleading’ is hardly justified.
It is very hard to provide a simple but adequate explanation.
The use of zeolites in soil treatment remains one of the options we are actively exploring, as we made clear in our article; none of the possibilities we discussed have been ruled out.
There is indeed very extensive literature on their use as feed additives, and it is matched by that on the use of clays and cyanoferrates.
Extensive lists of references are not appropriate in Chemistry in Britain articles, but readers can rest assured that our attention, both to published literature and ongoing work in Europe, including the USSR, has been as thorough as possible.
We are at a loss to know the cause of Dr Dyer's ‘twinge of alarm’.
Certain cyanoferrates are approved as food additives, for example to salt, having first been subjected to a thorough toxicological evaluation.
Since our article appeared, a group of experts convened by the EC has concluded that ‘Although clay minerals have been widely used since the Chernobyl accident, the Prussian Blue compounds have been found to be more effective and easier to administer’.
(G. Desmet et al.,
to be published in Sci.
Total Environ.).
In the context of the current UK problem with upland free-grazing sheep, the effective application of any feed additive is extremely difficult to achieve, and the use of boli currently appears to offer the best prospects.
No practical method of administering the large quantities required of zeolites or clays under these conditions — of the order of 1 g/day/kg bodyweight (BW), as against a few mg/day/kgBW for AFCF — has yet been found (K. Hove idem ).
Chemistry and comics
Paul S. Phillips, Nigel P. Freestone and Roger A. Alder
Chemistry has to look to its public image — people are not certain whether it is a good thing or not.
But if we look at the chemistry and other science portrayed in comics and illustrated periodicals, we can see an interesting shift in public attitudes over the past few decades.
Could comics be used as a vehicle to present science attractively once again?
The public understanding of science is a two-edged sword.
On one hand the public demands ever more complex and advanced technology while at the same time mistrusting and denigrating the scientific/technological base that helps to produce today's high standard of living in the developed world.
This attitude is reflected in a variety of ways in the popular press.
Chemistry has a poor image because it has become associated with a range of disasters,eg Bhopal, rather than the production of useful substances such as the life-saving drugs.
The environmentalist is increasingly seen as ‘being on the side of the public’, fighting pollution and striving to improve our quality of life.
This attitude has not always been the case.
During the 1950s the public image of science was altogether more positive; science was providing solutions to society's greatest needs.
This is nowhere seen more clearly than in comic books, which have long provided adults and children with an outlet for their imagination.
Early US comics
Comic books were first published in the US in 1933, for use as advertising giveaways.
They were so successful that publication for retail sales began in 1934.
The comic book industry enjoyed rapid growth until the late 1950s when, for a number of reasons, sales began to level off.
Surprisingly, comic books throughout their history have contained a significant number of references to chemical facts — indeed, we have used them in our teaching on the history of chemistry.
Perhaps the most significant comic book series produced was the Classic Illustrated , published between 1941 and 1971.
This series was very successful and over 800 million copies were printed in more than a dozen languages.
Chemists appeared regularly in the Pioneers of science sections.
Biographies of such people as Bunsen, Lavoisier and Priestley (Table 1) were attractively illustrated and historically accurate.
The discovery of dynamite by Alfred Nobel is told in Classics Illustrated no 73 (1948).
The story of how Nobel produced dynamite by stabilising nitroglycerin (by mixing with kieselguhr) is skilfully told, while readers are left in no doubt that he became very disillusioned when his explosives were used for warfare.
The complex connections between chemistry, technology and warfare are probed in an attempt to explain the origins of the Nobel prize system.
Classics Special Issues were also produced during the years 1955–62.
These were 100-page educational comics that dealt with a broad range of topics from the history of making.
The atomic age is an issue of interest to chemists.
It begins with the atomic theory developed by Democritus around 460 BC.
The story continues with Pierre Gassendi (1650) and Avogadro (1811) up until the time of publication.
The artwork is excellent and the story is quite gripping.
Apart from Classic Illustrated , which was at the top end of the market, a wide range of other comics contained significant amounts of chemistry.
In several placed Donald Duck makes exciting discoveries by playing with a chemistry set.
In 1944 he discovered methylene (CH 2 )— a remarkable discovery indeed.
Apparently the Disney studio had several requests from chemists for more information on the subject following the actual spectroscopic determination in 1959.
Topics as diverse as spectroscopy and nitrous acid appear in a range of publications, all attesting to the interest inherent in the subject of chemistry (Table 2).
UK comics
The comic book in the UK began in the Victorian era.
Punch was first produced in 1841 and is the longest lived in a series of comic magazines inspired by the French Figaro .
The evolution of the comic book continued on its varied path, developing new ideas and throwing up new characters.
The first full-page story  told in pictures concerning the first truly British comic hero — a character called ‘Ally Sloper’— appeared in Judy during 1867.
The first comic designed specifically for children was Jack and Jill and was published by W. Long in March 1885.
Children growing up in the 1950s and 1960s were fortunate enough to enjoy the Eagle comic every week.
The attitude towards science in the Eagle could be said to be typical of UK comics generally.
Professor Brittain, a rather cool, laid-back individual, time and time again manages to ‘explain’ numerous scientific topics.
Along with excellent historical research, the benefits of science and technology to society were clearly demonstrated.
By placing science and technology in ‘context’, Professor Brittain was clearly ahead of his time.
A number of these articles of scientific interest were produced by L. Ashwell Wood.
Dan Dare was one of the great favourites of Eagle readers.
Dan was born in Manchester and was the son of Captain McGregor Dare, chief test pilot for Cosmic Spaceships.
Dan started school in Manchester but went to colleges in Washington and Sydney.
He eventually graduated as a bachelor of astrophysics at London University.
Time and time again it is made clear that many of Dan's great exploits are only possible because of the application of science.
Plutonium mining for dubious ends was one of the plots foiled by Dan.
Apart from a range of genuine chemical species mentioned, in Operation Plum Pudding (Fig. 1 ), Dan reveals that the newly produced Tungstal Maximite Spray was being used to protect Big Ben from weathering.
It was of little concern to Dan that much of the weathering may have been caused by industrial pollution — what mattered was that science had found an answer.
Was Dan Dare a sexist?
During Operation Moss one gets the impression that most males find it difficult to take Professor Jocelyn Peabody seriously (Fig 2 ).
The view seems to be that attractive young women have better things to do than spend their time doing science.
What is Professor Peabody's subject?
Not chemistry, but botany.
Rupert Bear was a character who had a remarkable number of adventures.
Perhaps it's fair to say that magic was more important to Rupert than science.
But his old friend ‘the Professor’ is obviously a scientist of note — and perhaps best of all, is fun and always using science to produce exciting things, even if he is often defeated by magic spells (Fig. 3 ).
Several common themes run through the treatment of science by comics in the 1950s.
These include:
science is valuable because it serves society;
scientists are heroic figures;
science is exciting;
the continuous application of science and technology will produce a ‘better tomorrow’.
Even during the heyday of the comics, certain science fiction stories were raising the question about the misuse of science.
Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde was a popular story raising an important point.
Dr. Jekyll becomes obsessed with producing a drug that can separate ‘the good and evil personalities of man’, but the results of his discovery send him mad.
Here was a clear warning about the dangers of uncontrolled science.
Today
Although it is difficult to compare the publications of today with the comics of the 1950s, it must be pointed out that there is a surprising amount of science in today's comics.
The best way to describe the content is to call it ‘green’, because the basis of the approach is environmental.
The same message is coming over time and time again: man's activities are destroying the planet, and the environmentalists are the most likely people to save the planet.
The Young Telegraph (no 24, 16 March 1991) demonstrates this trend clearly — there is one page given over to green issues and one question (What colour are copper sulphate crystals?) on chemistry.
Indeed, it is fair to say that the chemical  industry is seen as one of the worst polluters.
Batman encounters a problem with a toxic waste dump that results in the creation of the ‘corrosive man’— a chemical horror that burns its way through Gotham City.
So the message given to young people is on the whole negative: science and technology often create more problems than they solve.
A recent strip in the Funday Times (no 81, March 24, 1991) demonstrates the prevailing attitude: science is higher, expensive and obscure but sometimes it is extremely valuable.
The dedicated comic fan may argue that most publications mentioned so far were written mostly for males — what about comics written specifically for females?
This group of comics makes depressing reading indeed, because there is very little interest shown in scientific/technological reality.
Most issues abound in stories of high interest to the stereotypical young girl — boarding schools, French lessons, ballet etc .
Very rarely is the message sent that exciting young females could be scientists or technologists.
Can this trend by reversed?
Chemists must not be reactive — they need to be proactive and to reach the coming generation with a positive message that is well presented.
A comic gives children the opportunity to retreat into their own world; it is a very private thing.
Children think in black and white, good and bad, and the comic has a powerful influence on shaping attitudes.
Perhaps future issues of comics and children's magazines will again imaginatively present science, and especially chemistry, as beneficial and exciting.
Paul Phillips, Nigel Freestone and Roger Alder are lecturers at Nene College of Higher Education, St George's Avenue, Northampton NN2 6JD.
THERE'S BIG BEN STRIKING MIDNIGHT.
MERRY CHRISTMAS, OLD TIMER!
SAME TO YOU, SIR!
WONDERFUL HOW THEY'VE PRESERVED THOSE ANCIENT MONUMENTS!
WE'LL SOON HEAR THE BELLS OF ST PAUL'S.
IF THE BOFFINS HADN'T DREAMED UP THAT TUNGSTAL-MAXIMITE SPRAY, BOTH THOSE BUILDINGS WOULD BE RUBBLE BY NOW.
BRING IN B.B.C. VISION, SIR.
IT'S THE GILBERT HARDING CELEBRATION!
Table 1.
Some examples of chemists from the Pioneers of science series from Classics Illustrated 
Fig. 1.
Operation Plum Pudding (reproduced from The best of Eagle annual 1951–59; used with permission of Fleetway 1991).
Table 2.
Some chemical topics in comics.
Fig. 2.
Operation Moss (from The best of Eagle annual 1951–1959;used with permission, Fleetway 1991).
PROFESSOR JOCELYN PEABODY!
MY FAVOURITE BOFFIN!
I PREFER TO BE CALLED A SCIENTIST , COLONEL DARE!
…
AND FOR YOUR INFORMATION, DOCTOR CHARLES BUNN IS ONE OF OUR MOST EMINENT BRAINS.
FURTHER, THE TERM ‘COALSACK’ MEANS…
I KNOW, PROF!
I WAS ONLY FOOLING.
RUPERT AMAZES TWO CLEVER MEN
‘I've never heard of such a thing!
My, what a splendid gift to bring!’
‘I'll test a few drops,’ Rupert's told.
‘Will nothing make that water cold?’
‘It will not boil, it will not freeze, But stays the same heat, if you please!’
Then Rupert Bear explains his find, ‘It's Chinese magic!
A new kind!’
Fig. 3.
Rupert Bear (reproduced with permission from Express Newspapers plc).
Antibiotics — the new generation
Klaus Grohe
A serious problem in hospitals today is the development of microorganisms that are resistant to the ‘traditional’ antibiotics — penicillins, cephalosporins, aminoglycosides and tetracyclines.
New antibiotics are needed to combat the infections caused by these resistant microorganisms, and the fluorquinolones are the chemist's latest contribution.
These antibiotics act by a different mechanism from — and thus complement — the existing drugs.
Ciprofloxacin, a fluoroquinolone antibiotic, fills an important gap in the range of antibiotics and has an interesting development history.
The antibacterial quinolones (1–6 ) are derivatives of 1,4-dihydro-4-oxo-3-quinolinecarboxylic acid.
The first such substance to be synthesised was 1-methyl-1,4-dihydro-4-oxo-3-quinolinecarboxylic acid (1 ), which was obtained in 1949 by oxidising the alkaloids melicopine, melicopidine and melicopicine with concentrated nitric acid.
However, the antibacterial effect of the quinolones was not discovered by N. Barton and his colleagues  for another 12 years.
The first commercially available quinolone product was nalidixic acid (2 )— a 1,8-naphthyridonecarboxylic acid or 8-azaquinolonecarboxylic acid — produced in 1962 by G. Y. Lesher and coworkers.
The spectrum of activity of nalidixic acid was limited to Gram-negative  pathogens, it had an unfavourable pharmacokinetic profile, and resistance rapidly developed.
It therefore had only a limited use in the oral short term therapy of urinary tract infections.
The quinolone and azaquinolone products that were subsequently developed — oxolinic acid (3 ), cinoxacin (4 ), piromidic acid (5 ) and pipemidic acid (6 )— did not differ greatly from nalidixic acid in activity or use.
The breakthrough to finding broad spectrum quinolones was made in the early 1980s, when fluorine was substituted at position 6, a piperazinyl residue was introduced at position 7 and new residues were introduced at position 1 of the quinolone basic structure (7–10 ).
these structural modifications brought about a major improvement in antibacterial activity against Gram-negative activity to resistant Gram-negative bacteria, such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa — which can cause lung infections in hospital patients — and to Gram-positive bacteria.
The first commercially available products from this group of drugs for anti-bacterial chemotherapy were the fluoroquinolones, which bore very little resemblance to the nalidixic acid derivatives that did not contain fluorine.
They were based on the active ingredients norfloxacin (7 ), enoxacin (8 ) or ofloxacin (9 ).
They were soon followed by ciprofloxacin (10 ), which has become the reference substance for the modern fluoroquinolones.
The mode of action of quinolones is different from other antibiotics, which typically operate at the bacterial cell wall or at the ribosome.
The target of ciprofloxacin and the other quinolones within the cell appears to be the prokaryotic enzyme, deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) gyrase, an essential enzyme that catalyses chromosomal DNA supercoiling.
The quinolones rapidly block bacterial DNA replication and transcription by inhibiting DNA gyrase, ultimately giving rise to cell lysis.
The mechanism of action by which quinolones inhibit DNA gyrase is very complex and largely unexplained.
The classical synthesis
The quinolones and fluoroquinolones are normally obtained via the classical Gould-Jacobs reaction.
Scheme 1 shows a typical synthesis of nalidixic acid (2 ).
However, the Gould-Jacobs reaction is unsuitable for producing 1-cyclopropyl-quinolonecarboxylic acids or 1-cyclopropyl-azaquinolonecarboxylic acids of the ciprofloxacin type because it is not possible to alkylate 1-unsubstituted quinolones or azaquinolonecarboxylates with cyclopropyl halides.
The intermediate produce (13 ), for example, does not react with cyclopropyl bromide to form a cyclopropyl nalidixic acid ethyl ester (15 ).
Accordingly, 1-cyclopropyl-quinolonecarboxylic acids and 1-cyclopropyl-azaquinolonecarboxylic acids did not feature in the literature until the mid-1970s.
At this point the cycloaracylation process was discovered by Bayer, which made it possible to produce this type of substance.
The cycloaracylation process
In 1975–76 the cycloaracylation process, a new general method for making quinolone and azaquinolonecarboxylic acids substituted at position 1, was developed while working on synthesising heterocyclic compounds by cycloacylating tautomeric enamines and enhydrazines with bifunctional acylating agents.
This alternative process made it possible for the first time to obtain 1- tert -alkyl, 1-cycloalkyl, 1-aryl, 1-heteroaryl and 1-aminoquinolone and azaquinolonecarboxylic acid derivatives by combined acylation and arylation (aracylation) of enamines and enhydrazines with o -halo-(het)aroyl halides.
Some of the 1-cyclopropyl-quinolone-carboxylic acid derivatives exhibited particularly interesting microbiological properties.
Their antibacterial activity was considerably greater than that of the most effective 1-ethyl-quinolonecarboxylic acid derivatives.
The most potent and best tolerated derivative in the class was 1-cyclopropyl-6-fluoro-1,4-dihydro-4-oxo-7-(1-piperazinyl)-3-quinoline-carboxylic acid (10 ), which was developed as a broad spectrum chemotherapeutic agent under the generic name ciprofloxacin (see Scheme 2).
The central intermediate (21 ) in ciprofloxacin synthesis can be obtained by acylating ethyl cyclopropylaminoacrylate (24 ) with (16 ) or, better still, by acylating ethyl dimethylaminoacrylate (25 ) with (16 ) to form (26 ) and exchanging the dimethylamino group for a cyclopropyl amino group, as shown in Scheme 3.
The cycloaracylation process has also proved to be exceptionally useful for synthesising highly effective antibacterial 1-(2,4-difluorophenyl)-quinolone-carboxylic acid derivatives (temafloxacin) and 1-(2,4-difluorophenyl)-azaquinolone-carboxylic acid derivatives (tosufloxacin).
Ciprofloxacin
Ciprofloxacin (10 ) is the most active of the modern, commercially available broad spectrum fluoroquinolones and may even be the most active broad spectrum antibiotic available.
Binding a cyclopropyl residue at position 1 of the quinolone system gives a considerable improvement in antibacterial activity compared with the corresponding 1-ethyl-quinolonecarboxylic acid norfloxacin.
Ciprofloxacin's spectrum of activity encompasses both Gram-negative and Gram-positive pathogens, although anaerobic organisms are  generally less susceptible.
The onset of ciprofloxacin's bactericidal action is rapid.
Because of its special mechanism of action, there is no general cross resistance between this drug and antibiotics in other substance classes.
Ciprofloxacin is thus also effective against microorganisms that are resistant or multiresistant to other antimicrobials, such as aminoglycosides, tetracyclines or β-lactams.
Resistance to ciprofloxacin develops slowly via point mutation (ie single amino acid changes) within the bacterial DNA.
This means that because of the high initial sensitivity of most organisms to ciprofloxacin, the risk of mutation may be considered to be relatively low.
There has been no evidence of plasmid-mediated (ie from cell to cell) resistance to ciprofloxacin, such as that found to beta-lactam antibiotics, aminoglycosides and tetracyclines.
Ciprofloxacin can be given either orally or intravenously.
When given orally, it is absorbed rapidly and has excellent tissue penetration.
Two to three hours after oral or intravenous administration it is often present in tissues and body fluids at concentrations several times higher than in serum.
Ciprofloxacin is largely excreted as an unchanged substance and elimination is predominantly via the kidneys.
The serum half-life is between three and five hours after either form of administration.
The drug is a well tolerated and suitable therapy for a large number of systemic infections.
In recent years it has been particularly successful in treating respiratory and urinary tract infections, gastrointestinal infections, infections of the skin and skin structures, bone and joint infections and sexually transmitted diseases.
Ciprofloxacin can also be used to treat septicaemia, for selective gut decontamination and for patients receiving immunosuppressants.
In hospital it is possible to replace initial intravenous therapy with ciprofloxacin by the oral route within a very short time, which can make cost savings since patients do not have to be hospitalised for treatment.
Ciprofloxacin is the reference substance among the fluoroquinolones and, with the other derivatives, marks the beginning of a new era in antibacterial chemotherapy.
In February 1987 it became the first fluoroquinolone to be marketed in the UK under the tradename Ciproxin.
At the same time it was introduced into therapy in West Germany as Ciprobay and was subsequently launched in the US under the name Cipro.
It came onto the Japanese market in 1988 as Ciproxan.
It is currently available in more than 60 countries.
Worldwide there are now many millions of patients who have been successfully treated with ciprofloxacin either in hospital or as outpatients in general practice.
Ciprofloxacin's properties certainly make it a very interesting addition to the physician's armoury of antibacterial drugs.
Dr Klaus Grohe is the chemical project manager for quinolones at Zentrale Forschung,
Scheme 1.
Classical synthesis of nalidixic acid.
Scheme 2.
Synthesis of ciprofloxacin.
Scheme 3.
Alternative synthesis of intermediate (21 ).
Surface crystallography and ion scattering
J. Wayne Rabalais
A new form of crystallography that uses ion scattering and recoiling is revolutionising the study of surface structure.
TOF-SARS (time of flight scattering and recoiling spectrometry) can give sensitive and detailed measurements of surface structure and ion positions, and can be used to study all elements, including hydrogen.
This new technique may become a useful tool in new applications in chemisorption and catalysis.
TOF-SARS uses a combination of well known techniques from mass spectrometry and ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) surface science.
The interpretation of the data is simple and requires a minimum amount of calculation.
In the kiloelectron volt range, ions scatter from atomic cores and analysis of the scattering patterns reveals the position of nuclei.
In addition, different elements can be distinguished because the scattered energies are determined by the masses of the target atoms.
These features make TOF-SARS capable of both elemental and structural analysis.
When an ion approaches a surface, the angle at which it scatters depends on how directly it collides with a surface atom.
As in billiards, a direct collision results in backward scattering and an off-centre collision results in forward scattering.
Unlike billiards, however, rather than a clean ‘hit or miss’, the repulsion of the two positively charged nuclei causes a curvature in the ion's path even if it passes to the side of the atom.
The result is an excluded volume behind the target atom into which no ions penetrate.
This is called a shadow cone.
The ion trajectories are deflected and focused at the edges of the shadow cone much like rain falls off an umbrella, as shown in Fig. 1 .
Since the radii of these cones are of the order of inter-atomic spacings —ie 1–2A/9—the ions will penetrate only the outermost surface layers, making TOF-SARS extremely surface sensitive.
This shadowing phenomenon can be used to determine nearest neighbour interatomic distances in surfaces.
When the edge of the shadow cone cast by one atom crosses the position of a neighbouring atom, the ions concentrated at the edge of the cone make direct collisions with the neighbouring atom and are back scattered.
Nearest neighbour distances are determined by varying the incident beam angle to the surface, and observing the critical angles at which sharp rises in back scattering intensity occur.
These critical angles correspond to the condition at which the edge of the cone crosses the neighbouring atom.
The interatomic spacing can be calculated form the critical angle and the dimensions of the cone; these cones' dimensions can be computed from classical mechanics or they can be determined experimentally.
The scattered primary ion loses some of its energy to the target atom which, in turn, can be recoiled into a forward direction as shown in Fig. 1 .
If the recoiled atom is directed towards a neighbouring atom, a blocking cone is formed behind the neighbouring atom.
This produces a critical blocking angle for both scattered and recoiled particles.
Because the recoils result from direct collisions of projectile ions, recoiled particles have high, discrete kinetic energies, and because of the energetics of the collisions, molecular fragments are not observed as direct recoils and their energies are independent of their chemical bonding environment.
TOF-SARS instrumentation
An instrument for structural studies by using ion scattering and recoiling should be capable of varying the scattering (θ), beam incident (α), and crystal azimuthal (δ) angles —ie the angle between the primary ion beam direction and the crystallographic axes —(see Fig. 1 ); generating a pulsed kiloelectronvolt ion beam of low fluence; efficiently detecting ions and neutrals; and operating in an ultrahigh vacuum (10 -10 Torr).
The TOF-SARS system and the ion beam line with associated electronics has been built at the University of Houston.
The primary ion beam is a 1–5keV rare gas ion source, which has a narrow energy spread.
It is mass selected, pulsed at 10–40Hz with pulse widths of 20–50ns for an average ion current density of less than 1 nAcm -2 .
The detector is a channel electron multiplier or channelplate which is sensitive to ions and fast neutrals.
The sample is mounted on a precision manipulator and the angles α and δ are controlled by stepping motors.
Scattered and recoiled particles are velocity analysed by measuring their flight times from the sample to the detector, a distance of 1m, with standard timing electronics being used for data collection.
TOF spectra can be collected with a dose of less than 10 -3 ions per surface atom, making the technique relatively non-destructive.
Sample preparation
Single crystal samples with polished surfaces give the best results.
Samples are cleaned within the UHV chamber by sputtering  with AR+ ions, followed by annealing .
Polycrystalline samples can be used with good results in elemental analysis but these samples give less detailed information in structural analysis.
The sample cleanliness is checked by observing recoiled impurities in TOF-SARS or by using standard surface analysis techniques such as Auger electron spectroscopy (AES) and X-ray photo-electron spectroscopy (XPS).
The surface symmetry can be verified by observing the low energy electron diffractor (LEED) pattern.
TOF-SARS is capable of detecting all elements by either scattering, recoiling or both techniques.
The collection of neutrals plus ions will result in scattering and recoiling intensities that are determined by elemental concentrations, shadowing and blocking effects, and  classical cross-sections.
Spectra from a clean tungsten surface and from oxygen and hydrogen chemisorbed on that surface are shown in Fig. 2 .
The spectral peaks can be identified  by applying the laws of conservation of energy and momentum.
The TOF of an incident ion of mass M 1 and energy E that is scattered from a target atom of mass M & sub2 : at an angle θ is given by: where L is the flight distance.
Recoils that are ejected from single collisions of the projectile into an angle φ —ie direct recoils — have a TOF given by:
For clean W{211}, both the back scattering and the forward scattering spectra have sharp peaks at the TOF positions predicted by equation (a).
The absence of H, C, and O recoils in the forward scattering spectrum indicates that the surface has less than 1 per cent of a monolayer of these atmospheric contaminants.
The high background on the long TOF side of the peaks is attributable to ions that have lost energy because of multiple collisions and penetration.
When oxygen is chemisorbed on W{211}, an oxygen recoil peak is observed at the position predicted by equation (b).
The recoil peak is on the long TOF side of the argon scattering peak.
The position of the recoil peak relative to the scattering peak is determined by the relative velocities of the particles, which is controlled by the angles in equations (a) and (b).
As the scattering angle (θ) is reduced, the recoil peak shifts towards lower TOF until it appears on the low TOF side of the scattering peak.
Such a case is shown (Fig. 2b ) for hydrogen chemisorbed on W{211}, where the probe was a Ne+ beam.
The intensities necessary for structural analysis are obtained by integrating the indicated areas of fixed time windows under these peaks.
Structural analysis from TOF-SARS
Surface structural analyses are done by measuring the intensities of the scattered or recoiled peaks in the TOF spectra as a function of the various angles involved.
Examples of some of these measurements  on Pt{110} and W{211} crystals are presented below.
Back scattering versus incident angle (α) scans.
When an ion beam is incident on a surface at a grazing angle, each surface atom is shadowed by its neighbouring atom so that only forward scattering is possible.
As α increases, a critical value α c is reached each time the i th layer of target atoms moves out of the cones, allowing for head-on collisions and, hence, back scattering as shown in Fig. 1 .
If the back scattering intensity is monitored as a function of α, steep rises are observed when the focused trajectories at the edge of the cone pass through the neighbouring atom.
The first layer interatomic spacings can be determined by measuring α c along the directions for which specific crystal azimuths are aligned with the projectile direction and matching the experimentally determined ratio r/l;= tan α c to the (r ,l ) coordinates of the shadow cone.
The first layer spacing is then d = .
The first and second layer spacing is obtained similarly from α c measured along directions for which the first and second layer atoms lie in the same place.
Forward scattering versus incident angle (α) scans.
When α scans are done with a reduced scattering angle θ, peaks from shadowing are observed.
However, additional peaks arise from focusing of the scattered trajectories at the edge of the blocking cones of neighbouring atoms.
Such a scan is shown in Fig. 3 for (1×3) Pt{110} —ie the reconstructed phase of Pt{110} with two missing first layer rows.
The peaks observed in the α scans are labelled according to the trajectories indicated in the cross-section drawing.
Note that critical angles for shadowing effects (A-D) are at the low α side of the peaks and those for blocking effects (A'-C') are at the high α side of the peaks.
These results are consistent with a structure having two missing first layer rows.
Forward scattering versus azimuthal angle (δ) scans.
The surface periodicity, and therefore the crystal structure, can be determined by using a glancing incident angle, rotating the crystal azimuthally (ie about its normal), and monitoring the scattered flux at an off-specular angle (ie θ greater than 2α).
Under these conditions, the scattered flux is minimal along the crystallographic axes.
The reason for this is that the first layer atoms are shadowed by their neighbours along these principal axes and the projectile experiences a continuous potential that focuses it into a specular direction —ie θ = 2α.
Very little scattered flux is directed at off-specular angles.
Along intermediate axes where the first layer interatomic spacings are longer, incident trajectories can make more direct collisions, resulting in off-specular scattering.
This results in scattering minima along the crystallographic axes and maxima at intermediate axes.
The minima are located at δ values corresponding to the alignment of first layer neighbouring atoms.
These azimuthal patterns allow the immediate identification of the surface periodicity, or main crystallographic axes.
Scattering and recoiling structural contour maps.
TOF-SARS data can be presented in the form of SSCMs and RSCMs; these are plots of scattering or recoiling intensity in α, δ space.
The SSCM for a clean W{211} surface and RSCM for an oxygen chemisorbed W{211} surface are shown in Fig. 4 .
These plots reveal the symmetry of the data in α, δ space and serve as a fingerprint for a specific crystal face and adsorbate structure.
Considering the SSCM of clean W; α c is symmetrical about δ = , as is the first atomic layer.
The row of intense structures increasing diagonally at higher α values is from scattering from the second and third atomic layers which are not symmetrical about the  azimuth, as are all of the recoil structures.
This shows that the adsorption site is symmetrical with respect to this azimuth.
Detailed analysis shows that the clean surface is relaxed relative to the bulk structure and that the oxygen occupies threefold sites in which it is bound to two first, and one second layer tungsten atoms.
Recoiling versus incident angle (α) scans.
By measuring the α c for recoils, the interatomic distance of the adsorbate atom relative to its nearest neighbours along the direction of the projects can be determined.
Example plots of oxygen recoil intensities versus α for oxygen in two different coverages on W{211} are shown in Fig. 5 .
The low dose coverage of 0.5 monolayer gives a (2×1) adsorbate structure and the high dose coverage of 1.5 monolayer gives a (1times; 2) adsorbate structure as shown in Fig. 5 .
Sharp intensity rises from shadowing and sharp decreases from blocking are observed.
This indicates that, as the coverage  increases, shadowing and blocking along the  azimuth increase owing to oxygen atoms which are shadowed and blocked by their neighbouring oxygen atoms.
The α c s correspond to 0–0 distances equal to two tungsten lattice spacings at 0.5 monolayer and one tungsten lattice spacing at 1.5 monolayer, providing a direct measure of the 0–0 spacing.
TOF-SARS in catalysis
TOF-SARS has applications in catalysis as an elemental and structural analysis technique.
The unique features for elemental analysis are the direct monitoring of surface hydrogen and the extreme sensitivity to the outermost atomic layers.
As a structural analysis technique, TOF-SARS is sensitive to short range order —ie individual interatomic spacings along azimuths.
It is complementary to low energy electron diffraction, which probes long range order —ie a minimum domain size of 100–200A/9.
Structural studies by TOF-SARS have mainly been done on monocrystalline surfaces.
The adsorption on such well defined surfaces provides excellent models for more complicated practical catalysts.
These studies allow us to determine the active adsorption sites, the reactivity of different crystal faces, and the relationship between surface reconstruction and adsorption.
The near surface layers of practical supported catalysts have been studied through low energy ion scattering  by making use of the high surface sensitivity and ion beam sputtering to obtain monolayer ‘depth profiles’.
This can be used to determine the outermost or reactive species and the near surface concentration distribution.
Charging problems from the insulating support material can be overcome by neutralising with thermal electrons.
Some successful applications have been in studies of the spreading behaviour of oxides  such as MoO 3 on Al 2 O 3 ), the formation of monolayers by solid-solid wetting  (such as the spreading of MoO 3 , WO 3 , and V 2 O 5 on an Al 2 O 3 support), and the conditions for formation of surface polymolybdate, which is considered  to be a precursor state for the active catalyst.
TOF-SARS has significant applications in catalysis and can provide unique information about surface reactions.
Advances in all aspects of low energy ion scattering are occurring rapidly and the breadth of these applications will certainly expand in the near future.
Advances are expected particularly in areas such as the study of molecular species and polycrystalline surfaces and the use of large channel plates to collect data more efficiently.
J. Wayne Rabalais is Cullen professor of chemistry in the department of chemistry, University of Houston, Texas 77204, US.
Fig. 1.
Schematic illustration of:(a) back scattering and shadowing; and (b) direct recoiling with shadowing and blocking.
Fig. 2 TOF spectra for:(a) 4keV Ar + scattering from a clean W{211} surface;(b) 4keV Ne+ scattering from a hydrogen chemisorbed W{211} surface; and (c) 4keV Ar + scattering from an oxygen chemisorbed W{211} surface.
(FS = forward scattering; BS = back scattering; SS = single scattering; MS = multiple scattering.
Fig. 3 (a) Scattered Ne,+ intensity versus incident angle (a) scan for (1×3) -Pt{110} along the (112) azimuth, using 2keV Ne + and θ = 90°. (b) A top view of the two missing row reconstructed surface.
(c) Cross-sections through the (112) azimuth are shown along with the scattering trajectories.
Fig. 4. (a) Scattering structural contour map for the clean W{211} surface using 4keV Ar+ and θ = 163° and (b) a recoiling structural contour map for the W{211}- p -(1×2)-O oxygen adsorbed surface using 4keV Ar + and θ = 65°. (δ = O is the
azimuth; δ = -90° is the
azimuth and δ = +90° is the
azimuth.
Fig. 5.
Representative plots of oxygen recoiling intensity versus incident angle (α) for (a) both high (1.5 monolayer) and low (0.5 monolayer) oxygen coverage on a W{211} surface and (b) a view of the W{211} surface showing low coverage p (2×1) and high coverage p (1×2) domains.
(p means ‘primitive’ in LEED classification of surface structures.)
Biological control systems
J. M. Lynch and N. E. Crook
The search for new crop protection chemicals is continuing but the rate of success has been failing, making the process more expensive.
Scientists are also concerned that pest and disease populations may develop resistance to chemicals, or that the application of some chemicals may cause environmental damage.
Biological agents provide promising alternatives, but we need to understand more about their modes of action.
During the past 25 years the global market value of crop protection and enhancement agents has increased from ca $2 000m to ca $19 000m.
Biocontrol agents, dominated by the bacterium Bacillus thuringiensis , even now account for only ca 1 per cent of this market.
Set against this, however, is that over the same period the number of compounds screened for every new product generated has increased from 2 × 10 3 to 2 × 10 4 , which inevitably increases development costs.
Whereas biological agents have hitherto been less efficient in total kill, speed of kill and activity spectrum, they are also attractive — resistance to them in natural pest populations is infrequent, and they can present fewer hazards to operators and the environment.
These factors become particularly important when developing sustainable agricultural systems in which the emphasis is on optimising crop yield per unit rather than maximising yield per unit area.
There is, therefore, considerable opportunity for evaluating and developing biocontrol systems.
The challenge is to modify the development of populations of pests and diseases in relation to their enemies, which requires a clear understanding of population dynamics.
However, we believe that the market for biological agents will only be developed if we have a clear understanding of their mode of action.
Without this understanding, it will be difficult to predict the range of conditions under which the agents will function, and to write labels for their use of the kind which has become so essential for agrochemicals.
Plant diseases
The potential for disease biocontrol systems has largely focused on the soil.
A common observation has been that there are soils in which some diseases never seem to occur and it is presumed that microorganisms that are antagonistic to pathogens naturally occur in these ‘suppressive soils’.
There has often been a tacit assumption that these antagonists produce antibiotic metabolites and indeed, during one of the earliest metabolite searches, patulin (1 ) was detected as an antibiotic metabolite of Penicillium urticae ,Aspergillus clavatus and A. terreus .
Patulin was suppressive to the damping-off diseases of tomato .
This discovery did not prove to be particularly useful because the metabolite is a mycotoxin and mildly carcinogenic, illustrating that toxicological testing is just as important for natural products as it is for synthetic chemicals.
By contrast, the major success in disease biocontrol has been the use of Agrobacterium radiobacter strain 84 to control crown gall (tumours) of fruit trees (almond, peach, rose, cherry) caused by the various biotypes of Agrobacterium tumefaciens .
The antagonist produces an antibiotic, agrocin 84,(2 ) which is a  fraudulent adenine nucleotide.
Strain 84, which unlike the pathogen does not have the tumour-inducing (Ti) plasmid, is effective because its antibiotic is actively transported into pathogens via a permease that also transfers agropinopines to act as a food base for the pathogen.
The production of and resistance to the antibiotic is coded for on plasmid pAg K84, but unfortunately this can be transferred to the pathogen in the presence of another opine (nopaline), which is contained in crown gall tissue.
Thus, where there was a high disease pressure, the biocontrol system sometimes broke down.
now a variant of strain 84 has been genetically engineered with a deficient plasmid-transfer system .
This new strain (KT1026) has been satisfactorily evaluated in Australia and represents the first commercial release of a genetically engineered microorganism for biocontrol.
A range of other antibiotic metabolites with biocontrol potential has been identified .
For example,Pseudomonas fluorescens Pf-5 produces pyoluteorin (3 ), which is effective in controlling damping-off in cotton caused by Pythium ultimum (this disease prevents or retards the establishment of seedlings); other strains of the same bacterium produce pyrrolnitrin (4 ), which is active against a range of fungal pathogens of cotton, whereas phenazine-1-carboxylic acid (5 ) is active against take-all or ‘whiteheads’ of wheat caused by Gaeumannomyces graminis var tritici , which infects roots.
Among the fungal antagonists,Gliocladium virens produces gliovirin (6 ), which is active against damping-off of cotton.
Work at Littlehampton by N. Claydon, with J. R. Hanson at Sussex University, showed that a strain of Trichoderma harzianum , which produces the volatile 6n-pentyl-2 H -pyran-2-one (7 ), is active against a wide range of fungal plant pathogens  and that the more active but non-volatile harzianopyridone (8 ) is produced by another strain of the fungus .
Considering the vast range of secondary metabolites produced by fungi and bacteria, there is likely to be a huge number of potential uses in crop protection.
In addition to antibiotics, it should be recognised that enzymes are microbial products which could also be involved in the biocontrol action, for example, by causing the lysis of the cell walls of pathogens during the phenomenon of mycoparasitism (Fig. 1 ).
By using chromatofocusing techniques and enzyme assays, the enzymes involved in the biocontrol action of Trichoderma have been shown to be chitinases.  glucanases and proteases.
As yet we are unclear on the relative role of antibiosis, enzyme production and mycoparasitism in overall biocontrol activity.
Viral control agents
Insects are susceptible to a wide range of viral and bacterial pathogens.
Many insect viruses belong to families of viruses commonly found in mammals, but baculoviruses — viruses of the family Baculoviridae — occur only in invertebrates.
These viruses have received most attention because their high pathogenicity, narrow host range, and complete safety to vertebrates and plants, make them ideal candidates for biological pest control agents.
Most baculoviruses have one feature that is unique to insect viruses — they produce occlusion bodies in which the virions are embedded.
Occlusion bodies (OBs) can be from a few hundred nanometres to several micrometres across and these viruses can therefore easily be seen under the light microscope, which greatly aids diagnosis.
This feature allows the virus to persist in the environment even though its host, the insect larva, may be present for only a few weeks during the year.
The coding moth (Cydia pomonella ) granulosis virus is illustrated in Fig. 2 .
Baculoviruses have rod-shaped virus particles containing at least 25 different polypeptides and a large (100–200 Kbp) circular double-stranded DNA genome likely to contain close to 100 genes.
The most extensively studied baculovirus is Autographa californica NPV (AcMNPV).
Despite its large size, techniques for the genetic engineering of the AcMNPV genome are relatively straightforward and many studies on gene function have been done by using deletion and insertion mutants.
Foreign genes can readily be inserted into the virus genome and expressed at high levels.
If the foreign gene codes for a protein that is toxic to insects or which affects their metabolism, then the resultant recombinant virus may well be more pathogenic than the wild-type virus.
Two such viruses that have been produced recently expressed insect-specific neurotoxin genes from a mite  and a scorpion .
Many different viruses have been shown in field trials to be capable of giving very satisfactory levels of control of their host insect.
However, no more than about a dozen viruses have been produced on a commercial scale and only a few of these have been used on more  than a few hundred hectares per year.
South-American countries have shown that viruses can be used successfully on a major scale.
In Brazil,Anticarsia gemmatalis NPV is used to control velvetbean caterpillar on around 1 million ha of soybean.
In Colombia,Trichoplusia ni NPV has been used on a very large scale against T. ni larvae on cotton.
It was so successful that it replaced all other control methods and the insect ceased to be a major pest.
Viruses have also been used in Asia, particularly China, and in some African countries.
Most viruses used in pest control programmes have been sprayed directly onto crops.
One of the most successful uses of a viral control agent, however, causes long-term suppression of the pest population without ever being applied directly to the crop —ie the use of a non-occluded (sub-group C) baculovirus to control the rhinoceros beetle (Oryctes rhinoceros ), which is very damaging on coconut plantations.
The Oryctes virus is mixed with a bait to which adult beetles are attracted.
The virus infects the gut cells of the beetles, which subsequently disseminate the infection by excreting virus at feeding and breeding sites.
Larvae thus become infected and are killed by the virus.
Bacterial control
Many bacteria can also be isolated from insects and may be important in the natural control of insect populations, but the only bacteria which have been extensively studied and used as pest control agents are Bacillus spp.
By far the most important of these is Bacillus thuringiensis )(Bt ), but B. sphaericus is highly pathogenic to mosquitoes and B. popillae has been used to control scarab beetles, which are serious pasture pests.
Although Bt is a single species of bacterium, many thousands of different strains have been isolated and show a very wide range of activity spectra against insects — particularly Lepidoptera (moths and butterflies), but also Diptera and Coleoptera (flies and beetles).
The insecticidal activity of most strains of Bt arises mainly from the proteinaceous δ-endotoxins, which are produced in such large amounts within the cell when it forms spores that they produce a characteristic crystal (Fig. 3 ).
The monomeric form of the crystal protein varies from a M r of 27 000 up to 135 000, but these are protoxins which are cleaved by enzymes in the insect gut to give active toxins with M r from 24 000 to 65 000.
Bt strains have traditionally been classified by serotyping, but this system has been unable to cope with the vast number of new strains discovered recently.
Newer classifications depend on pathotyping  and more recently on sequence similarities of the δ-endotoxin genes.
The δ-endotoxin genes are usually located on large plasmids.
Up to five different toxin genes have been found in some strains of Bt and up to four different genes have been found on the same plasmid.
Strains with improved insecticidal activity have been produced in our laboratory by partial plasmid curing — so that the remaining genes are expressed at a higher level — and by transconjugation to produce new combinations of plasmids, giving a desirable activity spectrum.
Our understanding of the natural occurrence of Bt has been revised dramatically in the past few years.
Up until the mid-1980s, most isolates of Bt had been obtained from insects for material closely associated with insects).
It has now been confirmed, however, that Bt is a ubiquitous soil microorganism and that highly active strains of Bt can be found in a wide variety of environmental samples.
Glossary
Conjugation:
a mating-like process between bacteria in which genetic information is transferred from one cell to another.
Gene expression:
production of protein coded for by a gene.
Genome:
the genetic complement of a living organism.
Mycotoxin:
any toxin produced by a fungus.
Opine:
guanidoamino acids synthesised and released by plant cells after infection with a Ti plasmid and used by Agrobacterium tumefaciens as a source of carbon and nitrogen.
Partial plasmid curing:
a selection of strains with less than their normal complement of plasmids.
Pathotyping:
classifying microorganisms according to their pathogenicity (biological activity).
Plasmid:
circular DNA molecules able to replicate independently of the chromosome in microorganisms.
They are widely used in genetic engineering as vectors into which foreign genes are inserted for subsequent cloning or expression in cells.
Plasmid pAg K84:
the plasmid (47.7Kb) that codes for the production (and resistance) to the antibiotic agrocin 84.
Secondary metabolite:
a metabolite of restricted taxonomic distribution and having no obvious metabolic function.
Transconjugant:
a bacterium with new genetic information resulting from conjugation.
Tumour inducing plasmid (Ti plasmid):
the 200 Kb plasmid in Agrobacterium tumefaciens which carries virulence genes and induces tumours in fruit trees by transferring a T-DNA fragment (24 Kb) to the plant cell.
Virion:
synonym for virus particle.
Bt has been in commercial production for pest control since 1957.
The early strains used were not highly active against some major lepidopterous pests, but the discovery of the HD1 strain in 1969 gave rise to products with a broad activity spectrum against many pest species and, until very recently, this has been the basis of all commercial products for caterpillar control.
In the mid-1970s a strain of Bt was found in Israel that was active against Diptera and in particular against mosquitoes and blackflies.
Bt var israelensis (Bti ) rapidly became the basis for commercial products for mosquito control and has been used with considerable success in many countries.
In 1982, a new strain of Bt was isolated  from the mealworm,Tenebrio molitor (Coleoptera ), in Germany, and although not highly active against this initial host species it was found to provide very effective control of Colorado potato beetle (Leptinotarsa decemlineata ).
This, and a closely related isolate, are now in commercial production for control of this pest.
The massive investment in Bt strain search and genetic manipulation programmes since the mid-1980s began yielding new commercial products in the late 1980s.
These include new wild-type strains with higher activities against particular pests, transconjugant strains that combine the activities from more than one wild-type strain, including strains that are active against both Lepidoptera and Coleoptera , and genetically engineered bacteria in which a Bt toxin gene is expressed.
Since the δ-endotoxin is coded for by a single gene, which is usually carried on a plasmid, it has been relatively easy to locate and clone these genes from a number of strains of Bt and to express them in other organisms.
Tomato and tobacco plants expressing Bt δ-endotoxin genes are resistant to a number of lepidopterous pests.
Other plant species have also been transformed with the δ-endotoxin gene and are at various stages of development.
However, it is already apparent that resistance can be induced in insects relatively rapidly when they are exposed to toxin that has been expressed in plants or other organisms.
Although such problems still need to be overcome and further extensive field trials are required, it is likely that varieties of plants expressing the Bt toxin will be commercially available by the late 1990s.
Biocontrol through fungi
Entomopathogenic fungi — those causing disease in insects — have also been used in pest biocontrol, but they require high humidity.
Their use is therefore better suited to environments such as the rhizosphere/soil, protected crops, or tropical conditions (eg paddy fields), where the water potential is likely to be more amenable to spore germination and growth.
Otherwise, the problem may be overcome by developing moisture-conserving formulations for applications.
Many entomopathogenic fungi produce insecticidal toxins as secondary metabolites in submerged culture.
Cyclic depsipeptides (‘destruxins’)(9–11 ) from Metarhizium anisopliae have been studied most extensively.
Beauveria bassiana produces beauvericin (10 ), beauverilides and bassianalide (11 ), which are cyclic peptides.
The fungus Verticillium lecanii was developed commercially from work at Littlehampton.
The specific applications of these three fungi are illustrated in Table 1.
Conclusions and directions
The full potential of most biocontrol systems has not yet been realised — in the past because, perhaps, of a lack of credible interdisciplinary approaches in developing the science and a lack of commercial involvement in technological development.
This position is now changing, with increased public investment in the science and increased interest from biotechnology companies and the multi-national conglomerates.
Furthermore, with a growing public awareness of the need to protect the environment and generate crop production systems that are sustainable, the social and political climate is right for the development of biocontrol.
In the short term, at least, the best prospect is for biological agents to be integrated with conventional chemicals in crop protection.
Whereas biological control must be central to organic farming systems, the major potential application appears to be as a component of integrated farming systems which use limited amounts of chemical pesticides.
Molecular biological methods are being used increasingly in evaluating the mode of action and there is also the potential to develop new improved strains of biocontrol agents by genetic engineering.
There is environmental sensitivity about the latter approach and it is clear that there will be national and international regulatory hurdles to clear before such strains can be used.
We have a major research programme funded by the UK Department of the Environment to monitor the environmental impact of genetically modified organisms (GMOs).
The development of biocontrol systems is, however, not solely dependent on the use of GMOs.
There is a vast untapped genetic and metabolic biodiversity in nature that can also be harnessed.
Professor Jim Lynch is head of and Dr Norman Crook is a project leader in the microbiology and crop protection department, Horticulture Research International, Littlehampton, West Sussex BN17 6LP.
Table 1.
Selective pest controlling entomopathogenic fungi.
Some antibiotic microbial metabolites
Fig. 1.
Penetration of Rhizoctonia solani by Trichoderma viride.
Fig. 2.
Codling moth granulosis virus (photo: Peter Atkey, HRI).
Fig. 3.
Crystals of protein toxin from the pathogenic bacterium Bacillus thuringiensis (photo: Peter Atkey, HRI).
CONTROVERSIES: What's in a name?
R. D. Bagnall writes:
In recent years there has been a move in UK schools to standardise scientific nomenclature, and to phase out imperial measurements in favour of metric ones.
Not only this, but within the metric system itself there is standardisation, so that some of the terms with which I grew up have all but disappeared.
For example, children today are happy with metres and centimetres, but seem at a loss when faced with yards, feet and inches.
For them, energy comes in joules, and force in newtons, but whatever happened to ergs and dynes?
Simply measuring height can mean a communication problem between children and their parents, but as a university lecturer I face a much greater difficulty because the use of just one inadvertent ‘old’ term can easily lose a class of students.
Times of change
Over the years I have observed the changes at first hand, with each new undergraduate intake, and have had to alter my terminology to suit.
Purists argue that science should be precise, and that standardisation of terminology is part of this precision, but I think it has been a retrograde step.
Far from being an enriching process in which students can more easily grasp the basics of science, they are left the poorer because their understanding is in fact limited, in the sense of being bounded, by the very standardisation that was meant to free them.
Let me explain.
I was fortunate to grow up at a time when imperial measurements were generally used, but science was special in being both imperial and metric.
Like everyone else, I became equally at home with both systems, and I was doubly fortunate in that while I was still a student the metric system changed from being ‘cgs’ based (centimetres, grams, seconds) to ‘MKS’based (Metres, Kilograms, Seconds).
Thus today I am equally at home with both metric systems, and can switch from ergs to joules, or dynes to newtons with ease.
Not so my students however, for whom even simple things can cause immediate confusion.
For example, to them a thousandth of a litre is 1cm 3 .
If I inadvertently forget and use 1 cc or 1 ml, they look baffled.
They have only a limited view of science, and would have some difficulty reading, say, a textbook of physics from only about 25 years ago.
Chemical names
This modern impoverishment is well illustrated in chemistry.
When I was a student, the alkanes were known as methane, ethane, propane, butane, pentane etc , and it was generally accepted that not until pentane did the name indicate the number of carbon atoms involved.
Of course it is possible to have isomers of some of these.
For example, it is possible to string together the four carbons of butane in two different ways.
In the ‘good old days’, one structure was always n-butane (n for ‘normal’) while the other was isobutane (meaning an isomer of n-butane).
Today, however, isobutane takes the name of the longest straight run of carbon atoms, and is called 2-methylpropane.
There is some merit in this of course, because there are several isomers of pentane and higher hydrocarbons, and it is a little confusing to call them all isopentane, isohexane etc .
Nevertheless, modern nomenclature loses more than it gains.
For a start it sounds clumsy, and the likely structure isn't immediately obvious.
For example, suppose I give you some 2,2,3-trimethylpentane.
How many carbon atoms are there per molecule?
Its other name is isooctane.
Now how many carbons?
I rest my case.
Let's get a little more complicated.
The aliphatic acids were once known as  formic, acetic, propionic, butyric, pentanoic, hexanoic etc , but today they are more systematically named after the hydrocarbon with the same number of carbon atoms —ie methanoic, ethanoic, propanoic, butanoic etc .
This looks more uniform, and the old names are then described as ‘trivial’.
However, the ethyl ester of ethanoic acid used to be called ethyl acetate, whereas today it is ethyl ethanoate.
The latter version may be more logically correct, but it jars on the ears, and is more difficult to say.
Dental problems
I teach materials science to dental students which involves using chemical names.
Did you know that almost all modern dentures are made by polymerising methyl methacrylate? the name is a bit of a mouthful (if you'll excuse the pun), and is better known by the acronym MMA.
The polymer is then polymethylmethacrylate, or PMMA for short, I am rapidly approaching the point where I cannot teach this subject any more in this way, even though the textbooks still do, because students no longer recognise the trivial name ‘acrylate’.
Instead, dentures are now made from methyl-2-methylpropenoate — with no acronyms.
The familiar smell of the dental surgery comes from oil of cloves, a component of some dental cements.
If I call it by this name I will have the whole of a dental audience with me.
If I use its other trivial name, eugenol, most people will understand.
However, if I call it by its old full name, 2-methoxy-4-allylphenol, or worse by its modern one, 3-(4-hydroxy-3-methoxyphenyl)propene, I will have lost everyone.
The situation can get much worse.
Among the early candidate adhesives for sticking fillings to teeth was an adduct of N -phenylglycine and glycidyl methacrylate known as NPG-GMA.
However, more systematic naming can be used, and the same substance can appear as N —(2-hydroxy-3-methacryloxy-propyl)-N -phenyl glycine.
This makes things very confusing.
Trivial names
The point is that the trivial names and acronyms are easy to remember and immediately evoke fond memories.
In fact a good analogy may be made with human relationships.
We all have proper names, but familiarity allows us to give each other nicknames with which we feel more comfortable.
It is the same with science and its trivial names.
They do one thing that systematic nomenclature cannot do — they make the subject user-friendly with a familiar ‘feel’ to it.
Some acronyms are almost pronounceable, and have become ‘words’ in their own right.
Take HEMA (pronounced hee-ma as in Lima) for example, a water soluble monomer used widely in medical materials.
Its old name was hydroxyethyl-methacrylate, from which the acronym HEMA comes, but its new name is 2-hydroxyethyl-2-methylpropenoate.
Catchy, isn't it?
Or what about 4-META (pronounced 4-mee-ta as in cheetah), currently used in some dental fillings to promote adhesion to teeth.
Its full name is 4-methacryloxyethyl trimellitic anhydride, and even this isn't a true systematic name because it still refers to methacrylate chemistry.
Ask most students what the letters PVC stand for, and you will be told ‘polyvinyl chloride’.
Ask what a vinyl group is though, and they may not know, because although students know the polymer as PVC, they actually call it polychloroethene, and it doesn't occur to many of them that there must be something called vinyl chloride.
The loss of trivial names such as vinyl, amyl, allyl, and so on, which in a couple of syllables conjure up huge chunks of molecules, continues to amaze me.
My world of science is so much richer than theirs, because I not only know the systematic names, but I am also fluent in the trivial ones, the scientific nicknames which allow us to chat about science over coffee.
It is this richness of scientific language which I feel has been lost.
The result is that I rarely hear students chatting about science — it would simply take too long to formulate a question and answer.
Imagine for example the stunning impact of ‘pass the sugar’ in proper chemistry, or being asked if you want ethanoic acid with your french fries.
It doesn't happen, and students are the poorer because the compounds that I see as old friends are more like enemies to them.
If you still don't believe me, try asking what acetone is.
You'll probably get a blank stare, because today it's propanone.
I once saw someone turn this situation to his advantage.
Diethyl ether — just plain ether to most of us — needs to be scrupulously dry for some experiments, and the normal method of drying is to use sodium wire in the bottle.
He kept finding his ether bottle emptied by unknown hand, but solved the problem by relabelling the bottle as 3-oxapentane.
After that no one knew what it was, so no one touched it.
Trivial names are much better as memory aids as well.
I have often found that schoolchildren who find chemistry tedious can have their interest rekindled by humorous stories of compound names.
Cyclobutane has four carbons in a ring, and so is square shaped.
It could perhaps also be called squarane.
Add a triangle to one side, and you have housane.
Make a cube shaped hydrocarbon and the obvious name is cubane.
Where the trivial name is easily remembered by association with shape, the systematic name would kill any enthusiasm.
The latest addition to the list, buckminsterfullerene, has 60 carbon atoms and would be hideous to name systematically.
I remember a story from my student days which has stuck with me in this way ever since.
The chemistry department had a strong reputation in carbohydrate chemistry, and the story had it that as new sugars were discovered they were given names that always ended in ‘-ose’—eg sucrose, glucose, fructose etc .
Faced with yet another new sugar, for which a name was required, a temporary name was given while the big decision was made.
For a short while it was apparently known as ‘godnose’.
The point of this is not the trivial name involved, but the fact that I remember it so clearly.
That is what modern scientific teaching has lost, and that is why it is poorer.
When I worked in the pharmaceutical industry, trivial naming was taken to an extreme.
Each new compound synthesised was simply given a number, sometimes up to six figures long.
Remarkably, compounds which showed particular promise as drugs became routinely discussed by number alone, although everyone knew the chemistry behind them.
A simple five-figure number might conceal extremely complex chemistry.
This familiarity, this friendliness of science is fast disappearing under the banner of standardisation.
Like many others from the 1960s and before, I am fortunate that I missed the modern way and so view science as a richer and altogether more fulfilling experience.
My memories are full of anecdotes and trivia, not stultified by rigid dogma.
I began this discussion by saying that adherence to systematic nomenclature is a limiting kind of freedom.
I would like to end with a plea to all those out there of similar mind to keep alive the trivial names, the odd stories, the quirky characters and the strange anecdotes, and to pass these on to the next generation with a simple message.
‘Real’ science is often not the same as in textbooks.
Real science can be fun.
Dr R. D. Bagnall is a senior lecturer in the department of conservative dentistry, University of Edinburgh, High School Yards, Edinburgh EH1 1NR.
BOOKS
Electroanalysis of biologically important compounds J. P. Hart
With the challenge, ‘Convince us that we should adopt the methods you advocate’, we ignorant occasionally throw the erudite into disarray.
Mentally, at least, I issued the challenge in respect of this well presented and impressively referenced volume and am now convinced that is folly for anyone performing analyses on biological samples to remain ignorant of what electroanalysis can offer.
We each have shopping lists of awkward analytes or matrices that we hope to ‘tame’ by some new technique or development that offers specificity, sensitivity, precision, economy, and speed.
The estimation of glutathione in whole blood and plasma by liquid chromatography with electrochemical detection is one of many examples detailed in this book.
Similarly, the application of linear sweep voltammetry to the simultaneous determination of hypoxanthine, xanthine and uric acid must be attractive to those investigating xanthine oxidase inhibitors and other urate-lowering drugs.
Could there be an application for the observation that most methylated purines give neither a peak nor an inflexion on cathodic stripping voltammetry?
A wealth of detail pertinent to analysis of many biologically important molecules is supplied, yet there seem to be notable omissions such as monosaccharides —eg fructose — oligosaccharides (for which electroanalytical methods exist), while catecholamines are given passing mention and referenced, neatly, to another volume in the series.
There is little adverse effect from the light sprinkling of typographical errors.
Figures, equations and structural formulae are commendably clear: the general index, index of chemical substances and list of symbols/abbreviations, all add to user friendliness.
Not only is the book up to date— it also indicates where future developments may lie.
It is value for money.
A. D. NICOL
Transition metals in total synthesis P. J. Harrington
This book developed from a course of graduate lectures in Advanced organic synthetic methods given at the State University of New York at Binghampton.
It is an interesting, well written book and I anticipate that it will gain a wide readership.
Each of the 15 chapters focuses on the total synthesis of a biologically active natural product.
The syntheses have been carefully chosen by the author and demonstrate how the unique chemistry of transition metal complexes allows otherwise difficult synthetic transformations to be done efficiently.
Examples include a synthesis of thienamycin by using organoiron chemistry and a prostaglandin synthesis exploiting transmetallation reactions.
The layout of each chapter is particularly easy to follow.
For each total synthesis a brief introduction is given, outlining the biological activity and other syntheses of the target compound.
Then the general principles of the organometallic reactions involved in the synthesis are discussed in some detail.
This information is supported by numerous figures, references and tables of examples, which enable the reader to assess the scope as well as the limitations of the reaction in question.
Finally, the total synthesis of each target compound is described in detail, accompanied by useful practical comments.
I enjoyed reading the book, and feel that the author's original approach makes the book a valuable addition to those already published on the subject.
The price of the book may preclude its private purchase, but it would be a useful addition to any library.
D. K. DEAN
Studies in organic chemistry no 41: Organic chemistry in action: the design of organic synthesis F. Serratosa
This new book deals with aspects of the mysteries of designing organic syntheses.
It is written in a very personal style, and reflects very much the author's own approach to the teaching of organic synthesis at the advanced undergraduate and (better) postgraduate levels.
In the 12 chapters the author takes us from a basic introduction to the design of synthesis, through the various methodologies, to a few selected total syntheses.
These are two valuable chapters on stereoselective syntheses, and a useful account of elementary computer assisted methods is included.
There is even a copy of the program Chaos, which has been written for beginners as a heuristic aid for designing organic synthesis.
It would be easy to say that this volume is just another book’ on organic synthesis — one which will sit alongside the excellent texts of S. Warren, and the more recent book by E. J. Corey and X. M. Cheng,The logic of chemical synthesis .
It differs significantly from these texts, however, because Warren's books still provide the most balanced approach for teaching organic synthesis at the undergraduate level, while The logic of chemical synthesis provides an outstanding perspective for postgraduate teaching.
Serratosa's coverage of organic synthesis is too fragmented and too personalised to make the book an undergraduate text, and it is not advanced enough for postgraduates.
While it would be easy to criticise the choice of material, the examples used and the emphasis, Serratosa's book does contain some new innovations for teaching the difficult subject of the design of synthesis, and I will certainly use some of these features in my own classrooms.
G. PATTENDEN
Colorants and auxiliaries: organic chemistry and application properties, vol 1: Colorants; vol 2: Auxiliaries J. Shore (ed) Bradford Society of Dyers and Colourists
Colour science is well served by books on specific aspects of the subject, many of which are published by the Society of Dyers and Colourists.
This latest book from the Society has a broader content: as the preface states, it is directed specifically to the organic chemistry and application of dyes and pigments and to the auxiliaries used with them in textile coloration processes.
The book thus seeks to explain the application of these colorants in terms of their organic chemistry.
The book is divided into two volumes.
Volume 1, dealing with colorants, contains seven chapters from five contributors.
With books of this nature, there is always the danger of varying quality between chapters, but happily the book's editor has by and large overcome this difficulty.
There are good, consistent treatments of the synthesis and properties of the main chemical classes of colorants (chapters 4–7), but an especially appealing chapter is chapter 3, in which the structure of dye molecules is related to everyday dyeing practicalities, such as colour application and colour fastness.
By contrast, the treatment of pigments is disappointing, only one chapter being specifically devoted to these highly important colorants.
The application performance of pigments is extensively governed by their physical properties, and it is unfortunate that this relation is not highlighted.
Indeed, pigment technology is a fascinating example of applied surface and colloid chemistry.
Volume 2 deals with auxiliaries: these substances, derived from a vast range of chemical types, assist the application of dyes and are very often vital ingredients of dye-baths.
Volume 2 is also different from volume 1 in being — except for one chapter — the work of one contributor, T. Baldwinson.
To provide a coherent survey of dye auxiliaries is ambitious, yet Baldwinson's five chapters are both highly informative and readily assimilated.
He is to be congratulated on this singularly structured approach.
The remaining chapter in volume 2 provides a very useful account of fluorescent brightening agents.
The clear presentation makes it a particularly useful reference book.
However, it is disappointing that it concentrates quite so much on the more traditional aspects of coloration, especially the coloration of textiles.
There is little or nothing on the coloration of other everyday materials, such as leather and paper, nor is there any mention of non-substrate uses, such as in dye lasers or photovoltaic cells.
Arguably, though, the degree of coverage which can be sensibly contained in a book of manageable size is necessarily limited by the level of detail presented.
Indeed, overall this is a useful companion for any scientist or technologist with an interest in colour at a price that, for its content, is not too prohibitive.
R. R. MATHER
Computer chemistry M. Marsili
Computer chemistry is an all embracing title that leaves the reader anticipating what is to follow.
Can the author cover it all in 200 pages?
Will the contents be weighted towards the author's speciality?
I was surprised, therefore, on starting to read this book, to find that there were three introductory chapters with sections on Man and computers and The computer as a laboratory as well as the more intriguing Computer chemistry and human psychology and Problem solving and artificial intelligence .
At this stage, having read through a brief overview of generic computer hardware and boolean algebra as well as the author's personal views on how various chemists approach computers and the differences between ‘computational’ and ‘semantic’programs, I am left wondering at whom this book is aimed.
The application chapters also have some surprises.
The chapter on molecular modelling dismisses much of three dimensional molecular visualisation with the comment, ‘Besides the trivial operation of rotating the whole structure or selected substructures around a given bond’, and goes on to discuss comparison of molecular structures.
Molecular mechanics and molecular dynamics are also covered in this chapter but with no mention of the important new perturbation techniques aimed at estimating free energy differences.
The next three chapters cover the areas of reaction kinetics, spectroscopy and organic reactions in more detail with examples taken from specific programs.
At the end, I am still left wondering who is going to buy the book.
If I am an undergraduate, the two basic areas of quantum mechanics and X-ray crystallography are not covered and I wonder whether I am going to be examined on chemistry and human psychology?
If I am a chemist already, wanting an overview of another subject, I may not want to read three introductory chapters.
Personally I would have preferred a review of what software exists, and whether I require access to a PC or a Cray supercomputer.
J. M. GOODFELLOW
Dietary fibre: chemical and biological aspects C. A. T. Southgate, K. Waldron, I. T. Johnson and G. R. Fenwick (eds)
This book is a record of the papers presented at the Fibre 90 conference held in Norwich in April 1990.
There are 57 papers and seven workshop reports.
The papers are grouped into seven sections: dietary fibre; health and the consumer; the chemistry of dietary fibre; analytical techniques; fibre and the small intestine; fibre and the large intestine; fibre and lipid metabolism; and fibre and the food and pharmaceutical industries.
The papers are very mixed.
There are some authoritative reviews and also some quite short research notes, outlining research in progress.
There are also minor errors in some of the references.
It is an interesting book to dip into, but it cannot be read at one sitting.
The research papers dealing with some of the newer forms of dietary fibre now being studied, such as sugar beet fibre, prune fibre and pea fibre were most interesting.
The brief workshop reports have all been written by experts and are helpful in telling the reader what was discussed and what decisions were taken.
The authors are truly international, many from Europe and some from the US, Canada, Australia, India, Japan and Israel.
The book has been well edited but the quality of the typescript is variable.
The subject index is helpful but there is unfortunately no author index.
The book has been produced very quickly after the conference and the editors and publishers should be congratulated.
This book must be available for all interested in nutrition and dietary fibre.
Food scientists and technologists will find much of interest and value, particularly if they are involved with product formulation and development.
I. MORTON
Concepts and applications of molecular similarity M. A. Johnson and G. M. Maggiora (eds)
At the end of a scientific lecture, C. P. Snow once received a backhanded compliment from his chairman who said, ‘We all knew Raman spectroscopy was complicated, but did not realise how complicated until we heard Snow's talk’.
I have somewhat the same feeling after reading this edited volume on molecular similarity.
The notion of one molecule resembling another is fundamental to much of chemistry, and in particular to the world of medicinal chemistry where variants of compounds are synthesised with the aim of improving biological activity.
Given that a pharmaceutical company may have a database of perhaps hundreds of thousands of previously synthesised compounds, it is important to be able to ask whether anything in that database resembles a current lead compound or molecule of interest.
This is a fairly mundane question, but the book does not give a mundane answer.
It is heavily weighted towards mathematical aspects of the topic and even goes into philosophical and psychological questions.
‘What do we mean by similar?’
It may be scholarly to give many references to work done in the 18th century and to plumb the depths of graph theory, but the result is not going to be of very much help to a working chemist.
Rather the book is aimed at people who write programs for the bench scientist.
Closest to his or her heart is the chapter by Hopfinger and Burke and that by Dean on molecular graphics.
For the expert the book will certainly become a standard work of reference.
W. G. RICHARDS
Profiles, pathways, and dreams: The right place at the right time.
J. D. Roberts
This book is the autobiography of John D. Roberts, the organic chemist whose pioneering work has done much to establish NMR spectroscopy as a routine tool in organic chemistry.
Roberts was born in 1918, the son of a dairy farmer in Puente, California.
His parents were bookish and encouraged the young Roberts in his early interest in science.
High academic success did not come immediately to Roberts — he went as an undergraduate to the University of California at Los Angeles (UCLA) rather than the prestigious Cal-Tech, because his high school grades were too low for the latter.
Roberts' student days coincided with the depression and to finance his studies he had to work at night and on Saturdays in a bakery store.
He graduated in 1940 and spent a short time at Pennsylvania State University before returning to UCLA to do his PhD.
A variety of short term appointments followed, including a year at Harvard, after which Roberts went to Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
From there he moved in the mid-1950s to CalTech, where his interest in NMR spectroscopy arose.
Roberts covers many topics, including his involvement in organic synthesis, and his work on the C 4 H 7 + carbocation.
Though his input has been enormous, he is modest about the extent to which it has brought him fame.
He writes ‘…scientists are no different from football or baseball players, and genuine Hall of Famers are very rare indeed’.
I enjoyed reading this book and recommend it to anyone with an interest in the way chemistry really develops, as opposed to the way it is described in the research literature.
J. W. NICHOLSON
Food Irradiation and the chemist D. E. Johnston and M. H. Stevenson (eds)
This book is the proceedings of an international symposium on Food Irradiation held in Belfast in April 1990.
To speed up publication the presentations have been used unaltered so the book lacks a coherent style or structure.
Ten chapters, each by a different author, cover different aspects of the subject, however there is some repetition.
Closer editing would have improved this but at the cost of time.
It would also have helped to eliminate contradictions between authors such as the use of incorrect units.
For example, in the excellent chapter on dosimetry by Sharpe, dose rates of ‘K Gy per hour’ are stated as meaningless, but are subsequently used in the chapter on irradiation of packaged foods by Kilcast.
These comments apart, the book is obviously timely considering the current importance of the subject.
It provides a good overview of the situation on how irradiated foods of different kinds can be monitored both for effects and to check whether they have or have not been irradiated.
In some areas such as spices, which retain some inorganic minerals, there are good methods for detecting irradiation, while for other foods no reliable methods exist.
Other aspects are looked at such as packaging food and irradiation interactions.
As the first chapter states, ‘the true challenge is for the chemist’, and it will be for the analytical chemist to develop reliable methods.
This book clearly indicates the problems, and some of the ways they might be solved.
A. R. GRIFFITHS
Sonochemistry: the uses of ultrasound in chemistry T. J. Mason (ed)
This book is well written and consists of 11 chapters written by nine authors, all experts in their own subject.
A good general introduction is followed by a clear discussion of the basic principles of particle displacement and factors affecting cavitation and bubble movement.
In the next chapter the diagrams are particularly helpful in explaining the application of ultrasound in non-intrusive diagnosis, inspection and monitoring.
I found it helpful to read the chapters on power ultrasound, commercially available equipment and scale — up considerations together.
The first covers transducers, horns or velocity transformers and acoustic input and amplitude, and mentions health and safety.
The other two chapters both include useful tables of the advantages and disadvantages of different types of equipment.
Cleaning baths, probe systems, submersible transducers, whistle reactors and tube reactors are described and illustrated by Mason, while Goodwin discusses the first two methods with details of other larger scale equipment.
The role of ultrasound in organic synthesis concentrates on classical reactions such as reduction, carbanions, alkylation, ester hydrolysis and acylation of aromatics with a mention of biological and sonochemical reactions, together with a list of references.
The chapter on new free radical reactions discusses the Barbier reaction — which is similar to the Grignard reaction — and the next chapter gives details of catalyst preparation, activation and the various types of systems, with a comprehensive list of references.
The use of high and low frequency ultrasonic waves in polymer chemistry is followed by polymerisation together with references.
Ultrasound in chemical technology includes atomisation, precipitation and crystallisation, filtration, membrane permeability, and electrochemistry.
I enjoyed reading this book and can recommend it as a source of information about the background theory and application of ultrasound to chemistry.
R. WALKER
Langmuir-Blodgett films G. Roberts (ed)
As the first major book devoted wholly to Langmuir-Blodgett (LB) films, this book covers virtually all aspects of the preparation, characterisation and potential applications of these molecular assemblies.
It begins with an historical introduction indicating the origins and development of the subject which is followed by chapters on the preparation of floating Langmuir layers and transferred LB films.
Details are given on the vast range of molecules suitable for use with the LB deposition technique.
A plethora of optical, electrical and structural characterisation techniques are discussed in chapters 4 and 5.
Chapter 6, on the biological aspects of LB films, brings together many of the interesting properties of biomolecules in relation to their behaviour both on the water surface and as transferred LB structures, in one concise review.
The final and longest chapter describes the potential applications of LB films and stresses those areas in which the author feels the greatest opportunities exist for industrial and commercial exploitation.
This book is essential reading for any researcher new to the subject or requiring access to the myriad techniques used and studies undertaken.
Each author has been allowed the freedom to write in his own style and provides a large set of references promoting further study.
Some repetition of certain material does occur, however, in several chapters, although this means that each chapter may be read almost independently of the others.
While the pace of research in this subject has meant that the most recent work is not included, the reader is directed towards the  most active research groups and the most commonly used journals.
In conclusion, this book has brought together for the first time the work of all the main researchers and provides a motivating set of reviews for any interested scientist.
T. RICHARDSON
Methodological surveys in biochemistry and analysis, vol 20.
Analysis for drugs and metabolites including anti-infective agents E. Reid and I. D. Wilson (eds)
The analysis of drugs in biological fluids is becoming a task of increasing complexity and technical sophistication and the importance placed upon results obtained from bioanalytical procedures for drug determination cannot be understated.
It is with this view in mind that this book must be read.
Most of the text comes from the proceedings of the 1989 Bioanalytical forum at Guildford, and is divided into three main sections — producing valid analytical results; the analysis of anti-infectives, and specific approaches for various drugs and metabolites.
In each case, the individual topics (which are discussed by experts) are backed up with additional notes and comments from other participants.
It was refreshing to see how much importance is now being given to producing both valid and acceptable analytical results.
The introduction and implementation of good laboratory practices (GLP) in the pharmaceutical and related industries has helped the cause of the ‘humble’ bioanalyst considerably.
This book covers at length the types of problems encountered in validating a given analytical method, with correct data manipulation and with the quality control of the assay procedure.
Each contribution is well referenced and has a succinct conclusion.
The section on the analysis of anti-infectives and their metabolites covers the analysis of a wide range of anti-infectives — from β-lactam drugs to antivirals such as AZT — by using both chromatographic and immunoassay techniques.
The additional notes and comments proved very useful — in particular, the section on drug survival in clinical samples that are being irradiated as an anti-HIV precaution, which should prove to be very useful to those working in this area.
The third section of the text will enable readers to plan approaches for analysing various drugs and their metabolites, including the automation of the analysis of bulk samples.
As is usual with texts in this series, this book contains an analyte index as well as a general index, for easy reference.
This book will be of great use as a reference text, both to students studying aspects of drug analysis and toxicology, as well ass scientists who are already working within the pharmaceutical and healthcare industries.
A must for the departmental library.
M. R. DEWJI
Harry James Barber 1904–91
Harry James Barber — John to many of his intimates — died on 3 March 1991, after a prolonged courageous battle with Parkinson's disease, at the end of 21 years of active, enjoyable retirement.
He was born at Godstone in Surrey and educated at Kingston Grammar School and King's College London.
After graduating with first class honours, Barber obtained a PhD in 1927 under Prof Samuel Smiles, FRS, for work on cyclic disulphides derived from diphenyl.
Barber then began what was to be a 43 year long career with May & Baker, as research chemist under Dr A. J. Ewins, FRS, carrying out process research in support of the manufacture of products such as neoarsphenamine (NAB) for treating syphilis.
This practical involvement led naturally into five years spent as production manager at the Wandsworth factory, just before M & B moved to Dagenham in Essex in 1934.
At Dagenham, Barber returned to chemical development work, becoming head of the Technical Development Division and later chemical research manager.
He often reminisced about his contribution to the manufacture of sodamide, an essential reagent in the production of M & B 693, making the first few batches himself using molten sodium and ammonia — an exciting reaction to control.
Barber was also concerned with innovative process development in support of a second line of successful research at Dagenham, into new aromatic diamidines,eg propamidine, of value against bacterial infections, and pentamidine, used for treating human sleeping sickness, and in recent years for controlling a symptom of Aids.
World War II brought many new urgent needs such as anti-malarials, antiseptics and in particular participation in secret inter-allied research aimed at the synthesis of penicillin.
Immediately after the war, Barber was a member of a British Intelligence Objective Subcommittee survey team investigating research and manufacture in Germany.
By 1958, with more than 50 papers published, the University of London recognised Barber's contribution to chemotherapy by awarding him a DSc.
With the new M & B Research Institute being built at Dagenham to house some 350 scientists, Barber was appointed research controller, a post he held until his retirement.
From the outset in 1947, Barber was closely concerned with the initiation of M & B's agricultural and veterinary activities.
His skill in managing multidisciplinary activities soon led to important successes.
The efforts of his team, headed by Keith Carpenter, were recognised by the Queen's Award in 1969 for technological innovation in the discovery and development of the hydroxybenzonitrile selective weed killers, notably bromoxynil and ioxynil, and again in 1974 for the weedkiller, asulam.
Barber was a member of the council of the Royal Institute of Chemistry (1960–63) and vice-president (1963–64), chairman of the Essex Section (1967–68), and for many years a member of other institute committees.
Barber may best be remembered as a founder member in 1948 of the Fine Chemicals Group of the Society of Chemical Industry, and later as its chairman.
Under the pseudonym Matthew Bramble, Barber wrote as early as 1957 in all three journals extant at the time, eloquently pleading for ‘one good chemical news journal to read once a week’;Chemistry in Britain was eventually launched in 1965.
Two leisure interests will be particularly recalled by Barber's friends — playing hockey into his 60s and membership of the Savage Club during his last 26 years.
Barber had an exceptional flair for expressing himself fluently in crystal clear prose.
Perhaps above all he will be remembered by many as the friend who taught them the craft that is organic chemistry.
Bill Wragg and Denys Coomber
radicals
IN THE LIMELIGHT
Alec Campbell
In 1802, when blowpipe analysis was at the peak of its popularity, Robert Hare in Philadelphia invented his oxy-hydrogen blowpipe.
With this he was able to melt several substances previously regarded as infusible.
When a piece of quicklime was held in the tip of the flame it became white hot and glowed brilliantly.
An engineer, Thomas Drummond of Edinburgh, saw the possibility of using the effect for illumination and in 1828 created the Drummond light, usually known as the limelight.
Theatre managers were quick to realise the dramatic potential of such a dazzling light.
The equipment they used consisted of two concentric tubes leading to a horizontal jet, and an arrangement of bevelled wheels for turning the lump of lime.
The gases were contained in gasbags of indiarubber, oiled silk, or the rubberised waterproof cloth of Macintosh and Hancock.
The bags were fitted with brass nozzles and taps, and when in use were compressed between hinged and weighted boards.
The oxygen was usually supplied by a pharmacist to whom the bag was sent for filling.
Lime lights were also used for magic lantern shows until they were superseded by the carbon arc.
Few theatre managers understood the nature of the gases which they handled.
This is not surprising: even Pilâtre de Rozier, the French balloonist, once filled his mouth with a mixture of hydrogen and oxygen with a few to blowing the gases into a flame.
The resulting explosion loosened his front teeth.
In 1887 a Newcastle theatre manager sent a boy to the pharmacist with a bag to be topped up with oxygen.
The pharmacist, Joseph Wilson Swan of electric light fame, found the bag was half-full of coal gas and promptly returned it.
Meanwhile the manager had started to put coal gas into the other, oxygen, bag.
In that state he gave it to the boy who set off on his half-mile walk.
Outside the Bank of England he put the bag on the ground to have a few moments rest.
A man emerged from a nearby tobacconist's, lit his pipe, and threw down the lighted match, causing an explosion which blew out the windows of the Bank.
At the enquiry which followed one manager said ‘I always light the oxygen first, and when that is burning I turn on the gas’.
Another said he believed that the gases should always be mixed, adding superfluously ‘I am not familiar with the management of experimental gases’.
The brilliant incandescence of heated lime led Welsbach in the 1880s to experiment with fabrics impregnated with nitrates of the lanthanides and actinides; on ignition a fragile skeleton of oxides was left.
These gas mantles brought new life to gas lighting just when it was threatened by Swan's electric light bulbs.
The limelight was fading, but the white hot glow of the mixed oxides of thorium and cerium was there to take its place.
RSC news
Food and cancer
An international conference entitled Food and cancer prevention 92 will be held at the UEA, Norwich, on 13–16 September 1992, sponsored by the RSC Food Chemistry Group.
Topics covered will include chemical and biological aspects of dietary anticarcinogens and antimutagens.
For details contact the AFRC Institute of Food Research 
Council and boards
A number of vacancies on the RSC Council and boards are due to be filled at the AGM on 16 July 1992 in London.
Members are invited to make or support nominations for these vacancies.
Details can be found on page 61.
Annual congress
The 1992 annual congress of the RSC will take place at UMIST on 13–16 April.
Details of the programme are given on page 62.
Risk management
The RSC is to hold an international conference on the Risk management of chemicals — can chemicals be used safely?, on 13–16 July 1992.
For details see page 60.
Hickinbottom
The 1991–92 Hickinbottom fellowship for research in organic chemistry (established as a result of a generous endowment from the will of the late Prof W. J. Hickinbottom) has been awarded to Dr C. Abell of Cambridge University (see below ).
The scheme is designed for the younger (less than 36 years old) organic chemist, the funds to be used for the purchase of equipment, books and consumables, technical assistance, professional travel or any other activity directly related to the research being undertaken.
For details contact Mrs P. A. Mohamed, RSC, Burlington House, Piccadilly, London W1V 0BN.
Applications for the 1992–3 fellowship should be submitted by 1 April 1992.
Organic synthesis
A one-day Perkin Division symposium on Trends and developments in organic synthesis will be held at the Scientific Societies' Lecture Theatre at 10.30 am on Thursday 20 February 1992.
The meeting will include a Tilden lecture by Prof G. Pattenden (Nottingham) entitled Synthetic methods for target synthesis .
Supporting lectures will be given by Dr D. W. Knight (Nottingham), Prof P. J. Kocieński (Southampton), Dr P. J. Parsons (Reading) and Dr S. E. Thomas (Imperial College, London).
For details contact S. S. Langer 
Downland dinner
The 150th anniversary of the RSC was celebrated by the Downland section with a dinner at the Gatwick Manor hotel in October.
About 80 representatives of local industry, universities, colleges and schools attended the event.
The after dinner speaker was Professor Heinz Wolff, of Brunel University, who gave a witty and entertaining talk on the possible applications of chemistry to manned space travel.
He embraced topics as diverse as oxygen recycling, air sterilisation using  hydrogen peroxide and the treatment of sewage under zero gravity conditions.
The only disappointment of the evening was the lack of interest shown by the ordinary members of the Society for this event; most of those who attended were spouses, friends, or colleagues of the committee.
Whitgift lecture
At the annual Whitgift School's lecture, which was held in Croydon on 10 October, over 70 people heard Dr John Mann from the University of Reading deliver a talk entitled Murder, magic and medicine .
In a lively and entertaining performance the audience was treated to a graphic description of the history of man's relationship with chemicals derived from plants.
Dr Mann's central theme was the ability of humanity to use scientific knowledge for the good or the bad of his fellow man.
He illustrated this by describing how alkaloids had been used as poisons since Roman times (murder), through the discovery of the pain killing effects of morphine (medicine) and finally the hallucinogenic activity of LSD (magic).
J. M. Berge
Enzymes
Faraday Discussion 93 on Structure and activity of enzymes will be held on 1–3 April 1992 in Cambridge.
The last Faraday Discussion to be devoted to the physical chemistry of enzymes was held in 1955.
Since then, much has been learnt about the structure and properties of proteins and about the active sites of enzymes.
X-ray diffraction and spectroscopic techniques continue to provide important clues, leading towards an understanding of the remarkable specificity of enzymatic catalysis.
The field is being actively investigated and is at an exciting stage; computational chemists have entered the fray.
The discussion will bring together a wide range of scientists, including crystallographers, spectroscopists and theoreticians, who are interested in enzymes.
The final programme and application form are now available from Mrs Angela Fish 
Risk management of chemicals
The RSC is to hold an international conference on the Risk management of chemicals — can chemicals be used safely?, at the University of Surrey on 13–16 July 1992.
This conference, which is supported by the EC, WHO, IUPAC and Cefic, is a sequel to the Society's conferences Toxic hazard assessment of chemicals , in 1986 and Risk assessment of chemicals in the environment , in 1988.
Lecturers include:
The conference will be preceded by a teach-in on Sunday 12 July 1992, itself to be preceded by an informal buffet on Saturday 11 July 1992.
The teach-in will enable the less expert delegate to learn some of the fundamentals concerning the interdisciplinary nature of risk management, the terms repeatedly used and the means of retrieving data.
For details contact Dr John F. Gibson 
Southumbria Section celebrations
The Southumbria Local Section held a very successful 150th anniversary celebration dinner in Grimsby in October.
Over 100 members and guests attended, including the RSC's secretary general, Dr Jack Gow, the president-elect Professor Charles Rees, and the former managing director of the Cookson Group Dr Ralph Iley, as well as representatives from many local chemical companies.
In proposing the toast to the Society Dr Iley spoke of the need to maintain a supply of well-qualified entrants to the profession and to educate the public about the achievements of the chemical industry.
He reminded everyone that good often comes out of change dictated by environmental considerations, for example his own company became involved in titanium dioxide extraction when looking for an alternative to white lead.
Professor Rees spoke of the close relationship between academia and industry and stressed the need for this relationship to continue.
He also noted that it was at about the time when Prince Albert, the Prince Consort, opened the Royal College of Chemistry, the precursor to Imperial College, that he also opened the new Grimsby dock.
Also in October, the Section organised a very enjoyable celebration concert at the Franklin College, Grimsby, performed by members of the Grimsby, Cleethorpes and District Youth Orchestra.
All the music played was written by composers who were chemists (or almost so), ranging from the seventeenth to the twentieth century, from Campion to Elgar.
J. Wilson
Perkin awards
For three major meetings involving the Perkin Division in 1992, Perkin Council has agreed to offer academic staff conference awards.
These will assist younger members (not more than 35 years of age) of the Society to attend the meetings, by covering registration fees and travel costs.
The meetings for which the awards are offered are:
For further details contact Mrs P. A. Mohamed, RSC  The closing date for applications is 1 April 1992.
Huddersfield award
On behalf of the Society, the RSC's president, Sir Rex Richards, has accepted an honorary Fellowship of the Polytechnic of Huddersfield.
The award, which was made during the year in which both the RSC and the polytechnic celebrate their sesquicentenaries, recognised the longstanding special relationship between the parties, and marks the RSC's contribution to the work, life and culture of the polytechnic and its precursor institutions.
Above, left to right, Prof M. I. Page, dean of the school of Applied Sciences, the Polytechnic of Huddersfield; Sir Rex Richards; and Prof K. J. Durrands, rector, the Polytechnic of Huddersfield.
From left to right: Prof Charles Rees and Mrs Rees; Keith Hardy the section chairman and Mrs Hardy; Dr Jack Gow and Mrs Gow; Jeffrey Wilson district member of Council and Mrs Wilson
Vacancies on RSC Council and boards 1992
At the annual general meeting in London on 16 July 1992 vacancies on the Council and some of its boards are due to be filled in accordance with the electoral procedures specified in the By-laws and summarised in the notice.
Initial nominations and appointments are listed below and members are invited to make further nominations to fill vacancies where indicated.
All members are entitled to make or to support a nomination for any vacancy amongst the officers and the elected members of Council and boards subject, where appropriate, to members hip of a particular Division, association with a particular district, or professional membership.
1.
Present membership of the Council.
The appended list gives names of all officers and members of Council currently serving, and indicates those due to retire at the close of the AGM.
Nominations made or endorsed by the Council are recorded below.
2.
President and immediate past president.
In accordance with By-laws 55 and 56, Prof C. W. Rees, DSc, CChem, FRSC, FRS, will become president of the Society at the conclusion of the AGM, and Sir Rex Richards, MA, DPhil, DSc, CChem, FRSC, FBA, FRS, will assume the office of immediate past president.
3.
Divisional members of Council.
Nominations by Divisional councils under By-law 77:
4.
District members of Council.
Nominations by local section committees under By-law 80:
5.
National members of Council.
Three vacancies.
If fewer than three nominations are received, Council will nominate sufficient members to fill the vacancies in accordance with Bylaw 41.
6.
Divisional president.
E. J. Newman, PhD, CChem, FRSC, will become an ex officio member of the Council in accordance with By-laws 32(h) and 76 on assuming the office of president of the Analytical Division.
7.
Board chairmen.
The following will become ex officio members of Council in accordance with By-law 32 on assuming the office stated.
8.
Elected members of boards.
Nominations may be made by boards or members under arrangements introduced by Council under B-law 68(i).
9.
Provisions relating to candidates and nominations.
Nominations must be in writing, signed by not fewer than the required number of signatories, and incorporate (or be accompanied by) a signed declaration by the nominee that he or she is willing to serve.
Each nomination should refer to one nominee only and no member may subscribe to more than one nomination for national member of Council, and one in respect of any other vacancy.
Nomination forms may be obtained from the secretary general at the RSC, Burlington House, Piccadilly, London and the vacancy for which the form is required should be indicated.
Nominations must be received at Burlington House by the closing date, 1 March 1992.
By Order of the Council     
J. S. Gow Secretary general 5 December 1991