

In the Beginning
Back in prehistoric times, the river which we now call the Thames was created by rains falling on hilly ground on the western side of this country, and meandering lazily until it found its way into the sea on the eastern side of the continental peninsular which became an island by separating itself from the continent of Europe.
Possibly, the River Thames had a very different appearance and variations in its route, so it would not have been possible to pin-point the position of Chiswick which now lies nestled in a compact ‘U’ bend of the river.
It is recorded that the area north of the river was probably uninhabitable with dense forests to the north and east of the area which became known later as Middlesex, with heath and scrub to the south, except along the margin of the river, which ‘margin’ was of considerable width.
In the vicinity of the area now called Kew, the River Thames was a mile wide, with great fens and sedges spreading out from its banks.
Such conditions led to areas of swamp which were a natural trap for unwary animals which ventured to the river to drink.
Some evidence that this must have happened along the Chiswick banks of the river, was uncovered during the construction of the London & South Western railway line, in the nineteenth century, which involved the need to make a deep cutting not far from what became known as Gunnersbury Station.
It was discovered that, under about thirty feet of vegetable loam, there existed one of the most fascinating graveyards, containing the remains of early animals which had hunted, fed and  drank in the swamps.
The skeletons found included rhinoceros; hippopotami; auroch; elephants; shorthorn oxen, and even the quite rare sabre-toothed cave tiger.
Riverside conditions such as that, must have continued to exist for a very long time, for when the Romans arrived and established — about A.D.47 — a settlement astride the River Fleet where it ran into the north bank of the River Thames, the River Fleet was about two hundred yards wide at that junction.
The Romans called their settlement ‘Londinium’ which, in due course of time, became known as London.
The name Fleet was an Anglo-Saxon word meaning ‘tidal inlet’ and the  principle sources of the water flowing into the River Fleet, were the heights of Hampstead Heath, also the grounds of Kenwood House at Highgate, all joining just north of Camden Town, and flowing south to join the River Thames, close to the Blackfriars monastery which gave its name to the bridge over the Thames at that point.
The Romans who settled on the banks of the Rivers Fleet and Thames, were not unopposed; amongst other difficulties, they had to contend with Boadicea, the fierce lady leader of the local inhabitants.
The bronze statue of Boadicea, in her chariot, which can be seen on the Thames Embankment at Westminster Bridge, is the work of Hamo Thornycroft, R.A., who had a studio in Holland Park, but it proved too small, so he removed it to the ‘tin tabernacle’ which Sir John Isaac Thornycroft, F.R.S., had built as a workshop in the gardens of Walpole House on Chiswick Mall, during the last decade of the nineteenth century.
One of the great achievements of the Roman Empire was the construction of their roads by which means their Legions moved with comparative speed from place to place.
It has been claimed that the existence of the Roman roads enabled the early Christian Church to spread the Gospel throughout the European area and beyond.
One such Roman road led from Londinium westward, crossing the River Thames by a stone bridge — at a place now called Staines — to Exeter, and to a place where the Romans utilised the local waters for their baths, aptly called Bath.
That road must have passed close to the place now called Chiswick, but keeping well north of the river swamps, probably along the northern boundary of the area which subsequently became known as Turnham Green.
A small Roman settlement is believed to have existed on a spur of land lying between Stamford Brook and Bollo Brook, at which site was discovered a Roman bronze finger ring, also an almost complete, decorated, Samian bowl, dated at about 100 A.D.
Other finds, not far away — at Turnham Green — included an urn full of silver coins.
Although some Romans remained in England, the Roman Legions left in A.D. 411, following which the various regions declared their individual rule — e.g. the Kingdom of Kent became established in A.D. 457, and Christianity became well established  there; so much so that, in A.D. 602, Canterbury in Kent, was made the seat of archbishopric.
Britain at that time, like much of the European continent — including Italy — was ruled by strong personalities in small units, sometimes called ‘Kingdoms’, and invasions from other countries sometimes led to settlement.
The first Saxon invasion of Britain took place before the end of the fifth century.
The Danish invasion took place in A.D. 787, and one Danish ruler, called Egbert, succeeded as King of Wessex, in A.D. 802; becoming overlord of Cornwall and Devonshire in 815; then King of Kent in 825, and became known as King of the English, in 829.
Finally he also became Overlord of Wales, in 831, before his death in 839, probably aged about sixty years.
Egbert's grandson, Alfred, succeeded as King of Wessex in 871, when he was twenty-two years of age, and was declared King of the Saxons and of the English.
He was also recognised as Overlord of Wales in 893, and as such, ruled until his death in October 899.
Not until after his death did he become known as Alfred the Great.
The title of King of the English was carried by no less than ten male successors before King Canute — who was already King of Denmark and Norway — succeeded at the end of 1016, to be succeeded by his son in 1035, and another son in 1040, but that son died two years later, aged only twenty-four.
Edward, his half-brother, succeeded, aged about 38 years, and he remained as King for twenty-four years, during which time his endeavours towards sainthood earned him the title of The Confessor.
It was Edward the Confessor who founded Westminster Abbey in 1065.
Edward's brother-in-law became King Harold II, in 1066, but he died later that same year at the Battle of Hastings, to  whence he had travelled from Stamford Bridge in Yorkshire, where he had successfully defended against an invasion of Norwegians.
The Normans Arrive
William the Conqueror, who was a second cousin to King Edward the Confessor, succeeded as Duke of Normandy in 1035, and believed that he was entitled to the crown of England, despite the fact that Harold II had fought along side him in his many battles against his great enemy, the King of France.
He decided to invade England and landed his troops at Hastings on the south coast, and had established a good bridgehead before the news reached Harold and he was able to journey down from Yorkshire.
William's was the last successful invasion of the British Isles and he was crowned King of England at Westminster Abbey on Christmas Day, 1066, aged 39.
A great administrator, William ordered that a comprehensive record be compiled by a royal commission whose members had to visit every English shire in 1086, recording the use of every piece of land, and the massive manuscript records can be found in the Museum of Public Records at Chancery Lane, London.
It became known as the Doomsday Book and it took two years to compile, but it illustrated that England was then a land of extensive royal forests and open fields, with only a few townships in the forest clearings, or at a river crossing.
The fields were divided into strips of round-backed ridges, separated one from the other by ploughed furrows which acted as land drains.
Every man owed allegiance to a Lord — the tenants who worked the field would hold  his land from the owner, who would be either a Baron; a Bishop, or the  Abbott of a monastery, to whom the tenant had to render service.
The ability to read and write was confined to churchmen (this was common throughout the whole of northern Europe), not even William or his Norman Barons were able to read, so William appointed Lanfranc as Archbishop of Canterbury and he set up a diocesan pattern which endured and encouraged the growth of ecclesiastical courts of law and a succession of ‘clerks’ who became the forerunners of the civil servants.
Most of William's twenty-one years as King of England, was spent back in Normandy protecting his Duchy from his continental neighbours.
He died at Rouen on 9th.
September 1087, fighting King Philip I of France, and was buried at Caen.
The Doomsday Book, which was completed in 1086, mentions Fulham — out of which the areas of Chiswick; Acton; Ealing and Hammersmith were formed.
William I was succeeded by one of his sons, William II, who was crowned King of England, whereas the Duchy of Normandy passed to another son, Robert, who had sometimes sided with King Philip I of France, and that presented many of the Norman Barons in England with divided loyalty.
There was another younger brother (to whom the father had left considerable treasures), Henry, against whom William II and Robert co-operated.
Unlike the father and the other two sons, Henry had learned to read.
William II was not popular and offended the monastic chroniclers, but he met with an accident and died on a hunting trip in the New Forest, in August 1100.
Henry was with him when he died, and he rode forthwith to Winchester to secure the royal treasury and was proclaimed King of England.
Robert, the Duke of Normandy, was in Italy at that time, otherwise he might have been able to challenge Henry.
Henry married Matilda, sister of the King of Scotland, himself a direct descendant of Alfred the Great, and Henry established a civil service and a centralized exchequer to hold the government of the people together.
Henry's only son, William, was drowned at sea in 1120, but Henry lived on until 1133.
Stephen of Blois, the son of William  I youngest daughter, was favoured by the Barons and was crowned King of England by the end of 1133, but for a number of years he was imprisoned by the Barons during civil war.
In 1154, Stephen adopted Matilda's son, Henry Plantagenet, as his heir, and he became Henry II upon the death of Stephen at Dover Castle, in October 1115, at the age of 21.
A Church already existed at Old Chiswick, for the folk who lived along that part of the River Thames, or used the ferry crossing which was just west of the eyot there.
That Church, which was dedicated to St. Nicholas, the patron saint of sailors and fishermen, was declared in 1181, as the church in the Prebendal Manor of ‘Chesewic’, one of the manors of St. Paul's Cathedral.
There existed a second manor of the Dean and Chapter of St. Paul's Cathedral, close to Chesewic, and that manor lay between the river and Turnham Green and was called Sutton which it is thought  probably derived its name from South Town.
Because it was so small — no more than a  Hamlet — it was often referred to as ‘Little Sutton’.
Its situation south of Turnham Green is thought to have given rise to its name locally, in the first case.
King Henry II carried out legal reforms and, in 1162, persuaded Thomas  Beckett to become Archbishop of Canterbury in the hope that he would help to bring the ecclesiastical courts into line with the royal courts.
Thomas was not so keen on relinquishing the Church privileges and there were years of disagreement.
Whilst Henry II was in Normandy, he learned of Thomas's continued intransigence and that caused Henry II to utter the words, ‘Will no-one rid me of this troublesome person?’, which prompted four knights of his household to cross to England and assassinate Thomas Becket in his Cathedral, on 29th.
December 1170.
Henry II was appalled and accepted the humiliation of public penance.
Henry II had five sons who were suspicious and envious of each other, but three of them died before Henry died in the summer of 1189, and all his possessions passed to Richard, who had pledged himself to set out for the Holy Land on the Third Crusade.
Just about one hundred years earlier, in 1099, during the First Crusade, the Order of the Knights of St. John was instituted with the Maltese Cross as the symbol — still used by the present day St. John's Ambulance Order.
Richard, the ‘Lion Heart’, was crowned King Richard I, in September 1189, and in his Crusade he conquered Cyprus and the city of Acre, advancing to within twelve miles of Jerusalem, but he fell out with other Christian princes on the Crusade and was shipwrecked during December 1192, in the Adriatic, and fell into the hands of Emperor Henry II of Austria, who held him captive until he received a ransom of one hundred thousand pounds.
When Richard died, in 1199, John succeeded him as King of England and Duke of Normandy but he abandoned the Duchy in 1203, only to prepare expeditions, in 1205, to recover his position in France, imposing heavy taxes in England.
He also objected to the Pope's choice for Archbishop of Canterbury, which brought about a situation whereby all religious observance could not be undertaken, including baptisms, weddings and burials, and John was excommunicated.
Faced by rebellion, John made peace with the Pope in the  spring of 1213, but his campaigning against Philip of France was doomed to failure.
The Barons in England were furious at John and they presented him with the Great Charter — Magna Carta— prepared by Archbishop  Langston , to which John authorised the attachment of his seal at Runnymede, beside the River Thames, in June 1215.
John died in October 1216 and was succeeded by his young son (only nine years old) who, fortunately, had two able Regents to guide him — William Marshall and Hubert de Burgh.
At the age of eighteen, in January 1227, Henry III assumed full authority, and he married Eleanor of Provence, in 1236.
Henry III's youngest sister married, in 1238, Simon de Montfort, Earl of Leicester, who wanted royal policy to be controlled by a ‘Parliament’ with representatives from the larger towns, and he effectively kept Henry III and his son, captive at Lewes for over a year.
The son, Edward, escaped in May 1265 and overthrew Montfort, with royalist supporters, on 4th August 1265.
Henry III died in November 1272, when Edward was campaigning in Sicily but he returned and, at the age of 33, became King Edward I, and although it was his wish to finally liberate Jerusalem from the Moslem Saracens, he became involved in England, Wales and Scotland.
He copied Montfort's precedent by summoning national assemblies which became known as ‘Parliaments’, although only consultative, with absolute power remaining with the King.
At an early age, Edward I had married Eleanor of Castile, and they had sixteen children (nine died in infancy) and they were devoted to each other.
When Eleanor died of fever at Nottingham, in the autumn of 1290, Edward was grief stricken and journeyed to bury her in Westminster.
He ordered crosses to be erected at the nine places where her coffin rested on that journey; one was at Waltham — and is still in existence — known as Waltham Cross, and the last was at a small place named ‘Char’ where there is a marked turn (char) on the River Thames — now known as Charing Cross.
In the summer of 1277, Edward I fought a vigorous campaign against the Welsh, who were led by Llywelyn ap Gruffydd, and although Edward was able to impose a ‘Statute of Wales’, outbreaks of rebellious nature continued.
In order to bring about reconciliation, in 1301, Edward had his eldest son, Edward of Caernarvon, proclaimed the ‘Prince of Wales’, and that custom continues to this day.
A visit is recorded, by a government official, under King Edward I, to the Church by the ferry at ‘Chesewic’— in October 1297.
Edward I also became involved with the Scots by claiming the right of arbitration between the rivals for the Scottish throne, at the end of 1290, and he installed a puppet government in the lowlands of Scotland and carried off the traditional coronation stone from Scone, transporting it to Westminster.
The Scots rebelled, but Edward I controlled them introducing, for the first time, the longbows of England.
In March 1306, Robert Bruce was crowned King of Scotland at Scone, so King Edward I again set out to meet the challenge but on the sands of the Solway, he died aged 68, on 7th.
July 1307.
His twenty-three year old son who succeeded him, Edward II, chose not to continue the challenge and returned to London and marry Isabella, the daughter of King Philip IV of France.
Whilst he was in France, Edward II left his friend, Gaveston, as Regent, and created him Earl of Cornwall.
Discord arose in England however, and Gaveston was excommunicated by the Archbishop of Canterbury and was eventually executed in June 1312.
Edward II decided to take action against the Scots in 1314, but lost against Robert Bruce at the battle of Bannockburn on 24th.
June 1314.
This encouraged the Scots to invade England and they managed to capture Berwick.
King Edward's unpopularity was not enhanced by close relatives being created Earls, so Isabella went to Paris in 1325 to consult with her brother, by then King of France, and with the help of the Earl of March, troops were sent from France to round up the royal favourites for execution, and to depose and imprison Edward II, who was murdered by one of the Earl of March's agents in September 1327.
By then the fourteen year old son, Edward III, had been crowned with his mother, Isabella and her lover, Mortimer, Earl of March, in control.
In 1330, however, Edward III successfully rid himself of that control and Mortimer was himself executed.
In order to please the Barons, the new king acclaimed knightly chivalry with jousts and tournaments in which pageantry, courage and military prowess could be displayed.
In 1344, Edward III swore to emulate King Arthur and founded a Round Table for the knights and in 1348 he established the Order of the Garter, a brotherhood of twenty-six knights.
King Edward III successfully restored English ascendancy along the border with Scotland but the death of his uncle caused division among the French as to who should be their King in his place, so Edward III made a claim to the throne, hoping at the same time, to break the link between the French and the Scots.
That led to the Hundred Years War, and in the summer of 1346, Edward III landed in Normandy and that led to the battle of Crecy on 26th.
August 1346, in which, although outnumbered by five to one by the French troops, the English longbows revolutionized battle tactics and the English won.
Edward III's son, the Black Prince, although only sixteen, fought at the battle at Crecy, and at the siege of Calais, which surrendered in August 1347, and went on to campaign successfully in France so that a favourable treaty was concluded in 1360.
By 1376, however, Edward III had lost all those concessions, except Calais and the people in England were weary of the cost of the wars.
Thee Black Prince died before King Edward died in 1377, so he was succeeded by his grandson, Richard II, who was only ten years old, He was overshadowed by his three royal uncles, Edmund, Duke of York; Thomas, Duke of Gloucester, and John, Duke of Lancaster.
According to records, there existed in 1378, a hamlet called ‘Stronde’ along the Middlesex bank of the River Thames, just east of Brentford, which indicates the existence then of what is now called Strand-on-the-Green.
The modern day Chiswick grew up from the gradual merging of the original Chesewic with the hamlet of Little Sutton and Stronde, linked by Turnham Green and the Brentford Road from London.
A Peasants' Revolt — the workers of Kent and Essex — led by Walter the tiler (who became known as Wat Tyler), occurred in 1381, in which they refused to pay the Poll Tax, and they gathered together to sweep in revolt into London, Although only a lad, Richard II subdued the revolt.
As he grew older, Richard II became more assertive, also became a patron of the arts and culture — Geoffrey Chaucer was one of his favourites — and that did not please the Duke of Gloucester, who with others began a civil war to remove the King's favourites from Court.
For the next ten years, Richard II concentrated on building up a reputation with a reputably good government beside him against his powerful uncles.
He was also able to reach a settlement with France  and by visiting Ireland, he was able to rationalize the government there.
His much loved wife, Anne of Bohemia, died in 1394, and this affected him so much that he felt everyone and everything was against him.
He raised an army of men from Wales, Ireland and Cheshire to strike against his uncles and the Duke of Gloucester was killed.
However, the son of the Duke of Lancaster landed forces from France, whilst Richard I was in Ireland, and raised the people of the north of England against the ‘tyranny’ of Richard II.
This led to Richard II being imprisoned in the Tower of London and the House of Lancaster usurped the throne with Henry IV being crowned at Westminster, on 13th.
October 1309.
Richard II died mysteriously in captivity.
Agincourt to the Stuarts
King Henry IV proved not to be popular, mainly because he had to ward off constant attempts to usurp him, and all his energy was directed in that pursuit, so that he died at an age of less than forty-seven, in March 1413.
His son, a bachelor of twenty-five, became King Henry V, and he experienced a couple of attempts to usurp him during the first year, but by August 1415 he was able to sail with an invasion fleet of 1500 vessels to France, where he withstood an attack launched on 25th.
October by the French, at Agincourt, with fearful loss of life to the French troops, and Henry V became a legend.
The French recognized him as heir to their throne by a treaty of May 1420, on the understanding that he would marry the French King's daughter, Catherine.
they were married in December 1421 and a son was born at Windsor, but before the boy was nine months old, Henry V died in France.
The son became King Henry VI of England and France in 1429 and 1430 respectively, but he was a pawn in the game of power politics.
He grew up hating any form of bloodshed and it was he who founded Eton College, also King's College, Cambridge.
The French were restless, and Joan of Arc stirred up patriotism and led a revolt against the reign of King Henry VI.
The King's great-uncle, Cardinal Beaufort, the Bishop of Winchester, was very wealthy and retained considerable power.
Two of his nephews commanded armies in France and his wealth was so vast that he was able to make substantial loans to the Exchequer at a high rate of interest, which was not very popular.
The existence of a number of fine houses along the Middlesex bank of the River Thames at Chiswick, close to the Eyot and the ferry — as well as fishermen's cottages — is recorded, with references to the Parish Church of St. Nicholas, also visits to those houses by royalty, particularly Henry VI and his Court.
Chiswick — including Little Sutton and Strand-on-the-Green — could then be described as a pleasant village contained within a ‘U’ shaped bend of the River Thames, just off the western edge of London.
In total, including Turnham Green, it occupies 13,300 acres of mainly  flat land on a gentle south-westerly slope down from the hills of Harrow and Highgate — from 36 feet to 15 feet above the ordnance survey datum — with a fine depth of approximately 40 feet of gravel and sand over London clay, topped by fine vegetable mould.
Its situation is about half way between Westminster and Windsor, similarly between the Royal Parks of Richmond and Hyde Park, from the latter of which two roads ran westward, one from the north side and the other from the south side, both meeting at Turnham Green.
In those days, there existed no bridges across the River Thames above the old London Bridge and the ferry at Chiswick was much favoured because it was found that the Eyot broke the stream during up-tide.
The marriage of King Henry VI was arranged by the Duke of Suffolk, to Margaret of Anjou, in 1444, and Margaret proved to be a fiery vixen.
Six years later, the Duke of Suffolk was murdered whilst in custody for embezzlement and public feeling turned against the House of Lancaster, The common soldiers were left without pay, so a revolt occurred in 1450 that threatened royal London and Westminster.
Henry VI became quite ill in August 1453 and his wife, Margaret, sought the power of Regent, but Parliament favoured Richard, Duke of York, an efficient military commander and a rich land-owner.
Thus there developed what became to be known as the War of the Roses, which raged on and off from 1455 to 1485.
Richard was killed in the battle at Wakefield in December 1460, so his eldest son then entered London and became King Edward IV.
However, the Earl of Warwick joined the Lancastrians and Edward IV was forced abroad, but the Lancastrians did not trust Warwick and Edward IV returned with forces and was able to divide them resulting in Warwick being killed at Barnet in April 1471, and Henry VI being captured and executed at the Tower of London.
Up until that time, every form of documentation and writing had to be by manuscript, but in 1476, Mr. William Caxton set up his printing press, at Westminster.
Gradually from that time, there was greater chance for ordinary members of the public to see for themselves, and learn to read themselves, the various written words.
Edward IV died in April 1483, and the power struggle resumed as his younger brother, Richard, Duke of Gloucester, was Protector of  the heir, the twelve year old Edward V, and the Duke removed the heir and his brother, who was two years younger, to the Tower of London where they died.
Richard, having declared the marriage of Edward IV as invalid, claimed that the children were illegitimate, so he was crowned Richard III, in the summer of 1483.
The Lancastrian, Henry Tudor, when he heard of what had happened, gathered a force in France and landed in Wales — where he had lived for part of his life — and he opposed Richard III, who was killed in battle in 1485.
Henry Tudor found that there was still considerable opposition to him becoming King, particularly from ‘Yorkshire’ pretenders, who included Margaret of Burgundy, for whom an Oxford tradesman called Simnel, crossed into England from Ireland, in the summer of 1487, with a force of two thousand German mercenaries, but Henry — who had become King Henry VII, in September 1485 — raised a larger army and defeated them at Newark.
Henry VII instigated changes which included reducing the power of nobility over the countryside and extending the duties of the Justices of the Peace.
The King married Elizabeth of York, the eldest daughter of Edward IV's children, and he built, in 1501, the Manor beside the River Thames at ‘Shene’ which became Richmond Palace where, in due course, the nineteen year old Henry VIII was to spend part of the honeymoon (1509) of his first marriage.
The eldest son of Henry VII, Arthur, married the daughter of the joint sovereigns of Spain, Catherine of Aragon, but Arthur died only five months later, following which Catherine became betrothed, and later married, the second son, Henry.
When Henry VII died at Richmond Palace, in 1509, that second son became King Henry VIII.
The new king was handsome, scholarly, a good linguist, a superb horseman, unrivalled in field sports and martial arts, also an able musician.
Thomas Wolsey, an ambitious diplomat, became Archbishop of York in 1514, and a Cardinal as well as Lord Chancellor, in 1515.
Henry VIII impressed the Continent, in the midsummer of 1520, at the ‘Field of the Cloth of Gold’ held a few miles south of Calais, and which lasted four weeks with jousts, summit talks, banquets and entertainment.
During the summer of 1521 he produced one of his writings entitled ‘In Defence of the Seven Sacraments,’ exposing the heresies of the German Protestant, Martin Luther, and he dedicated the writing to Pope Leo X, from whence the King was known as ‘The Defender of the Faith’.
The son who was born in 1511, lived only six weeks and there followed a succession of miscarriages and still-births, so Henry VIII convinced himself that God was punishing him for marrying his late brother's widow, so he sought the Popes annulment of the marriage.
Pope Clement, however, was not inclined to agree and that occurred at a time when the people of England were annoyed at the imposition of heavy taxation by the Cardinal Morton, also Cardinal Wolsey.
However, Wolsey was replaced, in 1529, by Thomas Cromwell who advised Henry VIII that a formal breach with the Pope would allow the Archbishop Thomas  Crammer to declare his marriage to Catherine of Aragon null and void.
The Reformation Parliament of 1529 to 1536 attacked the ‘privileges of Rome’ and its jurisdiction of the Church, so it recognised the new marriage of the King to Anne Boleyn, in January 1533.
Henry VIII became the supreme head of the Church of England and, between 1530 and 1539, the Roman Catholic monastic foundations in the land were dissolved, the Crown claiming the extensive lands which brought considerable revenue to the King.
Although Anne Boleyn gave birth to Princess Elizabeth at Greenwich, in September 1533, there was no son forthcoming and Henry VIII became convinced that she had another lover, so he had her beheaded on 19th.
May 1536 and married Jane Seymour on 30th. day of the same month.
In October 1537, a son was born but Jane died in the confinement Henry remained without a wife until January 1540, when he married Anne of Cleves, a German princess, but that marriage was dissolved without being consummated, so on 28th.
July 1540, Henry married Catherine Howard, a cousin of Anne Boleyn, but she also was beheaded, for indiscretion, in February 1542.
At that time, John, Baron Russell, the first Earl of Bedford, who was an advisor to King Henry VIII — also executor — lived in a mansion house called ‘Corney House’ which was situated along that part of the river frontage at Chiswick which is still referred to as ‘Corney Reach’, although the house itself was demolished in 1532.
In 1543, Henry VIII  took as his sixth wife, Catherine Parr, who had already survived two husbands, and she also survived Henry VIII who died in 1547, to be succeeded by his nine year old son, Edward VI, who became an enthusiastic Protestant.
Edward VI signed a document, in 1552, which ensured that the royal succession must exclude Roman Catholics, such as his half-sister, Mary.
Lady Jane Grey was nominated by King Edward VI as his successor — she was married to the son of the Duke of Northampton.
Edward VI hadn't reached sixteen years of age before he died, in July 1553, and for just nine days Lady Jane Grey was considered to be Queen Jane, but the country was not prepared to accept her as Queen.
Mary Tudor rode to London in order to claim the throne and with the intention of reinstating the Roman Catholic Church, but the fact that she was married to Philip of Spain and wished to make him King of England, was also not acceptable and led to hostility in London.
That led, therefore, to Princess Elizabeth being received as Queen, and like her father, she had a scholarly mind; also she had some exceptional advisers, including William Cecil, Lord Burghley, who became her Secretary of State and served her loyally for over forty years.
Elizabeth never married but used her spinsterhood as a diplomatic  bate — Robert Dudley, the Earl of Leicester, was very close and, after his death, his stepson, the Earl of Essex, became close, but he was executed for treason when it was learned that he had entered into a conspiracy.
Mary Stuart, Queen of the Scots, was also executed, in 1587, for being implicated in the Babington conspiracy, although Elizabeth I evaded responsibility for that execution.
During the reign of Elizabeth I, English seamen such as Drake, Hawkins, Grenville and Raleigh exasperated the Spanish by their expeditions to the Americas, and the Roman Catholic King Philip of Spain also considered Elizabeth I a heretic; so he despatched a great fleet of galleons, in 1588, named ‘The Armada’, to sail up the English Channel and transport a Spanish army of invasion from the Netherlands, but the smaller British ships played havoc with the mighty ships during their journey and stormy weather drove the remnants of the Armada around the British Isles, most of the ships being wrecked at various points, including the Atlantic west coast of Ireland.
There followed a period of about fifteen years when creative genius became evident, such as the works of William Shakespeare; Marlow ; Spencer and Ben  Johnson .
It was during the reign of Queen Elizabeth I that the Burlington Arms was built in Church Street, Chiswick, quite close to St. Nicholas Church, and the building still exists, although much altered internally, and in more recent years used for residential purposes only.
Shortly before her death, Queen Elizabeth I was entertained, in October 1602, by Sir William Russell, at Corney House, Chiswick, which area was still attracting residents of distinction who were seeking a healthier and cleaner environment, away from the dirt and the clamour of the Cities of London and Westminster.
Church Street, Old Chiswick William P. Roe
Before and After Cromwell
Mary Stuart's son became King James VI of Scotland in 1587, and he was heir apparent to the English throne, but Elizabeth I lived until March 1603, when she died at Richmond Palace.
By then James was highly disliked by the Scottish Presbyterians, also by the growing Puritans in England.
Nevertheless, he secured peace, also reconciliation with Spain, although that was marred by the disclosure of the Guy Fawkes plan to blow up the House of Commons, in 1605.
The importance of wider biblical study was accepted by James (who became James I of England) and he ordered the preparation of the Authorised Version of the Holy Bible, which was published in 1611.
James I believed that ‘Kings were breathing images of God upon earth’ and he insisted on lecturing Parliament, so the relationship between King and Parliament steadily deteriorated and much of the political initiative began to pass from the House of Lords to the House of Commons.
Following the death of James I, Charles I became King of England, in 1625, and the Duke of Buckingham (who had been James I's favourite) retained his influence over the throne until he was assassinated at Portsmouth, in August 1628, but not before he had arranged the marriage of Charles I to Henrietta Maria of France.
From 1629 to 1640, Charles I tried to rule without Parliament and his chief advisers were the Earl of Stafford and Archbishop Laud, who annoyed the Puritans in Parliament because he favoured outward ceremonial in religious observance.
The Scots rebelled and Charles I had to raise more money for an army to quell the uprising and for funds he had to resort to Parliament who demanded the removal of both Archbishop Laud and the Earl of Stafford.
In January 1642, Charles I foolishly entered the House of Commons seeking to arrest five leading Members of Parliament (who were not there at the time) and he received a magnificent rebuke from the Speaker of the House.
Since then no sovereign has ever entered the House of Commons.
Such was the background to the outbreak of Civil War.
Charles I raised his standard at Nottingham and received support from the north and the west of England, also the Church; Oxford University and feudal aristocrats.
Opposing him were the wealthy traders of London and the people of the south and east of England.
Oliver Cromwell, a Puritan, raised his New Model Army, with the support of Parliament, after he had observed the defeat of the Parliamentary forces at Edgehill, in which the King's General of horses, Prince Rupert, played havoc with the footsoldiers with cavalry charges.
Cromwell, a Member of Parliament, returned to London and combined his role of an M.P.
with being a Captain of a troop.
Prince Rupert managed to fight his way towards London and having reached Brentford, he decided to try to capture London and whilst his troops were encamped on Kew Green, they learned from a maid from a riverside inn (The Bull) that Oliver Cromwell was holding a council of war there, so he despatched some horsemen to capture Cromwell, but the ‘Round Heads’ kept the horsemen at bay until Cromwell had escaped in a boat to the island in the river  closeby , which island has been called ‘Oliver Isle’ever since.
The Earl of Essex, who was in overall charge of all the Parliamentary troops, with the advice of Cromwell, decided that the advance of the Royal troops on London must be halted, so he asked for volunteers from amongst the considerable number of apprentices in London; armed them as best he could and they marched to Turnham Green where they were able to inflict such losses on the troops led by Prince Rupert that they were forced to withdraw, and there was no subsequent attempt to capture London.
Peace negotiations with the King, in the spring of 1643, came to nought and Cromwell, now a Colonel, increased his troops into regiment strength, enrolling godly men, often of poor and mean parentage, but inclined to his own Puritan thoughts.
He taught them that they were serving God, not a Roman Catholic King, and practice of religion by his men was of the utmost importance.
He trained two thousand brave men, who became well disciplined; no man swearing without paying a fine and if found to be drunk, they were set in the stocks and some were cashiered, and they became known everywhere they went as an elite regiment and many more wished to join them.
They achieved resounding success, shouting psalms on the battlefield and when marching.
Royalist pamphleteers attacked Oliver Cromwell, particularly on ‘defiling of churches’ and breaking of statues, etc, which the Puritans hated as outward signs of ‘popery’.
The great Civil War battle of Marston Moor, in the vales of Yorkshire, in July 1644, with Parliamentary troops under the command of Cromwell, Fairfax and Leven, with Lord Manchester in overall command, resulted in a great victory for Parliament, but it was not followed up by Lord Manchester, much to the chagrin of Cromwell, and the Royalists managed a considerable victory in September of that year, at Lostwithiel, thirty miles west of Plymouth.
Lord Manchester's delay in sending troops south resulted in King Charles' forces reaching Salisbury and relieving the Parliamentary siege of Donnington Castle.
During the general cessation of hostilities in the winter that followed, Oliver Cromwell managed to persuade Parliament to the reorganization of the Army, with Sir Thomas Fairfax as the Commander-in-Chief.
The Battle of Naseby which took place in June 1645, with Fairfax and Cromwell in charge of the Parliamentary forces and Prince Rupert, Astley and Langdale in charge of the Royalist troops, resulted in a great victory for Parliament, achieved — according to Cromwell —‘none other than the hand of God’.
By 1646, the Royalists were defeated and King Charles I was charged with treason against the peoples parliament and was beheaded at Westminster on 30th, January 1649.
Oliver Cromwell, soldier and statesman, became the Lord Protector, Parliament having carried out a purge, abolishing monarchy as unnecessary and burdensome.
Nevertheless, Cromwell was offered the crown subsequently, but he refused, possibly to adhere to his own convictions, but his only son, Richard, was not a strong person.
Following the death of Cromwell in September 1658, Richard took over as Lord Protector, but proved too weak and amiable to control parliament, particularly as the army and the majority of the gentry preferred the restoration of the monarchy.
One of those gentry was Viscount Fauconberg, who had married Mary, the third daughter of Oliver Cromwell, in the same year as Cromwell had been offered the crown (1657) and they occupied Sutton Court, a mansion in the Little Sutton area, south of Turnham Green.
Under Lord Protector Cromwell, the property of the Deans and Chapter of St. Paul's Cathedral, in the Manor of Chiswick, had been transferred to Trustees who sold off all the freehold reversion of the Prebendal Manor, including the ancient Manor House; Homefields; the Lord's close abutting Chiswick Fields; Barne Close and some pasture abutting the London highway; a meadow called Prebend Mead and other land including pasture on Stamford Lane and many cottages up to Turnham Green, together with the windmill there.
General Monk, in the spring of 1660, led a bloodless coup and declared that Charles II should become King, so a warship was sent to Holland to fetch him back to England, where he arrived before the end of May, aged 30 years, and was received rapturously in London.
Despite this, however, he was treated with some suspicion by Parliament, who restricted his ability to raise taxes to pay for army or navy forces, so he turned to Louis XIV of France, who secretly made funds available so as to improve the failing status of the Roman Catholic Church in England, where the Church of England virtually excluded all ‘dissenters’, which included Roman Catholics.
King Charles II founded the Royal Society with such persons as Christopher Wren; Isaac Newton; Boyle; Hooke and others.
Plagues were experienced from time to time, particularly where people were crowded together in places like London, which suffered the Great Plague in 1665, followed by the Great Fire in 1666, which the Roman Catholics on the Continent declared was a punishment for the beheading of King Charles I. In the event, the Great Fire enabled King Charles II, who took control in September 1666, to arrange the clearance of the fire devastated area and to rebuild the City of London with Christopher Wren in charge of the plan, so that the mass of narrow streets were replaced, to a great extent, by wider, straighter roads, with some magnificent building, including St. Paul's Cathedral.
In England, possibly as a result of the Continental view, rumours arose that the Great Fire occurred as a result of acts by ‘papists’ and the King (who had married Catherine, the daughter of the King of Portugal in 1662) had to combat the ugly anti-Catholic mood of Londoners and Parliament, particularly when another rumour arose of a plot to overthrow him for his Roman Catholic brother, the Duke of York.
Although Charles II had fathered eight illegitimate sons by his five mistresses, of which Nell Gwynne was his favourite (the New King's Road was built to give the King access to Nell Gwynne), Catherine had no children and although Parliament endeavoured to persuade him to exclude his brother from succession to the throne, Charles II refused.
When he did in February 1685, his brother became King James II.
William of Orange and William Hogarth
Well before the Great Plague of London in 1665 and the Great Fire of the following year, Chiswick had become established as a healthy environment away from Westminster and the City of London, yet conveniently close to both, also to Richmond Palace and Windsor Castle.
Furthermore transport from one place to another could be by the River Thames rather than the roads, which were not always safe and often impassable in some weather conditions.
Some seven years before the death of King Charles II, Princess Mary of England had married William of the House of Orange, and that gave rise to the English-Dutch alliance in 1678.
James II succeeded to the throne but the favourite illegitimate son of Charles II, the Duke of Monmouth, did not approve so he landed in the West Country and encouraged a Protestant revolt, but much of the public supported the King and the uprising was suppressed.
King James II appointed the notorious Judge Jeffreys to hold Assizes to deal with the uprising and he inflicted cruel sentencing on all the partakers which included the execution of the Duke of Monmouth.
Such harsh sentencing caused concern amongst the more moderate members of the public, including Parliament.
James II raised a standing army with which he hoped to subdue parliament and London, and he prosecuted seven Anglican Bishops, also violated the rights of the ancient universities and placed Roman Catholics in key military positions.
In June 1688, James II's wife, Mary of Modena, gave birth to a son (later known as the ‘Old Pretender’) and the threat of a return to continuing Roman Catholic royalty caused six politicians with Bishop Compton of London, secretly to invite William of Orange, the leader of the Dutch against Louis XIV of France, to claim the English throne on behalf of his wife, Mary, the eldest daughter of James.
William of Orange landed with his troops at Brixham, Torbay, on 5th.
November and received a great welcome so that he was able to advance towards London unopposed as any support for James II faded away.
James fled to France where he was banished and lived until 1700.
Sir Stephen Fox, who was Member of Parliament for Sarum and served as Lord Commissioner of the Treasury for both King Charles II and William 111, from 1665 until his death in 1716, bought the copyhold, in 1682, or thereabouts, of an estate north-west of Corney House (on the river front of Old Chiswick) and behind the first Earl of Burlington's mansion in Chiswick, and in 1691 he also acquired several acres on the west side of Chiswick Lane, where he sited a mansion with gardens, which he came known as Manor Farm House.
Sir Stephen Fox became Lord of the Manor and a lane still exists between Chiswick Lane and Devonshire Road, called Manor Alley.
William of Orange, following his arrival in London, called a Parliament for 1st.
February 1689 and within three weeks a Declaration of Rights denounced the illegalities of the previous reign.
By that time Mary had joined her husband and they were then proclaimed King William III and Queen Mary, both sovereign and henceforth the crown depended upon Parliament.
The Triennial Act 1694 required a new Parliament to be summoned every three years, and in 1701, the Act of Settlement required all future monarchs to be members of the Church of England.
William III's one ambition was to topple Louis XIV of France and when James II went to Ireland to establish a following there, William decided to take up arms against him.
James had managed to besiege the city of Derry, but as had occurred in London in the Civil War, the apprentice lads saved the city by closing the gates.
James II was defeated at the Battle of the River Boyne, a victory which is celebrated each July, even now, by the various Orange Orders around the world.
On his first visit to Sir Stephen Fox's Manor Farm House, King William III described the house as perfectly fine and he made a number of visits there.
On a Saturday in February 1698, an attempt was made to kill the King by halting the Royal Coach in the muddy Turnham Green Lane on its way from hunting in Richmond Park.
It was unsuccessful and a disaffected Scottish gentleman, Sir John Barclay, had to make his escape to the continent.
King William II had established the Bank of England in 1694, to.
enable the government to have funds to maintain an army and a navy.
Mary died in 1695 and although wretched at heart, William continued until on 20th.
February 1702, his horse stumbled on a mole hill in  Hampton Court Park, and he never recovered from the fall, dying at Kensington on 8th.
March 1702.
James II's surviving daughter, Anne, became Queen of England at the age of 37, but unfortunately she was a sickly woman who lost all her seventeen children, including William, Duke of Gloucester, when eleven years of age.
Her husband was Prince George of Denmark.
Anne's closest friend was Sarah Churchill, whose husband was created Duke of Marlborough in 1702, and who won a resounding victory against the French troops of Louis XIV at Blenheim in 1704, followed in later years by many other victories, which included the acquisition of Gibraltar, in which Admiral Rooke took a major part.
On 17th.
June 1703 John Wesley was born and four years later, his brother, Charles.
The English and Scottish Parliaments were linked by the Act of Union in 1707 under Sydney Godolphin's ministry, but friction between the ruling Whigs and the Tory party, who disliked the continuing war against France, split Anne and Sarah Churchill.
In 1707, Gibraltar became besieged by the Spaniards and it was defended for three years by General Elliot, who became Lord Heathfield and who bought Heathfield House, facing Turnham Green, from Lord Egmont, in 1789.
By 1711, the Tory party had toppled Godolphin's ministry and the new administration secured peace at Utrecht, in 1713.
The British crown was expected to pass to the Dowager Duchess Sophia of Hanover, by virtue of the terms of the Act of Settlement, but Sophia died early in 1714, shortly before Anne died on 1st.
August 1714, so Sophia's son, George, the elector of Hanover, became King at the age of 54.
George I could speak no English and knew nothing of British monarchy and duties, so an inner council of ministers was formed under the leading politicians and, by 1720, the ‘cabinet government’ was well established.
Robert Walpole, as leading politician at that time, became indispensable to George I, despite their mutual dislike for each other.
Robert Walpole is reputed to be the very first ‘Prime Minister’ and, as such, he remained until 1742.
George I died in June 1727, whilst on a visit to Hanover, and he was succeeded by the more cultured George II, whose wife was Caroline of Anspach, and she fitted well into London.
Walpole was  retained and he was determined to keep Britain at peace.
Caroline died in 1737 and without her influence, George II began to think of settling disputes by war.
A trade conflict with Spain — allies of France — arose in 1734 and soon the old animosity between France and England came to the surface.
Walpole resigned in February 1742 and George II led his army against the French, winning a great victory, in June 1743, at Dettingen, and that enhanced his reputation in England.
Pretender Charles attempted to enter England in 1744, and succeeded in landing in Scotland the following year but, after initial successes in Scotland as ‘Bonnie Prince Charles’— the grandson of James II — he suffered a terrible defeat at Culloden in 1746 and that was followed by the imposition of a ruthless repression in the Highlands of Scotland by the favourite son of King George II, the Duke of Cumberland.
The ‘New Style’ Calendar was adopted in Britain in 1752 but not without some opposition from some who thought they were losing several days of their life.
Despite the truce of 1748, England and France were continually at war and, in due course, George II decided to allow William Pitt to become Prime Minister so that he could leave Britain and campaign against the French, as a result the French suffered notable defeats, losing against Clive in India; also in America and at Quebec in Canada in 1759.
George II died in October 1770 and his grandson, twenty-two years of age, became George III and he did not have the same deep concern for Hanover as had his forbears.
He was a conscientious and hard worker, filled with a sense of mission which led to some misinterpretation by the Whig-Liberal group.
In the very severe winter of 1763, the River Thames froze over and the scenes of that event are still depicted today on Christmas cards.
At that time the electors for the County of Middlesex used to gather at Brentford for elections and, in 1768, John Wilkes was elected as their member of Parliament.
Captain Cook discovered New South Wales in 1770 and in that same year, hack in Britain, Lord North became Prime Minister but strong opposition by Colonialists in America to the imposition of tea-tax, developed in 1773, which led to the Boston Harbour incident  in the following year, and eventually to the American War of Independence which lasted from 1775 to 1782.
Chiswick, at about that time, was enjoying its reputation as a healthy environment which one resident, Dr. W. Rose recommended to many people including Thomas Bentley, the partner to Josiah Wedgwood, and the manager of that famous Staffordware depot at Chelsea.
Another notable resident then was the Honourable Thomas Walpole, the second son of Lord Walpole of Wotterton, Norfolk, and the younger brother of the great Sir Robert Walpole, who had been Prime Minister for twenty-two years during the first half of the eighteenth century.
William Hogarth, who was born on 9th.
November 1697, will always be associated with Chiswick, although he was constantly referred to, in his day, as ‘Mr. Hogarth of Leicester Fields’— the name by which Leicester Square was known at that time — as that was his business centre and where he worked before he married.
His bride was Jane.
the daughter of Sir James and Lady Thornhill, and the wedding took place on 23rd.
March 1729.
Apart from his engravings, for which he became particularly well known, he was an excellent portrait painter and his painting of four children — one of whom became the fifth Duke of Devonshire — in the grounds of Chiswick House, probably attracted him to Chiswick, an area considered by many notable persons at that time, as very healthy.
On 13th.
July 1749, Hogarth acquired the Copyhold of a red brick villa, of the Queen Anne style, with a garden of about a quarter of an acre containing an old mulberry tree, not far from Chiswick House, and it became known as Hogarth House, and the lane by which it was approached became known as Hogarth Lane — now part of the Great West Road Extension (A4) into central London.
At his house, Hogarth provided for himself, a painting room over the stable; his wife, her widowed mother, Hogarth's sister, Anne, and a young cousin, Mary Lewis, lived in the house for many years.
Hogarth also lived there, but he was often at his business address in Leicester Fields, and in his latter years he became ‘Sergeant Painter’ to the King.
Hogarth was a witty and genial companion, hence his friendly association with his contemporaries, such as David Garrick, Alexander Pope, Horace Walpole and Dr. Johnson.
He loved animals and endeavoured, in his engravings, to moralize an immoral society.
His self portrait with his dog is often thought to be the inspiration for John Bull and his bulldog.
Just two weeks before his sixty-seventh birthday, Hogarth died at Leicester Fields, but his conspicuous monument — by David Garrick — was erected in Chiswick churchyard.
His widow, Jane, spent her last years — until 1789 — at Chiswick, attending the parish church of St. Nicholas, and living on a pension from the Royal Academy, as requested by the King.
Hogarth House became occupied, subsequently, by the Rev. H. F. Carey, who held the curacy of Chiswick at that time, and who translated Dante there.
The conversion took place of the old Vestry Hall on the corner of Heathfield Terrace and Sutton Court Road, at the beginning of the twentieth century, for the new Urban District Council of Chiswick, the building included not only the Council Chamber and offices and a large Town Hall, but also another Hall named after Hogarth, whose bust is still displayed in the Entrance vestibule.
The upkeep of Hogarth House became neglected and it was severely damaged by enemy bombing, during the second world war, but a well known Chiswick resident who lived in the fine mansion of Grove House, Col. R. W. Shipway, J.P., made a generous gift to the Middlesex County Council who restored the house and reopened it to the public as a museum in 1951, transferring it to the London Borough of Hounslow in 1965.
Chiswick House
Mention Chiswick House today and everyone will think of the neo-Palladian Villa set in wonderful parkland, now all controlled by English Heritage, and famous as one of the finest examples of its kind in Britain, yet so close to the centre of London and with other interesting places close by.
The exceptional elevations of Chiswick House, particularly at the rear with the marvellous old Cedars of Lebanon, has been used for countless ‘back-grounds’ for high-class advertisements, films and television programmes.
It is certainly not the original Chiswick House, as a late Elizabethan, or Jacobean Mansion, with cultivated parkland, existed on the site since the early part of the seventeenth century, and possibly earlier.
That original Chiswick House was believed to have been built by Sir Edward Wardour but it later passed into the hands of Robert Carr, Earl of Somerset.
None of the earlier owners seem to have held on to the property for very long, for in 1647, it was acquired by the Earl of Pembroke, then shortly afterwards, it was sold to Lord Pawlet, who is reported to have entertained General Fairfax at Chiswick House, on a number of occasions.
The next owner was Sir John Ashburnham, who became Lord Ashburnham and, in 1664, the property was bought by King Charles II, who granted the estate to his son, James, Duke of Monmouth.
A few years later, however, it passed into the ownership of Lord Gerald of Brandon, who sold it in 1682, to the Speaker of the House of Commons, Sir Edward Seymour.
In the same year, however, it was again sold, this time to the Earl of Burlington and it remained in the Burlington family for many years.
By 1702, the house and grounds were held by Richard Boyle, the third Earl of Burlington, also the fourth Earl of Cork, who travelled extensively and had many influential friends, including Alexander Pope, who was considered to be head of the literary world and who moved with his parents, in 1716, to the end house of Dr. Matthias Mawson's new buildings (Mawson Row), that end house being on the corner of Chiswick Lane and a lane that later became known as  Mawson Lane (now obliterated by the dual carriageway of the Great West Road Extension A.4.); that end house, in due course, becoming a Public House named Fox and Hounds, following Alexander Pope's removal to Strawberry Hill at Twickenham.
In his travels, Richard Boyle had come to admire and study the works of Inigo Jones; but he became even more enthusiastic about the Italian style of Palladio at Vicenza.
Lord Burlington, having met and befriended William Kent, decided in 1717, to remodel the parkland at his Chiswick House, working on what was virtually flat ground around the mansion, producing terraces and the semblance of knolls, as well as introducing stretches of water and ponds.
Lord Burlington also employed the services of an architect named Campbell, who built for him a beautiful temple, based on the Temple of Romulus in Rome.
During 1730 to 1732, Lord Burlington carried out some extensive alterations to the old mansion, incorporating the famous neo-Palladian villa, which was planned by William Kent, under the personal direction of Lord Burlington.
It was not intended that the Villa would be used as a residence (the east wing of the old mansion being retained as the family residence), but mainly for the exhibition of the fine collection of paintings and sculptures which the Duke had gathered together, including examples of Holbein; Rembrandt: Leonardo da Vinci; Titian; Van Dyke and Rubens.
On each side of the double flight of steps on the front elevation of the Villa, a statue was erected; on the one side Palladio and on the other, Inigo Jones; they are there lo this day.
A gateway designed by Inigo Jones in 1621, was given by Sir Hans Sloane of Chelsea, to Lord Burlington, in 1738, and it was incorporated into the gardens of his Chiswick House.
It was not until 1837 that the beautiful pair of wrought-iron gates, which had been at the entrance to Heathfield House, facing Turnham Green, were purchased by the Duke of Devonshire for the main entrance to Chiswick House, created as the alternative to the old main entrance off Lord Burlington's Lane.
The Duke arranged for a long avenue Or lime trees to be planted alongside a driveway leading from the main road that ran westward from London (Chiswick High Road) and sweeping into his Chiswick House grounds and, despite having been cut in two by the dual carriageway of the Great West Road  Extension, it still remains as Dukes Avenue.
A large number of the old lime trees were felled by the gales in October 1987, but young limes have been placed in those same positions in order to preserve the avenue.
That pair of wrought-iron gates was removed, in 1897, to the Duke's London home — Burlington House, now the Royal Academy, in Piccadilly, and moved again, in 1921 to the boundary' of Green Park in Piccadilly.
Lord Burlington married a cousin of Lord Chesterfield, and he and his bride took a foremost part in the life of the Eighteenth century, both being very gifted in many ways.
Lord Burlington was an outstanding and resplendent figure, not only was he a Knight of the Garter, but also Lord High Treasurer of Ireland; Captain of the Yeomen of the Guards and Governor of Greenwich Hospital, and he made a serious contribution to that age, although it is his contribution to the arts and architecture for which he is most remembered.
Lord and Lady Burlington had three daughters, the heiress, Lady Charlotte Boyle, married William Cavendish, the Marquis of Hartington (son of the Duke of Devonshire), so, when Lord Burlington died in 1753, Chiswick House became part of the Cavendish estate.
By strange coincidence, two retiring Prime Ministers stayed at Chiswick House prior to their death, each at the age of fifty-seven.
The first, in 1806, was Charles James Fox (third son of Henry, the first Lord Holland), and the second, George Canning, in 1827, a great parliamentarian, whose statue can be seen in Parliament Square, well back from the statue of Winston Churchill, but nevertheless still facing the House of Commons.
By 1764 the estate was held by the fifth Duke of Devonshire, whose wife, Georgina, was Earl Spencer's daughter, and she became the popular hostess in the many entertainments for which Chiswick House became famous.
Georgina arranged for the wooden bridge over the lake to be replaced with the stone bridge of classical design, by Wyatt, who also had designed the wings of the Palladian Villa.
The sixth Duke of Devonshire came into possession of the property in 1811 and it was he who introduced a menagerie of animals to the gardens of Chiswick House, including deer; kangaroos; elks; emus; Indian bulls and goats of several kinds.
The Duke also conducted a mission to the coronation of Emperor Nicholas of Russia in 1826, the  Emperor returning the visit by attending, in 1844, a magnificent garden fete at Chiswick House, with hundreds of guests, numerous musicians, and for that occasion, giraffes were also introduced.
The sixth Duke never married, but he was a great horticulturist, and it is believed it was his interest and influence which led to the establishment of the Royal Horticultural Society at Chiswick.
It was certainly he who employed, as a garden boy, one by the name of Joseph Paxton, and in clue course, they erected the three hundred feet long conservatory in the garden, and created the facing formal Italianate gardens.
The Duke's gardener, Joseph Paxton designed the Crystal Palace which was erected in Hyde Park for Prince Albert's 1851 Great Exhibition, and later transferred to Sydenham in southeast London.
Queen Victoria and Prince Albert had been notable guests of the Duke in 1842, and in 1844 a grand fete was organised by the Duke for the reception of the Emperor of Russia (mentioned above) at which the King of Saxony; the Duke of Wellington and many representatives of the nobility of Britain attended.
After the death of the sixth Duke in 1858, the property passed to the Duchess of Sutherland, and she entertained the great Italian patriot, Garibaldi (he planted a young cedar tree in the garden), also Prime Minister Gladstone.
For some years (circa 1866 to 1879), Chiswick House and its grounds were rented by the Prince of Wales — who later became King Edward VII — as a nursery residence for his children and, as a boy, King George V was there convalescing after illness.
On 28th.
June 1873, the Prince and Princess of Wales held a garden party there, at which Queen Victoria, also the Shah of Persia, were present, and the list of guests was so long that it filled three columns of the Times.
A period of decline was experienced by Chiswick House through the Crimean War also the Great War of 1914 to 1918, and after a succession of occupants it became a private asylum for the mentally ill.
Although there was a risk of the grounds becoming ‘ripe for development’ that was avoided by Chiswick House and gardens being acquired by the Middlesex County Council with contributions from King George V (who remembered his boyhood time there); the Borough of Brentford and Chiswick, and others.
During the Second World War of 1939 to 1945, Chiswick House was occupied by the Fire Services and the house, remarkably, was hit by incendiary bombs, so the condition of the entire property had become so dilapidated that entire renovation was required.
Such renovation was not possible until some years later when the property was transferred to the Ministry of Works — which later became part of the Department of the Environment — and a decision was reached to restore the Villa to its original proportions, i.e, without the wings which had been added by Wyatt.
After extensive renovation, Chiswick House was opened formally by the Duke of Devonshire to the public, in 1958.
The great storm of the night of 15th-16th.
October 1987, also inflicted extensive damage to the gardens — which had to be closed to the public until rendered safe — and a great number of trees were felled.
English Heritage are pursuing a programme of general renovation to the entire property.
The Eighteenth Century
Even before the eighteenth century there existed various forms of development around the old Chiswick Parish Church of St. Nicholas, such as the first Elizabethan ‘Burlington Arms’; Vine House; Pages Yard-Ferry House-Brampton House and the cottages in Fishermen's Place, also fronting the river, Bedford House (which included Eynham House), Said House and Cottages; Thames View; Lingard House; Red Lion House; Prospect Cottages also Walpole House, where Barbara Villiers, Lady Castlemain, created Duchess of Cleveland in 1670, lived in her later years.
She had five children by King Charles 11, her three sons all became Dukes and her two daughters both married Earls.
When she died in 1709, two Dukes and four Peers acted as pall bearers at her funeral which was held at St. Nicholas, the parish church.
Walpole House, which had been erected in the sixteenth century, was altered with a new front elevation, in 1730, and at about the same time two other houses were knocked into one to become Strawberry House.
Early in the eighteenth century, Charles Whittingham moved his printing press from the City of London into a house on Chiswick Mall — as that river front became known — called ‘High House’, and The Chiswick Press was established.
It became to be regarded as one of the finest printers in Europe and, as such, flourished until the middle of the nineteenth century.
John Sich founded the ‘Lamb Brewery’, in 1773, just off Church Street, Chiswick, and it remained in the same family until 1923.
His eldest son — also John Sich — was a Lieutenant in the Corps of Chiswick Volunteers formed at the time of the threatened invasion of England by the forces of Napoleon.
In about the middle of the eighteenth century, John Zoffany, a portrait painter, arrived in England, and although not regularly accepted at first, he became friendly with Garrick and other actors which lifted his prospects, so he took a lease of a house called ‘London Style’, which was set back from the north bank of the River Thames, just east of Kew Bridge, but later his wife and children occupied a house on the river front on Strand-on-the-Green, which  house was named after the painter.
Strand-on-the-Green, which was originally only a collection of fishermen's cottages at a riverside hamlet which, in the fourteenth century was called ‘Stronde’ then ‘Ye Strande’by the end of the sixteenth century; then later it became ‘Strand Green’and then ‘Strand in the Green’by the beginning of the eighteenth century.
During the latter part of the eighteenth century several handsome houses were built overlooking the river there and the name became ‘Strand on Green’, and not until the early part of the nineteenth century did the present name of ‘Strand-on-the-Green’ become formally adopted.
Four cottage almshouses had been built at the eastern end of Strand-on-the-Green, in the first half of the eighteenth century, and dedicated ‘for Ye use of Ye poor of Chiswick for ever’.
They were acquired by Mr. B. Hopkin-Morris and preserved by him until his death in 1933, when they were named after him, as a memorial.
When, in 1972, a proposal was made to demolish them and to sell the site for redevelopment, strong local opposition arose, as a result of which the almshouses were entirely renovated and the interiors brought up to modern standards.
The renovation, which was carried out under the direction of an architect.who lived on Strand-on-the-Green, received a Times-R.I.C.S.
Conservation Commendation Award.
Reverting to the eighteenth century, in December 1783, King George III selected William Pitt the Younger as Prime Minister when he was only twenty-four years of age, and he remained in office throughout the troublesome years of the French Revolution which lasted from 1787 to 1799.
Well before then John Wesley had created an entirely different atmosphere in the British Isles by his wandering ministry, preaching and his publications, which together with his brother's (Charles) hymns, had established a Christian people who were called ‘Methodists’.
The Falkland Isles were first occupied by the British in March 1765, but a Spanish expedition from Buenos Aires, in 1770, initially expelled the British, but Spain surrendered the Isles back to Britain, in January 1771, after the threat of war.
In April 1832, Britain proclaimed sovereignty over the Falkland Isles.
The son of King George III, as Prince Regent, was renowned as a connoisseur of elegant living and of art treasures, also architecture and was the patron of the architect, John Nash, who designed and built the famous Regent Street crescent in London's West End, and other developments around Regents Park, also the equally famous Brighton Pavilion.
George Washington was elected, in 1788, as the first President of the United States of America, and in that same year, Bonnie Prince Charles, the Pretender, died.
John Wesley died in 1791, aged eighty-eight, and the famous mutiny of the British Navy ship Bounty took place.
In France, royalty was abolished in 1792, and a Republic proclaimed, to be followed by the ‘Reign of Terror’, with the notorious Robespierre, lasting until 1794.
In the following year, Napoleon was appointed as Commander-in-Chief of the French forces after his victories in Italy and, in subsequent years, he won such remarkable victories that he was able to appoint himself as First Consul in November 1799, and was made Emperor in 1804.
The population of Great Britain had grown by 1801 to 10.5 million, compared with 7.4 million in 1750.
There existed at that time, a real threat of an invasion of the British Isles by the French forces under Napoleon, so militia groups were formed and Martello Towers were erected around the more vulnerable coast line, to ward off and give warning of any sign of an invading fleet.
That threat of invasion was, however, removed, in 1805, by the great naval victory at Trafalgar, in which Horatio Nelson destroyed the French fleet at the cost of his own life, This was followed by General Arthur Wellesley — who later became the Duke of Wellington — leading British troops into the Spanish Peninsula against Napoleon, who then began to experience considerable defeats, not the least of which was his retreat from Moscow in the winter of 1812, and the following year saw the Duke of Wellington taking the war into France culminating in the Battle of Waterloo in 1815, which brought about the final defeat of Napoleon.
King George III was overtaken by his mental illness, so on 5th.
February 1811, the Prince Regent assumed the royal prerogative until  his father died in January 1820 and the Prince Regent became King George IV.
The Plymouth Brethren were founded in that year of 1820, by an Anglican ex-clergyman, on the basis of strict Calvinism, which had been a considerable influence earlier on John Wesley, but not embraced by him.
While his father was still alive, the Prince Regent had married secretly a Roman Catholic widow, Maria Fitzherbert, but as it was without his father's consent, it was contrary to the Royal Marriage Act of 1772, so in 1795, he married his cousin, Caroline of Brunswick, and a daughter was born, Princess Charlotte, but George IV and Caroline grew to loathe one another, so from 1796 they lived apart.
Princess Charlotte died in November 1817 after her marriage to Prince Leopold of Saxe- Coburg .
Early in 1828, Russia acquired part of Armenia from Turkey, also the province of Azerbaijan from Persia.
In that same year, the Duke of Wellington became Prime Minister until George IV died in June 1830, when he was succeeded by William IV who was sympathetic to the Whig party and a supporter of the Reform Bill which had been introduced by Earl Grey, who became Prime Minister following the Duke of Wellington.
At that time, Chiswick still comprised three districts around Turnham Green — to the west there was Strand-on-the-Green with houses facing the river and behind a ‘Back Lane’.
Close by, near the junction of Kew Bridge with the Brentford Road and that end of Turnham Green Lane, was the London Style and Style Hall, also the Star and Garter Hotel.
At the eastern end of the Brentford Road was Stamford Brook Lane, turning northward and Chiswick Lane leading southward to Mawson Lane and the riverside houses opposite to the Eyot (or Ait), in turn leading back to St. Nicholas Church, Fishermen's Place and Church Street, at the other end of which was Pages Yard and Lord Burlington's Lane, with Chiswick Square on the south side and Hogarth Lane extending from that end of Mawson Lane, linking Little Sutton with that area via Barrowgate Lane.
Sutton Lane wound from the hamlet of Little Sutton, southward to Sutton Manor Court and northward to the western edge of Turnham Green, immediately opposite to the old Pack Horse Lane which was   the turning running north from that side of the Brentford Road along side the tavern called ‘The Pack Horse’.
Chiswick in the early part of the 19th century
As the name indicates, Lord Burlington Lane bounded the southern side of the grounds of Chiswick House, and extended westwards close to Grove House, to link with Strand-on-the-Green.
Grove House could be approached by a lane called King's Lane from Sutton Lane close to Sutton Manor Court.
The great area of land south of Lord Burlington Lane, down to the river bank, was meadowland with osier beds at the water front.
North of Chiswick House Gardens was the Common Fields of Turnham Green, with stretches of market garden land west of Sutton Lane, between it and Strand-on-the-Green, with more market garden land close to Corney Lane at the Chiswick Lane end of Lord Burlington Lane.
William Fromow, of Norfolk, decided to establish his nursery business in Chiswick, and in 1829, he purchased an existing nursery, south of Turnham Green Lane and west of Sutton Lane, with its stock, and the business passed to his son, also William, then to other members of the family, in 1869.
The imposition of heavy death duties payable in the 1930's, led to the sale of the original nursery land, on which three blocks of flats were built — Beverley, Belgrave and Beaumont Courts, but the little parade of shops on the corner of Walpole Gardens, just across the road from the old nursery, is still named Fromow's Corner.
Viscount Melbourne became Prime Minister in July 1835, but by the end of that year, it was necessary for the Duke of Wellington to become Prime Minister for a short period, followed for about one year by Sir Robert Peel, who had been Home Secretary and had introduced the first Police Force, enrolling men who soon became known as ‘Peelers’ or ‘Bobbies’, after the founder.
Rivers and canals had been the main means of transporting goods, particularly heavy or bulky goods, but at the beginning of the nineteenth century, railways began to appear.
George Stephenson was appointed engineer to the Stockport and Darlington Railway which opened in 1825, as a line to transport coal only, but the idea soon spread and, in 1826, the Menai Suspension Bridge was opened, linking Anglesey to the mainland.
By then George Stephenson's son, Robert, had also become involved in the ever increasing extension of railways which became  particularly useful as a means of transporting passengers, as well as goods, and even more so on Continents where great distances overland existed.
The great parliamentarian, George Canning, became Prime Minister in 1827, but only for four months, as he died at Chiswick House.
A family of Wiltshire farmers decided, in 1835, to buy a brewery and chose Chiswick.
The family name was Fuller, and John Fuller — who knew nothing of the brewery trade — decided to bring in a Mr. Turner and a Mr. Smith and they formed a partnership which continues still as the well known firm of Fuller, Smith and Turner.
King William IV had a younger brother, the Duke of Kent, who had married Victoire, the sister of Leopold of Saxe-Coburg, but William disliked Victoire the mother of Victoria, born at Kensington Palace on 25th.
May 1819, followed shortly afterwards by the death of the Duke of Kent, so Victoria saw very little of either King George IV or King William IV.
The death of William IV occurred in 1837, by which time Victoria was just eighteen years of age and, therefore, able to be crowned Queen.
The Victorian Era
In the same year as Queen Victoria succeeded her uncle, King William IV, Dr. Edward Tuke took a lease on the Manor Farm House, in what by then was called Chiswick Lane, and it became a home for mentally ill gentle-persons.
Dr. Tuke pioneered treatment of mental illness, and when he died, in 1855, his two sons, Thomas and Edward, both being qualified doctors, carried on the practice.
Thomas married one of the daughters of Dr. John Conolly (under whom he had studied the ‘non-restraint’ system of treatment for the mentally ill) at the then new Middlesex County Asylum at Hanwell.
Two of the sons of that marriage also became doctors, Thomas and Charles, and it was under their supervision that the asylum was moved from Manor Farm House to Chiswick House in 1893, where it remained until 1929.
Being only eighteen years of age and relatively unversed in matters of state, Queen Victoria was much influenced by the Prime Minister, Viscount Melbourne, who held that office from 1835 to 1851.
However, in 1839, she fell for Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha, who was just three months older than  Elizabeth , and they were married in February 1840.
It was that year that the world was introduced to the idea conceived by Sir Rowland Hill — postage stamps — the first of the one penny stamps, black in colour, which could be used to send a letter through the postal system called the Post Office.
By 1840 George Cloud's omnibuses left for London from the ‘George IV’ inn on Turnham Green, every half-hour during the day, also three Carriers left daily for London.
The omnibuses were horse drawn, single decker with passengers sitting facing each other across a middle aisle, and other omnibuses travelled westward from Chiswick through Brentford, Isleworth and Hounslow.
The river was still a main means of transport and many dignitaries maintained their own form of floating vehicle such as a large barge rowed by members of the experienced watermen.
One such barge went with the office of the Lord Mayor of the City of London and that barge was quite frequently moored off the shore at Strand-on-the-Green, close to an inn which became known as ‘The City Barge’.
In 1841, Sir Robert Peel had again become Prime Minister, and records illustrate that the population of Chiswick had risen to 5,811 — also on 9th.
November of that year, a son was born to Queen Victoria, named Edward, but he was not to become King until the beginning of the next century.
The increase in the population of Chiswick caused thought to be given to the need for another Anglican Parish Church situated in the Turnham Green area, so Sir Gilbert Scott, R.A. was commissioned to design an appropriate church to be built on land granted by the Dean and Chapter of St. Paul's Cathedral, as Lord of the Manor of Little Sutton.
The new church on Turnham Green was named Christ Church and was consecrated in 1853, with a parish separated from the old Chiswick parish of St. Nicholas.
Whereas things appeared stable in Britain at that time, overseas there existed events of change — in Italy there existed no unity and much of the land was occupied by the forces of Austria, but they were removed and in 1833, a united Italy was advocated under Papal rule, but that proved not to be successful and it would be some years before Garibaldi was able to form the Italian National Association for the Unification of Italy which only achieved its objective in 1871.
Similarly it took Germany well over twenty years from 1848, to unify the various Houses which included Prussia, Saxony and Bavaria.
Ireland, which had been ruled by England for nearly seven centuries, had remained largely Roman Catholic — despite considerable immigration from Scotland and England to Ulster, in the seventeenth century — had harboured bitterness as long ago as Queen Elizabeth I's time and, in 1845, a great period of famine occurred, resulting in wholesale emigration, mainly to the United States of America, generally in ships with appalling travelling facilities and causing appreciable loss of life to the passengers on the way.
That added to the bitterness which has lived on from generation to generation.
Earl Russell succeeded Sir Robert Peel as Prime Minister in 1846, and well before then Queen Victoria had commenced having her children which numbered four boys and five girls born during the first seventeen years of her marriage.
Up to the middle of the nineteenth century, water could only be obtained from wells — which frequently also became places of meetings and entertainment, e.g. Sadlers Wells, or by collecting and storing rain  water, or it could be purchased from water vendors, at three  pailsful for a penny.
In dry weather, however, resort had to be made to the water carriers, who  abound everywhere.
Generally the water was transported in a large Barrel-on-wheels drawn by a donkey, and many of those poor creatures died during their arduous toiling, hence the existence of so many ‘Dead Donkey Lanes’.
Queen Victoria's Consort, Prince Albert, was intelligent and much esteemed, and he was the principal instigator of the ‘Great Exhibition’ which took place in 1851.
To stage the Exhibition, Prince Albert commissioned the services of Sir Joseph Paxton, who had become head gardener to the Duke of Devonshire, and had acquired a reputation for his effective building of large glass houses.
One such glass house was erected — on the chosen site in Hyde Park, encompassing a large area and completely enclosing several growing trees.
The Great Exhibition lasted from May until October and attracted visitors from all over the world to see the various items of produce exhibited, and a Mr. Thomas Cook enlarged his business by arranging trips to that Exhibition from a great many places.
Afterwards, the great glass house was dismantled and re-erected at Sydenham in south-east London, and there became known as Crystal Palace.
Two years earlier, Karl Marx, the father of Scientific Socialism, settled in London having been expelled from Prussia and France.
He died in 1883 and was buried in Highgate cemetery.
The increase in the population of Britain — excluding the whole of Ireland — in 1851 had reached 20.8 million, and in that same year the discovery of gold in Australia led to a ‘goldrush’.
The Duke of Wellington died in 1852, when Lord Derby was Prime Minister, and a most magnificent funeral was arranged in his honour.
Lord Derby was followed as Prime Minister by the Earl of Aberdeen in December 1852, and in October 1853, Turkey declared war on Russia.
The Russian fleet managed to destroy the Turkish fleet and that caused Britain and France considerable concern as they feared the Russians, so they joined Turkey in March 1854.
An invasion of the Crimea took place in September 1855 and a year later, Sebastopol was taken and the Russians agreed peace terms in 1856.
Viscount Palmerston had taken over as Prime Minister by then only to lose that position to Lord Derby again but only for a year, as the  Liberals were able to take control of Parliament in 1859, with Viscount Palmerston remaining as Prime Minister until 1865, during which period many changes took place.
The construction of the Suez Canal — which links the Mediterranean Sea and the Red Sea, thereby shortening considerably the shipping distance between Europe and the eastern continents — was commenced in 1859, the same year as Charles Robert Darwin published his ‘ Origins of Species’ which provoked a great deal of controversy.
The work of Florence Nightingale (born of British parents in Florence, Italy — hence her name) in organising a band of nurses in the Crimean War, to relieve the suffering of the soldiers, became known and she received honours and testimonials from many countries.
She had been a nurse at St. Thomas's Hospital in London and there exists a link with Chiswick in that St. Thomas's had a sports ground in Chiswick until after the second world war, which was acquired by the local authority for housing purposes, and in her honour one of the roads was named ‘Florence Close’.
Back in 1858, the increase in urban development in Chiswick had required new controls — so the Chiswick Improvement Commissioners were elected by ballot and met in the hall of College House on Chiswick Mall.
The American Civil War broke out in 1860, with Abraham Lincoln becoming the President of U.S.A. in 1861, the abolishing of slavery being the main issue and it was formally abolished in the U.S.A. in 1863 although the Civil War raged on until 10th.
May 1865, shortly after President Lincoln had been assassinated on 14th.
April.
Queen Victoria suffered a severe blow in December, 1861 when her beloved Prince Albert died — it was very many years before she eventually accepted his death ,Memorials to him included the elaborate memorial in Kensington Gardens, with the world's continents represented around its base, and facing the magnificent Albert Hall which is still the home of various public occasions and wonderful concerts.
Edward, Prince of Wales, began to share the numerous public functions and his marriage in 1863 to the beautiful Princess Alexandra of Denmark was greeted with joy.
Henry Dawson, the painter, came to Chiswick in 1863, and occupied ‘The Cedars’ in Burlington Lane, but he died in 1878.
Viscount Palmerston died in October 1865 and Earl Russell became Prime Minister again.
It was at about this time that the Duke of Devonshire created the splendid avenue of lime trees which started beside some large houses — Afton House; Bolton House and Linden House — on the south side of Chiswick High Road, and extending down to the northern boundary of Chiswick House grounds, sweeping on through the magnificent wrought-iron gates, at the end of Hogarth Lane, and continuing through the gardens to the house.
It was the longest avenue of trees to be found in Europe, but it was cut into two by the construction of the new dual carriageway road, constructed after the second world war, to link the Great West Road with the extended Cromwell Road.
In the great storm of October 1987, many of the original trees in that avenue were uprooted but they have been replaced with young lime trees.
A map of the Chiswick area published  at about 1860, shows two inns, one on either side of Acton Lane, on the north side of Chiswick High Road, and close by ‘Caughts’ the butcher's slaughterhouse and shop; a square in front of the  Infant's National School, called Essex Place Square, with Mill's Row to the north.
The ‘Crown & Anchor’ is shown situated on the corner of the turning leading to Mill's Row and to Belmont House, with Holly House occupying the space between it and Fisher's Lane.
Queen's Row and Albert Place were situated on either side of Bond Street, just west of the windmill, against which Windmill Road led to Castle Place, which comprises a terrace of four cottages still existing.
On the south side of the High Road, east of Linden House, was Campden House and two inns, ‘George IV’ and the ‘Prince of Wales’, with an area behind them, east of Dukes Avenue — the Glebe Estate — referred to as ‘New Chiswick’estate containing artisan dwellings built for the workers at local manufactories, such as‘Thornycroft's’and Dan and Charles Mason's ‘Chiswick Soap Company’which manufactured not only soft soap, but furniture and metal polish.
It was not until the early years of the twentieth century that they had devised a formula for their boot polish which was marketed later under the name of ‘Cherry Blossom Boot Polish’ which became such a success, being sold at one penny per tin.
The old map refers to the southern section of Turnham Green as the ‘Front Common’(that on the north side of the High Road being referred to as the ‘Back Common’) and  there existed, in Sutton Lane, overlooking the Packhorse Pond, ‘The Chestnuts’, also Arlington House, with Arlington Park to the west, on the other side of the road from Fromow's nursery, and the ruins of Heathfield House still shown on the road leading to Little Sutton and Dean's Almshouses.
Mr. Thomas Thornycroft purchased some land at Chiswick Wharf, adjacent to St. Nicholas Church, in 1864, so that his engineer son, John Isaac Thornycroft, could build boats.
With the help of his father, John built the Nautilus, 38ft long and one of the earliest boats to be driven by a screw propeller, and it outpaced all the steamers which followed the University Boat Race between Putney and Mortlake, which by then had become an annual event in the spring of each year.
Thornycroft's shipbuilding business flourished and one of John's fellow students at Glasgow University, John Donaldson, a Scot Presbyterian, married John's sister, Frances, and in 1873, became a partner in the business, It was John Donaldson who built the Tower House in Chiswick Lane in 1875, and that house is now the home of the Missionary Sisters of Veronica.
The Thornycroft Company built twenty-five torpedo boats for the British Government in 1885.
The marriage of John Donaldson and Frances Thornycroft resulted in the birth of a son, who was named Thornycroft Donaldson, who — together with John Isaac Thornycroft's eldest son, John Edward, continued the business into the twentieth century, although it removed to Southampton in 1900.
For approximately five years between 1865 and 1870, the Prince of Wales rented Chiswick House and its gardens, as a nursery residence for his children.
His eldest son, who later became King George V, recalled with much pleasure those pleasant days in the delightful gardens of Chiswick House.
Lord Derby had again become Prime Minister in 1866 to be replaced for a short period by Benjamin Disraeli, but by the end of 1868 Mr. W. E. Gladstone took control of Parliament, and was to remain in control for over five years.
William Booth, a Methodist local preacher, began evangelical and rescue work in the East End of London in 1865, and that eventually led, in 1878 to the first formation of the Salvation Army, with himself as the General in charge.
It soon became an organisation of worldwide influence and still exists as strong as ever.
The Church of England was disestablished in Ireland in 1868.
In Italy, Giuseppe Garibaldi, had campaigned for the unification of his country for many years, gaining Venice from the Austrians, and established Victor Emmanuel as King of Italy, but it was not until 1870 that a march on Rome overpowered the French and Papal troops, and establish a united Italy with Victor Emmanuel as King in residence, in July 1871.
All areas around London were gradually being developed into suburbs by the 1870's, and Chiswick was no exception.
William John Tomlinson, whose  forbears had been watermen and then boat builders, had turned his skills into property building and eventually he managed to acquire land of his own on which to develop houses.
He was instrumental in developing Oxford and Cambridge Roads — both named after the Universities that held their annual river boat race on the River Thames into the Chiswick area — also Harvard Road, which was named after the American University who rowed against Oxford and Cambridge, at about that time ,He extended his development to the other side of Chiswick High Road, including Thorney Hedge Road and Silver Crescent, Mr Tomlinson built houses in other areas close by, including Clarence Road, off Wellesley Road, and his son, Richard, became an architect and was involved in the building of the Gunnersbury Baptist Church in Wellesley Road.
Another Anglican Parish was created in the Grove Park area of Chiswick, upon the building of another church, in 1872, with funds generously provided by the seventh Duke of Devonshire, and the Church was named St. Paul's.
Germany also became a single united nation by the proclamation of William I as Emperor (Kaiser) of Germany, on 18th.
January 1871, to be followed on June 1888, by William II — Kaiser William.
Benjamin Disraeli became Prime Minister of the British Parliament in 1874 and remained in that office until 1880 It was during his administration that Britain purchased a major holding of the shares of the Suez Canal Company
The influence of Britain as a nation was probably approaching its peak at about this time; the British possessions were worldwide; the British Empire was acclaimed universally; Queen Victoria was declared Empress of India, and the armed force — particularly the Royal  Navy — was much respected, although British Imperialism was distrusted by some, such as the United States of America.
In South Africa, the British forces met with some resentment and opposition, not only from the natives, but also from the Settlers of Dutch descent, and in October 1880, the first of the Boer Wars broke out.
W. E. Gladstone had returned as Prime Minister and in South Africa, Lt. General R. S. S. Baden-Powell became prominent as the defender of Mafeking.
The British Army soldiers had been, for a considerable period of time, mainly clad in a red tunic for battle, reputably so that any sign of blood was not easily discerned, but Baden-Powell realised that, with the advance of fire arms, the red tunic provided a more prominent target than the rather drab mixture of green and brown as normally worn by the Boers.
At his recommendation, the uniform of the British Army was changed to khaki which became so familiar in the subsequent world wars,
Mr. Jonathan Thomas Carr felt offended by what he considered was the ugly and tasteless housing being erected in the London suburbs, so he produced a scheme to create a garden suburb of Houses without basements, and of character within reach of people with moderate means, yet at the same time, retaining existing trees wherever possible.
So, in 1875, he founded Bedford Park — now a conservation area — around the old mansion house known as Bedford House, the residence of John Bedford, with two houses erected by John Bedford, one on either side of his mansion house, for his two daughters; he named one house Melbourne House and the other Sydney House, a recognition of the ascent of the development of Australia.
By that time the embanked railway line — now the District Line — had bisected the ‘Back Common’ of Turnham Green, and the area left north of the railway gradually became referred to as Acton Green.
The area north of Bedford House, which itself was just north of the Green, consisted of orchard and market garden land, so Mr. Carr's idea led to the area of Bedford Park becoming known as the first Garden Suburb, with three principal architects designing the buildings, Norman Shaw, E.W. Godwin and E.T.
May.
Apart from the houses, which formed the main part of the development, there were small parades of shops; an estate office; a club; a covered market or ‘superstore’; one inn and one splendid church built on a site given by  the Ecclesiastical Commissioners in 1879, St. Michael and All Angels, the parish hall being added in 1889.
The ‘superstore’ Failed to prove a viable proposition and it subsequently became a workshop for a specialist firm of motorcar body builders used by Rolls Royce cars, and only in more recent years has that business ceased and the premises redeveloped as office accommodation.
The Club proved very popular for many years as it appealed to the many actors, artists and musicians who found the atmosphere of Bedford Park most congenial.
Ronald Colman, who became universally well known as a film actor in the 1920s and 1930s, played his first acting rolls in the Bedford Park Club.
In the late 1930s, however, the Club failed and was later taken over by C.A.V. 
Into the Twentieth Century
Vincent Van Gogh was born on 30th.
March 1853 and he died at the very early age of thirty-seven, on 29th.
July 1890.
Although he spent a comparatively few number of years as a painter, it is for his paintings that his name is known worldwide.
He is little known as a teacher, or as a local preacher, but in fact his first choice of occupation upon leaving school, in Holland, was — to use his own words —‘School-mastering and the Church’, which occupations he thought were the only professions worthy of consideration.
As a schoolmaster, however, he was not very successful, even when he came to England in 1876, but as an apprentice pastor, he achieved some success.
When the school, with which he had found employment in Ramsgate, removed to Isleworth in Middlesex, he went with it and whilst there he came into contact with the Protestant Church circles which were Free Churches, i.e. not tied to either the Church of England, or the Roman Catholics.
The Rev. Thomas Slade Jones was the principal of a ‘Methodist’ school in Twickenham Road, Isleworth, at that time and he encouraged Vincent Van Gogh with his preaching.
Van Gogh stayed with the Rev. Jones from July to December 1876 and continued to write copiously and regularly to his beloved brother, Theo, also to his parents.
One such letter to Theo, dated 10th.
November 1876, reported that on the previous Thursday evening, he had preached in the little church at Turnham Green, to whence he had walked from Isleworth.
The sermon that he preached on that occasion, is the only one recorded, and it is contained in that letter to his brother.
His text was Psalm 119, verse 19- ‘I am a stranger on the earth, hide not Thy commandments from me’.
He also sent his brother a sketch of the little church at Turnham Green — together with a sketch of another church at Petersham — and he records that he returned to Turnham Green on a number of occasions subsequently.
On one such occasion his experiences were described in a letter to his parents, dated 19th.
November 1876, and which reads —‘Last Sunday, I was early at Turnham Green to teach at the Sunday School, it was a real English  rainy day.
Mr. Jones and his boys and I went in the afternoon to take tea with a sexton, a shoemaker who lived in one of the suburbs.
The view from the window there reminded me of Holland, a grass field, changed into swamp by the pouring rain, around it rows of little red houses with gardens and lights of the lamps that were lit’.
Although there is no clear evidence, reference made in Van Gogh's letters indicates that the sexton's house was on the north side of Turnham Green (now Acton Green), and although he referred to a Methodist school, in all probability the church at Turnham Green was another of the non-conforming denominations and it seems likely that the little wooden church at Turnham Green, which he had sketched, was the earliest Congregational Church, sited off Chiswick High Road, opposite to its junction with Chiswick Road, and just west of King's Place, The little church was probably in use prior to the erection, in 1878, of the large Congregational Church on the adjoining sit.
Unfortunately even the Church of 1878 has since been demolished.
Down on the river front of Old Chiswick, the firm of Thornycroft's continued to be busily occupied with their boat building, and one of their employees, Mr. R. T. Smith, made an approach to his engineer employer, John Donaldson, who was a good Scottish Presbyterian with strong Christian principles, for a loan of five pounds in order to enable him (R. T. Smith) to start a coffee stall in Church Street, in an endeavour to keep some of the other employees away from their regular visits to the Lamb Tap Inn.
The coffee stall proved to be very successful and R. T. Smith, who had a heart of gold and a knack of handling welfare problems, gave up his job with Thornycroft's, in order to found, in 1880, the Chiswick Mission and he was successful in finding homes for children who had been left motherless, but were not eligible to be accepted into orphanages.
John Donaldson continued to pay R. T. Smith his salary on the understanding he would never disclose the fact.
Well before 1880, Wesleyan Methodists had a thriving Sunday School and some form of regular public worship in the Strand-on-the-Green area, but due to the generosity of the Duke of Devonshire, a large site in Sutton Court Road was made available to the Methodists, who raised funds and built a substantial Hall in the centre of that site, opened in 1880 and used for Sunday School and public worship; followed, in 1902, by the erection of a Manse on the  southern flank.
At that time there existed other good houses, up to the corner of Cedars Road, which were subsequently demolished to create the dual carriageway of the Great West Road Extension.
A minister was appointed to occupy that new Manse, Rev. A. Strutt and in the next few years, he and his successor, also the Society of the Methodist Church, strove to raise funds in order to build a large church, with extra vestries, on the remaining section of the site, situated on the corner of Barrowgate Road.
In those days there existed another Methodist Society, known as the Primitive Methodists, and they had established themselves in Chiswick using a room in Devonshire Road, and working amongst the labouring classes of the community.
In 1881 having expanded and temporarily using the old Chiswick Lane Chapel, they were able to acquire a freehold site off Chiswick Common Road and Fishers Lane, on which they built their ‘L’ shaped Mission Church and School premises.
Unfortunately, those premises were destroyed by enemy bombing in the second world war, and the site is now part of the Shelter-homes development.
Horsedrawn trams were introduced in 1882, using rail-lines set in the middle of the main roads — in Chiswick, from the foot of Kew Bridge — just in front of the ‘Star & Garter’ inn — to Hammersmith Broadway.
By 1901 however, the local Power House was producing electricity and the tramways were electrified and extended to Hampton Court, in the one direction, and to Westminster Embankment, in the other.
The firs Chiswick Public Library was established in 1890, in Bourne Place, and moved a short distance, eight years later, to larger premises in Dukes Avenue, which were subsequently enlarged.
Chiswick had its first official Fire Station in 1891 — with motor ambulances — the first in England.
By 1881 the population of Britain — not including Ireland — had increased to 29.7 million, whereas that of Ireland had decreased to 5.2 million, compared to 6.6 million in 1851.
Mr. W. E. Gladstone was Prime Minister from 1880 to 1885 but then that post alternated between the Marquess of Salisbury and Mr. Gladstone until the turn of the century, with a short interlude in 1894–1895 when the Earl of Rosebery was in that office.
One of the National Schools — which were aided, in the latter part of the nineteenth century, by voluntary societies and the Church, with assistance from Parliament — was established at Strand-on-the-Green, off Back Lane, in 1874, and became the Strand-on-the-Green School.
The needs of children, especially those without parents, concerned the hearts and minds of Christian people, and one such person was Dr. Stephenson, who founded a home for such children, in 1876, and that organisation became known as the National  Childrens' Homes.
During the winter of 1892, it is recorded that the weather became so cold that the River Thames froze over at Chiswick.
Bridges across the River Thames were gradually being constructed, but the one nearest to the estuary had to be so constructed as to permit the tall ships entering the London Docks, to pass under, so the Tower Bridge was designed and opened in June of 1894.
The Chiswick Baptist Church was opened in 1897, situated just off Chiswick High Road, opposite to Turnham Green Terrace, in Annandale Road; also, in that same year, St. Thomas's Hospital created their own Sports grounds on an area of land in Chiswick, bounded by Sutton Court Road, Fauconberg Road, Grove Park Terrace and the Southern Railway.
The English expectation of life, in the 1880s, was only 43.7 years — by 1940 this had become 60.2 and increasing with the advancement in medical care — and between 1870 and 1900, the British Empire was increased territorially by a half and its population by a third.
Also in the 1880s, Europe was divided into states of vastly varying sizes, as small as Montenegro and as large as Russia, but eighty per cent of Europe's total population was to be found in six countries — Russia, Germany, Austria-Hungary, France, Italy and Britain.
the existence of coal, iron ore and a large population assisted the economies, but that large population meant that it was necessary to import from overseas quantities of food at an ever increasing cost, particularly as Europe suffered a succession of bad harvests, at that time, and that led to emigration overseas, mainly to the United States of America.
Approximately 25 to 30 million people from Europe emigrated there, also to South America; Australia; New Zealand and various colonies in Africa, between 1880 and 1910.
The effect in Britain was a sizeable reduction in arable areas of production, and the agricultural industry gradually ceased to be the  employer of the most workers.
The emigration also led to worldwide adaption of European concepts, even in Japan and China.
In addition, telephone systems and transworld cable laying, in the 1880s, brought about world communication, as never before.
Great power in Britain, in 1880, was still in the hands of the aristocracy and Gladstone's cabinet was full of representatives of the Whig tradition, but some such as Joseph Chamberlain, were more radical and anxious to change the situation.
Between 1880 and 1900, Local Authorities in Britain were empowered to provide housing; baths and libraries.
Parliament regulated conditions of work; hours of employment and introduced schemes of accident insurance, also arbitration services for industrial disputes.
Even old age pensions were discussed — but no action taken.
By 1882, Edison's system of generating power in a central power station, changed industrial methods almost as much as steam had brought about the industrial revolution, and by 1885 the first internal combustion driven machine had appeared, to be followed in 1894 by the first recognisable motorcar.
Queen Victoria lived on to see these tremendous changes and in June 1897, when the British Empire was probably at its peak, she celebrated her Diamond Jubilee with great pomp and ceremony.
One of the most popular forms of transport in London at that time was the omnibus drawn by a pair of horses — worked for three hours a day, with a rest every half-mile — which, by 1890, had become double-deckers with an outside staircase at the back, and which held up to twenty-six passengers.
In October 1889, the British Government became determined not to allow any threat to the British strategical supremacy in South Africa, and that led to the outbreak of another Boer War, which included some humiliating defeats in the initial stages and the two great sieges at Ladysmith and Mafeking which were finally relieved in 1900.
Britain experienced international isolation over the issue and in March 1902, agreed to the Boers' wish for peace.
Just before that, however, Queen Victoria had died at her favourite home in the Isle of White, Osborne House, on 22nd, January 1901.
Her eldest son, Albert Edward, Prince of Wales, was fifty-nine years of age, and as he had travelled extensively, as the Prince of Wales, in Europe, Canada, U.S.A. and India, also Palestine, Turkey, Egypt and  Russia, he was much practised in the matters of state, His wife, Alexandra, was of considerable help to him and during his reign as King there sprang up, in 1904, the ‘Entente Cordiale’ between Britain and France, probably arising from his visit to Paris in May 1903.
The Marquess of Salisbury had become Prime Minister in 1895, and in 1889 his government introduced death duties which were to lead to the gradual breaking up of the wealthy estates, which previously had passed from father to son — or some other relative — without any loss.
Poverty amongst the general populous was still quite common, at that time, and it often meant appalling destitution.
Women had always been denied the rights to vote in any election, but the Local Government Act, 1894, gave women property owners, in England and Wales, the right to vote in local elections, but they were still excluded from Parliamentary elections.
The terrible massacre of Christian Armenians in Turkey was reported in October 1895.
Along with scientific and industrial advancement, medicine increased apace —aspirin began being produced in 1897.
The demolition of the third Kew Bridge took place in 1998, in preparation for the erection of another new bridge to replace it.
The first Kew Bridge was constructed mainly of timber on stone foundations, with eleven arches and a carriageway over thirty feet wide, and it was opened by the then Prince of Wales, on 4th, June 1759.
Toll houses were positioned at either end and tolls continued to be collected until 1873.
The second Kew Bridge was built of stone during the period between 1783 and 1789 and was opened by King George III on 22nd.
September 1789.
The latest Bridge was opened on 20th.
May 1903 by King Edward VII and is correctly named ‘King Edward Bridge’.
Trade Unions had become united in the Trades Unions Congress and at a meeting in 1899, it was agreed to call a special conference on political representation of Labour, and that led to the foundation of the labour political party at the turn of the century.
Suburban residential development in Chiswick had already become noticeable by the end of the nineteenth century with Back Common load and the adjoining Bond Street, Holly Road, Clifton Gardens, Belmont Road and Grove on the north side of Chiswick high Road, and with Devonshire Road, Linden Gardens and Bolton Gardens  — later renamed Duke Road-on the south side, and a few houses in Dukes Avenue, opposite to the end of Barrowgate Road, which itself had a number of houses, mostly at the Sutton Lane end, close to Dead Donkey Lane.
West of Turnham Green considerable residential development had already taken place between the High Road and Wellesley Road, including Chiswick Road, Marlborough Road, Grosvenor Road, Heathfield Gardens and Arlington Park Gardens North and South — the latter being renamed later Walpole Gardens, and the former shortened to Arlington Gardens.
South of Barrowgate Road there existed a few houses fronting Sutton Court Road; some Almshouses on the southern side of Sutton Lane, with the fish pond behind them; Sutton Court itself at the bottom end of Sutton Court Road, where Sutton Lane turned south — that part of Sutton Lane later became Fauconberg Road — with the Lawn Tennis Grounds on the southern side and Chiswick Park Farm occupying the whole area of land to the east of Sutton Court Road, and the continuing Sutton Lane — which later formed the southern part of Sutton Court Road — curving round to meet the bottom end of Burlington Lane, on the southern boundary of Chiswick House Gardens.
The Urban District Council of Chiswick had its meetings and its offices in the Vestry Hall, situated on the corner of Heathfield Terrace and Sutton Court Road, but these were extended and substantially rebuilt, to be opened in February 1901 as the new Chiswick Town Hall, which included the Council Chamber; the Devonshire Room and the Hogarth Hall.
The population of Chiswick had reached 29,804 by that time.
Before and After the Great War
When Queen Victoria died at the beginning of 1901, Britain entered into the Edwardian Era with changes taking place at an ever increasing pace.
King Edward VII and his Consort, Alexandra, were able to influence international events, particularly in Europe, which continued to be the predominant continent and Britain looked forward to a long period of peaceful influence.
The population of Britain had reached 37 million in 1901 and the Prime Minister was still the Marquess of Salisbury, also the Commonwealth of Australia was established.
In 1902, the year in which Sir Edward Elgar wrote ‘Land of Hope and Glory,’ A. J. Balfour became Prime Minister.
Man's desire to fly like the birds had existed for hundreds of years but with the advent of the internal combustion engine, the chances of achieving some sort of flight appeared to be improved.
The Wright Brothers, in 1903, were able to demonstrate the possibility of flight by achieving the first flight of just thirty-six metres.
In that same year, motor-taxis appeared in London, to be followed in 1905 by the first motor-buses being tried in London.
However, before then, in 1901, the first batch of electrically driven trams were introduced in Chiswick, with a service running from Shepherd's Bush to Kew Bridge and later extended as far as Hampton Court.
Balfour's government introduced an Education Act which provided for an orderly scheme for elementary and secondary education in schools administered by Local Authorities.
On 8th.
February 1904, the Russo-Japanese War commenced ending on 5th.
September of the following year, with the defeat of the Russians.
That defeat caused France — who had previously looked to Russia as an ally — to look to Britain for mutual support, enhancing the Entente Cordiale which had developed following King Edward's visit to Paris, with Queen Alexandra, in May 1903.
In Chiswick, in 1904, the Royal Horticultural Society, which had occupied the area south of Horticultural Place back to Barrowgate Road, off Sutton Court Road, completed their removal to Wisley.
Also  the Chiswick Open-Air Swimming Bath was opened, just off Burlington Lane, close to the Duke of Devonshire's riverside meadows.
General Booth of the Salvation Army, had recognition by the City of London conferring on him the Freedom of the City, in 1905, which was also the year when Dr. T.J.  Barnard (the founder of the Children's Homes that bear his name), died on 19th, September.
King Edward VII opened a new highway in London, aptly named Kingsway, and the marine engineers, Thornycrofts, decided to remove from their Church Wharf, Chiswick premises and set their expanding business in Woolston at Southampton.
Their premises at Church Wharf were taken over by Gwynne's, an engineering firm, then making pumps, also the ‘Albert’ car.
During the Great War of 1914 1918, Gwynne's switched to the manufacture of aircraft engines.
1906 is probably best remembered for the great earthquake in San Francisco, which resulted in fire and general destruction of the city; also the Simplon tunnel through the Alps was completed, allowing railway traffic to pass from one side of that range of mountains, to the other.
Back in the British parliament, the Liberal Party, by an alliance with the new Labour group, won control of the House of Commons and Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman became Prime Minister.
The partnership between Rolls and Royce, motor engineers, led to the foundation of Rolls Royce Ltd., in 1906, and in the following year, the Territorial Army was established — also the English Boy Scout movement, which was the brainchild of Sir Baden-Powell, from his experiences at Mafeking, during the later Boer War.
The idea of the boy Scout movement soon spread and was imitated throughout the civilised world.
Both Australia and New Zealand achieved Dominion status in 1907.
The Olympic Games were held in London during 1908, and in that year H. H. Asquith became Prime Minister.
Viscount Northcliffe, the prominent journalist, offered a handsome Cash prize to the first person to fly across the English Channel which resulted in a Frenchman, M. Bleriot, flying from Calais to Dover in 1909, which was the year in which Sir A. V. Roe began aircraft manufacture.
Also in 1909, Chiswick saw the opening of two new Churches — the Methodists in Sutton Court Road had raised sufficient funds to erect  their large Church on the corner of Barrowgate Road.
It was one of the first buildings used by the public, to be lit by electricity — direct current, 110 volts in parallel.
That new Church came within the new parish of Sutton Court, created out of part of St. Nicholas's parish and part of Christ Church's parish of Turnham Green.
A new Church of England Church had also been erected at the southern end of Sutton Lane, and was named St. Michael's as the money for it had been realised by the sale of St. Michael's Church in Burleigh Street, London, which had been associated with St. Martins-in-the-Fields.
The new St. Michael's Church, Sutton Court, opened on 7th, December 1909.
Nationally, 1909 was notable for a blunder in the House of Lords by the use of a veto against the Budget of that year, which had been prepared by the Liberal-Labour group in the House of Commons.
It led to the Parliament Bill which proposed to restrict the power of the Lords, also introducing a limit of five years for the life of any Parliament, and strengthened the position of Mr. Asquith as Prime Minister.
Unfortunately King Edward VII died on 6th.
May 1910, and it was necessary for his eldest son to become King George V, in his succession.
Fortunately, George V had worked well with his father and knew the nature of the current political trends, but he did not wield the same influence internationally as his esteemed father.
George V had married, in 1893, Princess Mary — a Londoner — granddaughter of the Duke of Cambridge, and she was probably responsible for making George V popular with the British people.
The London General Omnibus Company had been experimenting for some years and, in 1910 introduced to the streets of London, their ‘B’ type, petrol engined, double-decker, opened top buses.
Also in that year, the Dominion of South Africa was established.
Mr. Oswald Stoll — who was subsequently knighted — began to erect, in 1911, one of his ‘Empires’, a theatre of entertainment, in Chiswick High Road, situated between the ‘Old Packhorse’ on the corner of Acton Lane, and the family butchers, ‘Caughts’which had its own slaughter house, as well as a shop set well back from the main road, just west of Essex Place Square.
The population of Chiswick had reached 38,772, by that time.
Old age pensions were, at last, introduced in that year of 1911, also national insurance for all weekly paid workers, against ill health and, for those in trades, also against unemployment.
It was in that year that female suffrage was being widely advocated and the militant suffragettes made their appearance.
The Royal Flying Corps was established in 1912, in which year the tragic sinking of the ocean liner Titanic took place on hitting an iceberg on its maiden voyage, with the loss of over fifteen hundred lives.
In the far eastern country of China, the dynasty was overthrown and the country became a Republic.
On 18th, January 1912, Captain Robert Falcon Scott, and his colleagues, reached the South Pole to find that Amundsen had reached there before them, and the whole party perished in appalling weather on their return journey to their ship Terra Nova, in which they had sailed from England in 1910.
In 1914, Mr. H. H. Asquith was still Prime Minister — he was a Congregationalist — the son of a Canadian Presbyterian Minister, and he had Winston Churchill in his Cabinet, with Mr. Bonar Law as leader of the Conservative opposition.
Income tax was 1/2d,(6p.) in the pound but that had risen to 5/- (25p.) in the pound by 1918.
On 2nd June 1914, The Archduke Franz Ferdinand and his wife, were assassinated by a Bosnian Serb and that triggered a series of events that led to the outbreak of war on 4th, August 1914 — the war that became known as The Great War.
Kaiser William II had built up strong forces in Germany and enlarged its naval power to counter the power of the British navy, and it was Germany's declaration of war on Russia which led to France and Britain declaring war on Germany and the Austrian-Hungarian Monarchy.
What had not been realised by all concerned was the fearful advance in the scientific methods of waging war — no longer was war a man to man affair — men could be destroyed in hundreds from a distance and that ability was not confined to one side alone.
Accordingly, instead of the war being over in a short time — as was thought by many — it became literally bogged down in trench warfare never previously experienced.
On the outbreak of war, Prime Minister Asquith formed a coalition government and Herbert Horatio Kitchener — who had been Commander-in-Chief  during the Boer wars — was appointed Secretary of State for War.
He was drowned when on board H.M.S. Hampshire, in 1916, when it was sunk.
Earl Douglas Haig, a Lt. General, was put in charge of the British Expeditionary Force that went to France, and he was promoted to Field Marshall.
Sir Thomas Sopwith — who had won an award as an engineer, in 1910, for flying from Kent to Belgium — formed his company, ‘ Sopworth Aviation’ and built aircraft used extensively during the war, such as the  Sopworth Camel.
Also in 1914, the Panama Canal was opened, shortening the journey between the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans.
Italy declared war, in 1915, on their northern neighbours, Austria, and in that same year, the Germans first used poison gas against French and British troops in the trenches at Ypres.
Another German atrocity was the execution by firing squad, in 1915, of Nurse Edith Cavell, who had been matron of a Belgian Hospital in  Brussells since 1907, and had stayed on duty despite the German invasion of that country, and who had been accused by the Germans, of assisting British, French and Belgian soldiers to escape captivity.
Zeppelin airships had been developed before the outbreak of war and, in 1915, the enemy used them to carry out bombing raids on London; also the German submarine ‘U’ boats sank a civilian ocean liner, named the Lusitania with the loss of 1,198 lives, including many citizens of the United States of America.
Military activity was not confined lo the European area but spread into the area known as The Middle East where an unusual British Officer, Thomas Edward Laurence, was able to successfully organise Arab tribesmen to fight for the Allies cause.
In Chiswick, in 1915, a new Secondary School for Girls was opened, situated in open space, close to Chiswick House Gardens, in Burlington Lane.
By 1916 it had become obvious that the war was not likely to be over for some time and the government round that it was necessary to introduce military conscription in place of voluntary conscription, in order to ensure replacement of the thousands of soldiers being killed and wounded on the battlefields.
The cost of the war was not confined to lives, however, for it became necessary, in 1916, for the Bank of  England to issue, for the first time.
one pound and ten shilling notes for general use.
Another ‘first time’ was the introduction during that summer, of a scheme entitled Daylight Saving by putting the clocks forward one hour.
Yet another ‘first’ was the introduction by the British Army of the armoured tank on the Somme battle front.
Back in Britain, it became necessary to introduce food rationing as the blockade by the German ‘U’ boats was having its effect on the supplies of foods from overseas.
Another problem arose in 1916, which cannot easily be explained without reference to the proposed ‘Home Rule’ in Ireland that had developed under the government of Asquith which introduced the Home Rule Act 1914.
Many had hoped that with so many Irishmen from both northern and southern Ireland fighting together against Germany, that their differences would have been overcome.
However, many American citizens were of Irish descent and held bitter opinions of the English.
One such person was John Devoy, who was associated with the Irish Republican Brotherhood and who was also in close touch with the Germans, so he arranged for supplies of arms to be shipped to Ireland.
One of those German arms supply ships was sunk on 24th.
April 1916, and that sparked off a rebellion in which the General Post Office and other places in Dublin, were occupied by forces opposed to the British rule, and the local leader proclaimed the establishment of a republic, although he and his colleagues had no mandate from the Irish people.
Many of the rebels were arrested and shot which gave impetus to Irish Nationalism which, in turn, was much opposed by the Northern Counties of Ulster, who had Lord Carson as their leader.
David Lloyd George — who had entered Parliament in 1890, as a Liberal — endeavoured to negotiate between John Redmond, for the southern counties, and Lord Carson, in order to produce a grant of immediate Home Rule to Ireland, but excluding the six counties of Ulster, but the British coalition government under Asquith.
watered down the terms so it came to nil.
By 7th.
December 1916, there was a coalition between Liberals and Conservatives which forced Asquith to resign and Lloyd George became Prime Minister.
King George V had been very grieved at the outbreak of the Great War, which he would have liked to avoid, but Britain's commitment to  Belgium made that impossible, and in 1917 he decided to change the royal ‘House’ name from Saxe-Coburg-Gotha to Windsor.
Germany was experiencing a very effective blockade by the British Navy and by 1917 the German authorities authorised their submarine ‘U’ boats to attack all Ships sailing to and from any British ports — many neutral ships had been sunk previously — but as many of those ships were American, President Woodrow Wilson won a mandate in U.S.A. to declare war on Germany on 6th.
April 1917.
Momentous events were taking place, however, in Russia — riots in Petrograd led to mutiny in the military forces and, on 15th, March 1917, the  Tzar abdicated.
Vladimir Ulyanov — who chose to use the name of ‘Lenin'-had been exiled to Siberia in 1895 after he had founded a Union for the liberation of the working classes.
He was released in 1900 and lived in Paris and London, where he met Trotsky, but he went to Switzerland where he was contacted by the German government and smuggled back into Russia, in 1917, to lead the Bolshevik Revolution.
The Bolsheviks had let it be known that they wished to end their war with Germany, and after The Revolution in October 1917, in Russia, the Bolsheviks were able to seize power and, in December 1917, they signed an alliance with Germany.
Peace with Russia enabled the German forces to concentrate on the western front before the troops arriving from the United States of America could be fully deployed, so in the spring of 1918, a massive Germany attack was launched and their troops came within fifty miles of Paris before being halted.
Elsewhere in Europe, however, the Austrian v.
Italy campaign was winding down; the Bulgarians were seeking peace by the late summer; a peasant revolt in Hungary caused the Austrian-Hungary Monarchy to waiver and the full deployment of the fresh U.S.A. troops had the effect of causing the Germans to realise that they could not win the war.
At eleven o'clock on the morning of the eleventh day of the eleventh month — November 1918 — the Great War ended.
In memory of the ten million, or so, men who died in that war, it became the practice for everyone and everything, to stop still and be silent for two minutes at that hour, on that date every year thereafter.
Subsequently, after the Second World War, that practice has become a token at Memorial Services on the nearest Sunday to the eleventh of November each year.
The end of that war brought about many changes in Europe, one of which was the creation of a new mid-Europe nation which was originally named the ‘Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes’, but which formally changed its name in 1929, to Yugoslavia.
During those long war years, the women in Britain had carried out jobs which only men had carried out previously and the influence of the voice of women had to be acknowledged.
It took the form of granting women — provided they had attained thirty years of age, the right to vote in a parliamentary election; also all men of twenty-one years of age.
The joy of the end to the war was marred, unfortunately, by a worldwide influenza epidemic.
Lady Astor became the first woman to be elected a member of parliament in 1919, and Sir Herbert Austin, a major car manufacturer, was elected as the member of parliament for King's Norton.
Also in 1919, the first flight directly across the Atlantic, was achieved on l5th, June by Captain Alcock and Lt. W. Brown.
A daily air service began between London and Paris.
During that same year, the Peace Conference assembled and the Versailles Treaty of Peace was signed, under which the principles of a League of Nations were laid down.
However, it was in March 1917 that a fighting body was founded in Italy, led by Mussolini, called Fascists, who were avowed anti-communists and anti-socialists.
After the Great War, one of the tanks used by British troops in the war zone, was positioned on a slanting rockery, on the north-west corner of Turnham Green.
opposite the ‘Old Pack Horse’, whilst at the other Chiswick High Road corner — Heathfield Terrace junction — an obelisk was erected as a permanent War Memorial, around which Memorial Services have been held ever since.
The British government produced the 1914 Housing Act in an endeavour to rectify the lack of suitable housing in the Country, authorising Local Government bodies to provide housing with subsidies from the Treasury Funds.
This created ‘Council Houses’ for the first time.
In London, the General Omnibus Company introduced a new double-decker bus — still with an open upper deck — with a 28 H.P. petrol engine, and capable of carrying forty-six passengers.
In Chiswick, a street market was introduced on the southern side of the High Road — between Devonshire Road and Linden Gardens — but it was not very popular and complaints began to build up.
By the generosity of the Duke of Devonshire, an area of land on the southern side of Burlington Lane, not far from the Southern Railway Station, was made available to the Chiswick Parochial Charities, and a number of Memorial Homes were erected for housing ex-service men and their families.
British Legion was able to raise funds for the erection of a Servicemen's Memorial Club in Bourne Place, just off the Chiswick High Road, between Dukes Avenue and Duke Road.
Not far away, at the top of Richmond Hill in Surrey, with a line view over the Royal Park on the one side and the valley of the River Thames — below Richmond Terrace — on the other side, charity funds provided a Home for permanently handicapped British Service men.
It was named after the nearby Inn, the ‘Star and Garter Home’, and it still provides for the needs of such servicemen, the newer inmates generally rendered handicapped as a result of their tours or duty in Northern Ireland, also some from the Falkland conflict.
King George V unveiled the ‘Cenotaph'-the war memorial in Whitehall, close to the parliament buildings at the Palace of Westminster, also to Downing Street, in 1920, and an ‘Unknown Warrior’ was ceremoniously Buried in Westminster Abbey.
Also, in 1920, the first meeting or the League of Nations took place in Paris, with subsequent meetings at Geneva.
By 1920 it was appreciated that the Great War had brought about many changes, particularly in Europe and around the Mediterranean area; Europe's domination of the world had been weakened, and there was a marked decline in ‘colonisation’, as well as a gradual change from ‘British Empire’ to ‘British Commonwealth’, although it took another war to finalise that process.
As in Italy, during the previous year, a political party appeared in Germany in 1920, led by Adolph Hitler, called the National Socialists — Nazi for short — vowing to unify all Germans and arrange for the abolition of the Treaty of Versailles, which imposed heavy reparations and restrictions on Germany.
By that time the Fascist party in Italy had increased in strength to 300,000 members.
In Cilicia, a massacre of 7,000 Armenians and Turks, took place in 1920 and in the United States of America the ‘Prohibition’ of the sale of alcoholic drinks, came into effect.
For the first time, women graduates were admitted to Oxford University, to take degrees and the 1920 Unemployment Act extended the system of the right to ‘dole’ payments, to almost every worker.
Also in 1920, the first public broadcasting station in Britain was opened by Marconi.
Over the Irish sea, in Dublin, that same year, fourteen British officers were murdered which gave rise to further outrages there, during the following year, by the Sinn Fein group.
Those troubles — referred to as the ‘Irish Rebellion’— were overcome only by violent methods used by the ‘Black and Tans’, plus some restless ex-soldiers, known as the ‘Auxiliaries’, and when the facts of those violent methods became known to the British public, they were declared unacceptable — despite the outrages which Sinn Fein had instituted in London and the bombings in Belfast.
So a truce was declared in July 1921, and negotiations took place between Mr. De Valera — on behalf of Sinn Fein, and the British government, so that by December an agreement was reached to partition Ireland, with six Counties of Ulster remaining with the United Kingdom, with its own Northern Ireland Parliament in Belfast.
The remainder of Ireland became known as the Free State of Eire, but disagreement about that partition of Ireland became an inflamed issue within the Free State, and it led to bloody civil war there, after 50,000 British troops were withdrawn, in 1922.
An announcement was made in 1921 to the effect that approximately 93,800 officers and men were still listed as ‘missing’ and unaccounted for, as a result of the Great War; also the British Broadcasting Company was formed.
The population of Chiswick had reached 40,942 by 1921.
For eastern Europe, 1922 was a traumatic year — money prices were multiplying rapidly; in Austria by 14,000 times; in Hungary by 23,000 times; in Poland by 2 million times; in Russia by 400 million times and in Germany, by one thousand million times.
On 31st, May 1922, the German mark collapsed completely.
In Italy, a general strike in May 1922, enabled Mussolini's Fascists to drive the Communist Administration of Bologna out of office, and later that year, Mussolini unseated the government and handed over  the administration to the King and the Army, which left the Italian King with little alternative but to ask Mussolini to form a new government, which was sworn-in on 31st.
October 1922.
In Britain, David Lloyd George was succeeded as Prime Minister by Mr A. Bonar-Law, who headed a Conservative Government with the Labour Party for the first time as a formidable opposition.
The London County Council was given an administrative home when their County Hall, Which had been erected on the south bank of the River Thames, at the foot of Westminster Bridge, was officially opened by King George V, in July 1922.
Lord Carnarvon discovered the treasures in the tomb of King Tutankhamen, near Luxor, in Egypt during that year of 1922.
Dan Mason of the Chiswick Polish Company —‘Cherry Blossom Polish’— was a great benefactor and in 1922 he bought Boston House in Burlington Lake, Chiswick, and had it converted into a club for the female staff of his Company's factory.
Dan Mason had also provided Chiswick with its own Hospital on the river frontage of Chiswick Mall, which later became the Chiswick Maternity hospital.
A royal wedding took place on 26th.
April 1923, which had greater significance than was realised then — the Duke of York married lady Elizabeth Bowes-Lyon, who later became King George VI and Queen Elizabeth — now the Queen Mother.
Also in 1923, the Urban District Council of Chiswick purchased from the Duke of Devonshire, one hundred and thirty acres of riverside meadowland, for public use and it was adapted with embankment, tree lined promenade, shelters and a bandstand.
These Dukes Meadows are particularly recalled on the occasion of the annual University Boat Race.
Because reparations had not been received from Germany, French and Belgian troops re-occupied the Ruhr area of Germany in January 1923.
The Conservative Prime Minister, Bonar Law, decided to resign as leader, due to illness George also resigned as leader of the Liberals — and Stanley Baldwin took over as Prime Minister.
In a general election, in December, the Conservatives, although winning more seats in the House of Commons, than either the labour or Liberal parties, had fewer than their total.
Eight women members were elected to that parliament, which J. Ramsay MacDonald — the leader of the Labour party — was invited to form a government, but'  that government couldn't last and, in 1924, the Conservative party won a large majority, so Stanley Baldwin again became Prime Minister with Winston Churchill as the Chancellor of the Exchequer.
King George V opened the Wembley Exhibition Centre in April 1924.
Lenin had been the effective leader in the United States of Soviet Russia but he died in January 1924, leaving two possible successors, Trotsky and Stalin, but Stalin had established himself in the Communist hierarchy and Trotsky was subsequently expelled.
The President of the United States of America, Woodrow Wilson, also died in 1924.
Chiswick theatre lovers were delighted at the opening of the ‘Q’ Theatre, in Kew Bridge Road, close to the Star & Garter Hotel on the Chiswick side of Kew Bridge.
Unfortunately, the theatre closed in 1956.
With financial help from the British Government, Imperial Airways was established in 1924, providing a fairly regular service for private passengers, to various parts of the world.
Adolph Hitler published, in Germany, the first volume of his book called Mein Kampf detailing his aspirations for complete German nationalisation, in 1925.
That same year, the London Omnibus Company introduced their first bus with a roof over the seats on the upper deck, but the tyres on the wheels remained ‘solid’, although pneumatic tyres were introduced on new single-decker buses.
An inn; a number of Victorian houses and other properties at the western end of Chiswick High Road, enjoyed a view over open fields and orchards beside the Brentford Fruit and Vegetable Market until the initial work commenced on the construction of the first dual carriageway road, with a separate cyclists track, in the western suburbs.
That road became known as the Great West Road — the first section later achieved the name of the ‘Golden Mile'-which was formally opened by King George V (wearing a bowler hat) in 1925; a year when the Oxford boat sank in the April University Boat Race.
Germany had become a republic at the end of the Great War, and in 1925  Hindenberg became the President of that republic.
Radio transmission had advanced and the first trans-Atlantic broadcast took place in 1925, but only the following year, John Logie Baird was able to demonstrate television.
On 4th, May 1926, the Trades Union Council called for a General Strike in support or striking coal miners.
In order to counteract the General Strike, the government called for volunteers and received support in large numbers resulting in amateur drivers running the tram, buses and food lorries, which ran in convoys to defeat the picketing strikers.
That effectively broke the General Strike, which ended on 12th.
May.
The British Broadcasting Company commenced transmitting regular programmes to the public in 1926.
In Chiswick, provision was made for Boys to receive Secondary School education, in the extension that had been added to the Girls School in Burlington Lane, and the School became the Chiswick Grammar School.
Also, in 1926, the Central Electricity Board was founded.
Despite the advancement in aeroplane technology, it was not until 1927 that anyone had managed to fly alone-'solo'-all the way across the Atlantic Ocean, but in that year, a young American aviator, Lindbergh achieved that objective.
The requirement forever more schools for the ever growing young population in Chiswick resulted in another school, a Secondary School for both boys and girls, being built on a site between Burlington Lane — not far from the County Grammar School — and a new road being constructed which gave more direct access to both those schools from Sutton Court Road.
The new school was opened in 1927 and was called the Central School and the new road was named Staveley Road, which was lined with flowering cherry trees, a great attraction for visitors every year during blossom time — one of the more notable visitors each year was the late Queen Mary, consort to the King at that time, George V.
It was in 1928 that Grove House was pulled down and the area redeveloped residentially — Grove Park Road, Kinnaird Avenue and Devonshire Gardens — close to the Chiswick Southern Railway Station.
During the seventeenth century, Grove House was linked by a line avenue of trees to another Manor House, Sutton Court.
the daughter or Sir Chaloner Chute, who was Knight of the Shire of Middlesex, also Treasurer of the Middle Temple, and lived in Sutton Court, married Henry Barker who lived in Grove House.
During the Eighteenth century, the Barker family sold Grove House to Viscount of Boston, the Earl of Grantham.
Under his will, Grove House was left to his daughter and her husband, William Elliot, a Colonel in the Grenadier Guards, also an uncle of George Augustus Elliot, the defender of Gibraltar, who became Lord Heathfield and ended his life at Heathfield House, Turnham Green.
In due course Grove House was sold to Humphry Morice, son of a Governor of the Bank of England, and an intimate friend of Walpole, who dined with him there frequently.
Before the end of the eighteenth century, Grove House was devised to a Mrs. Luther, then the house was occupied by the Rev. Robert Louth, son of the Bishop of London, but in 1861, the Duke of Devonshire became the owner.
Towards the end of the nineteenth century, it was acquired by Colonel R. W. Shipway, J.P.-the donor of Hogarth House to the public — but in 1928 it was demolished.
The general election of 1929 resulted in the Labour Party, with liberal support, forming the government and Ramsay Macdonald again becoming Prime Minister.
Internationally, the new Country of the ‘Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes’ was renamed Yugoslavia, also the Lateran treaties were signed, creating a new, entirely independent, state known as Vatican City, and provided the Papacy with a large endowment as well as embodying a Concordat with the Italian state that acknowledged the end of temporal power.
The General Omnibus Company introduced to London, in 1929, the first six-wheeled bus, and in that year Chiswick experienced one of its greatest fires — Sanderson's Wallpaper Factory, situated beside the Public Library in Dukes Avenue and flanking Barley Mow Passage.
The blaze commenced one lunchtime when few people were in the premises, so there was no loss of life, but it took a long time for the blaze to be brought under control and some days before the firemen were able to be sure that there was no risk of further outbreaks of fire.
In Scotland, the Presbyterian Churches united in 1929, to form the Church of Scotland.
However, 1929 will probably always be remembered for the collapse of the stock market in New York's Wall Street, in October, which resulted in no capital being available from the United States of America, so a world slump occurred.
The price of most raw materials fell by fifty-six per cent; foodstuffs by forty-eight  per cent and most of the manufactured goods had to be sold at thirty-eight per cent lower than their previous prices.
The effects of the world economic slump were traumatic but one event which occurred in 1930, was the commencement by France, of the building of a line of concrete defences along its border with Germany — that line of defences became known as the Maginot Line.
Gwynnes Works left their Chiswick riverside premises in 1930, and in that same year the Chiswick Polish Company merged with the Nugget Polish Company of Kensington, and the united firm became known as ‘Chiswick Products Ltd’.
By the year 1931, the population of Great Britain had reached 44.9 million persons, but that figure now included the people in Northern Ireland.
Japan resented the League of Nations with a problem in 1931, by attacking and completing a conquest of Manchuria.
The United Stales of America — who had excluded themselves from the League of Nations — did nothing about the matter.
Japan was a member of the League and a Commission of Inquiry, set up by the League, investigated and its report criticized Japan, who then left the league, on 27th, March 1933.
The League's failure in its first confrontation with a major power alarmed smaller, more vulnerable countries.
The economic effects of the 1929 Wall Street collapse was still very evident in 1932, and in September 1932, Britain suspended payments in gold.
By the end of that year, twelve other countries had followed that arrangement, so the United States of America also took its dollar off the gold standard.
Over the Irish Sea, an Irish Republican who had been born in New York, U.S.A. — and therefore, legally an American citizen — Eamon De Valera, became President of the Irish Free State.
He was leader of Sinn Fein, which translates as ‘Ourselves Alone’.
In Germany, in July 1932, the Nazi party won 230 seats in the Reichstag, which made them the majority party, although Adolph Hitler was not able to become the Chancellor until January 1933.
1932 was a momentous year in Chiswick, which had found itself almost isolated and unable to expand due to the River Thames cutting it off from the County of Surrey, and the boundary of Hammersmith to the east, being also the boundary with the London County Council; with little or no contact or matters of interest with Acton to the north, but nevertheless a narrow link with Brentford, to the west (Chiswick  High Road had been called the Brentford Road for very many years), which link was considerably enhanced by the construction of the Great West Road.
A merger of the two District Councils had been discussed and agreed.
His Majesty, King George V, acting through Right Honourable Lord Rochdale, the Lord Lieutenant of Middlesex, presented the merged two Urban Districts with a Charter of incorporation, which raised the status of the united Districts to that of a Municipal Borough, entitled to have a Mayor instead of a Chairman of the District — as well as Aldermen and Councillors.
The man chosen to be the ‘Charter Mayor’ was Mr. James Clements, who had been the Chairman of the Brentford District Council in 1903, and as such had been present when King Edward VII had opened the new Kew Bridge.
Brentford has a colourful history, its Market and Fair being recorded at the beginning of the fourteenth century, when the area was referred to as ‘the Manor of  Bratnford ’.
Its history of commerce is believed to be the reason why Ealing — of which Brentford was originally its southernmost part — decided to keep Brentford at arm's length, thereby retaining to itself, an almost exclusively residential area as Ealing.
Within the Borough of Brentford and Chiswick there existed Boston House in the Manor of Boston, with a varied history over many hundreds of years; also Gunnersbury House — the name Gunnersbury is believed to be derived from Gunilda or Gunyld, a niece of King Canute, who had a house or castle there — which led to the Manor of that area being called ‘Gunnersbury’ by the seventeenth century.
Only more recently was the site of Gunnersbury House used by the late Leopold de Rothschild in order to build the palatial house, part of which is now the Gunnersbury Museum.
Brentford was also the centre at which the Middlesex Elections were held and some very boisterous hustings took place there for the nomination and election of parliamentary representatives.
Towards the Second World War
Unemployment reached a peak in 1933 — universally there were thirty million people without work and any form of free trade between nations and virtually been abandoned, each country having introduced import quotas, tariffs and controls.
There was also a continued fear of the spread of Communism, particularly by the Roman Catholic Church.
In January 1933, Adolph Hitler had managed to become Chancellor, and gained control of Germany.
A few days before a new election was due to take place, at the beginning of March, a mysterious fire destroyed the Reichstag and the Communists were blamed for that outrage.
At the election, the Nazi party increased the number of seats in the Reichstag to 288, and by December of that year, all other parties were banned or dissolved.
Pope Pius XI publicly praised Hitler for his stand against Communists, and in July 1933, a Concordat signed between Nazi Germany and the Holy See, was subsequently ratified in September.
The great Chertsey Road had been in construction for some while as it involved the building of three new bridges over the River Thames at Chiswick, Richmond and Twickenham, but it was completed in 1933, and the entire achievement was formally opened by Edward, Prince of Wales, who drove along the route, cutting ribbons at each of the three bridges.
During 1934, Hitler's desire to become the sole dictator of Germany took a step further when he was able to dissolve all Trade Unions, and followed that with a purge of unwanted members of the Nazi party.
It was strongly suspected, internationally, that Mussolini, the Dictator of Italy, was involved in the assassination which took place in October 1934, at Marseilles — the victims being the French Foreign Minister and his guest, King Alexander of Yugoslavia.
In any event, on 5th.
December 1934, Italian and Ethiopian force came into conflict in the border area of Ethiopia and by the following summer, Mussolini was making extravagant demands of Ethiopia.
The British Government's Foreign Secretary Hoare, strongly advocated collective action against Mussolini's disturbance of the peace, particularly when Mussolini  launched a full scale invasion on 3rd.
October 1935.
The League of Nations imposed sanctions but those proved half-hearted and ineffective, so Italy overran Ethiopia by 9th.
March 1936.
The League of Nations was fatally damaged as a result of the lack of effect of their imposing sanctions on Italy in that period of 1935 to 1936, and both Britain and France became concerned, particularly as they had thought, until then, that Italy would prove to be their ally against Germany.
Britain, however, celebrated the Silver Jubilee of King George V and Queen Mary, the occasion being a joyous one, particularly in London, where there was a magnificent parade.
The London buses by this time had taken on the look of the more modern style and were being driven by diesel engines, also they were capable of carrying as many as fifty-six passengers.
Trams, however, were taken off the streets of London, in 1935, and were replaced by trolley-buses — vehicles able to run on electric power by having two arms stretching above their roof to make contact with a pair of overhead cables, instead of the single arm of the tram and the metal rails set in the carriageway of the road along which their route was arranged.
The trolley-buses were able to manoeuvre to the curbside, but they were unable to pass each other and frequently, in awkward manoeuvres, one or both arms became disconnected from the overhead cables, resulting in a loss of power and the trolley-bus coming to a standstill.
For that reason, they were abandoned in 1962.
King George V died at Sandringham on 20th.
January 1936, and the Prince of Wales was declared King Edward VIII.
He was forty-one years of age and still a bachelor, but within a few months it became known that he wished to marry Mrs. Wallis Simpson, an American divorcee.
Both Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin and the Archbishop of Canterbury were opposed to the marriage and rather than give up his proposed marriage, Edward abdicated on 11th.
December 1936-before being crowned — in favour of his brother, the Duke of York, who was crowned on 12th.
May 1937, to become King George VI.
Edward's marriage to Mrs. Simpson took place in France in June of 1937.
Whilst Britain was occupied with those matters, German troops began, on 3rd.
March 1936, to re-occupy the demilitarized Rhineland  zone, against which Britain and France found that they were powerless to to take any action.
Also, in the meantime, a military revolt had taken place in the Spanish army, lead by General Franco, and it soon became clear the division of the contending sides were, on the one side, The Nationalists who were strongly supported by Italy, Germany and Portugal, and on The other side, the government forces, supported by Communist Russia, which led to that side being referred to as ‘Republicans’.
Franco's Nationalist forces received massive physical support with arms and men, also aeroplanes, whereas the support for the Republicans by Russia was very little, although supplemented by ‘republicans’ of many nations.
France and Britain pursued a policy of non-intervention, but by February 1939, both were forced to recognise Franco as the leader of Spain, and the civil war ended in March 1939.
Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin retired, in May 1937, with an earldom, and he was succeeded by Mr. Neville Chamberlain.
The Trunk Road Act, 1936 had an effect on Chiswick, in that under its legislation the Government and Local Government officials were able to propose new dual carriageway Trunk Roads, and one such road would cut across Chiswick, thereby severing the district into two parts.
The London County Council proposed to widen and extend Cromwell Road to its western boundary — i.e. to the eastern boundary of Chiswick, and the Ministry of Transport, with the Middlesex County Council, proposed linking that extension to the Great West Road.
Not unexpectedly, the residents of Chiswick became alarmed at the prospect, but the acquisition proceeded of the properties on the proposed route.
The covered market which was situated on the corner of Chiswick High Road and Linden Gardens since the open market on that south side of the High Road had been put under its cover, was not popular and, in 1937, it was closed and the site used for a new Station for Ambulances and Fire-Engines.
The nearby premises previously used as the Fire Station, was taken over by the Borough Of Brentford and Chiswick, as their Electricity Headquarters.
Under the borough's jurisdiction, electricity was readily made available and residents were encouraged to have their home wired at very low cost, if necessary payable on weekly hire terms.
When Neville Chamberlain became Prime Minister, in 1937, he had as the Foreign Secretary, Anthony Eden, a very able minister of considerable repute, which fact probably accounted for the fact that he remained as Foreign Secretary despite the clear differences of opinion that became apparent between them.
Hitler's Germany dominated Europe diplomatically, in 1938, as never before; this was probably due to the continued fear of Communism by most European States, to a greater extent than the fear of Hitler's Nationalism.
In February 1938, the government of Austria was threatened with invasion by Hitler's troops, unless the Austrian Nazis were incorporated in their government, and by acceding to that threat the Austrian government was effectively destroyed.
In March, the German Army entered Austria unopposed, and Hitler arrived in Vienna on 13th.
March.
Thence began the terror against Jews, Socialists and Catholics.
Under the  Versaille's Peace Treaty agreed after the Great War, the country of Czechoslovakia was created, which included an area known as ‘Sudetenland’.
It contained many people of German origin, and although the Germans there represented less than one-third of the population, nevertheless Hitler began demanding the right to their ‘freedom’ from foreign rule.
Those circumstances posed a threat to peace in Europe and Neville Chamberlain, being anxious to avoid war at all costs, arranged to meet Hitler on 15th.
September 1938.
That meeting took place at Berchtesgaden, and Hitler was persuaded to delay action over Sudetenland for a week while Chamberlain consulted his colleagues, also the French government.
However, Hitler abandoned those peaceful negotiations for threats of violence, and that outraged Chamberlain who appealed to Mussolini to help him persuade Hitler to attend one more conference.
Hitler agreed to meet Chamberlain, Mussolini and Daladier of France, at Munich on 29th.
September 1938, and under the terms agreed by those representatives, Germany was allowed to occupy Sudetenland, which they promptly did on 10th.
October, but it resulted in Czechoslovakia becoming a broken nation.
Chamberlain returned to Britain and publicly proclaimed ‘Peace in our time’ but he had by now realised that Hitler's word could not be trusted, so he endeavoured to form an alliance with Russia against Germany, the fear of Communism being overcome by the greater fear  of Nazi domination, However, Poland refused to agree to Russian troops having the right to cross Polish territory for the purpose of attacking Germany from the east, so an effective alliance was impracticable and Russia became isolated from that proposed pact.
Preparation for a possible war became evident.
thereafter; in Chiswick a decision was made, in the late summer of 1938, to dig into the grassed area of Turnham Green, between Christ Church and the War Memorial, in order to provide Air Raid Shelters for public use.
During the spring and summer of 1939, Hitler intimidated Poland over his claim for the right to have back a corridor — which Poland had been given after the Greet War to give Poland an access to the Baltic Sea, including the port of Danzig.
On 23rd.
August 1939, Hitler signed a non-aggression treaty with Russia, possibly believing that without Russia as an ally, France would not go to the aid of Poland in the event of war.
At that time France had about 2.6 million men aged between twenty and twenty-nine, whereas Germany had about 5 million of that age group.
At 6.30 a.m. on 1st.
September 1939, German troops invaded Poland and his airforce commenced bombing Polish cities.
Hitler was presented with an ultimatum by both Britain and France to cease their invasion by 11 a.m. on Sunday, 3rd, September, or a state of war would exist between the allied British and French forces against Germany.
No such assurance was received, but the German troops advanced very rapidly, cawing some concern to Russia, so Stalin decided that he would prefer the German troops to stop halfway across Poland and he sent his — troops into that poor country from the east.
In addition; Stalin realised that Russia was vulnerable from attack through Finland, so between the end of November 1939 and the spring of 1940, Russian troops fought the Finish and achieved control of the Baltic States.
Back in Britain, men were called to arms; everyone was issued with a gas mask; sandbags were provided to protect specified buildings and to provide some shelter against the expected air attacks, and provision of Air Raid Shelters was hastened.
Concern for the safety of young children resulted in a massive scheme to evacuate children from the vulnerable cities to safe homes in more isolated country areas.
Those endeavours were proved to be somewhat premature as no real bombing of cities occurred until the following year, and many of the  children had returned home only to have to be again evacuated when the bombing did start.
Hitler endeavoured, in October 1939, to make peace with France and Britain, but the Allies would not negotiate unless Hitler restored Poland, Austria and Czechoslovakia to their former state.
The supply of Iron ore for the German war machine was so vital that Hitler ordered the invasion of Denmark and Norway, and that started on 9th.
April 1940 and the objective was soon achieved, despite the endeavours of France and Britain who sent troops to Norway.
Throughout all this, the United States of America had chosen to isolate themselves, but shortly before the outbreak of the war, in May and June of 1939, King George VI and Queen Elizabeth crossed the Atlantic to visit Canada, also visiting and staying with President Roosevelt of U.S.A., which much enhanced the relationship between Britain and the United States of America.
The disastrous outcome of the Norway campaign brought about a parliamentary crisis in Britain, resulting in Neville Chamberlain being replaced by Winston Churchill on 9th.
May 1940.
The very next morning, German forces invaded Holland and Belgium, bypassing the French Maginot Line and a succession of Allied defeats led to the withdrawal of the bulk of the British Expeditionary Force from the beaches of Dunkirk, with a considerable loss of equipment.
A second Expeditionary Force was despatched across the Channel to France, but it WAS forced to return to Britain almost immediately because the French government asked Germany for an armistice, on 17th.
June 1940.
Possibly the decision of the French government was influenced by Italy announcing, on 10th.
June 1940, of its intention to enter the war on the side of Germany.
The only foothold left for British forces, in Europe, was Gibraltar.
the French General de Gaulle, who had managed to escape to Britain, announced on 18th.
June 1940, to the people of France, that he was not abandoning the struggle against the Nazi forces of Germany.
Hitler again offered peace to Britain, on 19th.
July 1940, but Winston Churchill did not trust Hitler and defied him to invade Britain.
Appreciating that Britain had become even more vulnerable to air attack, children living in ‘target areas’, such as London, were again evacuated into country areas, and in June 1940, Strand-on-the-Green School was closed in Chiswick and reopened in Cornwall.
As it so happens, Strand-on-the-Green was one of the very many places that felt the effects of the German bombing — in November 1940, a German landmine landed in the area, destroying cottages on the north side of Thames Road.
From mid-July to the end of September 1940, the Battle of Britain look place in the sky above that part of England within reach of German bomber and fighter planes.
Hitler had hold to obtain air supremacy prior to his planned landings and invasion of Britain, but the British fighter pilots — later helped by Polish fighter pilots who had escaped from Poland and had to be trained to handle Spitfires and Hurricane fighter planes — were able to destroy so many German planes that any attempt to invade would have been disastrous.
Those fighter pilots were praised by Churchill, when he made his famous announcement that ‘Never in the history of human conflict had so much been owed to so few by so many’.
Although the United States of America continued to remain neutral, their relationship with Britain became further enhanced by Winston Churchill being Prime Minister, as his mother had been an American citizen, and Churchill was able, in September 1940, to bargain successfully to obtain fifty destroyer-class ships with which to combat the German naval forces — mainly submarine boats — which were endeavouring to blockade sea borne supplies reaching Britain.
Two European physicists, working in Britain, were able, in 1940, to establish that isotope 235 of uranium could be separated industrially, and during the following year, the Maud Committee reported that an atomic bomb was possible.
President Roosevelt was re-elected in the United States of America, in November 1940, for a further term of four years, so the ‘lend-lease’ arrangements were then undertaken to enable Britain to receive much needed supplies.
Italy decided to attack Greece on 20th.
October 1940, but made virtually no progress in the winter months and the arrival of British Air Force units to assist the Greek troops, prompted Hitler to act in order to protect the very important German control of oilfields in Rumania.
Italy also managed to occupy British Somaliland, in East Africa, but lost battles in the western desert areas of Egypt, in February 1941; also in East Africa, before the end of 1941, where it was possible to  re-establish the Emperor of Ethiopia.
The pro-German government in Yugoslavia was subjected, in March 1941, to a coup d'etat and the young King Peter assumed the government, but in April the Germans launched an attack, not confined to Yugoslavia, but also embracing Greece, using paratroops on a massive scale and with ‘blitzkrieg’ methods.
The British troops in Greece, also in nearby Crete, were driven out, and other setbacks were experienced in the Western Desert of Egypt, mainly due to the over long supply lines.
Having secured those positions, Hitler now proceeded with his planned massive attack on Russian forces in Poland — on the dawn of 22nd.
June 1941, German forces launched their surprise attack and were able to break up the Russian formations and take a huge number of prisoners.
At first, Stalin refused to believe the news of the attack and that enabled the German forces to achieve many objectives, Despite their rapid advance, however, the Germans failed to reach Moscow, partly because the Russians indulged in a ‘scorched earth’ policy, and on 6th.
December that year, they were able to launch a counter attack, the very day chosen by the Japanese to launch their infamous aerial attack on the United States of American naval forces at Pearl Harbour.
For some reason, Hitler thought that the United States of America would be much too occupied with fighting the Japanese in the Pacific, to concern itself with Europe, so he decided to declare war on the United States on 11th.
December 1941.
In the previous August, a co-operated movement between Britain and Russia, resulted in the occupation of Persia (now Iran) against a possible threat of German occupation.
Also, as it so happens, in August 1941 Winston Churchill had a meeting with President Roosevelt on board a British battleship, off the coast of Newfoundland, and that was followed by a further meeting at Christmas in Washington, when they agreed to send aid to Russia in the form of armaments, etc., also they drew up the Atlantic Charter under which it was proclaimed that all peoples, in all parts of the world, would have the right to choose their own form of government.
Back in Britain, the bombing of cities continued; even Buckingham Palace was damaged and St. Paul's Cathedral made remarkable escapes from destruction.
King George VI and the Queen made regular visits to bombed areas throughout the country, also the Prime Minister, Winston Churchill; in order to lift the spirits of the people who suffered so much death and destruction.
America Enters The War
Following their attack on the American naval units in Pearl Harbour, the Japanese forces made remarkably swift advances in the Far East, managing to capture Singapore from the British forces, on 15th.
February 1942, which involved the surrender of sixty thousand British and Commonwealth troops.
British troops in Burma, having been forced back, soon learnt the requirements of jungle warfare and, under Wingate, began advancing against the Japanese.
Bombing raids in the European theatre of war, grew bigger with the entry of the American Airmen, and the first of the Allied ‘thousand bombers’ raid on a German city (Kohn) was carried out on 30th.
May 1942.
There was a turning point in the Japanese advance in the Pacific at the beginning of June 1942, when the ‘Battle of Midway’ took place and resulted in a decisive win for the American forces.
Although the German forces on the eastern front of the European battle-zone, had not reached Moscow, they had been able to reach the outskirts of Stalingrad by August 1942, in which month Winston Churchill visited Stalin in Moscow.
Egypt and North Africa had proved how swiftly modern mobile forces could overrun quite considerable distances, and in the summer months of 1942, the British and Commonwealth forces were again back in Egypt, relying on overstretched supply lines.
It was almost by chance that General Bernard Law Montgomery was appointed as Commander of the forces there, and in him there is a link with Chiswick.
The General's father was the Rev. Henry Montgomery, the vicar of St. Mark's Church, Kennington, when Bernard was born, but two years later he was appointed Bishop of Tasmania, to whence the family moved returning to England some twelve years later, when Bernard was fourteen years of age, and in January 1902, the family moved into a Victorian house, 19, Bolton Road, Chiswick, quite close to the River Thames and open sports grounds.
From that address, Bernard and his brother, Donald, attended St. Paul's School at Hammersmith.
Their mother, Maud, was eighteen years younger than their  father, and although, as a boy, Bernard constantly sought his Mother's love and affection, he did not succeed and possibly because of that, he failed to shine academically — but he was very keen on all forms of sport.
Nevertheless, he obtained a Commission in the Regular Army before the Great War of 1914 — 1918, in which he was wounded by a sniper's bullet through a lung, and would have died but for the fact that one of his men, having also been wounded, fell on top of‘Monty’ and thereby, protected him from further sniper bullets until darkness permitted rescue to be made.
‘Monty’ was ‘married’to his army career and favoured bachelor officers, but when he was approaching forty years of age, he met a widow, Mrs. Betty Carver, an artist who lived at 2, Riverside Cottages, Chiswick Mall.
They were married on 27th.
July 1927, at her parish church, St. Nicholas, Church Street, Chiswick.
Unfortunately, Monty's beloved Betty died of a strange illness, just ten years later, leaving a distraught Monty with a son, David.
By that time, as it so happens, it was apparent to many, and certainly Monty, that another war was becoming inevitable, so he applied all his energies into his career as an Army Officer.
the was posted to France and Belgium as part of the British Expedition Force, in the first few months of the outbreak of the war in 1939, and he realised then that the British Army was not nearly professional enough, compared with the German Army, and he noticed that many of the British Commanding Officers continued to treat the waging of war as some kind of game.
Possibly because of this, he was not very popular with many fellow officers, although favoured by some of the more capable officers who appreciated his professionalism.
His experience had led him to become a teacher at training sessions, but that prevented him from putting into practice his own form of calculated waging of war.
His appointment to the desperate Eighth Army, however, gave him that opportunity, particularly as, by then, the Americans were beginning to make available much larger supplies of tanks and equipment so vitally necessary.
At El Alamein, west of Cairo in the Western Desert of Egypt, Monty built up his Eighth Army forces in positions behind the Qattara Depression, and on the 23rd, October 1912, he launched a  massive attack on the German and Italian positions, commencing with an artillery barrage from at least one thousand guns.
It proved to be a decisive victory for the Eighth Army and it was followed by further swift advances across northern Africa.
In the meantime, plans had been afoot for a combined British and American force, known as the Allied First Army, to land on French North African shores — this occurred on 8th, November 1942, and those forces moved eastward towards the advancing British Eighth Army.
By May 1943, the remaining German and Italian forces surrendered at Tunis, to the merged Allied forces.
Apart from this defeat in Africa, Hitler's Germany was not having a happy time.
During 1942, Hitler decided to terminate diplomatic connections with the Vatican City; whilst in Russia, his troops suffered a considerable setback by the staunch Russian stand at Stalingrad.
His troops were left outside that city throughout the entire bitter winter of 1942–1943, resulting in the loss of a quarter of a million German troops when they eventually surrendered to the Russians on 2nd, February 1943.
The loss of British merchant shipping in the north Atlantic had always been very troublesome but in March of 1943, the worst monthly loss was recorded, fortunately gradually improving from thereon.
The work on the atomic bomb, which had been carried on in the British Isles, was transferred, in 1943, to the United States of America, and became known as the ‘Manhattan Project’.
Following up their successes in North Africa, British and American forces, under the American General Eisenhower and the now quite famous General Montgomery, carried out a seaborne invasion of Sicily, in July 1943, followed by landings in the southern tip of Italy at he beginning of September.
By then the Italian people had decided that they wanted no more war, so Mussolini was put in prison and a coalition government was formed under Badoglio, which government then surrendered to the Allied Forces.
However, the Germans had foreseen that possibility and they quickly extended their occupation of Italy.
It was comparatively easy for the German troops to frustrate any rapid advance by Allied troops, particularly in the vast mountainous regions which stretch right down the centre of Italy.
Stalin had been hoping that British and American forces would be used to create a ‘second front’ on the main continent of Europe and by now he had convinced himself that the United States and Britain were deliberately delaying the creation of the ‘second front’so that the Russian forces would be weakened by allowing the major part of the German forces to continue to oppose them on the eastern front.
Stalin even threatened to make a separate peace with Germany.
Between 28th.
November and 1st.
December 1943, a meeting took place between Winston Churchill, President Roosevelt and Stalin.
Churchill distrusted Stalin but Roosevelt was much mole trusting, and he appeared to be more concerned about British Imperialism.
‘Back in Britain — still being subjected to continual bombing — and bombing Germany in return — there continued a massive build up of materials; ideas; new inventions, and American, British and Commonwealth forces in preparation of the expected invasion across the English Channel.
On 4th.
June 1944, the Allied forces in Italy managed to reach Rome — which had been declared an ‘open city’(i.e. not to be damaged or destroyed by the conflicting forces) and that was followed on 6th.
June by the Allied invasion of the Normandy beaches and the establishment of the ‘second front’ so earnestly required by Stalin.
June 1944 also brought a new experience to the public in London — the first of the ‘unmanned Bombers’ called ‘V1’by the Germans, but ‘doodle-bug’by the Londoners.
They were rocket propelled bombs with wings that enabled them to be launched and to fly in a straight line until the rocket fuel was used up, then to fall on the unfortunate people and buildings below.
Initially this new German ‘victory’ weapon proved unnerving but before long it became possible for the ‘V1s’to be intercepted by fighter aircraft over the sea, although their speed was a problem, but by moving the bulk of the anti-aircraft artillery units to the Isle of Wight and along the southern coastline of England, it was possible to shoot them down before they reached the London area.
However, Hitler's scientists had developed another ‘Victory’ weapon — the ‘V2’— it was an advanced form of rocket with a nose-cap filled with high explosive designed to explode on impact.
the rocket was projected up to a considerable height and directed to fall somewhere  in the London area.
The first arrived in September 1944, and landed in Staveley Road, Chiswick — without any warning what so ever.
Understandably, no-one had any idea what had happened in Chiswick, but the truth was soon discovered and, on this occasion, there appeared to be no defence, apart from locating the places from whence they were being fired and subject the launch sites to intensive bombing.
‘V2s’ continued to arrive, however, until all the launching sites were overrun by the advancing Allied troops, but they ceased on 28th.
March 1945.
Between the arrival of the first V1s and the V2s, Hitler himself experienced a serious attempt on his life, orchestrated by some of his military advisers.
That plot to assassinate Hitler by a bomb, on 20th.
July 1944, failed although he was injured and undoubtedly badly shaken.
Other notable events in 1944, included the Warsaw uprising against the German occupation of that city, just ahead of the advancing Russian troops; also the liberation of Paris by Allied troops, with General de Gaulle given the honour of being welcomed there by his own nationals; and the Allied airborne operation intended to reach the eastern bank of the Rhine, involving the battle at Arnhem.
In Warsaw, by 2nd.
October 1944, it was necessary for the Polish patriots to capitulate to the German forces as the Russian troops failed to make their expected advance and reach Warsaw.
In fact the Russians didn't reach that city until 17th.
January 1945, by which time the Russians had established, and officially recognised the Union of Polish Patriots,(later called the Lubin Committee) and it proclaimed itself as the provisional government of Poland, a procedure which did not please the British, Americans, or the London Poles.
Another meeting between Winston Churchill, President Roosevelt and Stalin took place, this time in Yalta, between 4th. and 11th.
February 1945, and Stalin then agreed to allow free elections in Poland so that the London Poles would have a chance to form a new Polish government, but that agreement was never implemented.
In addition, the future of Germany was discussed and it was agreed that Germany — including Berlin — would be divided into four zones, each zone to be controlled by Great Britain; United States of America; Russia and France.
Stalin wanted Germany permanently crippled and partitioned, with massive reparations, but with the knowledge of what happened following the previous Great War, the others disagreed.
Allied troops advancing into Germany from the west, had liberated, by 13th.
April 1945, the concentration camps at Belsen and Buchenwald, revealing to the world the appalling truth of the Nazi's endeavour to exterminate the Jewish race.
It is believed that over six million men, women and children died in concentration camps under Nazi domination.
British and American forces had crossed the Rhine in force, in March 1945, but sadly the American President Roosevelt, died on 12th.
April, and the Vice-President, Harry Truman look over.
Less than two weeks later, British and American troops met sections of the Russian Army advancing from the other direction, and the end of the European war.
was within sight.
Mussolini met his death at the hands of the Italian partisans, on 28th.
April 1945; British and Commonwealth troops, having rescued Venice continued to arrive at Trieste by the beginning of May, meeting the Yugoslav troops of Tito, in the hills above that City, and fighting against the Germans effectively ceased in Italy.
On 30th.
April, Hitler had committed suicide, just as the Russian troops were in the process of overrunning Berlin, and on 8th.
May 1945, the final capitulation of Germany occurred with an unconditional surrender to the Allied forces.
Combat in Europe actually ceased on 13th, May, when the Russian troops completed their occupation of Czechoslovakia.
The war against the Japanese was still in progress and although considerable advance had been made, there was a great deal of very difficult terrain to be covered and the prospect of arranging an invasion of the Japanese islands was horrendous.
By this time, however, the ‘Manhattan Project’ had produced and tested an atomic bomb, and the new President Truman agreed House the fearful weapon against the Japanese in the hope that it would cause them to agree to a ceasefire.
The first atomic bomb, carried in a single high-flying U.S.A. aircraft, was dropped on the Japanese city of Hiroshima, on 6th.
August 1945, and just two days later, the Russians declared war on Japan.
The second atomic bomb was dropped, on 9th.
August, by an American aircraft, on the Japanese city of Nagasaki, and the devastating effect on those two cities was such that the Japanese agreed, on 14th.
August 1945, to an unconditional surrender.
Before the dropping of the atomic bombs, the Americans had feared that the Russians would not honour their pledge to join the war against the Japanese, and it is believed that the Allied forces were held back in Europe, so that the Russian troops could advance through the eastern part of Europe into Czechoslovakia.
Accompanying the arrival of peace were the problems of reorganising the economies, and the gigantic task of sorting out the millions of refugees and displaced persons scattered throughout Europe.
Mass unemployment was fully appreciated and influenced the thinking of all governments, which in Britain had become a strong Labour government, following a general election, leaving Winston Churchill as the leader of a small Conservative opposition.
King George VI was shocked at the outcome of the General election, as he felt that Churchill deserved greater support for his wonderful work as the war leader.
General Montgomery, who had been brought back from Italy to take a very prominent part in the ‘D day’ operation and the subsequent advance through France, Belgium, Holland and Germany, had been appointed Field Marshall and found himself considered a hero of the people, wherever he went.
The Mayor and Corporation of the Borough of Brentford and Chiswick, having decided to offer ‘Monty’ the freedom of the Borough — which he agreed to accept — had to await the cessation of hostilities in Europe, to make the presentation to him, That took place on Saturday, 28th.
July 1945, and as the number of people expected to attend was considerably more than the Chiswick Town Hall could accommodate, the ceremony was held at the Chiswick Empire, hired for the occasion, and to which ‘Monty’ accompanied by the Mayor, Alderman T. W. Stroud, J.P., rode in a landau carriage through cheering crowds.
A reproduction Cromwellian Clock, made by the Goldsmiths' and Silversmiths' Company, was presented to ‘Monty’ in recognition of the distinguished services he had rendered to his King and Country, and the inscription included the Arms of Montgomery as well as the Arms of the Borough.
The Chiswick Empire featured in the life of Michael Redgrave, who — as a boy — saw there a rough and ready performance, by Ben Greet, and his company, of ‘Macbeth’.
Michael Redgrave was fortunate in having an excellent stepfather, and was able to study for four  years at Cambridge University where he obtained an honourable B.A. (Cantab.).
He married Rachael Kempson, in 1935, and during 1945, he purchased the riverside ‘Bedford House’ on Chiswick Mall, where he and his family — all now renowned in the theatre world — lived until 1954, when he sold the house back to Sir Arthur Ellis.
A meeting had been arranged between Winston Churchill, President Truman and Stalin at Potsdam, to commence on 17th.
July 1945, and continuing until 1st.
August.
Following the general election, however, the new Prime Minister, Clement Atlee, replaced Winston Churchill, on 25th.
July.
In November 1945, Tito was elected President of Yugoslavia.
Winston Churchill, relieved of his responsibilities, travelled to the United States of America, in March 1945, where he made a speech in which he made a statement that was to prove profoundly true.
He said —‘From Stettin in the Baltic to Trieste in the Adriatic, an iron curtain had descended across the continent of Europe’.
Fearing that Greece and Turkey would end up on the other side of that iron curtain the American President Truman declared that their security was vital to the Western powers and began a substantial programme of aid.
In addition, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization was formed by the western allies, an act that was countered by Stalin forming the Warsaw Pact, on the eastern side.
Back in Britain, particularly in London, the work of reinstatement, following the immense amount of destruction from enemy bombing, was gradually being put in hand.
In Chiswick, the Church of St. Mary Magdalene in Bennett Street, had been badly damaged, along with a considerable area of old properties around about, i.e. Hogarth Lane, Wood Street, Hunt Street and the southern end of Devon.shire Road.
As the remaining congregation of St. Mary Magdalene had joined St. Nicholas Church, it was decided not to rebuild as a church but as a new Hall and premises for the congregation of St. Nicholas parish.
The Committee of World Council of Churches drafted a plan, in 1946, for reconstructing the World International Assembly.
Also closer relationship was urged between the Protestant and the Orthodox Churches.
During the latter years of the war, Italy had undergone a traumatic experience with battles raging up the length of that country, and  emerged with their King Victor Emmanuel resigning in favour of his son, Umberto II, and a succession of coalition governments.
In June 1946, however, a referendum indicated that more than half of the Italian people wanted a republic, so Umberto left Italy.
Post-war to Cold-war
In the United States of America, the fear of Communism became clearly evident during 1947, and on 22nd.
May the U.S.A. Congress agreed to make available to Greece and Turkey, aid amounting to two-hundred and fifty million dollars.
Then, on 5th.
June, the American secretary of State, George Marshall, called for a European recovery programme, to be supported by aid from the United States.
Accordingly, between 12th. and l5th.
June, the non-Communist nations in Europe, set up the Committee of European Co-operation in order to draft a European recovery programme, and in August, the first ‘Marshall Aid’ arrived in Greece, followed by military advisers to assist in the Civil War against Communism.
During the next three years, nearly 10,000 million dollars were made available to Europe in ‘Marshall Aid’, which not only enabled Europe to recover and increase goods and services by twenty-five per cent over that three years, but also ensured a market for American-made goods.
In addition, military aid was made available from the United States of America, and the cost of maintaining American forces in Europe, was met by the U.S.A. Treasury.
In the Chiswick works of London Transport, during 1947, the very popular Regent Three (R.T.) double-decker bus was redesigned so as to be ‘jig built’ in a like manner to that which the mass-produced Halifax bombers had been during the war.
Almost seven thousand R.T.
buses were built between 1939 and 1954, although — following the nationalization of transport in 1948, London Transport were no longer allowed to build their own buses.
The process started in 1947 continued in 19485; in March the American government passed the Foreign Assistance Act, to enable the ‘Marshall Aid’ proposals to be put into effect, and on 17th.
March.
Britain, France, Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxembourg signed a treaty selling up the Brussels Treaty Organisation for mutual military aid.
On 30th.
March 1948, the Russians imposed restrictions on traffic between the western zones and Berlin, which led, on 25th June to the  Russians imposing a complete blockade of traffic into Berlin.
In order to overcome this blockade — which meant that the Berlin zones controlled by America, Britain and France, were cut off from their normal supply routes — a massive ‘Air-lift’ was organised by the three Allies, even coal was transported by air!
That effort frustrated the Russian attempt to isolate the three Allies from Berlin and normal road and rail links were re-established in May 1949.
As it was apparent that Stalin proposed to retain a firm grip on East Germany, the other three powers decided to create a democratic state in West Germany, by causing the existing state government to convene a constituent assembly.
In September 1948, a committee, chosen by the assembly, drew up the Basic Law which laid the foundation of a constitution, the main legislative body (Bundestag) with nearly five hundred members elected every four years, and an upper house (Bundesrat) of forty-five members composed of representatives of the state government.
Western Europe began to show signs of real recovery during 1948, made possible by the proper application of the benefits of ‘Marshall Aid’.
Also, Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxembourg formed the Benelux Union.
Collective defence continued to be the subject of considerable discussion in Western Europe, in 1958, and it was proposed, at Brussels, to create a new force by combining the western military forces in some way.
That proposal led to the signing of a treaty during the following year, and the setting up of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization — N.A.T.O.
The World Council of Churches was inaugurated in 1948, and included one hundred and forty seven churches from forty-four countries, meeting at Amsterdam.
King George VI had lost the title of ‘Emperor of India’ when that continent was granted independence in August 1947, but was delighted at the birth of a grandson, in 1948, by Princess Elizabeth and Prince Philip, and named Charles — destined to become Prince of Wales.
The establishment of the West German state in the latter part of 1948, enabled plans to proceed for a general election there, in August 1949, resulting, in 139 Christian Democrats; 131 Social Democrats and 52 Free Democrats being elected, with extreme parties winning very few seats.
East Germany continued to be under Stalin's control, via Walther Ulbricht but to counter the events in West Germany, East Germany was formally declared to become the German Democratic Republic, in October 1949.
Also, in October 1949, the Communists' who had been fighting in the Greek Civil War, ceased fighting.
The Organisation of European Co-operation (O.E.E.C.), which had been established to agree the division of the Marshall Aid among the member states, also liberated trading generally, and in a space of six years trading within the European states had doubled.
The reduction of tariffs and other restrictions, which had always been championed by Britain, gave way to the freeing or international trade.
The European countries also appreciated that the need for the whole world recovery was important, and they became more willing to contribute to the economic development of underdeveloped countries.
During 1950, as much as two thousand million dollars were contributed, and that amount was increased eight times in the next ten years.
General Eisenhower, the Allied Supreme Commander in the final stages of the European war, was appointed as Supreme Allied Commander of all N.A.T.O.
forces, in 1950.
Those forces included not only the Brussels Treaty Organization, but also Canada; Denmark; Iceland; Italy; Norway; Portugal and the United States of America.
It was also agreed that West Germany should be allowed to rearm as an essential part of N.A.T.O.
The population of Great Britain in 1951 — now including Northern Ireland — had reached forty-nine million, and following a general election, Winston Churchill again became Prime Minister.
It had long been suspected by the western powers that Russia was developing an atomic bomb, and in 1951 such a bomb was tested in the U.S.S.R.
Also in 1951, the European Coal, Iron and Steel community was established to form a common market, and a common programme or expansion of heavy industry in Europe.
Hogarth House in Chiswick, which had been transferred to the Middlesex County Council by Col. R. W. Shipway.
J.P.. had been completely renovated and, in 1951, was reopened to the public.
In September 1951 King George underwent an operation for cancer, but he died on 6th.
February 1952, at Sandringham.
His elder daughter, heir to the throne, was just twenty-five years of age and was  on a trip, with her husband, Prince Philip, to Kenya, so they hurried back to London.
After the State funeral, plans were made for the Coronation, which for the very first time was to be televised.
The Coronation took place on 2nd, June 1953, and that was closely followed by the news that Mount Everest — which had defied all previous endeavours to reach the summit — had been conquered by a Commonwealth team of climbers.
Before those events, however, in 1952, firstly, both Greece and Turkey joined the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, and secondly, Belgium, France, Luxemburg, Italy, the Netherlands and West Germany signed a mutual defence treaty for the creation of a European Defence Community.
The Federal Republic of West Germany was formally recognised, in 1952, as a complete sovereign state, by Britain, France and the United States of America, so those powers ended their respective ‘occupation’ and West Germany became a member of the European Economic Community also.
The death of Stalin occurred on 5th.
March 1953, by which time United Soviet States of Russia had become isolated from the western world, refusing to accept Marshall Aid and hiding behind the ‘Iron Curtain’ which they had created.
Malenkov became Chairman of the Soviet Council of Ministers, but he was challenged by both Marshall Bulgarin and Khrushchev, as effective leader.
For the next eleven years, Khrushchev became the effective leader.
Italy also saw another change following an election in 1953, which cost the Christian Democrats eighty seats and the five year old government led by de Gasperi, fell apart.
In the next ten years, there were twelve different governments, although the discovery of oil in Sicily, in that year, helped the Italian economy.
The North Atlantic Treaty Organisation had become very well established and the United States of America continued to be committed to it, as well as Britain, Canada, France, the Benelux Countries, Greece, Denmark, Norway, Ireland, Portugal and Turkey.
Despite French apprehension, West Germany also became a member of N.A.T.O., in 1954, on the understanding that both British and U.S.A. forces would remain on the European continent for an unlimited time.
During 1954, the internationally known Cherry Blossom Polish Company, which had changed its name previously to ‘Chiswick Products’, amalgamated with Reckitt and Coleman.
Delegates from Belgium, West Germany, France, the Netherlands, Luxemburg and Italy, met at Messina, in 1955, and that meeting produced the basis for forming the European Economic Council.
Since her Coronation, Queen Elizabeth II and Prince Philip — now the Duke of Edinburgh,— made a number of overseas tours, mainly within the Commonwealth of Nations, and these visits had become much more informal.
There had been visits by the Royal couple to several foreign countries also, including Communist countries at a time when there existed grave doubts about relationships with those countries.
The Duke of Edinburgh introduced an award scheme for young people, in 1955, and later he became the President of the World Wildlife Fund.
Winston Churchill remained in the House of Commons, but in 1955, Sir Anthony Eden, who had been his Foreign Secretary, was elected as Prime Minister.
By this time, Khrushchev, the effective leader of the U.S.S.R.
had realised that Stalin had become extremely unpopular with the Russian peoples, so he decided, in February 1956, to reveal some of Stalin's crimes — in effect denouncing him — and from then onwards the Eastern European countries began in shape their own policies, instead of blindly following the policies dictated by the U.S.S.R.
The setting up of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization caused the U.S.S.R.
to invite the Eastern European countries to enter into a pact, and in May 1956, the Warsaw Pact was signed by them.
In the meantime various troubles had flared up throughout the world -America had become involved in Korea; France was involved in both Algiers (who were seeking independence) and Indo-China; whilst Britain became involved in retaliation against the Egyptian government which had threatened to take over the Suez Canal.
When Britain sent in troops to prevent the Canal being taken over, there was a worldwide outcry, particularly from the U.S.A., who still accused Britain of retaining an Imperialist attitude, The British troops were withdrawn, but the Egyptians had sunk a number of vessels in the Suez Canal, so it became impassable for some while.
The U.S.S.R.
was also experiencing trouble — in June 1956, workers in Poland caused riots which had to be suppressed by Russian military forces.
During October and November of that same year, a general strike occurred in Hungary, with street demonstrations in Budapest, and again the Russian troops suppressed the uprising, sending in tanks to restore their control.
As a result, thousands of Hungarians escaped to Western Europe and elsewhere.
Also in 1956, Adenauer became the Chancellor of the coalition government in the Federal Republic of West Germany, and the Communist party was declared unconstitutional.
It was discovered, in 1956, that the population of the Irish Free State was only 2.9 million, whereas it had been three million in 1936.
The first appreciable new residential development subsequent to the war, to take place in Chiswick, occurred in 1956, on a section of land between the Cubitt's Yacht Basin and the end house in Hartington Road, close to Chiswick Bridge over the River Thames.
The new development was aptly named Thames Village.
Sadly the Little ‘Q’ Theatre, which had opened in 1926, close to Stilehall Gardens and the foot of Kew Bridge, was forced to close.
After the Suez Canal affair, Sir Anthony Eden felt obliged to resign as Prime Minister in 1957, and he was replaced with Harold Macmillan.
Ever since the end of the second world war, France had endeavoured to absorb the Saar area into their country, but in 1957, it was returned to the Federal Republic of West Germany, and following the signing of the Treaty of Rome by the original six countries, in March 1957, the European Economic Council was created and the Federal Republic was allowed to join the E.E.C.
After some twenty years delay — due to the intervening war — a start was made, in 1957, on the Great West Road Extension through Chiswick, to meet the Cromwell Road extension being constructed by the London County Council up to their boundary on the Hammersmith — Chiswick border.
Unfortunately, the new road extension meant the demolition of the Little Sutton Alms houses in Sutton Lane.
The Brentford and Chiswick Local History Society was formed in 1957 — too late to save the Alms houses.
Scientists who had been involved in the development of Hitler's ‘V2’ rockets, during the war, had been persuaded by both American and Russian authorities, to develop a rocket to enter space beyond the earth's atmosphere and its gravity pull.
A space race developed between U.S.A. and U.S.S.R.
which resulted in a near dead tie, although it was the Russians, in October 1957, who were able to launch their ‘Sputnik’ first, the Americans launching their ‘Explorer 1’, just two months later.
The following year, U.S.A. established its National aeronautics and Space administration — N.A.S.A.
General Charles de Gaulle was elected President of France, in 1958, a position he held for eleven years.
During 1959, London was provided with Routemaster buses which had an automatic gearbox; air suspension and heaters for the passengers.
It proved to be the last London double-decker bus with the passenger's entrance at the rear.
The Organization of European Economic Co-operation had flourished so much that, by 1959, it had eighteen members and other countries outside Europe, such as the U.S.A., Canada, Australia & Japan, wished to join.
In order to accommodate them, the name was changed to The Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development.
The European Free Trade Association was formed in 1959, by Britain, Switzerland, Austria, Portugal and the Scandinavian Countries, but it was not to prove a substitute for the E.E.C.
Since the beginning of the twentieth century, Chiswick was one of the homes of Sir Oswald Stoll's ‘Empire’ theatres — another was at Shepherds Bush Green, which still remains as the B.B.C.'s television theatre — and although the Chiswick Empire was not always used for ‘live’entertainment (it became a cinema during the 1930s), it was one of the principle variety theatres in the Country and saw performances by all the principle artists from George Robey to Morecambe & Wise; Petula Clark and Cliff Richards.
In June 1959, however, the last performance occurred at the Chiswick Empire which was then pulled down and the site redeveloped as a tower office block, originally named ‘Empire House’, but later that name did not prove acceptable to some local government officials, who considered that the name  smacked of imperialism, so the block now has only numbers in Chiswick High Road.
Due to the greater degree of nationalisation which had taken place throughout Western Europe since the end of the war, it was discovered, in 1960, that approximately forty per cent of the labour force was employed by the various governments.
Also, great changes had taken place — or were about to take place — which would reduce appreciably colonial holdings.
That was particularly noticeable in the continent of Africa where, already, the Gold Coast had been renamed Ghana; and Northern Rhodesia became Zambia.
The end of British Imperialism could be traced as having occurred with the Suez Canal affair which led to the resignation of Sir Anthony Eden as Prime Minister.
Khrushchev's denunciation of Stalin had angered the Chinese Communist leaders, as they believed in rigid adherence to the Stalin type government, and they disapproved of any form of ‘co-existence’.
When Khrushchev visited President Eisenhower in the United States of America, the Chinese authorities became furious, and denounced Khrushchev, so he cut off all military and economic aid to China, although he continued to support the Communist leader of Cuba, Fidel Castro.
By 1960, the American space programme had launched a number of ‘Mercury’ spacecraft, and the first of their manned spacecrafts was launched in the early part of 1961, once again with the Russians just beating them to that objective.
In his position as the British Prime Minister, Harold Macmillan announced, in July 1961, that the British government wished to negotiate joining the Common Market, i.e. the European Economic Community, but the French President, de Gaulle, fearing that France would lose her position as the leader of the six member countries, was not keen on the British, entry, despite the agreement of the other five nations, The special relationship that Britain had with the U.S.A. was also disliked by de Gaulle and, in any event, the French government wanted special provisions to protect French agriculture, so he effectively blocked Britain's entry into the E.E.C.
Due to the emigration of the people of East Germany to the West — there had been two million people removing in the ten years up to 1961 — a wall was constructed between that part of Berlin  controlled by the Communists and the other parts which were controlled by the Federal republic with Britain, France and the United States of America.
A meeting was held in Delhi, during 1961, between the World Council of Churches and the Russian Orthodox Church, with representatives of the Roman Catholic Church present as observers.
By 1962, a comparatively young man, John Kennedy, had become the President of the United States of America, and possibly Khrushchev of the U.S.S.R.
thought that he could create an advantage by shipping some Russian rocket missiles to his friend, Fidel Castro, in the island of Cuba, so that he would be able to use them as a threat against the continent of North America, a comparatively short distance away.
Whilst the rocket missiles were still on there way, in October 1962, President Kennedy presented Khrushchev with an ultimatum thereby forcing the return of the missiles to Russia.
That incident illustrated how easy it would be for an atomic war to develop, so a hot-line was set up by means of a permanent telephone link between Washington in the U.S.A. and Moscow in the U.S.S.R.
during the following year.
Whereas nuclear weaponry had effectively only been in the hands of the U.S.A., the development of such weapons by other nations had been increasing, so at a meeting, in December 1962, at Nassau, Prime minister Harold Macmillan and President Kennedy, hammered out an agreement whereby Britain abandoned its plans for ‘Skybolt’ in return for the U.S.A. ‘Polaris’missile for use by British nuclear submarines.
Despite the agreed arrangement between the Russian and American Presidents to have direct contact by means of the hot-line, there existed much distrust between those powers and every possible means was used to spy on the other, including space satellites and high flying aeroplanes.
One such American aeroplane was forced to land whilst flying over Russia, and the pilot, Gary Powers, was captured, much to the delight of the Russians, and to the dismay of the Americans.
Chiswick experienced some changes in 1962, one of which was the withdrawal of all the trolley-buses, which were replaced by the very popular Routemaster buses.
Also, the Christ Church Vicarage, Which was situated on the corner of Sutton Lane and Heathfield Gardens, opposite Fromow's Corner on the south-west Corner of Turnham Green, was demolished, the Vicar moving to a new Vicarage which  had been built close by, in Wellesley Road.
The demolition and clearage of the old site allowed the erection, during the following year, of the new Fire Station, complete with practice tower, the position giving easier access to the surrounding neighbourhood compared with the restricted access from the old fire station position on the corner of Chiswick High Road and Linden Gardens.
The site of the old fire station was subsequently used for the erection of a more modern police station.
Leadership of the Conservative Party became an issue during 1963, and Sir Alec Douglas-Home became Prime Minister in place of the now elderly Harold Macmillan.
Also during 1963, there were conversations about unification between the Church of England and the Methodist Church, but they came to nothing.
Between August and October 1963, negotiations between the appropriate powers led to a Treaty being signed in Moscow for a partial ban on testing nuclear weapons in the atmosphere, in outer space, or under water.
Chairman Mao, the very dominant Communist leader of China, was so annoyed at Khrushchev, particularly over his co-operation with the U.S.A. over the setting up of the hot-line, that he called the U.S.S.R.
‘Imperialists’, and in October 1964, whilst Khrushchev was on holiday, Brezhnev took over effective control of the U.S.S.R.
and reported that Khrushchev had resigned due to old age and illness.
Brezhnev, with the co-operation of Kosygin, endeavoured to rehabilitate Stalinism in the Soviet Union, which led to opposition and the need to institute oppression of dissidents and the increasing use of the notorious labour camps.
In the U.S.A., a new rocket for space exploration, called ‘Little Joe’ was launched in May 1964, and it became the first in a series under the name of ‘Apollo’.
However, also in 1964, China announced that it had exploded their first nuclear device, and that caused worldwide concern, particularly to their close neighbours, the U.S.S.R.
Winston Churchill died in 1965 and was given a State funeral comparable to that which had been afforded to the Duke of Wellington.