

ALL FOR FUN AND FUN FOR ALL!
Holidays should be fun.
Let's face it, when you work hard all year round to save money for a couple of weeks in the sunshine, you deserve to enjoy yourself.
To have fun one hundred per cent of the time.
Yet the ‘Fun Factor’ of your holiday depends very much on who you're with.
Particularly if you're young.
Find yourself in the wrong place, with the wrong people — old buffers, young fogies, lager louts, a domino convention or two, the Vienna Boys' Choir or the local rugby club — and your ‘Fun Factor’ plummets.
But come away with Club 18–30, share your precious two weeks with others who, like you, want to make friends and have a good time all the time, and you'll find out why we can justifiably claim to be ‘Fun Factor’ Number 1.
At Club 18–30, we have no resistance to fun.
To put it another way, we find fun simply irresistible.
And all of our holidays are geared to maximum fun and maximum value.
Served up of course in that certain unique Club 18–30 Summer Style.
The Club 18–30 motto for Summer '90?
‘All for fun, and fun for all.’
MORE FUN FOR YOUR MONEY
MAXIMUM FUN MINIMUM PRICES
Just because Club 18–30 gives you more it doesn't mean you should pay more!
Our aim is to give all of you as much fun as you can take for as little of your hard-earned cash as possible.
So before you get a rush of blood to the head, keep your hands in your pockets, read these pages, and see how to get more fun for your money.
WHITE HOT DEALS — HIT THE HOT SPOTS AT HOT PRICES!
Here's a range of super savings to interest anyone travelling on a budget — White Hot Deals.
Check out the White Hot Deals section at the other end of this brochure for a whole range of great holidays at value prices.
You get to choose your holiday destination and departure date, we get to choose which hotel or apartment you stay in (all of them will be near the main attraction of the resort centre), and you get to make big savings.
Well, sensible eh?
We've got a great range of popular Club 18–30 holiday destinations, from the beautiful Balearics to the gorgeous Greek Islands, tantalising Turkey, the captivating Canaries and fabulous Florida!
At such good prices you simply can't afford to miss out.
Book now before you're beaten to it!
WANT THE FREEBIES?
CHOOSE CLUB CHOICE
If you've ever doubted that all the best things in life are free, book a Club Choice holiday and find out for yourself because in a selected range of our top hotels and apartments we can offer you some great FREE features to add even more value to your holiday.
All Club guests staying in Club Choice accommodation benefit from the following FREEBIES — beach bag, beach mats, T-shirt, pen & postcards, a bottle of wine in your room and a grocery pack in self-catering apartments…plus even more goodies depending which hotel or apartment you choose!
All for fun and free for all, that's what we say.
Check out CLUB CHOICE, a great way to get more fun for your money at these top hotels:
LESS PEOPLE NO EXTRA
Unlike some holiday companies, we don't believe in always charging you more money just because you don't fill up an apartment.
Of course in high season we do have to ask for a bit extra if there's going to be empty space in your place, but for all departures before May 31st and after October 1st there are NO UNDER-OCCUPANCY SUPPLEMENTS in selected accommodation.
SINGLE ROOMS NO EXTRA
Just because very few hotels have that many single rooms it doesn't mean you should pay an arm and a leg for the privilege of being alone.
Our policy is that, where rooms are available, they come at NO EXTRA COST.
It's simply a question of first come first served, so if you're coming by yourself I should stake your claim now.
Anyway, even if we can't find you a single, we'll be more than happy to offer you our FREE service whereby we organise a share of a twin or triple room for you.
We're nice like that.
TWO'S COMPANY THREE'S A SAVING OF UP TO £60
Post-war Vienna, rain-soaked cobbles, Orson Welles throwing a moody, Trevor Howard looking incredibly British — ah yes, this must be The Third Man.
And what a movie.
What Harry Lime missed out on, though, was the fact that if he'd gone Club 18–30 instead of Austrian Airlines, and taken a couple of friends in tow who were paying the full price, he could have copped for a massive sixty sovs off his bill, got a suntan into the bargain, and avoided coming to a very nasty end in the sewers.
So if you're a third man, or a third woman for that matter, look out for the specially selected hotels at which you can make some fantastic savings when a third person shares a room.
Know what I mean Harry?
FUN FACTOR NUMBER 1 — THE FACTS
Ask what's so special about a Club 18–30 holiday and you'll get dozens of different answers, if not hundreds.
So, in an effort to once and for all give you the facts on why we're Fun Factor Number 1, we've called in a few experts to run through the complete bizzo.
A DOCTOR WRITES — YOU'RE ONLY YOUNG ONCE
Now, people often ask me, why go on holiday in the first place?
And I tell them this:
Unless you're Peter Pan, in which case you probably believe in fairies as well, it's probably fair to say that you are only young once.
(Stop that tinkering Tinkerbell!)
And believe me, being young, say between 18 and 30, is far and away the best time to travel.
See the world.
Get around.
Have fun.
That sort of thing.
Oh yes, I quite recommend it.
I was young once you know.
Of course in those days we used to go to Bournemouth.
For six weeks.
Thoroughly depressing.
These days young people need more.
A sunny beach for example.
Does the world of good, gives them a healthy tan, makes them feel fantastic.
Then of course there's the company.
Young people today don't want to spend their time stooging around playing cribbage with the old folks in the village hall.
Oh no, no.
They're much better off dancing the night away under the stars with a friend or two.
Finally, it is common knowledge that travel broadens the horizons.
Very much so.
Offers a chance to try different food and wines.
Take in some local culture.
Generally gad around a bit.
Indeed, I have no h-h-hesitation in prescribing a Club 18–30 holiday.
Best available, of that I'm certain.
Maximum fun, minimum hassle.
Lots of young people all enjoying themselves.
Life wouldn't be the same without it.
DAYS AND NIGHTS — JUST WHAT THE DOCTOR ORDERED
So it's official.
Come on a Club 18–30 holiday and there's every chance it will do you the world of good.
Seriously.
Maximum fun all the way, a large part of which is our rightly famous programme of Days and Nights, designed to let you see the very best of whatever's on offer wherever you are.
A mixture of something old and something new, everybody here at Club has his or her own favourite, and we've also asked a few personalities to say a few words about their number 1 trip.
Mac Cousteau tells why he likes Wet 'n' Wild.
‘Itsa wet.
An' itsa wild.
An' itsa wild.
An' itsa wet.
I like ze wet.
An' best of all — I like ita wild.’
Merci Mac.
Sir Francis Drake goes cruising.
‘Hey, there's nothing I like better than a slow cruise off the Spanish Main, a cool drink, and a little hot music.
Wow.’
Thanks Frank.
Peter Pan Prefers Pirates
‘O lumme yes, jolly good show and all that, knife throwing and juggling and dancing, gosh — behind you mister, watch out for the crocodile Cap'n Hook, pass another bottle of grog Tinkers old mate, and may your swash never buckle.’
Real neat Pete.
Desiree Minelli talks about cabaret.
‘ Willkomen , bienvenue you all to the cabaret.
The girls are beautiful, the band is beautiful, lager louts miss out.
Yes, life is a cabaret old chum, and this one's full of Club Reps, mobs of them, more than you can shake a stick at.’
WINE, DINE, AND SAVE DOSH TOSH
By Gourmet Correspondent Dina O'Vino.
As Mama used to say from her spot by the cooker — lass, you can't have much fun on an empty tummy.
And she was right.
Which is why I am glad to tell you that most of the Club Trips include food and the odd bottle of vino, as well as great entertainment.
What's more it's all included for around £15 per trip — pretty good value you'll agree, and not a bad way to budget for a terrific night out.
In fact, many Club guests choose to take the full trips package at the very start of their holiday, which means they know that certain nights out and meals are already catered for — and you'll be amazed how much that can save you on the food and drinks bill.
Better still, if you do choose to buy the full package of trips, we'll not only give you a tasty discount off the price, but also FREE membership of Club 18–30 Social, the biggest private club in the U.K. Club Social members get great resort discounts in all our favourite bars and restaurants, and FREE admission to some of the best discos around, PLUS a £10 discount voucher off the price of your next Club 18–30 holiday.
CHEERIO!
CLUBREPS — FACT OR FICTION
Contrary to rumour our Clubreps are not Masters of the Universe, although even we admit that one or two of them seem superhuman.
Stranger than the truth perhaps but tireless, happy go lucky, organised, a friend at all times — these are the boys and girls that really will ensure you get to make the most of your holiday.
You're never alone with Club 18–30 because a Clubrep is always nearby 24 hours a day.
And that's a fact.
CLUBLIFE U.K. STYLE
A fond farewell, a tearful eye, a waving hanky, sob, sob — it's all over, summer gone for another year.
But wait.
And that means you.
It's not goodbye Davina, just au revoir.
We'll meet again, I know it.
Because we joined Club Social and come the bitter frosty nights we can gather round for another glass for old time's sake and really get it on at the Club 18–30 reunions at South Coast World in November, Blackpool in March.
Ah yes, the chance to relive old memories, buy the Reps yet one more half of shandy, plan next year's jaunt abroad, and last but by no means least have one hell of a party.
Being there.
It's what your pocket money's all about.
CLUB COUPLES
CLUB 18–30, PUTTING THE ROMANCE BACK INTO HOLIDAYS
Few things are more poignant than a holiday romance, and we're very happy to say that over the years we've brought more than a few couples together who are now living happily every after.
But just because Club 18–30 is a great place for meeting people and making new friends of either sex, it doesn't mean to say that those people who already have someone special in their lives can't come and join in the fun as well.
A SPECIAL MESSAGE FOR YOUNG ROMANTICS
Let's face it, all of us are romantic at heart, and even more so when we're young, possibly even falling in love for the very first time.
That's when spending time together becomes so important.
That first holiday away is a magical occasion, and the last thing you want to do is share the magic with a hotel load of families and grannies.
What, talk about a passion killer!
Much better to spend your time with a lot of starry-eyed folk, over candle-lit dinners, under velvet skies, with a sense of total freedom.
By day of course, why not team up with another couple and get out and about sightseeing or discovering those hide away places that will linger for ever in your memories?
It makes car hire cheaper too!
CLUB COUPLES GET SPECIAL TREATMENT
Of course, just because you're all wishy washy and moonstruck, it doesn't mean you can't enjoy all the great fun of a Club 18–30 holiday.
All the trips and good times will be available in the normal fashion, and you can join in as much, or as little as you want.
However, we think that Club Couples should be more than slightly special, and to this end our Couples Clubreps will be on hand with a few ideas, designed with a slightly more subdued mood in mind.
On those standard trips that no one wants to miss — such as the cabaret, we'll also make an effort to keep couples together.
CLUB COUPLES REPS
Our Club Couples Clubreps are highly trained and will be on hand to welcome you with a FREE bottle of wine to get your holiday off to a great start, and make sure you get the most out of your holiday.
Romantics all, they can point you in the direction of the quieter beaches, the most atmospheric bars and restaurants, and will even try to arrange discounts in some of the better eateries for parties of couples.
They'll also be on hand to arrange car hire, and give any other advice you need.
SPECIAL CLUB COUPLES HOTELS
What's more we've designated certain of our hotels as Club Couples hotels.
The ones we've picked are a bit quieter and slightly more out of the main hubbub of our favourite resorts, to offer just a little more privacy and peace and quiet for those that want it.
CLUB COUPLES RESORTS
We've picked our resorts and hotels carefully and you'll find a Club Couples Hotel in the following places:
Turkey — Hotel Pinar, Ortakent.
(Page 89)
Ah yes, the mystic east, flying carpets, romance on all sides, and on the long sandy beach around the translucent waters of the bay at Ortakent you can laze your days away doing little else than looking deep into  each other 's eyes.
The Hotel Pinar is just back a bit from the beach, with its own pool and an à la carte restaurant set on a roof terrace overlooking the wooded landscape towards the sea.
If you can't fall in love here you can't fall in love anywhere.
Majorca — Hotel Portals, Portals Nous.
(Page 47)
Majorca is one of the most popular islands in the Med, bustling with life and action.
Yet, in the hidden away little resort of Portals Nous, there is an oasis of calm, tranquillity and romance, centred around the Hotel Portals.
It's a friendly relaxing place, with a good sun terrace and pool, and only 200 metres from the beach.
The Marina of Porto Portals is 2km away, and both Magalluf and Palma Nova are within easy reach by bus.
All in all, a great place to enjoy the best of both worlds.
Lanzarote — Plaza Palmeras Apartments.
(Page 28)
A hot wind from Africa, the tiger striped beaches, brilliant sunshine from a sky of blue, and the backdrop of the fire mountains — this could only be Lanzarote.
And all in all not a bad place for a romantic tête  à tête, nowhere more so than at the Las Palmeras Apartments where, among the seclusion of the palm trees, you can relax in maximum tanning mode with the partner of your dreams.
Alternatively nip down to the beach, or stroll down to the centre of Puerto del Carmen where the nightlife buzzes, and the cafés and bars stay open until the small hours before returning to your very own home from home apartment, complete with facilities, terrace and garden.
GETTING THERE
TRAVEL BY AIR
For Summer, Club 18–30 is offering an even better choice of air travel arrangements with flights from 16 U.K. airports.
Many of these flights will be operated by our sister company Air Europe, using their modern Boeing 757 super jets.
Other flights will be with Monarch, Dan Air, Air Europa, Caledonian Airways, Air 2000, British Island Airways, Paramount Airways, Orion, Air UK Leisure, British Airways, British Midland, Inter-European and Spanair, using Boeing 757, Tristar, Airbus and TU-154 aircraft.
On all flights you'll receive full in-flight service, a snack or meal depending on the time of day, plus duty-free and bar service.
TRAVEL BY COACH
Save £££s next summer with our express coach service to the south of France and Costa Brava.
You can either join us at the relevant Channel port or take advantage of our coach service operating from 49 departure points throughout the U.K. We take the cross-Channel ferry and motor down to the south of France or Costa Brava, in style.
We have a fleet of modern coaches, mostly double deckers, all with reclining seats, washroom with toilet, hot and cold drink service, on board video and music, forced-air ventilation and panoramic windows.
You really do travel in style and your holiday begins the moment you step on the coach!
TRAVEL DELAY PROTECTION PLAN
Unfortunately, flight delays do sometimes occur and these are beyond our control.
Whilst our Holiday Guarantee cannot eliminate delays we hope it will help you cope with the inconvenience caused.
Therefore at the start of your holiday we will do our best to provide the following:—
Light refreshments for delays of between 2 hours and 4 hours.
Meals at mealtimes for delays of more than 4 hours.
For Coach Departures.
If there is a delay of over 2 hours at the start of your journey from the U.K. we will do our best to provide you with light refreshments.
However, meals for coach departures and overnight accommodation in general will not normally be provided unless arranged by the carrying airline or other transport operator.
In addition, if you are delayed more than 12 hours and you have chosen to take the recommended Holiday Insurance Policy that Club 18–20 has arranged with Eagle Star, you have the right to cancel and receive a refund, or, at your preference, continue on your holiday and receive compensation of up to £65 per person.
Full details of Club 18–30 Holiday Insurance on page 96.
FLORIDA — USA
Florida, ‘The Sunshine State’, has an idyllic, almost tropical climate, the world's largest concentration of theme parks, beautiful scenery inland, water sports galore and amazing nightlife; the perfect holiday destination.
Take into account the incredibly high standards of service in the excellent hotels and you have every possible ingredient for the ultimate holiday experience.
It should come as no surprise then, if we tell you that over the last three years Florida has become one of our great Club 18–30 success stories, with thousands of club fans making the trip across the ‘big pond’ for their first stateside holiday.
Based inland, our hotels are situated in Orlando and neighbouring Kissimmee, ideally located for the vast variety of sights and theme parks you will want to visit on this holiday of a lifetime.
In fact, the USA is always among the first destination to sell out, so if you're thinking of going in summer '90 reserve your place A.S.A.P.
DAYS AND NIGHTS
As ever we have put together a package of Club 18–30 trips and good times to make sure you have the chance to see all the unique places of interest that Florida has to offer.
It is very different from our usual trip programme — there is so much to do and see, and we've been selective in choosing only the very best.
No holiday in Florida would be complete without a trip to Disneyworld or the Epcot Centre — and with Club 18–30 you're sure to have a great time!
We also operate an evening trip to Fort Liberty with a show and huge American-style meal with free drinks all night.
And don't miss Wet 'n' Wild, an amazing waterpark with slides, wave pools and knee ski lakes.
We're sure that having come this far you won't want to miss out on anything and we really do recommend you join us on these trips as it can be very expensive if you try to do it all on your own.
For the full trips programme you should allow around £235 — it's well worth the experience.
ORLANDO/KISSIMMEE
Orlando and neighbouring Kissimmee now form the undisputed theme park capital of the world and an ideal touring base for Florida, situated inland between Disney World, the Epcot Centre and the NASA Space Centre.
Mainly people come to Orlando to see the surrounding sites.
The Walt Disney World Magic Kingdom (to give it its full name) needs little introduction.
The Epcot Centre is a Space Age experience in ‘Imagineered Entertainment’ with a dazzling display of communications, transportation, energy and nature's own resources.
Both these and the other attractions can be easily reached from our bases in Kissimmee and Orlando.
Here you will find a strip of hotels, restaurants, bars and clubs (don't forget you have to be 21 or over to buy alcohol in Florida).
There's a range of fabulous large shopping malls, and don't miss Lake Cecil which offers excellent watersports.
So make Orlando part of your Florida experience and get to Kissimmee quick!
LA QUINTA
The lively, buzzing La Quinta motel is situated close to lots of local amenities, only 350 metres from the Florida Mall, Florida's largest shopping centre with over 200 shops, bars and restaurants, including fast food restaurants, and, of course, McDonalds.
La Quinta also has a lovely pool, set in gardens — ideal for soaking in a Golden American Tan.
All of the comfortable double rooms have air-conditioning, telephone (local calls are free!),
TV, Cable TV and private facilities.
Rooms sleep 2 to 3.
Meals: Room only.
SAVE INN
The focal point of this hotel is its fabulous pool and poolside bar set among lovely gardens where you can relax in between visiting the many attractions of the area.
Situated in Kissimmee, the Save Inn is about a 30 minute drive from the fantastic Magic Kingdom and is part of a large motel complex of typical US style.
The rooms are very comfortable, air-conditioned against the tropical style weather and all have private facilities and telephones in the rooms.
They also all have free cable TV and Satellite TV for which you pay a small charge.
For those last minute Mickey Mouse presents for home there is also a mini-market and souvenir shop.
You'll also find bars, restaurants and cafés nearby, many of which are open 24 hours, so you can eat out or stay in the Inn itself.
All rooms are twin bedded although a third bed can be added to some rooms.
Meals: Room only.
FAMOUS HOST KISSIMMEE
Situated in the centre of West Kissimmee, the Famous Host Inn is just opposite the lively ‘Old Town’ with its popular night club, Little Darlings, and an abundance of gift shops and hamburger joints.
Try the London Bar and the Blue Max pubs or the lively 60's Rock 'n' Roll Club — all firm Club 18–30 favourites.
The hotel itself has excellent facilities which include a lovely swimming pool and sunbathing area, where you can unwind when you're not out visiting the sights.
All the rooms sleep two and are very comfortably furnished with TV, air-conditioning and private bath, shower and WC.
Meals: Room only.
MOTEL SIX
Crammed full of bars, discos and restaurants, the old town of Kissimmee is virtually a stone's throw from Motel 6, making it a great choice for late night revellers.
The resort centre and another Club motel, the Famous Host Kissimmee are both only 200 metres away as are the London Bar, the Blue Max and the popular 60's Rock 'n' Roll Club where famous names appear live.
The swimming pool is ideal for a quick dip during the heat of the midday sun and the games room is a great way to keep active minds amused.
All of the comfortable double rooms have private facilities, telephone,(local calls are free), TV, air-conditioning and free in-house movies.
Prices are based on two people sharing a room.
Meals: Room only.
FAMOUS HOST ORLANDO
Situated only 60 metres from the International Drive resort centre, the Famous Host International is only a few minutes walk from a great selection of restaurants, bars, and general hub that Orlando has to offer.
The swimming pool is a daily focus of attention, and the amazing ‘Wet and Wild’ Theme Park is only 350 metres from the hotel.
All of the double rooms are comfortable and have private facilities, TV, Cable TV, telephone and air-conditioning/
Meals: Room only.
TENERIFE
Tenerife, the largest of the exotic, duty-free Canary Islands, is renowned not only for its excellent climate but also for its amazing variation of scenery.
In the north can be found lush greenery standing out in the bottom of the valleys that carve down through the mountains, and fields of banana plantations standing against the backdrop of Mount Teide, the island's dormant volcano.
Further down the island, little picturesque old villages nestle into the countryside.
Then, as you approach the south, everything changes; you'll become aware of the increasing heat and notice the sunblasted mountains, long hot sandy beaches and lively, modern resorts.
We've chosen the south coast again as our base for summer '90 — a paradise for both sun worshippers and night owls with its fantastic weather and abundance of night life.
DAYS AND NIGHTS
Make sure you see some of Tenerife's fascinating scenery during your holiday — join in some of our most popular trips, including a cruise on the Nostramo, an authentic Spanish galleon or our ‘Skool Dinners’ BBQ; the ‘Last Resort’, a special cabaret by the reps in Tenerife's top nightclub and the very popular Medieval Night — a delicious banquet in an old castle with jousting displays followed by a live, top named band.
These, plus other great trips, include food and drink and cost around £15 each.
If you buy all the trips, then we'll give you a great voucher pack which will save you £££'s in discos and clubs around the resort.
PLAYA DE LAS AMERICAS
Not that long ago there was nothing at all on this particular part of Tenerife's south coast.
Them somebody noticed the fact that the weather here is fantastic all the year round, spotted that the beaches here are superb, and decided to build a hotel or two.
From that day on, Playa de las Americas has never looked back.
It's the ultimate in designer resorts, one enormous pleasure garden dedicated to give as much as possible to as many as possible in as small an area as possible.
For young people, the main attractions are not those of the daylight hours, because this is the ‘latest’ resort we've ever seen.
Generally the action doesn't get going until past midnight but then the resort rocks right through until the discos close at 5am!
What's more, so that you don't have to walk too far to get from place to place, most of the nightlife is crammed into one strip no more than 400 metres long, which has bars, cafés and discos on 3 levels, just like one enormous night club with over 50 bars and dance floors.
You can start with a cocktail at the Waikiki fun pub, relax in the New Pacha bar, slip down to ‘Snobs’ or ‘Gigalo's’for a dance, and you've still not even scratched the surface of the place.
Nobody goes to bed much before 5am, and time means absolutely nothing.
PARQUE DE LA PAS
Parque de la Paz is our Club Choice in Tenerife for summer '90 — it offers a high standard of accommodation and facilities and is an ideal holiday base.
Parque de la Paz lies in one of the prettiest parts of Las Americas yet is only a short walk from loads of bars and discos.
The nearest beach is only 400 metres away, while the main beach is a mere 650 metres stroll away.
The pool has a large sunterrace and poolside bar, which serves a great range of drinks throughout the day.
The hotel also has five pool tables, table tennis and table football, as well as providing entertainment three nights a week.
The nights really begin to swing into action with regular party nights in the bar.
The apartments also have an à la carte restaurant and 24 hour reception with money exchange and general shopping facilities.
All of the rooms are modern and comfortable with private facilities, balcony.
They sleep 2–4 people with 2 sofa beds in the lounge.
Supplements per person per week: In an apartment for 4, 3 sharing £11.00(£12.00), 2 sharing £32.00(£37.00).
Supplements in brackets refer to departures in August and July.
CARIBE APTS
The Caribe apartments are a great holiday base being ideally located five minutes from both the beach and the nightlife.
There is a great atmosphere here which is an interesting mixture of traditional Spanish and modern, and the setting is very informal with a bar and TV lounge to relax and chat with friends.
English videos are shown daily.
The main attraction at the Caribe is the large pool surrounded by an even larger sun terrace equipped with table football and a pool table and for the very energetic, there's also a good tennis court next to the pool.
In fact you need never move far from the apartments as there is a pizzeria on the corner, a supermarket and plenty of cafés close by.
The apartments themselves are spacious with a separate bedroom, lounge with sofa-bed, a fully equipped kitchenette as well as a shower, bath, wc and balcony.
Prices are based on 3 sharing a one bedroomed apartment.
Supplements per person per week: In an apartment for 3, 2 sharing £16.00 (£20.00).
Supplements in brackets apply to July and August departures.
Meals: Self-catering.
LAS LANZAS APTS
These popular apartments are centrally located with a pizza bar, supermarket and nightclubs nearby.
The resort centre is about half a mile away and it's only a 5 minute walk to the sandy beach.
There's plenty to do here with a large pool and a terraced surround, pool table, indoor mini bowling alley, tennis court (with floodlights) and a lounge where snacks are available.
The studios sleep 2–3 in a sleeping area/lounge and have a separate kitchenette, private bathroom and balcony.
Apartments sleep 2–4 people and have a separate bedroom with sofa beds in the lounge, a kitchenette, private bathroom and a balcony.
Prices are based on 3 in a studio and 4 in an apartment.
Supplements per person per week: In a studio for 3, 2 sharing £15.00 (£19.00).
In an apartment for 4,3 sharing £8.00 (£10.00); 2 sharing £24.00 (£30.00).
Prices in brackets apply to July and August departures.
Meals: Self-catering
PARADERO STUDIOS
Just five minutes walk from the beach and the nightlife, these bungalow-style studios can be found nestling in a quiet spot.
They're a great base for those who want to take full advantage of the lively nightlife of Playa de las Americas and also be able to relax in the calmness of the grounds.
The most attractive feature is without doubt the pool, which is situated 150 metres away across a bridge which joins your studios with another Paradero complex.
The pool is enclosed by the bungalows, palm trees and bushes and is a real suntrap.
The poolside bar provides you with vital liquid refreshment and snacks to keep you going through the day and there's a supermarket close by.
For those who prefer something a little more energetic, there's also a darts board and a pool table.
All the studios sleep 2–3, have private facilities and terraces and are fully equipped for the self catering gourmet.
Supplements per person per week:
In a studio for 3, 2 sharing £14.00 (£17.00).
Supplements in brackets apply to July and August departures.
Meals: Self-catering
ACAPULCO APTS
One of the best things about the Acapulco apartments is its ideal location — only a five minute walk from the Veronicas nightlife centre of Las Americas.
In fact the Acapulco is a good all round Club base.
The apartments here re comfortable, having recently been refurbished, and all have private facilities, balconies and fully equipped kitchenettes.
There is an excellent pool with a large sunbathing terrace with sunbeds and the beach is a short walk away.
There is a bar and restaurant here serving food and drink at very reasonable prices.
There's a good range of snacks during the day and a full restaurant menu at night.
There is also a video player, 2 pool tables and a good sound system.
All in all the Acapulco is perfectly placed for you to enjoy all the best parts of Las Americas.
The sun, the sea, the beach, the nightlife and a range of bars and restaurants are right on your doorstep.
Each apartment sleeps 2–3 (the third bed being a sofa bed in the lounge) and each has its own fully equipped kitchenette, bath/shower and wc, as well as a balcony.
Supplements per person per week: In an apartment for 3, 2 sharing £16.00 (£19.00).
Supplements in brackets apply to July and August departures.
Meals: Self-Catering
VINA DEL MAR APTS
Situated close to the Acapulco, the Vina Del Mar apartments are a great addition to our list of places to stay in Playa de las Americas.
They're very central, no more than a five minute walk from the beach, although most people spend most of the day around the large pool, surrounded by a sun terrace which looks onto the pretty gardens.
There's an excellent bar here run by an English couple called John an Marie, who will serve you all meals from breakfast through to dinner, including such specials as a Sunday roast lunch.
The Vina del Mar is well organised and equipped with TV, video, pool table, dart board and video games.
The apartments themselves are very well furnished with a balcony, a fully equipped kitchenette, and private bathroom, each sleeping 2–4 people in a one-bedroomed apartment with sofa-beds in the lounge.
Supplements per person per week: In an apartment for 4, 3 sharing £8.00 (£10.00), 2 sharing £24.00 (£31.00).
Supplements in brackets apply to July and August departures.
Meals: self catering.
GRAN CANARIA
Gran Canaria is a fascinating island which caters for everyone.
It is an island of contrasts with superb climate and dramatic scenery.
The South, where we are based, is a holidaymaker's paradise with its fantastic wide, sandy beaches, sports facilities galore, high quality modern accommodation and an abundance of night-spots.
Toward the north of the island you see exotic banana plants, pine forests and coffee plantations: an interesting coastline which alternates between small fishing ports and large stretches of beach, and here and there you can spot ancient little towns and tiny villages which still retain their authentic Canarian character.
Also, in the north, Las Palmas, the lively capital, is well worth a visit, particularly to haggle over leatherwear and exotic handicrafts.
Meanwhile, back in the south they're kick-starting their camels on Mas Palomas beach, ready to take you treading onto the wilderness of the sand dunes.
‘Meet me at midnight, by the oasis — it's your turn to buy the San Miguels!’
Days and Nights
Quality and value for money is the name of the game here!
A favourite trip is Sioux City, a visit to an old film set built for Spaghetti Westerns where you can eat as much as you like from the western-style barbecue.
Eat, drink and be merry at the Medieval Night which includes a meal, free drinks and an open-air castle disco.
Or spend the day aboard an Onedin Line style ship on our Cruise, or see Puerto Rico by night.
These are just an example of the excellent trips available in gran Canaria — they cost around £15 each, less if you buy the whole package, and most trips include plenty to eat and often a free bar!
PLAYA DEL INGLES
If you're looking for a beach style holiday Playa Del Ingles must be on your short list — it has over four miles of sandy beach stretching from the centre of town to the high sand dunes at Mas Palomas, with plenty of seclusion for those who favour the all over tanning method.
But don't be fooled by the island's exotic name or location just off Africa — once the sun goes down the whole place comes alive.
The nightlife revolves around several self-contained centres, the biggest and best being the Kasbah where most nights you'll find us hopping and bopping around Fantasy Island, a wonderful disco pub presided over by our friends Steve and Donato.
Playa Del Ingles is also popular with the Irish, and not surprisingly there are a whole host of bars with names like The Shamrock, Molly Malones, and the Old Shilelagh.
Most of these bars have live music, and all have staggered happy hours (or is it happy stagger hour?!), so with a bit of forward planning we make sure your budget goes as far as possible.
The Kasbah, and other centres such as Metro and Aguila Roja, are excellent for duty free goods such as cameras and audio equipment, which can often be half the price they are in the UK.
You can also buy leather and jewellery, but don't forget to haggle.
Playa Del Ingles is a great Club resort.
It can offer you just about everything you can think of by day and by night, in abundance.
Come with us into the Kasbah, and get your piece of the action.
PARQUE NOGAL
These modern, luxurious apartments, our Club Choice for summer '90 are of an excellent standard.
They are set in a peaceful location only one kilometre from some of the most fantastic sand dunes in the Canaries and a short bus ride from the heart of the nightlife of Playa Del Ingles.
The apartments have two lounges with TB, and a supermarket on the premises.
the relaxing garden terrace and very peaceful swimming pool are a fantastic place for soaking up the long hot days in the sun, and the pool is served throughout the day by a restaurant/bar.
For the more energetic there is also a modern badminton court and snack bar.
These very comfortable apartments have kitchenette, private facilities, radio and terrace.
Each apartment sleeps 2 or 3 people, and are highly recommended.
Supplements per person per week: In an apartment for 3, 2 sharing £14.00 (£17.00).
Prices in brackets refer to July and August departures.
Meals: Self catering.
ROYAL PLAYA APTS
Situated only 200 metres from the beach and within a three minute walk from the shops and nightlife, the Royal Playa is perfect for an all action holiday in the sun.
The swimming pool has a snack bar which serves snacks and drinks throughout the day.
The apartments have a reception, lounge with TV, a rooftop sunbathing terrace and mini-market.
All of the comfortable one bedroomed apartments sleep 2–3 people and have private facilities, lounge, kitchenette and balcony.
The majority of apartments also have a sea view.
Supplements per person per week: In an apartment for 3, 2 sharing £15.00 (£18.00).
Supplements in brackets apply to July and august departures.
Meals: self catering.
TENESOR
The main attraction of the Tenesor is its lovely pool area, often the scene of a pool party, with its king-size swimming pool and sun loungers on the surrounding sun terrace.
If you are feeling particularly energetic, there are tennis courts right next door to the apartments which you can hire for a small charge.
The apartments are surrounded by an abundance of bars and restaurants and a ten to fifteen minute walk will take you into the town centre and the nightlife.
The beach is just a five minute walk away.
These very comfortable apartments are food value for money, sleeping 2–3 or 5 people.
All have fully equipped kitchenette, private facilities and balcony.
Supplements per person per week: In an apartment for 5, 4 sharing £6.00 (£7.00), 3 sharing £8.00 (£10.00); in an apartment for 4, 3 sharing £7.00 (£9.00), 2 sharing £20.00 (£27.00).
Supplements in brackets apply to July and August departures.
Meals: Self-catering.
TAGAROR APTS
These modern apartments, built in traditional style, are situated in the centre of Playa del Ingles, next to the Monterey, and have a terrific, friendly atmosphere.
The centre of attraction is the roof garden with swimming pool, sun terrace and a poolside bar and the lovely sandy beach, which is only a three minute walk down the hill.
Across the road there is a tiny bar called the Elephantes which is our local and our base.
Snacks are served here, and there is a restaurant attached for more substantial meals.
The nearest supermarket is next door where you can buy some basics, such as soft drinks and beer in reception.
All the one bedroomed apartments sleep 2–3 people and have private bath, shower, wc, lounge, equipped kitchenette and balcony.
Supplements per person per week: In an apartment for 3, 2 sharing £17.00 (£18.00).
Supplements in brackets apply to July and August departures.
Meals: Self-catering.
TIRAJANA APTS
The Tirajana apartments are ideal for those wishing to enjoy the nightlife and then get away from it at the end of the day.
Playa Del Ingles is only a ten minute walk away and the discos and general hub of nightlife only five minutes.
The pool and sunterrace are ‘the’ places for Gran Canarian sun soaking and the beach is 1 km away.
The Tirajana has two pool tables, a bar and supermarket.
The apartments sleep 2–4 and have private facilities, kitchenette and balcony.
Supplements per person per week: In an apartment for 4, 3 sharing £7.00 (£9.00), 2 sharing £20.00 (£26.00).
Prices in brackets refer to July and August departures.
Meals: Self-Catering.
LANZAROTE
Lanzarote is possibly the most unusual island in the world.
a place of amazing contrasts, you simply wouldn't believe that the landscape and scenery could change so dramatically in such a small distance, from the mountainous green countryside in the north to the fields of rock, ash and lava in the south.
In the centre of the island are the fire mountains — dormant volcanoes — where the temperature is 400 degrees a few feet below the surface, and you can find a restaurant that grills your steak on the native rock.
Close by is a fabulous network of caves, filled with deep lakes of clear blue water.
All around the coast of Lanzarote are long beaches of dark golden sand, washed by the clear blue Atlantic ocean — and, if you're a windsurfing fanatic, then Lanzarote is the one place for you as it's one of the world's top resorts with excellent facilities for both beginners and the more experienced.
The weather here is as fantastic as the scenery, it hardly ever rains and it's deceptively hot because of the cooling breeze that prevails.
The living is cheap and the people are friendly, with a large contingent of British who have chosen to make a permanent home here.
Perhaps that's not such a bad move.
DAYS & NIGHTS
A weird and wonderful island with weird and wonderful things to do.
We have a wide range of interesting and exciting trips lined up for you including a trip on an authentic spanish galleon to the famous Papagayo beach, or come back laden with bargains from the Sunday market at the old village of Teguise with a variety of exotic, local handicrafts.
There'll also be the infamous Club 18–30 beach party, the hilarious Reps' Cabaret, a visit to the beautiful waterpark and a Windsurf safari.
Each trip costs about £15 — buy them all and we'll give you a great discount booklet saving you £££'s in bars discos and restaurants in resort.
PUERTO DEL CARMEN
This is a modern, bustling resort featuring a long sweep of golden sand mottled with stripes of dark volcanic dust.
There is a relaxed atmosphere and everything you need for a great holiday is here.
The main pre-occupation is with suntans and nightlife and Puerto del Carmen is well equipped to provide both.
Our main night-time meeting place is ‘The Big Apple’ with Tony T. Rapping D.J.
Our other two favourite watering holes are Charlie's, which plays good live music, and fantasy Island presided over by ‘Marcial’.
— Porkies' is one of our favourite disco bars and the Diamond Cocktail Bar is well worth a visit.
Favourite eating places include La Bombola, probably the best pizzeria in town, the Garden restaurant for excellent food at reasonable prices and Formosa's for great  chinese food.
For the sporty, tennis, sub aqua, squash, windsurfing, jet skiing, water skiing, a ski bus and football are all available.
PLAZA AZUL APTS
These modern apartments are our Club Choice in Lanzarote and very much our Club base on the island, central to Club 18–30 activities and the facilities of this lively resort.
The apartments overlook the large pool and sunterrace which provides a perfect suntrap and the main beach is only a ten minute walk away.
There's a windsurfing beach nearby as well.
The Plaza Azul has its own cocktail bar where party nights are held, and its own restaurant.
There are also various cafés and restaurants very close by as well as the buzzing nightlife, all of which is only a 10 minute walk away.
All the one bedroom apartments sleep 2–3 people and have private facilities, kitchenettes, balcony and private TV showing English Videos.
Supplements per person per week: In an apartment for 3,2 sharing £21.00 (£23.00).
Supplements in brackets apply to departures in July and August.
Meals: Self-Catering.
PLAZA PALMERA APTS
The Plaza Palmeras apartments are ideal for Club couples, enjoying superb facilities and comfort in a convenient position.
They're only a five minute stroll away from the main resort centre with all its bars, restaurants and nightlife, and yet situated in a peaceful spot so you can get away from it all late at night.
Puerto del Carmen's sandy beach is 450 metres away and stretches for over 2 km, lined with bars and restaurants.
You can also relax on the terrace of the lovely fresh water pool sipping a cool drink form the bar.
The poolside bar also serves snacks and there's a weekly BBQ.
The apartments are idyllically set amongst lovely flower beds, palm trees and tropical shrubs.
The reception is an impressive design with a marble dome adjoined by tropical plants.
There is a games room where you can play pool or table-tennis, and live music is planned for the summer.
However, Lanzarote's swinging, lively nightlife is not to be missed and there's a good selection of restaurants within five minutes, and a lovely bar terrace can be found right next door in Cinco's Plaza.
There are supermarkets, shops and banks nearby.
All the apartments have a separate bedroom, a private bathroom, cooking facilities, lounge and a terrace.
We leave the Plaza Palmeras as the sun sets, with people sitting on their balcony sipping a cool drink from the fridge.
Will you be joining us next summer?
Supplements per person per week:
2 sharing a studio for 3, £16.00 (£20).
Supplements in brackets apply to departures
LA PENITA COMPLEX
The focal point of La Penita complex is the king-sized swimming pool, surrounded by bodies basking on sunloungers, in a setting of palm trees dotted about the building and grounds.
It's a relaxed atmosphere here with most people preferring to laze around the complex in the heat of the day, but the beach is only 3000 metres away.
Everything you need is available here from the tennis court which is floodlit at night so that you needn't play in the heat of the day, to the restaurants — the Timanfaya restaurant which serves snacks and full meals at discounted prices and the Indian restaurant.
La Penita is quite close to the centre of the resort — Joker's disco and most of the bars and nightlife are just a 15 minute stroll away.
Around the complex are a variety of shops and supermarkets.
The accommodation in La Penita consists of apartments which sleep 2–3 people, and are fully equipped with kitchenette, private facilities and either balconies or terrace.
Supplements per person per week: 2 sharing a studio for 3, £18.00 (£23.00).
Supplements in brackets for departures in July and august.
Meals: Self-catering.
SOUTH OF FRANCE
It's not all frogs legs and strings of onions in the South of France — the resorts are glamorous and the scenery beautiful.
From the northern tip of Spain across to the Western edge of Italy, this magical coast boasts mile upon mile of golden sand lapped by clear warm seas.
Our resort this year is in the Catalan region, with historic old towns contrasting with modern holiday resorts all set against the picturesque backdrop of the snow-capped Pyrenees.
The fabulous coastline is dotted with colourful yacht marinas, inland seas, hundreds of vineyards and a large number of popular campsites.
If sun, sand and sea are the main ingredients you look for in a holiday, then you'll really enjoy your stay here, and when you come camping with club in the South of France you get the best of both these worlds — the chance to enjoy a superb sun-filled holiday with a really lively bunch of friendly people at an inclusive price which gives you value for money.
DAYS AND NIGHTS
This corner of France has plenty to offer everybody and we recommend you try to see as much of it as possible.
You will have the chance to do just that by joining us on our fantastic trips package.
There will be around four trips per week on offer for summer'90, including our infamous Club 18–30 beach party, a BBQ night and our hilarious Club reps' cabaret.
We also operate trips into the bustling resort of Lloret, Spain, and in the height of the season we visit a waterpark and go camel riding!
You won't want to miss out, so be sure to allow around £12–14 per trip, all in all the trips will be great value and great fun.
CANET PLAGE
CLUB ACTION CENTRE
Set in the relaxed, easy going Roussillon area, the lively resort of Canet Plage is one of the most appealing resorts on this coast.
Its superb sandy beach which stretches for over four miles, is very popular with sunworshippers and sports enthusiasts alike.
There are plenty of facilities for waterskiing, windsurfing and paragliding and alongside the beach runs a palm tree lined avenue of shops, boutiques, bars, open-air cafés and restaurants, all making for a lively, bustling atmosphere.
MAR ESTANG
CLUB BONUS POINTS
2 swimming pools.
A range of watersports including windsurfing, waterskiing, canoes, pedaloes.
Fine sandy beach.
3 tennis courts.
A keep fit centre.
A football pitch.
Bars, restaurants, shops and take-aways on site.
Free nightly disco.
Party nights and barbecues.
Placed between the lake and the sea, Mar Estang is perfect for water lovers.
Upon production of your free club card which you receive on arrival (don't forget to bring a passport size photo with you!) there are windsurfing boards and canoes.
In the centre of all this activity are our tents and caravans which are set among shrubs and trees and provide accommodation for 2–4 persons.
All caravans have private facilities, WC and cooking facilities.
The site also offers modern toilet and washing facilities for campers, and tents have electric lighting.
For those who prefer to keep their feet firmly placed on the ground, Mar Estang also has a small weight training centre, as well as three tennis courts.
Lots of different sports are available, although some sports may be limited during low season and are subject to weather conditions.
With all these activities going on around you, ‘time out’ is definitely needed.
Less than two minutes away are the three pools which provide the daytime focus.
If however, you're here to be a beach bum, then the beautiful stretch of white sand contrasted against the clear blue sea is a definite magnet for all keen sun-worshippers.
The sandy beach stretches for over four miles and is very popular with watersports enthusiasts.
There are plenty of facilities for waterskiing, windsurfing and paragliding and alongside the beach runs a palm tree lined avenue of shops boutiques, bars, open-air cafés and restaurants, all making for a lively, bustling atmosphere.
There are two bars at the campsite (one open all day), a crêperie and a take away.
a restaurant is also at the campsite and serves both English and French cuisine.
But, it's not until the sun sets, that the Mar Estang really comes into its own.
After the happy hour at the crêperie you can move onto the free disco and strut your funky stuff or watch the twice weekly cabaret show.
Although don't forget that, as usual, your Clubrep will also have a great selection of Club entertainment including a barbecue, the Reps' Cabaret and a trip to Spain.
The campsite also has a selection of shops on site including a supermarket, launderette, bureau de change and weekly flea market and the resort of Canet Plage is only a five minute drive away.
Meals: Self catering and Accommodation only
Note: Bed linen is not provided so please bring a sleeping bag and towels with you.
Coach Departures
Take the coach to the south of France and save yourself £££s!
We meet up in Dover, take the ferry over to Calais and motor down to Canet Plage in comfort.
You can also get to Dover by coach — we have coaches departing from regional departure points around the U.K. See pages 10–13 for details of departure, periods of operation and supplements.
IBIZA
There is something both secret and secretive about Ibiza.
Every way you turn you see something different.
Every road you go down leads to a discovery.
Every time you go out you find something new.
And even when you think you know the island intimately, it will keep on springing surprises.
It is an island full of contrasts, with the perfect place for everyone.
The scenery is spectacular with rugged mountains, hidden sandy beaches, tree covered hills, cool and green even in the heat of summer, groves of olive trees, vineyards full of birdsong and always in the background, the bright blue sea.
Take a trip around the island by day and discover small restaurants tucked away in amongst the hills and valleys; follow the bumpy sandy tracks to tiny secluded beaches, almost empty apart from a small bar or café serving ice cold sangria and the snacks the Spanish call ‘tapas’.
By night the island really comes to life and everyone should try Ibiza town at least one.
It's possibly the most outrageous place anywhere in the Mediterranean, full of weird and wonderful people, stilt walkers, street markets, pavement cafés, and bars in which you just sit and watch a world you have never seen before walk past in front of your nose.
And last, and by no means least, we have San Antonio, the Club 18–30 base on Ibiza.
THE place for young people.
Perhaps the most exciting non-stop resort in the Med.
Now read on.
DAYS AND NIGHTS
There's so much going on in Ibiza it's easy to put together some really great trips.
Don't miss the ‘Rodeo Grill’.
a barbecue followed by the hilarious reps' cabaret and a chance to test you skill on the mechanical bull.
A favourite is the cruise to the beautiful island of Formentera where you can ‘hob nob’ with the yachts and speedboats of the jet set at Illetas Beach, not forgetting ‘champagne diving’on your voyage back.
One of our most popular evenings is the ‘Trick or Treat’ night at Club Tropicana.
A mix of all the classic T.V. game shows ‘live’ while you dine, with prizes for the lucky contestants.
These, plus many more great trips cost around £13 each.
Buy the full package and you'll get a great discount booklet which will save you £££'s in resort.
SAN ANTONIO
If you were designing the ultimate holiday resort for Club 18–30, you would copy San Antonio right down to the last bar and grain of sand.
It is an unbelievable place to spend the summer and young people from all over Europe flock here from April right through to the end of October to enjoy the free and easy life-style and atmosphere that they themselves have created.
Quite simply you come to San Antonio to get away from home and spend your time with people of your own kind, doing whatever you want to do.
There are no restraints, no pressures and time means absolutely nothing at all.
It's an amazing place and the perfect base for Club 18–30.
By day we'll offer to show you around the island or let you laze by the pool — the choice is yours.
At night we'd recommend that you follow our lead through the throngs of people crowding the streets to the amazing bars, clubs, pubs and discos.
Our three favourite bars are Sgt Peppers — warm and friendly with live music and videos, Darrell's — with Darrell Dean Walker live on stage, probably the best musician on the island, and King's — another live music bar.
Nightclub-wise we hit the Star Club, which has been a popular haunt in San Antonio for many years, and as ever we've arranged free entry for all club Discount book holders, saving you £5 every time you go.
They know our taste in music here, and the whole place rocks until around 5am, when it's time to retire to the sunrise, tuck into t burger at the Star Club café just outside, or go on and do whatever else you want to do.
What's more San Antonio is our biggest resort in terms of numbers of 18–30s who go abroad with us.
Club 18–20 is the biggest holiday company in San An.
We think that everybody should come here at least once in their life.
If you haven't been yet make sure you don't leave it too late.
GALERA
The Galera is a Club Exclusive hotel and besides having a great easy-going atmosphere, is the scene of many lively Club get-togethers and parties.
The centre of San Antonio with its famous ‘West End’ is just a five minute stroll away and guests here are welcome to use the pool at the Brisa, about 10 minutes' walk away.
The hotel has a TV and video lounge and a bar which serves snacks throughout the day.
In the evening, the bar provides a lively meeting place for the start of most of tour Club activities.
All the comfortable single, two and three bedded rooms have private facilities and balconies.
Meals: Bed and breakfast.
CONFORT PLAZA APTS
This is a place for those who enjoy a lively, friendly atmosphere and are serious about their suntans — the pool at the Confort Plaza, although small, is probably the best suntrap in San Antonio.
By day this means that the sun terrace around the pool is a sun-worshippers paradise — the only occasional movement being the trip to the poolside bar for a little light refreshment or a game of pool.
But don't let that fool you — by nightfall people are waking up ready to go out on the town.
Most evening activity starts in the American style caf é/bar; that has been built down at street level.
Here you can eat and drink well at reasonable prices before taking the two minute walk to the centre of town.
The apartments here are of a good standard and have private facilities, kitchenettes and balconies.
They sleep 2–4 people and here are some smaller studios available for 2 people.
KLIPPE APTS
These friendly, comfortable apartments are situated near the Tampico apartments and from the top floor there is a superb view over the bay of San Antonio.
There's an attractive pool with sun terraces and a poolside bar serving snacks.
The sandy beach is about 200 metres away with sunbeds, pedaloes and watersports.
The town centre is a five minute trip by taxi or a short ferry ride and there are plenty of shops, restaurants and bars close by.
The apartments have a good bar with TV and a supermarket down below.
Studios sleep 2–3 people and the one bedroomed apartments sleep 2–4 people, all have a private bathroom, kitchenette and balcony.
Prices are based on full occupancy of a studio or apartment.
SAN ANTONIO APARTMENTS
You've made three decisions so far, and they were easy.
You've chosen San Antonio, simply because it's the centre of all that's action-packed and lively.
You've chosen when you want to go, and that wasn't difficult because you know that San Antonio is electric right through from April to October.
And you've chosen an apartment holiday, for the freedom to stick to nobody else's timetable but  your own.
Let us make the fourth choice — which actual apartments you'll be staying in — and you'll find yourself with a whole lot more holiday spending money into the bargain.
We have several apartments for 2–4 people dotted around San Antonio and your actual apartment will be allocated on arrival in Ibiza; it will be one of those featured in the brochure or one of similar standard.
We guarantee that you will receive the regular services of our Clubreps and that the apartment will be cleaned weekly.
All apartments, sleeping 2–4 persons, have a bedroom, balcony, kitchenette and bathroom with shower and toilet.
BRITANNIA APTS
Situated close to the S'Amfora, these lively and very attractive apartments are just behind the Britannia bar and restaurant and are some of the best appointed on the island.
There are two separate sections here, divided by the new swimming pool, the area around the pool being a great suntrap.
Other amenities include a snack bar, pool table and video T.V.
There is a friendly, lively atmosphere at the Britannia and generally days are spent around the pool or visiting the S'Amfora or Venus pool and bar.
Both the Britannia bar and the Venus do a good line in food, and are popular early evening haunts, before the action moves into town.
The beach is about ten minutes away, with the main area of San Antonio being a fifteen minute stroll, so you're never far from the action.
There are one bedroomed apartments for 2–4 people and 2 bedroomed apartments for 3–5 people.
Each apartment has a separate bedroom, living room, kitchenette, private facilities and a balcony.
TAMPICO APTS
Without doubt, the Tampico is the best place to stay if you like a quieter relaxed atmosphere and the beach — it starts all of about 10 metres from the bar, and the only thing separating the two is the swimming pool.
Stand in the bar and you can look out at the full expanse of San Antonio running around the bay and watch the ferries plying to and from the very centre of town to the landing stage only 50 metres away.
The centre is a thirty minute walk or a five minute taxi ride away.
The room areas in this block are fairly quiet and most of the action takes place in the cavern-like bar which provides a cool focus out of the sun and is equipped with pool tables and video machines.
The accommodation here is all self catering, and the apartments are fully equipped with cooker and fridge.
For those who don't want to cook for themselves, the bar serves snacks.
There is also a good restaurant attached to the Tampico, and the nearby Amsterdam and Leandros serve excellent pizzas.
For variety, there is a choice of Chinese and Indian cuisine close by.
At night the area really gets going and the favourite watering holes are The Pink Panther, Buccanero's, the No.1 Bar, and the Happy Prawn — named after those 18–30's who have forgotten the factor 6 on day 1!
All apartments and studios have private facilities and terraces and sleep 2–4 people.
Studios sleep 2–3 people.
VENUS APTS
It would be impossible not to enjoy staying at the Venus — they're some of our nicest apartments in Ibiza.
Firstly, the large and airy rooms with full facilities and balcony are very comfortable.
Secondly, there is a lovely swimming pool and sun terrace.
But most of all there are Maria and Francisco.
Maria and Francisco run the apartments and the card, restaurants and bar beneath the apartments and are very friendly and helpful.
The food here is particularly good and reasonably priced — the reps come and eat here — and the bar never seems to close.
The nearest sandy beach is only about a ten minute walk from the Venus and the West End of San Antonio is about 15 minutes away.
Apart from this, the Venus is next door to the Britannia and 100 metres from the S'Amfora, so you're never lost for excellent company.
The apartments here sleep 2–4 or 3–6 people.
PALMYRA APTS
New for Summer '90 are the modern and stylish Palmyra Apartments.
Situated virtually on the beach and only a short walk from the centre of San Antonio, the Palmyra Apartments are ideal for those who want the best of both worlds.
A variety of watersports are available nearby and there is table tennis and TV area within the complex.
The pool area is an ideal spot for soaking up that golden tan and is only a short step to the beach.
The studios sleep 2–3 people and the apartments sleep 2–4.
All have private facilities, a kitchenette, balcony and most have a sea view.
Prices are based on full occupancy.
MESTRET APTS
These comfortable apartments, reserved exclusively for Club 18–30, are an ideal base for those who want to be right in amongst the action, being only two minutes from the shops, bars and nightlife of San An.
The Mestret has a small bar-lounge and you are very welcome to use the swimming pool and other facilities at the nearby Brisa, one of our main Club bases.
At the Mestret we have studios for 2–3 and one or two bedroomed apartments for 2–4 or 4–6 people sharing.
All the apartments and studios have kitchenettes, private bathroom or shower, WC and terrace.
S'AMFORA
One of our main Club bases in San Antonio, the S'Amfora is a large hotel with a non-stop electric atmosphere.
It's traditional in some ways but the brothers who own the hotel, Julio and Alfonso, have come to know exactly what the Club 18–30 holidaymaker is looking for.
The S'Amfora is a 15 minute walk to the centre of San Antonio and is a mega lively hotel, with the bar, which serves snacks all day at reasonable prices, and pool area, as the central focal points.
It is also equipped with a pool table, darts, video machines and football machine.
Juan and Pepe, who run the bar, luckily need little sleep and it is not uncommon for revellers returning from the star club at 4.00am to find a bar party in full swing.
Rooms here are large and airy, have private facilities and a terrace.
Some three and four bedded rooms are available.
BRISA
The club Choice Brisa has always been one of our favourite hotels in Ibiza because it has everything that Club guests are looking for.
It's exclusive to club 18–30, it's near the centre of town, it has a great pool and sunbathing area, a waiter-service restaurant with a special buffet breakfast and a reputation for excellent food, a friendly bar serving a good range of snacks.
a large TV lounge with an excellent sound system, English videos, dancing, pool and table tennis.
Add to this the fact that the rooms are of a very good standard, all with private facilities and most with balconies, the staff are very friendly and helpful and the atmosphere is lively and welcoming and you can see just why it's our most popular hotel on the island!
Larger rooms sleep 3 people comfortably and there are also some single rooms available.
MAJORCA
Whatever you are looking for in a holiday, we defy you not to find it in Majorca.
Miles of sandy beaches, dynamic mountains, hectic night life, tranquil coves, a cosmopolitan atmosphere and all around a deep blue Mediterranean sea, above which the blazing sun hangs in a cloudless sky.
Majorca has it all, and with Club 18–30 you can see most of it at your own pace.
We'll show you Palma Nova, with its piano bars dispensing every cocktail you've ever heard of and a few more besides.
And the hotspot Magalluf, full of rumbustious bustle and a brash sort of charm, a non-stop resort rocking long into the night.
of course that's not all there is to this beautiful island.
If you wish to venture northwards you can discover beaches, such as Cala Vinas, a bustling resort 3km away, and see the luxurious villas of the rich and famous who come here to sample the many and varied pleasures on offer.
For you, the sea and sunshine, food and wine, the sport, the relaxation and the night life are all there for the taking.
Be as demanding as you want; Majorca can give you anything.
DAYS AND NIGHTS
Majorca is packed with fun things to do and with years of experience behind us, we've singled out the very best entertainments and attractions for our trips programme.
Come with us to the biggest BBQ centre in Europe for a delicious meal, outdoor disco and brilliant atmosphere, or take it easy on our cruise, stopping on the way back for a spot of champagne diving.
Don't miss our most popular night in Majorca — the ‘Pirates Adventure’— a feast of spectacular dancing, juggling, knife throwing and swashbuckling swordsmanship followed by an excellent meal.
These are just a selection of our trips which cost around £13 each.
Buy the full package and you'll get a discount booklet which will save you £££'s in bars, restaurants and discos in the resort.
PALMA NOVA/MAGALLUF
This part of Majorca is the most popular area on the island and each summer more and more 18–30's flock here to enjoy the sunshine, the beach, the nightlife and the company of more young people than you could possibly imagine.
No one can really say just where Palma Nova stops and Magalluf begins, they just sort of merge into one another and the sandy beach runs the length of both resorts.
Palma Nova itself may be must more glitzy with smart cocktail bars such as Stadium and Lord Byron's.
It also has a brand new crazy golf course called Fantasy Golf, the biggest and best in Europe complete with waterfalls.
It's open  'til midnight so you can spend many a fun hour here.
On the other hand it's Magalluf which has made Majorca famous for British holidaymakers.
It's a larger-than-life, non-stop, 24 hour-a-day resort that has a brash sort of charm and enough action for even the most demanding of  socialites .
The sandy beach on Majorca is ideal for flopping on by day in order to recover in time for the next night of action, and what a night it will be in this town that never sleeps!
Club discount booklet holders will find that they can get into some of our favourite discos in resort, such as Heroes and Banana's free of charge as well as getting reductions in many other bars and restaurants.
It's a hectic, hustling, bustling place, come and see for yourself.
C'AN BUJOSA APTS
We think that these apartments are a bit of a find, and so are pleased to have them that we've taken them up throughout the summer on an exclusive basis.
One of the nice things about them is that they are situated in one of the quieter areas between Palma Nova and Magalluf, but it is only a short walk to the beaches and nightlife of both resorts.
All the apartments are different in design, with private facilities, fridge and cooking area.
Most rooms have a balcony.
There are one and two bedroomed apartments, both with sofa bed accommodation in the spacious lounge.
we also have some studios for two.
There is a nice pool, sunbathing area and poolside bar at the back of the apartments, and we know they'll be just as popular in Summer '90 as they have been in previous years.
KENSINGTON APTS
Located right in the heart of Magalluf, the Kensington Apartments have a wide variety of popular nightspots, bars, restaurants and boutiques practically on the doorstep.
And whenever you fancy a touch of the sun and sea air, you can head for the sandy beach, only 200 metres away.
All the apartments at the Kensington have been reserved solely for Club 18–30.
Each basic but spacious apartment sleeps 2–4 people, with two of the beds in the lounge/dining area.
Each has its own bathroom with shower and WC, plus a balcony and kitchenette.
Prices are based on 4 people sharing an apartment.
SAMOS
If you're the sort that finds it impossible to relax, the Samos is the perfect holiday base.
Just 300 metres from the stretch of sandy beach, and a short walk from the bright lights of Magalluf, the hotel is well placed for all the restaurants, bars and discos of the resort.
On top of that it has a whole life of its own with sports, a nightly disco, live music, and a daily English film.
It's a three star hotel patronised by many different nationalities.
It has rooms with private facilities and balconies.
The large pool area is excellent, and the food here is renowned for being very good with popular lunchtime and evening buffets at the poolside.
In short, the Samos is an established hotel which is well run and has a friendly, relaxed atmosphere.
MAGAMAR APTS
Set in the lively end of town, and new for Summer '90, the attractive Magamar apartments are the place to be if you want to see as much motion as lotion!
The hotel pool is 15 metres in length with a large terrace for sunbathing, making it an ideal suntrap.
If you're feeling more energetic, you can take advantage of the hotel's tennis court for a swift game or two.
The sandy beach of Magalluf boasting a variety of watersports and bars galore is only 600 metres away.
Night times are buzzing with loads of bars and hot night spots right on the doorstep.
The hotel also has its own bar which stays open till midnight and a very reasonably priced restaurant.
The modern apartments consist of one bedroom which sleep 2–3 or 4 and are comfortably and attractively furnished, with private facilities.
Because of the ideal lively location and facilities, we anticipate the Magamar apartments to be very popular this year with Club Clients.
Prices are based on full occupancy of an apartment.
SOTA VENT APTS
New for Summer ‘90, we're really pleased to be able to offer you the magnificent Sota Vento apartments as our Club Choice in buzzing Magalluf.
The apartments are set in 1500 square metres of grounds featuring a lovely swimming pool.
Step out of your apartments and you're only 200 metres from some of the liveliest discos on the island, and the kind of exciting nightlife Club clients have come to expect from this ever-popular resort.
Try for example Heroes, Banana's or Tokyo Joe's nightclubs or some of our favourite bars like the Pink Elephant.
The nearest beach is only a 150 metre walk away, and there is also a good bus service connecting the whole of the coast.
There is a great variety of watersports available nearby and a golf course 4 miles away for the more energetic amongst you.
The swimming pool, garden terraces and poolside bar are the daytime focus of attention for those who want to lie back and soak up the Mediterranean sun, and the restaurant and caféteria serve a good variety of snacks throughout the day.
Reception offers a service for money exchange and safety deposit boxes etc.
The apartments were built only two years ago, and are spacious and attractively furnished.
All the apartments have private facilities and comprise bedroom, bathroom, living/dining room, with kitchenette and private terrace, sleeping 2–4 people.
AQUARIUM
Exclusive to Club 18–30 and of a very high standard, you'll find the Aquarium hotel difficult to beat for a fantastic holiday in Majorca.
Just across the road from the beach of Palma nova as well as all the shops and restaurants along the sea front, this friendly hotel could not be in a better place for all the attractions Palma Nova has to offer.
The resort centre is only 100 metres away and most of the bars, discos and nightclubs are within a ten minute walk from the hotel.
It is also right next door to a brand new crazy golf course which is the biggest and best in Europe.
The hotel has a lovely swimming pool which has two sun terraces, one with sun shades, ideal for lazing away those long hot Mediterranean days.
A bar service provides drinks and snacks throughout the day and is very popular.
The Aquarium also has an attractive bar/lounge with colour TV and video, where Club clients get together for regular party nights.
It has a great dance floor and discos and live bands are staged here regularly.
The food in the hotel is of a good standard and a comprehensive snack service with a range of buffet style food is on offer.
In addition, the hotel provides a 24 hour money exchange and safety deposit boxes.
All the comfortable twin bedded rooms have private bath, WC and sleep 2–3.
Most have a balcony.
we also have some single rooms.
LAS PALMERAS APTS
Palma Nova's many lively bars and nightspots are all within reach of these well-maintained apartments and if you're wanting to eat out, a variety of good restaurants and cafés are close at hand.
Try Angelo's for an excellent cooked breakfast and a good range of snacks.
Las Palmeras, reserved exclusively for the Club, has its own attractive swimming pool and sunterrace, providing a perfect sun-trap and the sandy beach is only about 200 metres away.
All the comfortable and spacious apartments sleep 2–4 or 4–6 people and have a lounge with sofa beds and either one or two twin bedrooms.
All have a small kitchen plus a private bath, shower, WC and balcony.
WAIKIKI APTS
You'll find the ‘Waikiki’ at that point where Palma Nova bends into Magalluf, in an area called Torrenova, so it's ideally placed for the exhaustive nightlife of both resorts and the superb beach is only a short stroll down the hill from the apartments.
For those who want to cater for themselves in the fully equipped kitchenettes, there's a supermarket right opposite the apartments.
Alternatively, there are plenty of cafés and restaurants nearby, and the poolside bar serves snacks throughout the day.
The swimming pool is also surrounded by a great sun terrace.
The apartments themselves sleep 2–4 people in one twin-bedded room and a lounge-diner with sofa beds.
Each apartment has a private bathroom, WC and balcony.
PORTALS NOUS
Welcome to Portals Nous, a lovely resort on the bay of Palma with a superb sandy beach and a variety of bars, caféterias and good restaurants.
A fifteen minute bus ride takes you to the buzzing resort of Magalluf with its lively nightclubs, bars and discos, and Palma Nova, with its shops, bars and restaurants, is even nearer.
‘Hob nob’ with the rich and famous on the luxury marina at Puerto Portals…visit the Sporting Tennis Playa, a sports complex with floodlit courts, squash, gym, a beach and swimming pool, or the island's famous dolphinarium called Marineland…
Portals Nous has it all — and more!
Come and see for yourselves!
HOTEL PORTALS
Hotel Portals is an attractive hotel in an idyllic, secluded setting at the foot of a hill of pine trees.
The atmosphere here is friendly — an ideal place for Club Couples to spend a relaxing holiday in comfortable surroundings.
The hotel has its own pool with a large sun terrace, ideal for sunbathing.
The bar serves snacks and meals and the village shops, bars, and tennis club are a short walk away up the hill.
It's only 100 metres to the main road where a regular bus service will take you into the bustling resort centre of Magalluf, a 5 k ride which takes about 15 minutes, where a wider variety of bars, restaurants and nightlife can be found, or to Palma Nova 3km away, for a superb selection of restaurants.
The beautiful cove and lovely sandy beach of Portals nous are only 200 metres away, and the port of Puerto Portals is less the 2km, an impressive marina where the rich and famous moor their yachts — including the King of Spain!
Marineland, with its dolphinarium is in nearby Costa d'en Blanes so there's plenty to visit while you're here.
The rooms in Hotel Portals are comfortable and of a good standard with private facilities and balcony.
For a relaxing holiday in a quiet setting, yet with easy access of a lovely beach and the amazing nightlife of Palma and Magalluf, you couldn't find a better spot to enjoy the best of both worlds.
Meals: Bed and breakfast.
COSTA BRAVA
This rugged piece of coastline, stretching for 100 miles or so to the south of the French border, is part of the foothills of the Pyrenees mountains.
Where the land meets the sea there are hundreds of beaches and coves, some so secluded that they can only be reached by boat.
These beaches shelve rapidly and the sea is deep blue, contrasting with the light blue sky.
The hills and mountains are covered in lush green vegetation.
It is Spain's ‘Wild Coast’, it is the real thing and it is beautiful.
It is also the home of some of the most established holiday resorts in Europe, like Tossa del Mar and Lloret.
Places that are household names.
Places that some people somehow seem to pass by, in search of more recently heard of hot spots.
They are making a mistake because the Costa Brava has everything anyone could ever want — in large quantities.
It is rapidly becoming the playground for some of Europe's most sophisticated and cosmopolitan young people.
The French, Italians, Scandinavians, Dutch and Swiss come to play at prices that make some new hot spots look positively expensive.
Don't miss out, make sure you're one of them at least one.
DAYS AND NIGHTS
We've picked out a few of the very best places and entertainments for our trips programme to give you a taste of one of the most attractive areas in Spain.
The trips include a great party night called ‘Cova Rava’, a BBQ at La Siesta up in the hills, a beach party, Sixties night, ‘Wet and wild’ and of course, the hilarious Reps' Cabaret plus lots more.
Each trip will cost you around £12 to £13 each, but if you book them all we'll give you a discount booklet saving you £££'s in bars, restaurants and discos in resort.
LLORET
Going on holiday to Lloret is a bit like going to a party that has a real buzz when you arrive and just goes on getting better and better and better.
The town is a mixture of the old and the new.
Small back streets run higgledy-piggledy back up the hill from the golden, sandy beach and the main prom, and these contain a jumble of small bars, Spanish and seafood restaurants, Bodegas with wine barrels stretching from floor to ceiling, and wonderful shops selling leather, shoes and denim at remarkable prices.
In a slightly more modern area of town, but still only a short stroll away from the beach, is Lloret's West End, built around the ‘Queen Vic’, a traditional English style pub run by our good friend Jimmy.
It's open late, and has a massive outdoor cinema screen.
Right across the road from the ‘Vic’ is Rockafellas, the Club 18–30 disco bar, open well into the early hours and a host of other bars and discos such as the Texas and Moby Dick's.
So, come to this part of Spain and by the time you leave you'll understand why this area has become the most popular and cosmopolitan playground of Europe for young people.
MONTANAMAR APTS
These attractive apartments are only a 10 minute walk from the long sandy beach and to the resort centre where bars, shops and restaurants and an excellent range of sports are to be found.
There's a swimming pool and large sun terrace and guests are welcome to use the facilities of the Montanamar hotel opposite.
The apartments are comfortable and spacious with kitchenette, private bathroom and balcony and sleep 2, 3 or 4.
DON JUAN
This large hotel has such an enormous range of facilities that you will never be short of things to do.
The outdoor swimming pool is surrounded by trees and shrubs and the large restaurant and snack bar will keep those hunger pangs at bay.
If you fancy a break from sunbathing, the slot pool and table tennis are sure to keep you amused.
There are also two lounges and a choice of interesting and varied bars.
You'll find all the attractions of Lloret including its lovely beach less than 500 metres away, and if you forget to send Mum her donkey postcard, the Don Juan also has a souvenir shop.
All twin rooms have private facilities, WC and balcony.
Rooms sleep 2–3.
SAMBA APARTMENTS
The Samba is a comfortable hotel featuring a large swimming pool with grassy terrace for sunbathing.
The beach and buzzing town centre are only 750 metres away with its lively discos, restaurants and bars.
The Old Vic pub and Rockafellas nightclub are within easy walking distance.
The Samba also has its own lively pub called the victory, ideal for early evening drinks.
The Samba boasts a good range of facilities, including a lounge with pool table, TV room, table tennis and a snack bar serving a good variety of food and drink.
All rooms sleep 2–4 people and are fully equipped with cooking facilities, fridge and private bathroom.
MONTANAMAR
This excellent French-run hotel has now become firmly established as one of our best hotels in Lloret and we're pleased to feature it as our Club Choice in the Costa Brava for this summer.
The Montanamar has a traditional Club atmosphere largely due to the fantastic pool and sun terrace which is a hive of activity during the day for all Club clients.
The hotel also has a spacious dining room plus a large comfortable bar-lounge with a pool table, television, satellite TV and video.
So, if you're looking for a hotel with great amenities, and a good atmosphere whilst still being only 15 minutes walk from the long, sandy beach and Lloret's rocking nightlife, then look no further for Summer ‘90!
At night we gather in the bar before hitting the nightspots of Lloret's West End, or getting together with the other hotels for a party or disco night.
It's traditional Club 18–30 at its best — the time of your life at a price anybody can afford, and a great chance to make new friends in the sunshine.
All the bedrooms are served by a lift the have private facilities and a balcony.
Rooms sleep 2 or 3.
Some single rooms are also available.
COSTA BLANCA
This wonderful ‘White coast’ has one of the best sunshine records in Europe, with mid-summer temperatures pushing the high 90's and miles and miles of long golden sandy beaches fringed by the sparkling Mediterranean sea.
This popular corner of Spain has something of everything for everyone.
The rugged mountains and hills form an impressive backdrop, and inland peaceful villages look out across orange and lemon groves.
Alicante is the provincial capital and is full of attractive and trendy shops (great for clothes) and also has a marvellous seafront promenade.
Just six minutes away is the beautiful picturesque old village of Altea where a lovely old church stands on the top of a hill.
The village square has interesting market stalls selling local handmade crafts, and nearby Albir offers a range of watersports and a fabulous stretch of coastline.
The weather on this coast is delightful and there are bright lights and sparkling nightlife galore for anyone who is looking for fun.
The food is wonderful and holiday living is amazing at a low cost.
Yet there are still quiet corners and delightful places to see on the Costa Blanca…and all so easily reached on drives and excursions for those who want to get away from it all.
But best of all, it comes together in one of our favourite, brightest, liveliest and most cosmopolitan resorts of them all — Benidorm.
DAYS AND NIGHTS
Benidorm is such a terrific holiday resort, with so much to do, that it is difficult to know where to start.
There is such an enormous selection of bars, clubs and discos and lots of beautiful scenery that shouldn't be missed.
With so much choice it's lucky that we know the area so well and can show you all the best things on our trips.
Try our Pirate's Adventure — a spectacular show of dancing, juggling, knife-throwing and swashbuckling swordsmanship, including a feast rounded off with a disco.
And don't miss wet and wild, a visit to natural waterfalls in the mountains followed by an afternoon at an amazing waterpark.
These are just some of the things we get up to.
Individually the trips cost around £13–£14 each, but if you buy them all, we'll give you a free discount booklet saving you £££'s in many discos, bars and restaurants in resort.
BENIDORM
Benidorm has something of everything for everyone.
There are two of the finest sandy beaches in the Med and some of the best nightlife in the world.
You have an endless choice of brilliant cafés, pubs and bars like Beachcomber's, Lennon's and Harrod's in the old town.
Add to this the fact that everything here can cost considerably less than almost anywhere else, and it becomes hard to see why young people go anywhere other than this sophisticated, cosmopolitan, exciting and dynamic resort, which we think is particularly good for those going abroad for the first time.
So, come here and find out what a top international resort is really all about.
LA PLATA
Situated in the modern part of the town, you'll find a friendly atmosphere awaiting you at La Plata Apts.
Ideally located, it's only ten minutes' walk from Levante Beach and very close to a selection of cafés, shops, bars and restaurants.
There's a bar, TV and video lounge plus a swimming pool with sun terraces for the serious sun worshippers.
These small, well-furnished apartments, sleeping 2£4 people have a twin bedroom, lounge area with two extra beds, kitchenette, private facilities and balcony.
LOS ARCOS
Los Arcos Hotel, our Club Choice for summer, is a perfect base from which to explore the legendary nightlife and beaches of Benidorm.
There is a vast choice of discos, bars and restaurants practically on your doorstep; it's only a 100 metres walk to the main avenue of the bustling resort and a variety of discos and bars surround the hotel.
Tennis courts and various boutiques are also close at hand.
after sun soaking on the sandy Levante beach, it's only a 200 metre walk to the hotel.
There's a great atmosphere around the hotel's lovely pool, and the large bar/lounge plays a great mixture of music, and shows English videos every day.
Snacks are also served and there's a pool table and T.V. Discos are held in the lounge and excellent party nights take place here.
A buffet style breakfast is also laid on for all our club Choice clients.
All the rooms are comfortable with private facilities and terrace.
This is a lively, swinging hotel with everything you could need for a holiday to remember.
What more could you possibly ask?
MAYSAN APTS
These comfortable, modern apartments are centrally situated for Benidorm's many and varied attractions.
The beach is five minutes away, the nightlife in the new town is about the same, and the main shopping areas of town are a short stroll away.
The attractive pool and sun terrace are a real suntrap surrounded by trees and whitewashed walls, and there is a great indoor bar the caféteria which serves a good range of pizzas, grills, snacks and drinks all at reasonable prices.
As with most things in this 24 hour a day town, the bar never closes which is good news for pool and table-football fans who are well catered for here.
Rooms are of a good standard, all with cooking facilities, bathroom, WC and balconies.
LOS ALAMOS
This hotel, probably the most cosmopolitan of our units in Benidorm, is modern but built in the traditional Spanish way with large airy public rooms and a ‘cool’ feel in similar fashion, all with private facilities and balconies which overlook the most impressive feature of the hotel — the pool area, which is a real sun trap.
There is also a magnificent palm tree for shade where you can quench your thirst with a cool drink from the hotel bar which opens onto the sun terrace.
The Los Alamos is in a quiet side street about ten minutes from the action and about seven minutes from the beach, and is perfect for those who want the best of the action, along with the occasional quiet spell.
EASO
A character called Barny, an English hotelier, runs the Easo and he is in many ways our father figure in Benidorm.
There is a relaxed welcome at the Easo and a relaxed atmosphere; ideally located, the night life is only ten minutes away, as is the fabulous Levante beach.
The two main areas of activity are the bar and the pool.
The first has pool tables and videos.
Here we have parties and discos.
the sun terrace around the pool stretches from the back to the front of the hotel so you can catch the sun all day.
All the simply furnished rooms have private facilities and some have balconies.
CORFU
Corfu, with its long sandy beaches, clear blue water and verdant mountain backdrop was one of the first places in Greece to be ‘discovered’.
It was then, and still is now, very much an island holiday paradise, but it's come a long way from what were fairly basic beginnings and in addition to natural beauty can now offer resorts as modern and sophisticated as anywhere else in the Med.
Today tradition stands side by side with modern facilities.
You can watch age old Greek dances performed in mountain villages, before dancing the night away beneath the light shows of the high tech discos on the coast.
You can eat octopus dunked in ouzo in a tiny harbourside taverna before going on for a five star dinner at an international restaurant.
you can take a donkey ride up into the mountains in the morning, before spending the afternoon on a jet ski or paragliding down the beach.
Corfu gets better every year, and still manages to do all this while retaining its charm and identity as a Greek island.
If you haven't been to Greece before, Corfu is the perfect place to start.
This year our resorts offer something for everyone and the only problem is deciding where to go, but wherever you end up on Corfu a great time is guaranteed.
DAYS AND NIGHTS
Corfu is a really beautiful island and there's an amazing amount of things to do and see.
Over the past years, we've got together a superb programme of trips and good times to make sure you get the chance to see the very best this island has to offer.
see the Reps' Cabaret, try our ‘Corfu Cocktail’, ‘Chinese cracker’, or ‘The Venue’ and join our ‘Pirate Cruise’.
There's even a day trip to Albania.
At just £12–14 each and eight great trips to choose from you'll never be short of fun in Corfu.
If you buy them all, we'll give you a discount booklet saving you £££s on bars, restaurants and discos in the resort.
BENITSES
On a piece of rocky coastline and out of what used to be a quaint old fishing village, has sprung one of the liveliest resorts in Corfu.
It's one of the busiest nightspots in the Mediterranean and the streets are simply crowded from dusk onwards with young people going about the serious business of enjoying themselves, socialising, trying the local brew, ‘discovating’ and generally having a good time until the early hours of the morning!
In fact Benitses has always been a rocking resort, and over the past couple of years has become even more exciting.
You can choose between a vast selection of bars, all with English or English speaking staff, and take your pick out of the 6 or 7 nightclubs that raise the roof until the small hours.
If you are a night owl this really is the place to come to.
Daytimes are spent on the beach in town or in one of the adjacent rocky coves.
The beaches are a mixture of sand and shingle, and the sea is very blue.
Off the beach you can paraglide, jet ski or waterski and on the shore there is a go-kart track for those who wish to spend life in the fast lane.
Won thing we should tell you is that last summer Benitses sold out fast.
If you want to get a slice of the action book early — no kidding.
CLUB BENITSES
If you want to be in on the action then Club Benitses is the place to be.
we have two hotels — Loutrouvia and Eros, which stand next to each other on the waterfront with lovely views over the bay.
They are all exclusive to Club 18–30 and there's always a really lively atmosphere day and night.
Set right in the heart of bubbling Benitses, it's an ideal base for entertainment in the resort.
Madison's, which is part of the hotel Loutrouvia, has a bar and satellite video playing music during the day and at night.
Also Stringfellows bar is right next door and has satellite TV and pop videos.
It opens at 8.30 am for breakfast and closes around 3.00 am the next morning.
It's packed every night!
Club Benitses is practically self-contained with restaurants, bars, pool table and a tourist agency for money exchange.
It's only a short stop to the sand and pebble beach where watersports are also available.
Some of the rooms are about a two minute walk away in the Loutrouvia annexe.
All the two or three bedded rooms have private facilities, WC and balcony.
Rooms with sea views are also available.
Meals: Bed and breakfast.
Why not combine 7 or 14 nights in Corfu with a week on the ocean waves by taking our Ionian Cruise which gives you the chance to visit seven other Greek Islands.
Just add the 7 nights ‘add on to the 7 or 14 night price of your chosen hotel or apartment.
Cruising details and itinerary can be found on page 66.
LOUTROUVIA APTS
We're pleased to offer the Loutrouvia apartments again for Summer ‘90 because of their consistently high standard and popularity with club clients.
The four separate units which make up the Loutrouvia apartments are set back from the main road in pleasant surroundings.
The apartments are set against a mountain backdrop and the views are superb; it's hard to believe that the discos, lively bars and general hustle of Benitses are only a five to ten minute walk away.
All the facilities of the nearby exclusive Club Benitses are open to guests, which include Madison's bar with its pop videos, satellite TV table and self-service restaurant.
The studios and apartments are very attractive; the studios sleep 2–3 and the apartments sleep 4–6. 3–5 or 2–4 people in comfort.
All the apartments and studios have private bathroom and kitchen facilities and a balcony.
SAFRO APTS
Set amongst trees and gardens, these very attractive studios and apartments are opposite the beach and have fantastic views across to mainland Greece and Albania.
It's hard to believe the attractions and life of Benitses are only a five minute walk away, offering the best of both worlds.
All the studios and apartments sleep 2–4 people and are comfortably furnished with private bathroom facilities and a balcony with sea view.
ALEXIS STUDIOS
We're really pleased to offer these modern, well-furnished apartments as our Club Choice this summer.
They're exclusive to Club 18–30 and are set back from the main road in t more peaceful location, although the busy centre of Benitses with all its bars, discos and tavernas is within easy walking distance.
The first block is about 100 metres and the second about 500 metres from the main road and a host of restaurants and bars can be found nearby.
Favourite haunts include Rainbow's, the Black and White bar and Babylon's, to name just a few.
Benitses beach where jet-skiing is available, is also within 500 metres of the apartments.
The apartments are comfortable and modern and comprise two bedroomed apartments for 2–4 people, 3 bedroomed apartments for 4–6 and studios for 2 or 3 people.
All the apartments and studios are well equipped with modern furniture, private bathrooms, kitchen facilities and fridges.
Most have balconies.
In summary, the Alexis apartments are of a very high standard, and we think you'll find them an excellent choice for summer ‘90.
SIMON'S STUDIOS
Simone's Studios command fantastic views of the coastline of mainland Greece and Albania, as they're set up on a small hill looking out over the bay of Benitses.
The nearest beach is just across the road and it's only a 5–10 minute walk to the centre of Benitses with its all-action nightlife, bars and restaurants.
and after you've gorged yourself on all the fun and nightlife that Benitses has to offer, you can turn in for the night and leave it all behind.
These simple studios sleep 2 people and all have basic cooking facilities, bathroom, WC and balcony.
The studios are good for those wanting to be near the town but in a quiet spot.
Prices are based on full occupancy of a room or studio.
Meals: Self catering and Room only.
DASSIA
If you want good beaches and good nightlife, but also want to keep fit during your holiday, Dassia is an excellent resort.
In addition to a wide choice of watersport centres on the island, with two excellent schools for waterskiing, windsurfing and paragliding run by Spiros and Nikos.
Nikos is, among other things, a barefoot waterski champion and does the most wonderful tricks flying through the water at 60 mph on nothing but the soles of his size 11 feet!
He's taught many a Clubrep to ski and with only a very few exceptions, he can virtually guarantee to get you up and around the bay first time.
If you've always wanted to learn seriously, your Clubrep can arrange a course of lessons at a discount.
The other great reasons for spending the days on the beach is of course, the sun and marvellous tan that this lovely sun trap will provide.
at night Dassia is a bustling sort of place with pubs and bars on the main strip, just back from the beach turning on the light, turning up the music and really rocking away.
Try the sophisticated cocktail bars like Nouveau 7 and Tartaya and then move onto the Breezie or Plantation discos for some serious dancing.
As with the rest of Corfu it's getting better and better each year, but that doesn't mean you should wait to come!
PENELOPES
The Penelopes is a very popular hotel with its own lovely pool and, set on a hillside, it commands fantastic views over the bay to mainland Greece.
It is run by George Vasilas and his Irish wife and it is exclusive to Club 18–30.
The centre of town with its wide selection of cocktail bars, pubs and restaurants, is a ten minute walk from the hotel.
It's a little further to walk to the beach, but once you're there it's worth it — the watersports school is reputed to be one of the best in Corfu.
The hotel is smart, modern and comfortable.
The bar beside the large pool and sun terrace functions from June to August and serves snacks and drinks at a reasonable price throughout the day.
The swimming pool and sunbathing area are a focal point of the hotel — so pack plenty of sun lotion, as this really is a great suntrap!
All rooms have private shower and WC, self catering facilities and a sea view, most have balconies.
Rooms sleep 2,3 or 4.
Meals: Bed and breakfast or self catering.
PALOMA BLANCA
The Paloma Blanca is a fabulous hotel for those wanting to combine relaxing, sun-soaked days with lively nights.
It is only 500 metres from the centre of Dassia with its array of cocktail bars, pubs and discos.
Stroll into town and you'll find a great choice of restaurants serving all types of food from traditional Greek and international food to typical English.
The ideal location of the Paloma Blanca, set amidst orange trees and attractive gardens means you can enjoy the best of both worlds — daytime relaxation and night-time life.
Daytimes can also be spent on the beach at Dassia, soaking up the sunshine or taking advantage of the excellent watersports available.
Or, you can simply relax at the hotel as it offers excellent amenities for a comfortable holiday.
A focal point is the inviting, good-sized pool where you can cool off from the heat of the sun.
The Paloma Blanca has its own tennis courts where friendly tournaments can be played.
You can also play volleyball or table-tennis.
The smart cocktail bar is an ideal meeting place with a pleasant atmosphere and the restaurant serves a good selection of food.
The rooms are of a good standard, are spacious, and comfortably furnished, with en suite bathrooms.
Most rooms have balconies.
We think you'll find the Paloma Blanca is difficult to beat, so book now — you won't be disappointed!
Meals: Bed and breakfast.
KAVOS
This must be the ultimate beach resort in all of Greece — five miles of sand stretching away into the distance in either direction — more than enough for even the most demanding beach baby and relaxed enough so that you can always find a place to sunbathe however you want to.
Being on the sourthernmost tip of the island it's not exactly cool!
Kavos has been the fastest developing resort in Corfu over the past two years and now has more bars, tavernas and discos than just about anywhere else on the island.
What's more, the places themselves are really ritzy, many with videos and satellite TV late into the night.
Try the Ship Inn, Manhattan's, 42nd Street — the largest disco bar in town, or Malibu's.
Kavos has some of the hottest discos around including one of our great favourites Future Pace, much vaunted as THE best disco on the island playing the latest music, with computer lights and elevating roof.
In the height of the season, Kavos is teeming with young people having a good time.
If you want to be one of the crowd, there's no time like now to book a piece of the action.
All in all, it's young, it's fun, it's what life is all about and it's fast becoming one of the top resorts in this part of the world.
OLIVE GROVE STUDIOS
Once again we're pleased to have the Olive Grove Studios all to ourselves this year.
They're in a perfect position for those wanting a peaceful location, yet only five minutes walk from the beach and the centre of town, where our Club base, the Trabukos, is situated.
The studios are set back from the road and are shaded by the olive trees from which they derive their name.
The studios are for two persons and are simply but pleasantly furnished.
Each has its own basic cooking facilities and all have a bathroom with shower, WC and a balcony.
Prices are based on two people sharing.
Meals: Self catering.
CORINA APTS
These smart, modern rooms are among the best on the island, being modern, immaculate and attractively furnished.
The atmosphere is warm and friendly and the rooms are ideally located; situated on the main avenue, they are just a five minute walk from the hustle and bustle of Kavos with all its shops, bars and discos.
Yet, when you've decided you've had enough action in one night, you can leave it all behind when you turn in from some well-earned sleep!
Rooms are available on a bed and breakfast basis.
We also have a one bedroomed apartments for 2–3 people sharing, and apartments for 2–4 people sharing.
all rooms have private facilities and a balcony.
Meals: Bed and breakfast and self-catering.
TRABUKOS BEACH CLUB
Over the last ten summers the Trabukos Beach Club has become a great favourite with club 18–30.
The village tavernas and bars lie practically on the doorstep of this attractive hotel which is exclusive to Club 18–30.
One of its buildings is actually right next to the fabulous long sandy beach.
There's a great atmosphere at the open-air bar restaurant at the Trabukos where you can sit and relax in the heat of the afternoon sun.
Other popular haunts include 42nd Street — one of the most popular bars in Kavos, and the ship Inn, a well-known restaurant where you can enjoy a good selection of dishes, both English and traditional Greek.
Another of the Beach Club's plus points is that it is very central, right in the middle of Kavos.
Just down the road is the fantastic club, ‘Future Pace’, which is regarded as the best disco on the island, with its ritzy piano bar and restaurant on the roof terrace.
The Trabukos offers pleasantly furnished bed and breakfast accommodation, for 2 or 3 people sharing a twin or three bedded room with private bathroom and balcony, or self-catering studios for 2–3 people with private bathroom.
Meals: Bed and breakfast or self catering.
IPSOS
Ipsos is probably one of the most up and coming resorts we know of.
The large bay has a superb backdrop of mountains and the sea is warm, blue and incredibly clear — ideal for sub-aqua, or the odd spot of snorkelling.
The resort itself is a tremendously friendly place, where you really get to feel that you know almost everybody by the end of the first week.
The beach is narrow and sandy with enough room to spread out.
Just across the road is a selection of bars.
tavernas, and cafés and right across the water is Albania.
Watersports on the beach are well patronised, although most people choose simply to bake in the sun.
Nightlife-wise Ipsos is starting to rival Benitses.
It's a focal point for people from miles around and has a really continental flavour.
The Albatross has free entrance for Club guests and Moby Dick's serve good home-style cooking (a favourite of the Clubreps), or have a drink or two in Monaco's disco where drinks are at about English pub prices.
The Fontana Cocktail Bar is also making a name for itself as one of the smartest new places in town.
Lazy by day and hectic by night, Ipsos tends to be where the smart money goes.
Why not get in while the going's good?
MEGA
Because of its ideal position with the beach and the watersports centre just across the road and a host of bars, shops and clubs on either side, we've used the Mega as our Club base in Ipsos for many years.
The focal point of the Mega is the large outdoor bar overlooking the seafront which opens at 8.30 am to serve a good English breakfast and snacks throughout the day; it closes well after midnight.
There is another bar with TV lounge indoors and an a la carte restaurant which offers great value to Club guests.
All the bedrooms have a private shower and wc, most have a terrace or balcony, some with a seaview.
Some rooms are in the annexe and bungalows behind the main building set in their own gardens.
Rooms sleep 2–3.
Meals: Bed and breakfast.
IPSOS APTS
Here's a chance to stay in one of the best resorts on the island at a really low price.
The apartments we've selected, exclusive to Club guests, include the Palmyra, Mega, Yannis and Minos and are all close to each other and just across the road from the beach with fabulous views over the bay of Ipsos.
The apartments are set back from the busy main drag, in their own attractive gardens — a real bonus, as you can either come back in the afternoon for an uninterrupted snooze, or enjoy the hustle and bustle of one of Corfu's most popular resorts.
Having said all that, the famous Ipsos nightlife is practically on the doorstep as these apartments are right in the middle of town.
Whichever way you go, you'll come across bar after bar all turning out the latest in pop videos and the odd cocktail or two!
Our favourite night clubs, The Albatross and Monaco's, are literally a stone's throw away and there's a great selection of restaurants to choose from!
Apartments sleep 2–4, 4–6 and 4–5 people.
There are also studios for 2 to 3 people.
The apartments and studios have private kitchenettes with simple cooking facilities, private bathroom and a terrace or balcony.
GREEK ISLAND CRUISING
This is an adventure cruise in the best romantic tradition as you cruise around the beautiful Greek Islands, the scene changing from one day to the next, diving into the clear, blue water as you anchor for the night, or sipping your cooling drink as the harbour lights of a new port twinkle in the distance.
You'll be travelling in a traditional 65 foot long Greek style caique which accommodates a party of 32 or a 105 foot long motor cruiser which carries 48 people — both with twin engines.
You'll need to travel light, with shorts, swimming gear, T-shirts and trainers and don't forget the suncream as the sun can be very strong.
It's a great way to make friends with your fellow explorers as you discover different islands.
Your Clubrep will, as ever, be on hand to ensure everyone makes the most of their trip and will point you in the right direction for the sights, beaches and tavernas/bars of each island.
Club cruises start at a remarkably low price from Corfu or Rhodes with itineraries that take you to some of the most idyllic of the Greek islands.
Take this opportunity to explore these beautiful and varied islands that are waiting to be discovered!
DAYS AND NIGHTS
Because of the spontaneous, easy-going nature of island hopping, our trips programme may vary from week to week and island to island, but you can always be certain that your Clubrep will make sure you have the chance to see and do the very best things on each island.
IONIAN CRUISE
(7 nights)
Corfu
Syvota
Paxos
Antipaxos
Lefkas
Cephalonia
Ithaca
Parga
SUNDAY: Set sail from Corfu to the beautiful bay of Syvota.
A chance for a swim then on to the friendly and charming island of Paxos for the evening.
Here you'll find several tavernas and bars serving a range of traditional and international cuisine.
MONDAY: First a stop at the tiny island of Antipaxos with time to enjoy watersports, then on to Lefkas, with time for exploring and swimming before partying in the evening.
TUESDAY: Sail for Cephalonia with its beautiful sandy beaches, sparkling sea and pretty villages.
Look round the lively and colourful capital of Argostoli and dine out in one of its many tavernas.
WEDNESDAY: Time for swimming, watersports or shopping before cruising to Ithaca, an unspoilt paradise island of character and charm.
Here you'll find Greece at its most idyllic, with dazzling white houses and enchanting scenery.
At night, the whole valley sparkles with lights from the hillside villages.
THURSDAY: Sail north through the straits between the mainland and the east coast of Lefkas to the island's capital.
Lefkas has golden sandy beaches, mountainous scenery and lush vegetation.
FRIDAY: Cruise north again to the pretty mainland resort of Parga, set in a beautiful bay surrounded by mountains.
A lively, bustling place with heaps of atmosphere.
SATURDAY: Return to cosmopolitan Corfu with time for last-minute shopping and exploring, then join a club resort for a night on the town.
Why not extend your stay in Corfu for a week or two in any of our Cruise ‘n’ Stay studios, hotels or apartments?
CRUISE 'N' STAY
Why not combine a week's cruise with a week or two in resort?
Spend a week on the cruise leaving from either Rhodes or Corfu, then choose to stay in any of the hotels featured as Cruise 'n' stay accommodation in the resort from which your cruise departs.
To work out the price of a two or three week twin-centre holiday, simply turn to the page featuring your chosen hotel and add the ‘7 night ADD ON’ price to the 7 or 14 night hotel price.
DODECANESE CRUISE
(7 nights)
Rhodes
Symi
Kos
Bodrum*
Kalymnos
Nisyros
THURSDAY: Leave vibrant Rhodes Town and head for the tranquillity of the island of Symi with its picturesque natural port of Aigialos.
A day to unwind and slow down to the leisurely pace of a Greek Cruise.
FRIDAY: Time for a swim before sailing on to the cosmopolitan holiday island of Kos, with its lively town and excellent sandy beaches.
SATURDAY: By caique or ferry to Bodrum (optional excursion) on the Turkish coastline where you can sample a day of eastern delights, or stay on Kos and relax on the beach.
Join up in the evening for a night out in Kos and check out the discos.
SUNDAY: Kos to Kalymnos, the home of sponge fishing.
Try out your snorkelling in the clear, blue Aegean Sea.
MONDAY: On to the tiny island of Nisyros, you cannot fail to be impressed by the image of perfectly white houses, dense greenery and volcanic soil.
A chance to explore the monastery of the Madonna of the Caves.
TUESDAY: Cruise back leisurely to Rhodes Town — a stark contrast to the smaller islands, with its bustling bars and neon nightlife.
A great place for a farewell party and your last night on board.
WEDNESDAY: Return home or extend your stay in Rhodes in any of our Cruise ‘n’ Stay studios, hotels or apartments.
*Trip to Bodrum is optional.
RHODES
It's the largest of the twelve islands in the Dodecanese, it's the major eastern outpost of Greece, it's stunningly beautiful and one of the most idyllic places in the Med.
Rhodes seems to have everything.
Historically it played a major part against the Saracens, and the old buildings in Rhodes town and the Acropolis in Lindos still remain.
Scenically Rhodes is impossible to fault.
Long expanses of sandy beach fringe the clear turquoise sea.
Inland there are mountains and valleys which take your breath away In parts, the island is arid and desert-like, but then you turn a corner to be met with a vista of green citrus trees clustered with oranges and lemons.
And in terms of entertainment value, Rhodes is fantastic.
You can find hidden Greek tavernas where you explore the kitchens and choose your meal from what's in the fridge or bubbling on the stove.
There are modern 5-star restaurants, offering gourmet dinner and cabaret.
And in between there is a complete selection of discos, bars and night clubs, offering something for everyone at all prices.
Rhodes is a truly international resort, attracting good-timers from all over Europe with a unique atmosphere which combines tradition and excitement — you'll have a colossally good time!
DAYS & NIGHTS
Come on our trips to see the best of Rhodes.
Cruise to the picturesque bay and village of Lindos or try the fun cruise which includes champagne diving, disco and crazy donkey rides!
Then there's our ‘Manhattan Transfer’ and the ‘Club Academy 2’where you have the Chance to giggle at your Clubrep in cabaret.
Whatever you choose, you're sure of a good time.
There will be 7–8 great trips, costing around £12–£14 per trip, although if you book them all, you will receive a reduction on the total trip cost, free entry to the Set disco as well as Tiff's 2, and a discount voucher booklet saving you £££'s while in resort.
RHODES TOWN
Rhodes is a big, open, airy town with an atmosphere which is both laid back and bustling.
With winding street hidden behind massive stone walls, the old town is a must to visit, particularly in the cool of evening when the traders in the street markets display their wares and the old shops open after the afternoon siesta to sell gold, silver, leather and furs at reasonable prices.
Right next door, the new town really rocks, with lots of modern shops (great for clothes) and really good, classy, energetic bars.
Rock and blues fans must go to ‘Sticky Fingers’ and see live music like it was in the good old days.
Alternatively, try ‘Memphis’, ‘The 60's Bar’, ‘Nobbies’, and Tramp's disco bars and ‘Memories Pub’, for a touch of English bitter, or for a real British-run music bar try ‘Tiffs Music Hall’ or ‘Tiffs 2’, voted the best disco in Rhodes.
There's also a great selection of restaurants to choose from, including Chinese, English, Indian and French cuisine.
The international flavour of Rhodes also emanates from the people who visit — Rhodes is one of the top resorts in Greece for young Europeans.
So, come and see the different faces of Rhodes and ask yourself how there can possibly be so much in one place.
THERMAI
Due to popular demand we're pleased to be back again at the Thermai for Summer ‘90, one of the most established hotels in Rhodes Town.
This hotel oozes character from its high ceilinged public rooms and lounges to the fountain with its spectacular sound and light displays which play in the evenings.
Few hotels are better equipped for a Club holiday.
There are two bars, one at the poolside and one inside.
Video games, table tennis, pool tables and satellite TV are also available.
The pool, situated immediately across the road also has a snack bar, restaurant and sunbeds which are available at a reduced cost.
The Thermai is only 80 metres from the centre of town and both Old Rhodes Town and the nightlife are within a few minutes walk.
In face, it would be hard to get more central, especially with the nearest beach being only about a five minute walk away.
Rooms are basically furnished, all have private facilities and some have balconies.
RHODOS APTS
If you're looking for a comfortable apartment or studios in a quiet side street, yet in the centre of town with its host of bars and cafés, and only two minutes from the beach, then look no further.
These well-maintained apartments are comfortably furnished with private facilities and, being Club Exclusive, the Rhodos apartments have a great atmosphere.
Our other Club base, the Four Seasons is a mere two minute walk away with its lively bar so you'll never be short of company.
Guests are also welcome to use the facilities of the Amarilis and Thermai.
There are apartments in the main block and studios and apartments in the annexe just opposite.
Apartments for 2,3 or 4 people are available with kitchenette and private bathroom and studios for 2–3 people which have a kitchenette and private bathrooms across the corridor.
The third or fourth bed may be a sofa bed in some cases.
The rooms are clean and comfortable and all have basic cooking facilities.
AMARILIS
Over the last five summers the Amarilis has become one of our favourites which is no surprise as it's ideally located, less the five minutes walk from the nightlife and 170 metres from the beach.
And, with its own terrific bar, which makes a lively Club meeting place, the Amarilis is a perfect choice for our main Club base in Rhodes Town.
Even when the other bars in town have quietened down, the terrace bar here is full of action and the prices are very reasonable.
The bar also serves a good English breakfast (extra to the continental breakfast included in the price) and an excellent range of good value snacks and toasties.
Close by are cafés, tavernas and all nationalities of restaurants.
The rooms have private showers and WC and most have balconies.
The Amarilis is Club 18–30 at its best — a place to meet friends, relax and enjoy yourself with people your own age.
FOUR SEASONS
Directly opposite the beach, surrounded by a mixture of bars and restaurants and only five minutes walk from the nightlife of Rhodes Town, the Club Exclusive Four Seasons hotel boasts a perfect location.
It's only a two minute walk from our other Club bases, the Amarilis and the Rhodos apartments, so you always have the opportunity to meet other holiday makers and join in the fun.
The buzzing town centre is only 500 metres away, with its variety of lively bars and discos.
you'll also find a host of inviting bars and restaurants practically on the doorstep of your hotel; try for example the Shangri-La for a Chinese meal, or Shere-Kahn for delicious Indian cuisine.
Viking's and Rose Marie's restaurant close to the hotel are also renowned for their excellent value and are favourite haunts with Four Seasons guests.
The comfortable lounge opens into the open plan bar area which overlooks the beach and sea, ideal for early evening drinks.
The hotel has a T.V. and video, and offers snacks, as well as a great English breakfast.
All the bedrooms are comfortably furnished with private facilities and balcony.
The Four Seasons hotel is bound to be popular for next Summer — an early booking is strongly recommended!
Meals: Bed and breakfast.
PARTHENON
One for all rock and rollers, blues and jazz fans as the Parthenon Hotel is right next door to the most electrifying live music bar in Rhodes, Sticky Fingers.
It's also only 300 metres from the beach.
The more-up-beat night-life is only a five-minute stroll away, along with the shops and restaurants.
The hotel itself has a terrace with comfy chairs for that obligatory cocktail.
The bar serves snacks during the day and there are lots of cafés and restaurants nearby.
The comfortable rooms have a private shower, WC and most have a balcony or terrace.
Rooms sleep 2–3 people.
Some single rooms are also available.
NOUFARA
Based in the centre of Rhodes, close to all the activity, bars, restaurants and clubs, the Noufara is an ideal meeting place to have cocktails before painting the town red.
The outside bar provides drinks and snacks until the early hours of the morning.
Rhodes beach is a mere ten-minute stroll away.
Guests are also welcome to use the pool and facilities of the nearby Hotel Thermai.
All rooms have private facilities, WC, telephone and the majority have balconies.
Rooms sleep 2–3.
FALIRAKI
Faliraki is one of those typical Greek beach resorts that seems to have suddenly woken up and exploded into life.
By day it's very much a ‘let's get a sunlounger and lie on the sand’ sort of resort and the sandy beach is well equipped with everything you'll need in the way of bars, restaurants and shade, and there are several places to waterski, windsurf and parascend or try your hand on the wet bikes.
It's a friendly sort of resort, full of young people.
as you'd expect, the big attraction is the nightlife and the main drag is a long procession of bars.
Last summer we counted over thirty bars in all on our various refreshment excursions to Faliraki, but things are happening so fast that who knows how many there will be this summer?
From about ten o'clock the bars and the street start to fill up.
By midnight it's really rocking and on into the early hours of the morning we adjourn to one of the best discos in Faliraki, Set Disco, where 18–30 Social members can get special discounts.
It's been six years now since we first looked at Faliraki as a club resort.
Then we thought it was up and coming but a little quiet.
Now we think it has upped and come, really rocks and has enormous potential.
In short we're back.
Come up and see us sometime.
NEST
We're pleased to have this chirpy, family-run hotel exclusively to Club 18–30 again for Summer '90 in this lively young people's resort of Faliraki.
It's only about a ten to fifteen minute stroll to the excellent sandy beach where a brilliant variety of watersports are on offer including water skiing, windsurfing, boat-hire, wet-biked etc.
The hotel itself has a main building plus some rooms on the sun terrace overlooking the pool and bar area, where Club party nights are held.
The hotel also has a great variety of light meals/snacks and also has its own TV and video — so there'll never be a dull moment!
Lots of tavernas and restaurants are near at hand and Faliraki's great nightlife is within easy walking distance, approximately 15–20 minutes away.
Twin, double, three and four bedded rooms are available.
Prices are based on 2,3 and 4 people sharing a room.
Meals: Bed and breakfast.
IRENE STUDIOS
Set in small attractive gardens, these captivating Club Exclusive studios are only a 20–25 minute walk from the hustle and bustle of Faliraki and its vast beach, yet, when you've had enough for the night, you can turn in for some well-earned sleep!
The friendly hotel Venezia, complete with swimming pool, two bars and snack bar is just across the road and is our base for Club activities for the Irene Studios.
Studios sleep 2 or 3.
FALIRAKI APTS
These modern apartments and studios, in two separate blocks are exclusive to Club 18–30, and offer a good standard of accommodation.
If you want the beach or watersports, it's only a 20–25 minute walk.
The resort is a 15–20 minute walk and there are several restaurants, cafés and shops en route.
We have comfortable studios sleeping two or three people, all with private facilities and balconies.
We also have apartments with private facilities, balcony and separate kitchen which sleep two or three.
SUNSHINE STUDIOS
These good sized studios, all with private facilities and balconies are just a two minute walk from our hotel Venezia which contains two bars and a swimming pool with fantastic views over Faliraki.
The Club Exclusive Sunshine Studios are surrounded by pretty gardens about 20–25 minutes from the beach and nightlife of Faliraki, and are situated next to the Irene Studios.
All studios have cooking facilities and sleep 2–3 people.
VENEZIA
The Venezia, our Club Choice for Summer '90 is an extremely friendly, family run hotel exclusive to Club 18–30.
It offers excellent facilities and is very attractive with astounding views across Faliraki from the beautiful pool and poolside bar.
At night, the action really begins to heat up, as guests from the nearby Irene and Sunshine Studios meet up for BBQ's or for one of our many Club party nights.
Fun-filled Faliraki is only a 20–25 minute walk away but there is a public bus service which departs from outside the hotel, and lots of taxis to whisk you to the beach and Faliraki centre.
Faliraki is a lively town where you'll find a host of tavernas, bars and discos.
The hotel itself has excellent amenities and has been the centre of great party nights.
The Venezia also has two bars — one inside and one by the pool, where BBQ's are held some evenings.
The hotel has its own TV and videos, and snacks and meals are also available at very reasonable prices.
All the comfortable rooms sleep two and are of a high standard with private shower and W.C; most have a balcony.
So, if you're looking for an action packed fun-filled summertime in one of the classiest hotels on the island with all the advantages of Club Choice — then look no further.
Meals: Bed and breakfast.
KOS
Definitely the most up and coming ‘in’ place for Summer ‘90.
A beautiful island, with the most cosmopolitan crowd of the young and beautiful anywhere in Greece.
Kos is an island of contrasts, day and night.
By day the general atmosphere is tranquil, dreamy and unspoilt with long, sandy beaches and clear waters.
And as if this isn't enough, Kos has wonderful weather with a frequent cooling on-shore breeze and is still comparatively undiscovered compared to some Greek holiday isles.
By night, Kos really comes to life and boasts two of the best discos in Greece and lots of bars and tavernas to keep you happy well into the early hours of the morning.
We think that Kos is an exceptional place for seeing traditional Greece and still having a great holiday with all the nightlife you can imagine.
Also, as with most undiscovered places, it won't put too big a hole in your pocket even for a fortnight.
Go and see it while the going's good.
DAYS & NIGHTS
We'll make sure you see the best of Kos on our Club 18–30 trips programme.
For '90 there'll be a beach party with picnic lunch and a cruise and there's the Greek night, where you can have a go at some Greek dancing!
The ‘Kos Cocktail’ will take you on a tour of the island and Paradise Beach.
And last but by no means least there's the Rep's Street theatre Cabaret where you can have a really good laugh at your Clubrep!
At an average price of around £13 to £14 per trip, you can't afford to miss out, especially as most trips include food!
Buy the full package and you'll get a discount booklet saving you £££'s in bars, restaurants and discos in the resort.
KOS TOWN
When you think you've seen it all; when you've been to Benidorm, Majorca and San Antonio; when you know the most exciting places; come to Club 18–30 and we'll show you Kos.
Quite simply Kos is mind blowing.
By day it's relaxed with lazy days spent on the beach, sitting in the harbourside bars, or cycling sedately through the beautiful countryside exploring the ancient ruins of this historic island.
Come evening and Kos comes alive with the action centred around the ‘Street of Much Music’ where bars and restaurants stand shoulder to shoulder broadcasting pop and rock, across the ruins opposite, loud into the night.
The selection of bars seems never ending.
Generally we meet in Forum, stand outside and sort out our plan for the evening, and then stroll down the street to cactus, the old western style bar, Doors or Hamam's, to name but a few.
Sooner or later we'll all end up in Heaven, although this heaven is on earth and a really terrific disco where you can drink at one of four bars and dance beneath the stars.
It's no exaggeration to say that Kos will be THE next big place for young people.
Make sure you're there when it happens.
CATHERINE
This popular hotel has been such a success with Club 18–30 that we're delighted to feature it again as our Club Choice for summer ‘90.
Enjoying a fantastic location in Kos town, you'll find the Hotel Catherine set just back from the lively, bustling harbour, right in the centre of town and ideally placed for both the beach and nightlife.
The amazing ‘Street of Much Music’, with it's abundance of colourful bars and restaurants is only 10–15 metres away, as is the beach where you can take advantage of your free beach mat and cultivate those tans ready to show them off at some of Kos town's brilliant night-clubs, also 15 minutes away.
Inside, the hotel is comfortably furnished and the hotel bar, which has TV, English videos and video games, provides a lively and popular meeting place before painting the town red!
Another popular aspect is the hotel's bar where you can take a break from the midday sun for a welcome sandwich or toastie.
Being so central and combined with the fact that it's also a club Exclusive hotel where you can always be sure of a lively, fun atmosphere and a friendly welcome, it's hardly surprising that the Catherine is our most popular base in town and comes top of our list for summer ‘90.
There are twin, double and single rooms available, all with private facilities and most with a balcony.
ATLANTIS II
Just outside Kos town, the Atlantis II is in a quiet spot only ten minutes walk from the discos and twenty minutes to the town centre and there are also a few bars and restaurants nearby.
It's part of the lovely Atlantis complex and ideal for those who like a relaxed holiday in a well equipped hotel.
another Club hotel the Bohem is across the road, so you'll never be short of company.
There's a pool surrounded by a sunterrace and a poolside bar which serves drinks and snacks during the day.
The beach is only a short stroll away.
The rooms are for 2–3 sharing and are all well furnished with private bath, shower, WC and balcony.
BOHEM
Most of the bigger hotels in Kos have been built a little way out of the old town and the Bohem is about 15 minutes from the far side of Heaven (the disco)!
It's well worth the slightly longer walk as in Greek terms it really is quite comfortable and is part of a complex of hotels based around the lovely Atlantis complex.
The Bohem itself is best described as ‘smart’.
There is a nicely furnished bar area with a terrace and the rooms are large, airy and of a good standard.
All have private facilities and balconies.
The grounds are full of trees, shrubs and flowers.
Mostly we spend our days across the road at the Atlantis, lounging around the pool or on the beach.
There is a snack bar by the pool, a taverna in the grounds and an excellent restaurant in the Atlantis itself.
There is also a games room with table tennis, pool and video games and normally some sort of activity or entertainment going on.
Club 18–30 guests at the Bohem have full access to all these facilities.
Rooms sleep 2–3.
POPI STUDIOS
The Popi is well situated for everything — it's in the middle of the harbour area of Kos, only a kilometre or so away from the early nightlife and bars and very close to the late night discos.
It is run by a lady called Popi, offering both self catering accommodation and bed and breakfast.
The studios have full cooking facilities, all with shower, wc and balconies.
Eating and drinking out is easy as the street is full of cafés and bars.
The beach is all of fifty metres away across the road and is great for lazy days sunbathing.
The Popi also has  its own roof terrace and is ideally situated — right next door to the Nitsa studios, so you'll never be short of company and action.
NITSA STUDIOS
The Nitsa Studios are in an excellent position being practically next door to the Popi studios.
It's only a short stroll to the beach and seven minutes from the ‘Street of Much Music’ with its bars and restaurants and Heaven, the disco.
The Nitsa has its own snackbar and there's an excellent bar just opposite called Tropicana which is a favourite with Club 18–30 holidaymakers serving a great English breakfast and a good variety of snacks all day.
The studios sleep either 2 or 3, are comfortably furnished in pine and all have full cooking facilities, private bathroom and a balcony.
CRETE
Although Crete may be part of Greece, somehow it's different.
If you come here once, be prepared to come back again because it would take you years to see all that Crete has to offer.
There is a unique sort of timeless attraction that makes the future seem unimportant.
Only today matters, so forget about tomorrow, pack your bags, and prepare yourself for a magical holiday.
The island is a mixture of high mountains, craggy coastline, sandy beaches, deep blue sea, and music and laughter from the people here who take fierce pride in their independence, their curling moustaches and the fiery local brew — Raki.
On the coast the weather is fantastic with day after day of hot sunshine, in the mountains however the air cools quickly and until the end of June you can still find snow on the mountain tops.
There is much to do and even more to see.
The nightlife here is a mixture of uptown West end disco and traditional taverna dancing.
History is all around, and if you want to catch a spot of culture during your holiday try to see Knossos, Phaestos and Gortys, three of the most important archaeological sites in Europe.
All in all Crete is surprising, interesting and fascinating, as well as great fun.
What more can you ask for in a holiday?
DAYS AND NIGHTS
Take any of our trips and discover the distinct flavour of Crete.
We take you to the fortress island of Spinalonga, and to a Cretan night.
There's the infamous beach party, a disco crawl and the most popular trip, the Reps' Cabaret Night.
Our trips are optional, but you won't want to miss out.
If you book them all, you'll get a discount booklet saving you £££'s in the resort, so be sure to allow around £12 to £14 per trip.
AGHIOS NIKOLAOS
At night the harbour lights up and the atmosphere becomes electric as the streets of Aghios Nikolaos fill up with people looking for a good time in the restaurants, bars and discos.
On all sides the air is filled with music and a mixture of languages as young people from all over Europe get together to enjoy the pleasures of this picturesque resort that has so much to offer in such a small space — last year we counted over 15 different hostelries, none more than five minutes walk from each other!
But if you're looking for old style Cretan atmosphere as well as a place that's full of life, Ag Nik is the place to stay.
A natural harbour, set between two rocky headlands, forms a centre point from which narrow streets wind uphill.
Around the harbour, fishermen's tavernas still jostle side by side with the newer cafés and bars which have sprung up to cater for the younger market, and the main daytime activity seems to be relaxing over a quiet glass of something while watching the boats chug in and out.
It's all here, a mixture of the old and the new.
A combination of romance and excitement; fast food and long lunches; disco dancing and daytime drowsing; the beach and the bar, The choice of pleasure in Ag Nik is enormous.
In fact the only problem is deciding where to start.
KAMARA
Mr Nicos, the manager of the Kamara, will be welcoming Club guests for the sixth summer running when he opens his doors in Summer '90 and once again he is looking forward to dealing exclusively with us.
During his time the Kamara has become the accepted Club base in ‘Ag Nik’, partly because of its central position seven minutes form the beach and about three minutes from the ‘West End’, and partly because the bar here is a focal meeting point for 18–30's from all over the resort.
You can always be sure of finding someone to talk to at the Kamara.
It's a friendly, comfortable welcoming hotel with good rooms, all of which have facilities and balconies.
The bar is one of the cheapest in Crete, with reasonably priced beer and a good well-priced cocktail list.
Breakfast is served in the hotel, and there is a snack bar nearby.
More traditional fare can be found at the Plaka taverna just across the road.
Rooms sleep 2 or 3.
Meals: Bed and breakfast.
MARIA
The Maria is a small, friendly hotel, ideally located for both the nightlife and the beach.
Manolis, who runs the hotel, is particularly proud of the bar which serves snacks and boasts TV and music systems to make the whole place go with a swing.
The rooms here sleep 2–3, are of a good standard, cool and airy, and all have private facilities, most with a balcony.
Situated only five minutes from the nearest beach and about the same from the nightlife of the harbour, the Maria proves to be a good value choice for your Cretan holiday.
Breakfast is served at the hotel, and there is a good selection of bars and cafés nearby serving everything from bacon and eggs to fried squid.
Meals: bed and breakfast.
LOGGIA APTS
This modern block consists of individually designed apartments and studios for between 2 and 7 people.
Each is comfortably furnished and well equipped.
Most of the apartments face over the harbour and you can sit on your balcony and watch the fishing boats chug in and out of the harbour.
All around the harbour there are tavernas, restaurants, bars and cafés and there is a disco on the ground floor of the Loggia called Bora Bora, so if you want to be in on the action there is nowhere better.
The beach is only about five minutes away.
We have apartments sleeping 6–7, 4–6, 3–5, 2–4 and studios sleeping 2–3.
All rooms have cooking facilities and a fridge.
Prices are based on full occupancy of apartments.
MINOA
This friendly, relaxed atmosphere and the good service and facilities are our simple reasons for featuring the Minoa as our Club Choice for summer ‘90.
We'd better start off by telling you about the two brothers who run the Minoa, Yanni and Nico who run the bar and enjoy a joke.
Between them life at the Minoa is never boring!
The bar here is a major meeting point for 18–30's and many an early evening drink has developed into a fully blown party night of the spontaneous kind.
Prices here are really good, with draught beer, and a good line in pizzas, ice creams and loud music.
The sandy beach is only 200 metres away to the left of the hotel and the main late nightlife is about the same distance to the right.
There are lots of tavernas, restaurants and fast food joints nearby and the hotel has a swimming pool.
Rooms at the Minoa are large and well furnished with private facilities, and most have balconies and the overall atmosphere in the hotel is very friendly.
Some of the rooms are situated in the Minoa Sun annexe which is only about 100 metres away from the main building.
Prices are based on two sharing a twin room; double and three bedded are also available.
Don't forget the advantages of booking Club Choice — we're sure you'll enjoy yourselves!
Meals: Bed and breakfast.
MALIA
For most 18–30's the day in Malia starts around lunchtime with English breakfast at one of the cafés on the road down to the beach.
From then on it's all down to the serious business of sunbathing on the sand interspersed with the occasional trip to one of the beach bars.
These bars not only dispense liquid refreshment, but also provide sunbeds and parasols for their valued clientele, and arrange watersports both for experts and beginners.
You must be careful not to overdo it on the beach however, because the nightlife in Malia is simply explosive.
The main strip is a procession of bars, restaurants, discos and clubs all offering bright lights, loud music and cheap prices.
We'll often meet around midnight, taking in a beverage or two at Highway and the Garage, and tripping the light fantastic (and the fantastic lights) at Krypton and Cosmos.
Finally it's hard to resist the gravitational pull of ‘Flash’ or ‘Georges’— two of the most popular and packed discos in town, and the late night melting pots for fun seekers.
For most 18–30's the night finishes quite late and by the end of two weeks you'll probably find you'll need a holiday.
Still you could always come back to Malia for a little peace and quiet in the local monastery!
MALIA APTS
This is an ideal opportunity to save money on a self catering holiday in Crete.
We've taken a selected range of apartments in and around Malia, where you'll be welcome to mix with the crowd and enjoy all of the facilities and club activities.
Here, you'll be able to enjoy the benefits of Malia's two and a half miles of sandy beach with its range of watersports, beach bars and main street of swinging nightlife.
All the apartments have private facilities and most have a balcony or terrace.
Prices are based on four people sharing an apartment.
Meals: Self catering.
TURKEY
Turkey was an amazing success for Club 18–30 in £89 — and it's going to be even better in ‘00.
It's an exciting country with an Eastern quality that really makes it worth seeing.
Back in the good old days Turkey used to be part of what was know as ‘Asia Minor’, or the ‘Near East’, to distinguish its differences from Europe.
Certainly from the moment you land you realise that you are no longer on familiar ground.
The atmosphere seems somehow ‘spicy’ and aromatic, and you'll see exotic bazaars selling all manner of unusual wares including fantastic Turkish carpets.
Eating and drinking is particularly good value — you can get a 6 course ‘Mezes’ meal, where you get lots of small dishes of Turkish delicacies for about £3 although a good bottle of wine may set you back 70p!
What's more the food is delicious — very different from elsewhere in the Med.
Our three resorts are very close to each other on the Bodrum peninsula.
Here you'll find long sandy beaches in coves between rugged, rocky headlands; clear blue sea, perfect for swimming and watersports; sun, sun and more sun of the hot and tanning variety; and great nightlife with bars, discos and live music going on deep into the night and beyond.
It all adds up to an exotic holiday of pure Turkish Delight.
DAYS AND NIGHTS
Turkey has the most amazing sights to offer, so we have included some of the best of them in our trips programme.
We'll take you on a tour of Bodrum by night and show you the sights of the city.
There's also the ‘Blue’ cruise and a beach party.
The reps' cabaret is well worth seeing as well.
Visit the nearby Greek island of Kos and return loaded with duty frees or visit the magnificent site of Epheus, the largest Roman city outside Rome with its spectacular remains.
Our trips and good times programmes are of course entirely optional.
They cost around £12–£14 each and if you buy them all we'll give you a discount.
BODRUM
The Bodrum peninsular, within sight of the Dodecanese islands of Greece, has been one of the first areas of Turkey to attract British tourists.
Bodrum is a colourful, exciting evening town.
There are a few small beaches, but generally most people hop on a boat or shared jeep style taxi and go to Gumbet or one of the other nearby beaches to spend the day.
Come dusk the place starts to come alive and the narrow streets behind the harbour, with it's vast array of magnificent wood-built sailing cruisers, turn into a huge open air jamboree with everybody jostling, shopping, eating, drinking and generally having a good time.
The shops don't close until about midnight, and there are no licensing hours in Turkey, so time really means nothing.
There is always somewhere open, and bars such as Hardi/Gari, and the English run Friendship Bar are chocka until very late indeed.
Bring an empty suitcase with you and a little spare money, because the clothes here are very good quality and amazingly cheap as is leatherwear, silver, and Turkish carpets.
Bodrum also has what must be one of the most exciting discos around, the Halikarnas.
(Halikarnas, as all classical scholars will know was the ancient name for Bodrum).
Here in a vast amphitheatre you can dance the night away to a brilliant light and laser show, a stage show, and fountains shooting straight out of the sea, with the floodlit backdrop of Bodrum castle across the far side of the harbour.
There is more, and no room to tell you about it.
Take it from us that Bodrum is quite simply SOMETHING ELSE.
Don't leave it too long!
ANGORA I & II
At the top end of town, close to the Halikarnas disco and surrounded by cafés, bars, restaurants and other nightlife, these two typically Turkish little hotels are run by two brothers with fairly unpronounceable Turkish names.
Both hotels are built in the traditional ‘sugar cubes’ style, whitewashed to reflect the glare of the sun.
The rooms are of typical Turkish standard and communal areas are adorned with wall hangings.
In common with many buildings in Turkey, the outside activity takes place on the roof where both properties have bar/breakfast areas.
angora I has a great view from the bar across the harbour to the castle.
Angora I has a great view from the bar across the harbour o the castle.
Angora II is just around the corner in a quieter cul-de-sac.
There is a small beach nearby and all the excitement of Bodrum by night is on the doorstep.
The bigger beach at Gumbet can be reached by dolmus (bus) for about 25p.
A walk to the Hadi Gari Bar down by the harbour will take you right through the hustle and bustle of the narrow streets of the old town and can take as little as five minutes, although you'll be hard pressed not to be distracted by the jewellery, leather and clothes offered by street vendors at every corner.
All rooms have private facilities and sleep 2–3.
We reckon that both Angoras will become our favourite places to stay in Bodrum, in the right place at the right price.
FESLEGEN
If you want to be right in the heart of bustling Bodrum's bars and restaurants, then look no further than this friendly hotel.
Just next door is our main base in Bodrum, the Angora I and II, and the dynamic Halikarnas disco is just a short stroll away.
The Feslegen is built in an L-shape around a central courtyard where breakfast is served and is smoothly run by our friend Mutah.
It's close to the shops and about a two minute walk from the small town beach — most people ten to take a boat or dolmus to larger beaches outside the town, like Gumbet.
Rooms are twin, three or four bedded, all with shower, wc and balcony.
Meals: Bed and breakfast.
HARMONY
Slap bang in the centre of Gumbet and above one of the best discos in town, the club Exclusive Harmony is our lively Club base for Summer ‘90.
For daytime activity, the beach, restaurants and all of Gumbet's watersport facilities are only 100 metres from the hotel, and at night the Harmony has a great barbecue terrace which will be the focus of many Club party nights.
All guests have free entry into the Mad House Disco which is situated under the hotel.
The small swimming pool is perfect for cooling off under the force of the midday sun, and the snack bar serves a great range of food into the early hours of the morning.
All the rooms are comfortable with private facilities, some with a balcony.
Prices are based on 2,3 or 4 people sharing a room.
Meals: Bed and breakfast.
GUMBET
Gumbet is very much a daytime sort of place and a great compliment to Bodrum.
People generally come to Gumbet beach during the day as it's the nearest beach to Bodrum.
It's only a ten minute ride from Bodrum by dolmus — which will cost you about 25p.
There is a lovely sandy beach which is in a sheltered by making it ideal for watersports and the sea here is beautifully warm.
Here you can windsurf and waterski, and there are some excellent sailing dinghies, canoes and pedaloes.
On the other hand Gumbet is an excellent place for improving your suntan.
There is never a shortage of food and drinks on the beach and there are lots of restaurants and cafés, as well as people who stroll along the sand selling drinks and sandwiches.
For nightlife, Bodrum is the place to go and it's so close you really can have the best of both resorts.
TURIHAN
Stroll past the pool, step onto the beach and enjoy all of the watersport facilities that are on this popular Club Exclusive Hotel's doorstep, or, for those feeling slightly more adventurous, try a local Turkish boat trip to a nearby secluded bay for a spot of exclusive sunbathing.
The terrific open air restaurant and bar situated on the beach front serve a full range of local and international dishes, and the most popular disco in Gumbet is only a 300 metre stroll away across the beach.
All the comfortable rooms have private facilities.
Prices are based on 2 people sharing a room.
Meals: Bed and breakfast.
ORTAKENT
There can be few places featured in our brochure which are more lazy and laid back than Ortakent.
One long sandy beach surrounds a huge calm bay with crystal clear green water near the shore changing to blue as the sky deepens.
If you really want to be energetic, there's windsurfing and waterskiing here or you can stroll along the beach to where they still make wooden Turkish boats by hand.
For ritzy nightlife Bodrum is only a short taxi ride away, and in the minibus style taxi, the trip costs about 35p max.
These taxis run throughout the day and well into the night.
By day there are also boats from Ortakent which stooge around to other beaches and bays, giving you the chance to fully explore the area at a leisurely pace.
Then again, leisure is what this place is all about.
YAHSI BEACH CLUB
This modern hotel, run by Hassan, is just 50 metres from Ortakent's Yahsi beach.
Whether it's watersports like jet skiing and waterskiing or local nightlife, you'll find everything within easy walking distance of this ideal hotel.
When you want to go further afield, a fifteen minute bus or taxi ride takes you into Bodrum for sightseeing or nightclubbing.
All the rooms at the Yahsi Beach are of a good size and have private facilities and balconies.
The hotel has a small bar and breakfast terrace where clients can get snacks and drinks at reasonable prices.
Prices are based on two people sharing a twin room.
Meals: Bed and breakfast
PINAR
The impressive Pinar hotel, our Club Couples base in Turkey, is of a very high standard and boasts excellent facilities.
It is exclusive to Club 18–30, and offers an ideal opportunity to meet other couples on holiday.
Situated in a secluded setting, yet only 100 metres from the beach, the hotel is ideal for waterlovers as it's only a five minute walk to Ortakent's watersports facilities and beachside tavernas.
The hotel also has its own lovely swimming pool, a fabulous sun-trap, and a snack bar and T.V./video lounge.
The Pinar also boasts an a la carte restaurant with a rooftop dining terrace overlooking the wooded landscape towards the sea — a romantic setting for your evening meal.
Night times are lively with ‘happy hours’ and regular barbecues, Turkish nights and party nights.
The rooms are very comfortably furnished with carpets and modern bathrooms and have telephones and music systems.
All rooms overlook the pool area.
Meals: Bed and breakfast
ACAPULCO
Cradled between North and South America, Mexico is a fascinating and vibrant country steeped in history.
From beautiful, sun-drenched beaches to relics of an ancient civilisation, your dream vacation in Mexico welcomes you to a timeless world of colourful sights and sounds.
Renowned for its hot climate and exciting, spicy cuisine, Mexico is well-loved for its bright folklore and its lively street markets where local artisans display handwoven textiles, painted ceramics, unusual jewellery and leather goods.
CLUB RESORT
The sun isn't all that glitters in the famous sun-kissed resort of Acapulco.
Feast on an endless range of local and international dishes, then dance the night away in one of the many pulsating discos.
As the bay of Acapulco comes into view, you are greeted by miles of endless golden beaches, clear blue sea and more watersports than you could possibly imagine, from waterskiing to scuba diving.
But it's at night when Acapulco really comes into its own; no wonder this resort has been called ‘The Golden Zone’, with its countless bars, restaurants and nightclubs.
This and the friendly, English-speaking people, means that Acapulco has becomes one of the most popular action-packed holiday resorts in the world, frequented by the rich and famous.
Join them for the holiday of a life-time.
CLUB DAYS & NIGHTS
Discover the old, new and futuristic faces of Acapulco, including the famous cliff divers of la Quebrada, or wine and dine on the world's largest catamaran while taking in the magnificent views of Acapulco by night.
These are just a few of the amazing trips we offer to make sure you see the best of this area of Mexico — Club style.
You should allow around £70 per week, but if you want more, you'll have the chance to venture inland with us to Mexico City to experience the mystery of the Aztec and Mayan pyramids.
It's a chance not to be missed.
ROMANO'S LE CLUB
You can be sure of a buzzing atmosphere at Romano's ‘Le Club’ as it is situated in the Costa Azul zone which abounds with bars, restaurants and nightclubs, most of which are found within 100 metres of the hotel.
The pool is very popular here, with its sunterrace, sunbeds and poolside bar which serves snacks all day.
You can play table-tennis on the patio and volleyball and water-polo are organised for guests.
Watersports are available on the sandy beach which is an easy 160 metre walk from the hotel.
The hotel itself is very comfortably furnished with a large airy lounge and bar and a good, reasonably priced restaurant.
rooms are also very comfortable with side sea views and terraces.
TV and servicebars are available at a small charge.
Prices are based on two people sharing a twin room with private facilities.
Meals: Room only.
ROMANO'S PALACE
Romano's Palace is a lively, comfortable hotel and is very popular with young people.
Situated in a busy, bustling part of town, it is surrounded by shops, bars and restaurants and overlooks the golden sandy beach which is only 40 metres across the road and where all sorts of watersports are available.
The hotel has an attractive pool and a good sunterrace with sunloungers and a pool-side bar which serves snacks throughout the day.
Romano's Palace also has a popular lounge-bar and two restaurants, one of which is the lively ‘Rock Station’ where American-style meals are available.
All rooms are very comfortably furnished, have private televisions and a balcony with a side view of the bay of Acapulco.
Prices are based on two people sharing a twin room with private facilities.
Meals: Room only.
COPACABANA
You couldn't be more ideally placed for an action-packed holiday this Summer than in the smart and lively Copacabana hotel.
Situated right on the beach and in the lively ‘Golden Zone’, a wide variety of boutiques, restaurants, bars and discos lie practically at your doorstep!
The hotel's swimming pool is surrounded by a large sun terrace—an ideal spot for cultivating a golden tan!
For the more energetic, tennis courts and a golf course are available nearby.
The Copacabana offers an excellent choice of bars, including the lobby bar, a terrace bar and a poolside bar, so you'll never need to go thirsty!
Snacks are available during the day and there's a delicious barbecue grill on offer in the evenings.
The hotel also has its own terrace restaurant.
What more could you ask for!
Rooms are comfortable and spacious with private facilities, TV, air conditioning and a balcony.
Prices are based on two people sharing a twin room.
Meals: Room only.
SMART VALUE FOR MONEY OFFERS
Book your summer '90 holiday with this White Hot Deal section and save yourself £££s! club 18–30 is offering you the chance of a lifetime to book a fun-filled holiday at some of the lowest prices around.
All you have to do is choose the date you want to go on holiday and decide on the destination and we will choose the accommodation for you — offering you an unbeatable deal on the price of your holiday.
Your studio, hotel or apartment will be allocated on arrival and will be one of those featured in the brochure or one of a similar standard.
We guarantee that you will receive the regular services of our Clubreps and that the apartments will be cleaned weekly.
We think it's one of the best deals around, offering you the chance to secure your holiday at a value for money price.
WHITE HOT GUARANTEE
There will be absolutely no surcharges on the price of your White Hot holiday.
Conditions of the club Price Promise and Fair Trading Policy are on pages 92–93 of the main Club 18–30 brochure and insurance details can be found on page 94.
HOW TO BOOK
Just turn to the resort of your choice and choose from the range of accommodation on offer, apartments and hotel with self-catering, room only and bed and breakfast options.
Choose the resort and board arrangement you want and decide whether you want 7 or 14 nights, then leave the exact choice of apartment or hotel to us.
Don't forget you'll be able to enjoy all the benefits of a Club 18–30 holiday while making a big saving on price.
You can choose your departure point from our massive range of flights and airports on page 10–13 of the main brochure.
But when calculating the price of your holiday, don't forget to add on any applicable flight supplement detailed there.
Once you have made your choice all you have to do is fill in the booking form in the normal way on page 95 of the main brochure.
OUR CONSUMER HOLIDAY GUARANTEE
BOOKING CONDITIONS AND HOLIDAY INFORMATION
THE FIRST STEP — READING THIS BROCHURE!
When you book your (Club 19–30) Holiday we want you to be so satisfied that you'll book with us again next year.
IN the following section we have re; laced the traditional Booking Conditions with something new.
This is still a binding holiday agreement on both you and us, but we have set it out in plain English, in a way that we hope you will find informative and easy to read.
It is important that you do read these pages and indeed all the relevant parts of this brochure since they form the basis of your agreement with us and so that you are fully informed of your rights and obligations and can relax knowing that your holiday is covered by our Holiday Guarantee.
If there is anything else you need to know don't forget to ask us or your local ABTA Travel Agent before booking.
PLANNING YOUR HOLIDAY
a.
Do I need a passport or visa?
A valid passport is essential when you travel abroad.
You should allow at least 12 weeks to obtain a British passport.
Alternatively, a British Visitors passport obtainable from most Post Offices is valid for many countries in this brochure.
Spouses or newly-weds should carry a copy of their marriage certificate where passports and rickets are in different names.
Visitors with a passport stamp showing entry in Turkey or North Cyprus may be refused entry into South Cyprus.
It is particularly important for South African, Israeli and other non-British passport holders, and anyone with a passport with a Israeli entry stamp, to check the requirements for entry by charter flight with the Consulate of the country or countries being visited or transited through before booking your holiday.
All visitors to Mexico must obtain a Mexican Tourist Card: these are available on our charter flights.
It is your responsibility to be in possession of a valid passport and applicable visa.
These requirements apply to British citizens with passports issued in the UK.
Other nationalities must check with the consulate of the country being visited.
Passport and visa regulations may change at any time so always consult your travel agent or the Passport Office.
US VISAS
A British citizen with a valid passport does not need a visa to visit the U.S. for up to 90 days for holiday or business or to transit if he enters the country on an air carrier that has agreed to participate in the no-visa program.
(At the time of going to press, all our carriers are participating in this scheme).
The traveller also needs an onward or return ticket to a destination outside North America or the Caribbean and must complete a visa waiver form.
After entering the U.S. under this program and within the 90 day period, a traveller can visit Canada, Mexico or the Caribbean without a visa by any mode of transportation.
Most other travellers require visas.
Call the U.S. Embassy, London for more information at 01 499 3443.
TURKEY VISAS:
At the time of going to press, the Turkish Government have indicated their intention to introduce a £5 per person visa charge for British nationals, payable on arrival in Turkey.
Whilst we and other members of the travel industry are campaigning to have any such charges waived for holidaymakers, it is possible that they will be in force when you travel.
You should contact your Travel Agent for further information nearer your departure date.
Non British nationals should enquire direct to the Turkish Consulate at Rutland Lodge, Rutland Gardens, London SW7, Tel 01 589 0919.
b.
Will I need vaccinations
Destinations outside Continental Europe will usually require a course of anti-malaria tablets in addition to recommended vaccinations.
Always check with your doctor as to which inoculations are advisable or necessary well before you travel.
You should also refer to the DHSS leaflets: ‘The travellers Guide to Health’‘Before you go’(SA40)(which is updated on Prestel), and ‘While you're away’(SA41).
Please note that you are strongly advised against scuba-diving 24 hours before travelling by air.
c.
Are your holidays suitable for the disabled or those wit a serious medical condition?
At Club 18–30 Holidays we do everything we can to provide the highest level of service to all our customers.
However, we believe that it is only right to point out that we are not a specialist tour operator in the field of holidays for the disabled.
Regrettably, most overseas hotels are not well equipped for disabled holidaymakers.
Therefore, if you suffer from a serious medical condition or disability, we suggest you contact one of the specialist agencies for advice on the suitability of your hotel and the resort area generally.
Contact our Customer relations dept on 01 267 7044 for further information or see your ABTA travel agent.
2.
BOOKING YOUR HOLIDAY
Once you book your holiday with us this brochure forms the basis of the agreement between Club 18–30 and you and your party.
Set out below are further details of your and our obligations once the booking has been made.
When you book your holiday your agreement will be with ILG Travel Limited t/a Club 18–30 Holidays and some of the questions you might have about booking your holiday are answered below.
a.
How is the agreement made?
Your party leader must sign the Booking Form accepting the conditions of this agreement.
The holiday contract incorporates all of the information contained in this brochure.
If you are booking a late offer holiday any information or conditions set out in the hate offer documents are also part of your contract and if in doubt you should check with your Travel Agent.
The agreement or contract is concluded only when the Booking Allocation is despatched to you or your travel agent after receipt and acceptance of your booking.
Any money paid by you to your travel agent in respect of the holiday is held by the travel agent on your behalf until the Booking Allocation is despatched.
Thereafter, any money held by the travel agent is held on Club 18–30's behalf.
You must check the booking Allocation carefully and raise any queries immediately.
This agreement is governed by English Law and exclusive jurisdiction is conferred on the English Courts.
b.
When do I pay?
You pay the deposit immediately in all cases and if you book within 8 weeks of departure, the total cost of your holiday.
Approximately ten weeks before departure, you will receive a Final Invoice showing the total cost of your holiday.
This must be paid not later than eight weeks before your departure date.
No further reminder is sent to you and, if the balance remains unpaid by then, we reserve the right to cancel your booking and to make a cancellation charge as shown in paragraph 2 h.
c.
Is my money safe?
Yes!
We are members of the Association of British Travel Agents (ABTA membership number 3691x) and so your money is fully protected by their guaranteed bonding system.
In addition, all holidays using charter flights used by us are licensed by the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) under Air Travel Organisers License (ATOL) 1960.
d.
Can the price of my holiday go up?
Definitely not!
The price of your holiday is fully guaranteed and will not be subject to any surcharges.
e.
What is included in the price of my holiday?
ALL HOLIDAYS
Accommodation.
The Holiday price, unless otherwise stated, applies to each of 2 adults sharing a room (see note below about apartments).
Accommodation will be confirmed on your Booking allocation.
Meal Arrangements.
If you book full board you will receive breakfast, lunch and dinner.
If you book half board, breakfast and dinner are provided.
Services of a Club 18–30 Resort Representative.
Local Taxes and normal service charges.
UK VAT on certain holidays within the E.E.C.
The following exchange rates of 24th July 1989 have been used in calculating VAT as quoted in the Financial Times of 25th July 1989.
Spain-Peseta 193.5, USA Dollar 1.50, Greece-Drachma 280, France-Franc 10.47.
AIR HOLIDAYS
Return Flights.
Some flights have no supplement.
Others carry a supplement — check pages for full details.
Airport Tax and Security Charges.
Free Luggage Allowance.
Usually 20 kgs per person unless indicated otherwise on your air ticket.
Golf clubs may be carried within this allowance provided we are notified in advance.
Transport between destination airport and your hotel or apartment (except where car hire has been booked at the destination airport).
EXPRESS COACH HOLIDAYS
Coach transport to and from your resort accommodation, including ferry crossing.
Departures other than from Dover carry a supplement.
Check page 13 for full details.
All ports and toll charges
Free luggage allowance.
One case per person with no weight restriction.
Services of a Coach Europe escort.
e.
And what is extra?
Flight supplements where applicable.
Coach supplements where applicable.
Meals en route.
Accommodation and meal supplements where applicable and shown on the Price List.
Apartment low occupancy supplements.
Prices are usually based on the maximum number of persons a studio or apartment can accommodate.
When there are fewer persons any supplements are given in the Price List.
Rollaway/ extra bed charges (Florida).
If double beds are not suitable for sharing, rollaways are usually available; these will be charged for locally.
Please request when booking.
Holiday insurance.
You MUST be insured.
See page 38 of the brochure.
Optional Excursions and any charges made locally by hotels or others for a la carte dishes, entertainment, sporting amenities and equipment, and telephone connection charges.
Deposits.
In some cases a deposit may be asked for on arrival at apartments and, where known in advance, the amount is stated in the apartment description.
Please note the deposit quoted is per apartment and not per person, and is refundable less the cost of any damage or loss.
In the U.S.A. you may be asked for a credit card imprint as security when checking into your hotel if you intend to charge meals, drinks, etc. to your rooms.
g.
Can I change my booking and what will it cost?
If after our Booking Allocation has been issued, you wish to change to another of our holidays or alter your booking in any way (e.g. by changing your departure date or accommodation) we will do our utmost to make the changes, provided written notification is received at our offices from the person who signed the Booking Form, or your Travel Agent, at least six weeks before your departure date.
This must be accompanied by a payment of £10.00 per booking) to cover our administration cost.
NB.
Any alteration by you within six weeks of departure will be treated as a cancellation of the original booking and will be subject to the cancellation charges set out below.
Any new arrangements made will be treated as an entirely new booking.
h.
Can I cancel my booking and what will it cost?
Yes, but you will appreciate that we begin to incur costs from the time we reserve your holiday and should you or any member of your party cancel your booking once it has been accepted, this must be in writing, signed by the person who signed the Booking Form.
This is effective from the date it is received at our offices.
All cancellations incur a charge payable by you to compensate us for our offices.
All cancellations incur a charge payable by you to compensate us for our estimated losses and expenses, calculated as shown here as a percentage of the total holiday price of the person(s) making the cancellation, inclusive of all extras except holiday insurance premiums as shown here.
The minimum cancellation charge is your deposit amount.
As well as the above charges, under-occupancy supplements may apply to other members of a party where a member or members of that party cancel.
If one person in a twin room cancels, we reserve the right to pass on the full cost of the twin room to the person using that room.
i.
Do I need Holiday Insurance?
Yes, it's a must!
As a condition of booking you must either take out our special holiday insurance arranged through the Eagle Star Group or arrange a policy yourself providing comparable or greater cover under all sections.
Insurance premiums will be automatically added to your final invoice unless your alternative insurer is clearly indicated on your Booking Form.
We recommend our insurance as providing adequate cover for normal requirements, but it is your responsibility to arrange additional cover exceeding the maximum amounts payable under our policy, or providing cover for addition areas of liability if require.
j.
Can I make a special request?
If you have any special requests you must include them in the special request box on the booking form, but please note that special requests are not guaranteed and are subject to availability.
In view of the large number of requests made we are unable to advise you pre-departure if they cannot be met.
We regret we cannot accept special requests on late offer holidays.
k.
Can anyone else travel on the same booking in my/our place?
Only if the proper amendment procedure is followed (see ‘Can I change my booking…’, point 2 paragraph g above).
Accommodation and flights are reserved only for the use of passengers named on the Booking Allocation.
subletting, sharing and assignment are prohibited and may be illegal.
3.
CAN MY HOLIDAY ARRANGEMENTS BE CHANGED BY CLUB 18–30
a.
Minor and Major Changes.
Yes, whilst the arrangements for holidays in this brochure are made many months in advance, changes may unfortunately be necessary.
we reserve the right in our absolute discretion to make these.
Changes are usually minor, such as changes to departure times, or some accommodation facilities may be withdrawn and we will do our best to advise you or your travel agent of any such changes.
If your accommodation has to be changed we will do our best to provide alternative accommodation of similar or higher official classification.
Sometimes, major changes are necessary.
These are changes to your UK airport (except between Gatwick and Heathrow), resort area, time or departure or return by more than 12 hours, and the offering of accommodation with a lower official classification.
b.
What am I entitled to following a major change?
If we have to make a major change, you will be offered compensation or a credit towards the cost of an alternative Summer 1990 holiday you choose from this brochure (where available) as follows.
No other claims for compensation of expenses will be considered.
Should you decide not to accept the above major changes you may cancel your booking and we refund all monies paid and, where you advised of a major change within eight weeks of departure, issue you with compensation of £10 per person.
c.
What happens if the airline or aircraft is changed
The alteration of the airline or aircraft type operating your flights is not a major change and customers will not be specifically advised of such an operational amendment.
d.
Can my holiday be cancelled by Club 18–30?
Cancellation by us may be necessary in exceptional circumstances and we reserve the right in our absolute discretion to cancel your holiday.
In this event you will be offered the choice of an alternative holiday of at least comparable standard where available, or a full and prompt refund of any monies you have already paid.
In no case except for circumstances outside our control, will your holiday be cancelled after the date when your Final Invoice is due for payment.
Circumstances outside our control include war or threat of war, riot, civil strife, industrial dispute, terrorist activity, natural and nuclear disaster, fire or adverse weather conditions.
e.
Is there any other way my holiday may be terminated?
We reserve the right in our absolute discretion to terminate without further notice the holiday arrangements of any customer whose behaviour is such that it is likely, in our opinion, or in the opinion of an airline pilot, accommodation owner or manager, or other person in authority to cause distress, damage, danger or annoyance to other customers, employees, any third party or to property.
If you are prevented from travelling because in the opinion of any person in authority you appear to be unfit to travel or likely to cause discomfort of disturbance to other passengers, our responsibility for your holiday thereupon ceases.
Full cancellation charges will apply and we will be under no obligation whatsoever for any refund, compensation or costs you may incur.
4.
FLIGHTS AND TIMINGS
Flights are scheduled to be operated by Air Europe, Air Europa, Dan Air, Caledonian Airways and MD-83 aircraft.
We have to reserve the right to substitute alternative airlines and/or aircraft at anytime.
Such a change will not be regarded as a major change and you will not be specially advised of such an operational amendment.
a.
When will my flight timing become definite?
Flight timings in this brochure are based on our best estimate and historic experience of airline flying programmes.
Holiday brochures go to press before flying programmes are finalised and well in advance of the international scheduling committee meetings which allocate ‘slots’ to airlines.
Therefore timings are for guidance only.
As a result, we will advise you of the latest schedules on your Final Invoice, but we will not advise you of any timing changes at an earlier date.
We will, however, advise you of any known major changes as they occur.
In all cases, the final schedule will be provided on your flight tickets, approximately two weeks prior to departure.
b.
When do I check in?
You must arrive at your UK departure airport at least 1 1/2 hours before take off (2 hours for destinations outside Europe).
Failure to check-in on time will entitle the airlines to refuse check-in and boarding which may result in full cancellation charges being levied.
If we are able to arrange alternative travel to your resort, all costs incurred in assisting you to travel will be you responsibility.
If you wish to make duty-free purchases etc. please leave sufficient time by arriving at check-in earlier.
c.
What happens if my flight is delayed?
We would like to guarantee that our flights will never be delayed and in fact the vast majority of flights do depart on time.
Unfortunately though, delays sometimes occur.
These are completely beyond our control and we work closely with airlines and our overseas offices to make sure any delay is as short as possible and your overseas transfer and accommodation arrangements are changed if necessary.
Our aim is to minimise the inconvenience of delays so far as possible.
EXTRA FLIGHT DELAY AND CANCELLATION BENEFIT
If you take our recommended holiday insurance with the Eagle star Group you will either receive compensation for any delay over 12 hours delay and obtain a full refund of you holiday cost (less £20 and the insurance premium paid).
See the holiday insurance page for details.
d.
What happens if my baggage is delayed?
Although handling arrangement at UK airports are excellent, there are rare occasions when your baggage may unfortunately be delayed.
EXTRA BAGGAGE DELAY BENEFIT
If you take our recommended holiday insurance with the Eagle Star group and your baggage is not delivered within 12 hours from the time of arrival at your holiday destination due to delay or misdirection in delivery, you are covered up to £100 for essential purchases.
e.
Are there any conditions of carriage which apply to the journey?
Transport on an aircraft, coach, train or ship is subject to the conditions of carriage of that company, some of which limit or exclude liability.
These conditions are often the subject of international agreements between countries and copies of the conditions which apply to your holiday journey may be available for inspection either at our offices or at the office of the carrier concerned.
By its Contract with you ILG Travel Limited does not enter into an Agreement for carriage by air but only undertakes to reserve on your behalf accommodation on board an aircraft operated by one or other of the airlines mentioned in this brochure or such other airline as may be substituted.
5.
HOW CAN I BE SURE THIS BROCHURE IS ACCURATE?
We check and re-check the information about accommodation and resorts both at home and abroad to ensure that it is correct at the time of going to press Dec (1989).
However, please bear in mind that hoteliers, shopkeepers and night club owners etc. may wish to maintain or improve their facilities or even take a break themselves.
Circumstances such as these or weather conditions, the time of year etc may cause some of the amenities we have described to be temporarily unavailable and some resort/hotel photographs may illustrate amenities and conditions that do not necessarily prevail throughout the whole season.
These are regrettably beyond our control and we are unable to accept liability.
When we are told of any significant or long-term changes, we will inform you at the time of booking or if you've already booked, you will be contacted before your departure if there is time.
Where resort sports or other facilities are advertised, they may not necessarily be available in all resorts in the vicinity of all properties featured or at all times of the season.
(Temperature chart information was obtained from the Overseas Enquiries desk of the met Office Advisory Service, March 1989.)
6.
ARRIVING OVERSEAS WHAT WILL I FIND?
YOUR ACCOMMODATION
Our reference to ‘Hotel’ in this brochure covers all accommodation and does not necessarily distinguish between local classification such as‘Aparthotel’, ‘Hostal’, ‘Pension’, ‘Estalagem’and ‘Residencia’.
Of course, the British are not the only ones to take holidays and it is possible that you will be sharing your hotel with a group (perhaps a large one) from another country.
Please bear in mind that facilities and amenities can vary according to the mix and age of the various nationalities.
HOTEL/MOTEL CHAINS: Sometimes hotels change the name of the chain through which they are marketed (e.g. Ramada).
If such a change occurs at your hotel, you will only be notified if we believe it involves a significant change in facilities or standards.
a.
How many nights will I spend in resort?
Your accommodation is reserved for you from 12 noon on the day of your departure.
In the case of flights departing between 00.01 and 04.00 hours, the day of departure is deemed to be the previous day and the cost appropriate to that day is chargeable.
Where half or full board has been booked, flight timings may necessitate the loss of one meal; in such cases the holiday price has been reduced to compensate.
In most cases rooms must be vacated by 12 noon on the last day of your holiday.
However where possible, eg. if there are several hours to wait before your return flight, and this is often the case in low season, a room will be made available for changing and storing hand luggage.
Sometimes management may allow you to keep your room later but they are entitled to make a charge if they wish.
This is not normally possible with apartments.
b.
Do UK and other safety standards apply to my hotel?
Regrettably no, the safety standards and regulations in operation overseas are those of the country in question and may not reach the same level as those we enjoy in the UK.
The monitoring, enforcement and compliance with these local regulations is a matter for the authorities of that country and the foreign supplier of the services concerned.
The general standards of safety, hygiene, fire precautions etc will generally be lower than in the UK.
Liability insurance requirements vary considerably from country to country, as does the responsibility placed on organisations by local law.
Please therefore take all reasonable precautions to protect yourself and your family whilst on holiday.
In particular, you should familiarise yourself with fire escape routes.
c.
What about local resort conditions?
When travelling abroad we must all accept that things are different from the UK and that the limitations of the local infrastructure may well have some affect on services and supplies.
All accommodation and resorts are described as they are seen, but it is possible that local conditions and changes could affect the situation quite significantly.
In many countries solar heating and other energy conservation measures may result in a limited availability of hot water and breaks in the supply of electricity.
Unseasonal weather conditions in resorts whose main attraction is a lack of rain for most of the year, may cause disruption to electricity supply and when the weather is good, water supplies may be restricted to conserve stocks.
If you need a new light bulb or some other repair carried out, please ask at the reception desk, firmly but politely.
Should you have any difficulty, a word with your Club rep will normally do the trick.
Infuriating it may be, but you may as well shrug your shoulders as the locals do and accept that these things are part and parcel of travel overseas.
Experienced travellers will know that the chances of these matters affecting your holiday are small, but at Club 18–30 we believe the the first time traveller should be prepared for some of the differences that may be encountered abroad.
d.
Will local laws and customs be different?
Yes, driving and Licensing Laws and age limits vary dramatically throughout the world (e.g. it is illegal to purchase alcohol in the USA i under 21 years).
Due to the diversity of Club 18–30's programme it is not, unfortunately, possible to give information on each of the countries featured in this brochure.
Consequently we recommend that clients contact either their travel agent or the appropriate National Tourist Office for further details.
e.
Should I expect any building and development work in my resort?
Many resorts but by no means all, are continuing to develop, sometimes rapidly and intensively.
There may therefore be substantial building work in the vicinity of your holiday accommodation or in the resort area generally.
It is possible that a cement mixer or a tower crane may go into action or other works be carried out, as a hotelier or apartments owner seeks to maintain or improve standards and facilities.
This work may start early in the day as is local practice and can occur at any time of the season.
Unfortunately, it is not possible to foresee the extent and nature of any such activity at a particular time, and we are therefore unable to issue information updates on these rapidly changing local conditions.
Please remember that life has to go on abroad as well as at home.
f.
What can I expect my hotel room to be like?
It is not always possible to offer every type of room mentioned in accommodation descriptions with all the flights advertised.
Room facilities do not apply to single rooms which vary in facilities irrespective of the supplement paid.
Three and four-bedded rooms in hotels are usually twin bedded rooms with extra beds (often of the folding kind) and may therefore be rather cramped.
Beds are not always interior sprung divans, they may be built-in platform beds or a spring mattress on a wire mesh base.
Extra beds in studios and apartments are often required to be moved between units according to occupancy levels.
Consequently they can be convertible sofas, pull-down or folding beds, ‘nests’ of beds or divans.
Linen is not always as large as in the UK and towels can be small.
Beds on cruise ships may either be free standing or bunk beds.
g.
Will there be self service at mealtimes?
The practice of providing meals from a self-service buffet is becoming increasingly popular.
Many of the hotels in this brochure do continue to provide waiter serve, although some of these will have buffet for breakfast and for the first course of main meals.
However, hotel management do occasionally change this arrangement at very short notice; we will endeavour to give you the most up-to-date information on request.
7.
DEALING WITH PROBLEMS
a.
How do I make a complaint?
At Club 18–30 we always aim to provide you with the best holiday possible, but in the unlikely event that a problem should arise, we would ask you to contact your Club rep so that we can resolve the matter on the spot.
If the problem cannot be resolved then and there, a report form, normally available from your Club rep, must be completed in the resort by your party leader who signed the Booking Form.
This should be followed up within twenty-eight days of your arrival home by writing to the Customer Services Manager at (Academic House, 24–28 Oval Road, London NW1 7DE) stating clearly your invoice number, departure date, travel reference, length of holiday, resort and name of accommodation and enclosing a copy of the report form.
It is not necessary for any other member of the party to write to us.
By following this procedure, you will enable us to deal with your complaint promptly and you may expect to receive an acknowledgement within 14 days.
A full and concise response (together with an offer of compensation if appropriate) will follow within the next 28 days unless we have been unable to investigate your claim fully within that time, in which case you will receive a detailed explanation for the delay and a full reply within 56 days from receipt of your initial correspondence.
b.
Do we accept responsibility for the quality of your holidays?
Yes, we accept full responsibility for the quality of the holidays we provide.
We are very concerned to learn of any shortfall in standards and this is why we want to hear from you if you encounter any problems.
We have set out above our complaints procedure, which also assists us with our quality control monitoring.
c.
Who is responsible for any illnesses or injuries?
We accept responsibility for any loss or damage which you amy suffer on holidays as a result of the negligence of our employees or agents.
Most accommodation and transport is provided by independent suppliers, for whom we will accept responsibility on the terms set out as follows.
If you or any member of your family suffer death, bodily injury or illness arising from negligence of our suppliers (other than air and sea carriers performing any domestic, internal or international carriage of whatsoever kind for whom we accept no liability), their sub=contractors, servants and/or agents, we will accept responsibility provided that they were acting within the scope of or in the course of their employment when the accident occurred.
Where transport is by air, sea or rail, their obligations and liabilities are limited in the manner provided by the relevant International Conventions.
Should any payment be made to you or any member of your party by us in any of the circumstances referred to in this section, we reserve the right to claim in your place against the person or organisation responsible for causing the illness, injury or death.
This means that you must agree to assign that part of your rights to us and we will be subrogated to those rights.
d.
What about events not connected within the holiday package?
Should you or any member of your party suffer illness, personal injury or death through any misadventure arising out of an activity which does not form part of your holiday arrangement, nor part of any excursion sold through us, we shall offer you every assistance we can.
This includes advice, guidance and initial financial assistance where appropriate up to a limit of £5,000 per person.
This service is provided through IRPC by a legal expenses insurance policy which we have taken out for each of our customers' benefit.
Further details may be obtained from ILG Insurance Services on 01 466 4604, but you will be automatically covered and do not need to apply.
e.
What is the ABTA Arbitration Scheme?
We always aim to resolve amicably any complaints using our Customer Services Department.
If this cannot be done, you are entitled to take advantage of a Scheme of Arbitration devised by the Association of British Travel Agents and administered independently by the Chartered Institute of Arbitrators.
This scheme provides for a simple and inexpensive method of arbitration on documents alone with restricted liability on the customer in respect of costs.
The scheme does not apply to claims for an amount greater than £1,500 per person or £7,500 per Booking Form or to claims which are solely or mainly in respect of physical injury or illness.
Details of the scheme will be supplied on request.
Redress under the scheme requires written notice requesting arbitration to be made within nine months of the scheduled date of return from the holiday.