

PROLOGUE
Cosmeston Medieval Village is a heritage project unique in Britain, involving the excavation and full scale reconstruction of a medieval village on its original site.
It is situated in the picturesque surroundings of Cosmeston Lakes Country Park, near Penarth and is only 15 minutes by car from the centre of Cardiff.
The importance of the Cosmeston project lies in its scale.
Other medieval settlements have been excavated throughout the country, although far fewer in Wales than in England, but the scope of their excavation has usually been limited both in size and duration.
However, at Cosmeston the archaeologist has the opportunity to excavate a large portion of the settlement over a long period of time and to use the results to shed light on sites where the excavators have not been so fortunate.
Additionally, a more complete picture of the settlement at Cosmeston is accessible to the public by virtue of the way the excavations have been interpreted and presented for the visitor: the ultimate goal is nothing less than a full-scale, working reconstruction of the medieval village.
The village was discovered following work undertaken by the Glamorgan-Gwent Archaeological Trust Ltd. in 1977 and 1982 in response to a development threat close to the known site of Cosmeston Castle.
The Trust's excavation trenches revealed the remains of 13th–14th century stone buildings.
As a consequence of this the threat was lifted and an  invitaion was extended to the Trust by the local authorities to undertake a long-term research programme.
THE LANDOWNERS
It is not known who owned the land around Cosmeston before the Normans came to Wales.
It lay within the rich agricultural lowlands of the Welsh kingdom of Morgannwg which, towards the end of the 11th century A.D., was conquered by the Norman lord, Robert Fitzhammon and was established as the lordship of Glamorgan.
Among his followers were the de Costentin family from the Cotentin peninsular in northern France.
They are the first known lords of the manor of Cosmeston and gave their name to the village, Costentinstune (the place of the Costentins).
If the form of the village's name has changed in the course of the centuries, that is hardly surprising.
By 1317 the manor had passed from the hands of the de Costentin family into those of the de Caversham family who, in turn, passed it on to the Herberts in 1550.
More recently the land belonged to the Bute family who rebuilt Cardiff castle in the nineteenth century and laid the foundations for Cardiff's prosperity as a coal port.
Top right — Face mask from a 14th century pottery jug
Bottom right — The second marquis of Bute and Baron Cardiff 1793–1848.
Heraldic shield of Robert, Earl of Gloucester and Lord of Glamorgan in the 12th century.
Cosmeston within the shire fee of Glamorgan.
THE MANOR
The medieval manor was an area of land given to a man by the king or an important baron.
The recipient of the manor became the lord of this land and not only farmed directly some of the land within it (the demesne) but also held rights over the rest of the land: for example, the manorial lord administered justice within the manor, in return, the grantor of the manor received certain services from the manorial lord, such as the latter's serving as a knight in the former's military contingent as or when necessary.
This system of mutual benefits and obligations was known as feudalism.
The manor of Cosmeston was a sub-manor of the manor of Sully which, in turn, was held from the lord of Glamorgan.
Its extent was similar to the present day parish of Lavernock.
The administrative centre of the manor was the manor house.
In south Wales these manor houses were often heavily fortified and, because of this, are frequently referred to as castles.
The manor house at Cosmeston has traditionally been called a castle, but it may not have been so extensively fortified as to warrant this name.
However, there are fifteenth century references to it having possessed a tower or a corner bastion.
It appears from documents to have been ruinous and abandoned by 1437.
Manor houses usually had other buildings associated with them as well as gardens.
At Cosmeston the manorial garden and dovecot have been found in the field south-west of the manor house: they can be seen clearly on aerial photographs.
1.
Site of Manor House
2.
Old course of Sully-Penarth road
3.
Presumed route of branch road to the Manor house
4.
Lime kiln
5.
Manorial garden
6.
Dovecot
7.
Post medieval quarry
8.
Possible bee garden
9.
Probable medieval boundary
KEY
Top Left — The excavated dovecot
Top Right — Small 16th century flask
Bottom Right — Reconstruction of Sully manor
PEASANT BUILDINGS
The people who held their land from the lord of the manor (the tenants) were, in the main, peasant farmers producing enough food to sustain their family and to provide a produce rent for their land.
In good years a surplus might be produced which could be traded for money.
Recent research has shown that even in the thirteenth century the peasantry were participating much more actively in the monied economy than had previously been supposed.
The life-style of the wealthier peasants, whilst not luxurious, was not squalid by medieval standards and this is reflected in the substantial nature of their buildings .
Gerald of Wales, writing in the later twelfth century, says that the Welsh do not build ‘lofty stone buildings’ but content themselves with small huts made of the boughs of trees twisted together.’
In respect of the more anglicised parts of Wales, such as the Vale of Glamorgan, this statement was probably inaccurate even at the time of writing.
Most certainly it cannot be applied to the peasant buildings of a century or so later.
At Cosmeston, as at other local villages, buildings were constructed of worked limestone bedded in courses using clay as a mortar.
The walls probably stood to about 5 feet in height with heavy cruck roofs (formed from trusses built with bent timbers) on top of them.
In the main the roofs appear to have been thatched.
All the house buildings thus far found at Cosmeston are single-room dwellings, but some of the other buildings had two rooms and probably also had lofts.
All the buildings were well constructed and with adequate maintenance would have been capable of surviving for many generations.
Top Left — Rebuilding the roof of the byre
Top Right — Wattling a roof
Bottom — Thatching the Byre
Mid Right — Bronze medieval strap end buckle
THE FARMSTEAD
One of the most interesting groups of buildings at Cosmeston is the farmstead, a group of three buildings arranged around a central yard.
Many medieval farms in Wales consisted of only one main building, the so called‘longhouse’: farm animals were kept at one end of the house and the people lived at the other.
At Cosmeston, however, the people and animals were housed separately and the farmstead has a look that would be familiar to many modern farmers.
The barn is the building closest to the road providing easy access for carts through its double width entranceway.
Set furthest away from the road is the house.
Between the house and the barn is the smallest of the three buildings which has been reconstructed as a cattle byre (animal house).
This building has an entrance opening directly into the farmyard and many of the farm's activities, such as manure collection, would have been concentrated in this area.
Top Left — Inside the byre
Top Right — The farmstead's foundations
Bottom Right — Inside a peasant's house
Bottom left — Edward I silver penny
THE PEASANT GARDEN
A peasant's garden would have been an important additional source of food for him and his family and, in good years, any surplus could have been sold to augment his income as well.
Crops could have been grown in it free of the manorial and village restrictions which controlled the crops which could be grown in the village fields.
Vegetables formed the basis of the medieval peasant's diet and few were able to eat meat regularly.
As much of the diet was cereal based and mundane, strongly flavoured vegetables were favoured as a supplement: particular favourites were leeks, onions, chibols (Welsh onions) and garlic.
The vegetables most commonly grown in the garden were also grown in the fields: these were the bean and the pea, the basic ingredients in most medieval peasant recipes.
As well as vegetables the peasant garden would have produced a variety of herbs.
These would have been used for both flavouring and for medicinal purposes.
Herbs grown included common types still widely used today such as chives, sage and thyme as well as less common ones such as agrimony and betony.
The most popular herbs had many uses: tansy for example, was used in cooking, as a tonic, as a soothing lotion and as an insect repellent .
At Cosmeston a well manured area of land adjoining the farmstead has been interpreted as a garden and has been planted out as such.
All the plants mentioned above are grown as well as several others including cabbages, lettuces and radishes.
Only traditional cultivation techniques are used.
In future it is hoped to establish an orchard as apples and, to a lesser extent, pears were cultivated in the later medieval period and were particularly important for the cider and perry they produced.
Top Left — Clearing out a drainage ditch
Top right — A reconstructed medieval sickle
Bottom right — The peasant's garden
THE MEDIEVAL LANDSCAPE
Each homestead at Cosmeston, as at many other villages, was located within a block of land known as a croft.
The properties so formed were typically 1½–2 acres in size.
The boundaries of these crofts at Cosmeston can clearly be seen as earthworks in the field on the opposite side of the road to the village.
Additionally, the peasants would have held lands in the common fields.
These were large fields in which many people had a stake.
Usually marker stones, rather than hedges, indicated the individual plot.
Both meadow and arable land was allocated in this way.
In the arable fields the same crops were grown throughout a field and the task of harvesting was undertaken communally.
In villages where there were four arable fields a typical set of crops would have been one field of wheat, one of barley, one of beans with one other field, known as the fallow, given over to grazing.
Every four years each of the fields would be fallow at least once, thus giving the soil a rest.
Much of the remainder of the village's pasture land would also have been held in common and consisted probably of rough grazing, perhaps within a wood.
Some of the wealthier peasants would probably have held some enclosed freehold fields.
The enclosed fields of the manorial lord were known as the demesne.
This was land held by the lord over which the peasants could not exercise ‘common rights’ of grazing their animals, woodcutting, etc.
It might also have included woodland in which, again, the peasants could not graze their animals, but which the manorial lord would have used exclusively for his own purposes, including hunting.
The kind of well planned and managed landscape described above is likely to have existed around Cosmeston.
It arose as a consequence of the Norman conquest and settlement of the Vale of Glamorgan in the early twelfth century.
It was not the only type of landscape that existed in this region any more than it was over much of England.
Alongside the villages with their surrounding lands there were small hamlets and isolated farmsteads.
Within Cosmeston manor at least two other contemporary medieval settlements existed: a hamlet (now only a single farm) at Sutton, half a mile to the south of Cosmeston; and a small hamlet at Lavernock, the present centre of the parish which was once centred on Cosmeston.
Top Left — Lavernock Church
Top Right — Aerial view of still surviving medieval fields at Rhossili, Gower
Bottom — Sutton farm
WHY WERE VILLAGES DESERTED?
Research shows that a large percentage of known deserted settlements in England and Wales were deserted or began to decline 600–700 years ago.
The clue to their abandonment must therefore lie in the events of the fourteen–fifteenth centuries.
The population of England and Wales had grown steadily in the centuries up to about 1300, by which time it had exceeded a level which could easily be sustained by contemporary food production.
As a result of this expansion many settlements had been established on land that was of poor quality, such as the high heaths of Dartmoor.
In the early fourteenth century the climate became colder and wetter; people living in poor locations could no longer feed themselves and famine became  common place .
By the middle of the century the population was ripe for disaster and this arrived in the form of the Black Death, an outbreak of bubonic and pneumonic plague between 1348–50.
For the next 150 years there were further outbreaks every decade or so.
The population of Europe decline dramatically: in England and Wales the population may have fallen by as much as 50% by 1400.
This decline in population had great social effects.
Manorial rents fell and in order to avoid financial ruin  some lords removed the villages and common fields and turned to direct farming, often preferring to farm sheep rather than grow corn which was less profitable.
With the fall in population more land became available, and those peasants who survived found they were being offered more favourable landholding terms by some lords and left the poorer lands for vacant richer lands elsewhere.
Communal farming, however, was still important to those who could not acquire and enclose private farms.
Thus when villages became so reduced in size that they were no longer viable their inhabitants had to move out to nearby larger settlements.
All these changes led either to the desertion or substantial depopulation of settlements.
RECONSTRUCTING THE KILNHOUSE
It was decided from the outset to present the archaeological results of the project at Cosmeston to the public in the most imaginative way possible.
It was thought that this might best be achieved by reconstructing the village, with each building standing on its original site and being used, wherever possible, for its original purpose.
One of the most interesting reconstructions is that of a medieval kilnhouse.
It consists of a kiln at one end for drying or malting grain and a bread baking oven at the other end, it is built of local limestone collected from Lavernock beach.
The stone is bedded in courses with a mixture of a local clay, dung and soil.
The roof is formed of withies (willow and hazel rods) woven between willow rafters.
The thatch, which is marsh reed harvested from local wetlands, is tied on to this.
The whole is supported by a single truss of crudely worked elm.
On special events days up to 120 loaves are baked in the bread oven, thus demonstrating the soundness of its reconstruction.
The building is therefore not only a successful piece of archaeological experimentation but also an enjoyable experience for the visitor.
Top Left — Excavated foundations of the kilnhouse
Mid Left — Erecting a truss
Bottom Left — The reconstructed kilnhouse
Top Right — The past comes to life
THE FUTURE
It is hoped that the first phase of the project will have been completed by 1991 when the excavation of the village will have been finished and at least three properties will have been totally reconstructed.
It is also hoped that improvements to our visitor facilities, including the provision of a new visitor centre and cafe, will be well advanced by then.
The village in 1991?
The concern at Cosmeston is not simply to present static displays but to attempt to bring the village to life with living history events, with crafts-men working in the buildings and with more animals added to those already living at the village.
Top Left — Education
Top Right — Medieval bone comb
Top Left — Tourism
Bottom Right — Crafts
Bottom Left — Film making
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This brochure has been produced with the financial assistance of a grant from the Prince of Wales' Committee with funds provided by the Wales Tourist Board.
Their help in this and in many other areas is gratefully acknowledged.
The Trust also wishes to acknowledge the major contributions both financial and in kind made by the following organizations: We are also grateful to Mrs. Ayles of Cardiff castle and the many private individuals who have helped and assisted since the beginning of the project.
HOW TO FIND US
Cosmeston, which is 5 miles south of Cardiff on the B4267 road, is less than an hour's drive by car from the Severn Bridge and only 20 minutes directly past Cosmeston on the Cardiff-Barry route: visitors should alight at the Fort Road stop.
WINNER OF THE ‘HERITAGE IN BRITAIN’ AWARD