

UPdate
LIQUID CRYSTAL PLUG-IN TIMER CONTROL
A new electronic plug-in timer which can be used to provide precise control of any 13amp domestic appliance has been introduced by Superswitch.
The 1437 timer can be set to cover either 24-hour or 7-day periods, and incorporates a back-lit liquid crystal time display, push-button programming, and battery-powered memory protection.
The timer can be programmed to carry out up to six ON and six OFF switching operations.
A rechargeable battery protects the stored programme data for up to eight months in the event of the programmer being unplugged.
Typical applications of the timer include the control of table lamps for security purposes, the control of washing machines to take advantage of low-cost off-peak electricity, and the economical control of radiant heaters.
Selling price is around £30, from Argos, Texas, other major chain and d-i-y stores, and specialist electrical shops.
SAFE AND QUICK ACCESS TO THE SPACE IN YOUR LOFT
Householders who are staying at home rather than moving into bigger houses during the property recession, will be looking to use the loft space for growing families.
Getting into your loft quickly and safely has been made a lot easier with the unique collection of aluminium and wooden ladders and staircases available from the Loft Shop.
The range starts from £69.99 for a two-section aluminium loft ladder, and £128 for a pre-assembled wooden loft ladder, to a remote-controlled electric ladder which glides into operation at the touch of a button.
Made to measure, this top of the range concertina model could set you back as much as £2,000!
RANGE OF SOLID BRASS TOOLS EXTENDED
Three new solid brass hand tools have been introduced to the range of nine high-quality hand tools by Richard Kell.
The new tools are a Centre Finder with 0 to 2in capacity (price £5.64); a Luthiers Clamp, which has proved ideal for lightweight edge clamping (price £6.58); and a Featherweight Parallel-clamp, of 0 to 1½in capacity, which is a development of the traditional toolmakers' clamp (price £6.58).
TILTING RADIATOR BRACKET SYSTEM
If you want to decorate or clean behind radiators, you usually need an elaborate brush device, immensely long arms, or a friendly plumber with loads of patience.
Towever, all this can change with the introduction of the Pivotilt.
This replaces standard radiator brackets with two pivoting brackets that lock a radiator in place, yet at the flick of a catch, release it to hang at approximately 15° to allow easy cleaning and redecoration.
The Pivotilt incorporates two brass swivel joints that allow the radiator to move smoothly on its connecting pipes without straining them.
Because of its thin design and attractive white finish it's virtually invisible when the radiator is in place.
Pivotilt is childproof, meets all major requirements for strength and safety, and fits all Stelrad Accord radiators from 18in upwards.
Price is about £17 per pair.
Looking into garages
As well as providing a dry and secure home for your car, garages may also act as a store for ladders, lawnmowers and kids' bikes and maybe even a workshop utility room
Let's begin by assuming that your plot actually has somewhere for a garage to stand.
If it hasn't, the only thing you can do — apart from continuing your garage-less existence, or renting one from a car-less neighbour — is to convert part of the ground floor of your house to construct a built-in garage, with all the upheaval and loss of living space which that entails.
However, if you do have the room, you have several options.
If you have space beside the house, you can attach a garage to the side wall as a lean-to structure.
This is probably your best choice where space is limited: you need a minimum of about 2.4m (8ft) of space if you're going to be able to get out of your car without being a contortionist.
Its precise siting relative to the house will depend on the positions of windows and door in the side wall of the house; you obviously want to avoid covering windows but a courtesy door entering the garage could actually be a bonus on wet nights (note that the door must be a fire door in this situation).
Depending on the obstructions you find, you could site the building exactly alongside the house, bring it forward of the building line (if the planners will allow this — see later), or set it back into the garden.
Where a wider space is available beside the house, you can put up a wider, detached garage, perhaps sited with one wall on the boundary of your property, to leave a pathway between it and the house.
For a spacious single garage, you need a strip of land about 4m (13ft) wide), and for a double garage a width of about 6m (200ft) would be ideal.
Finally, if you have a spacious back garden, but less than 2.4m of space at the side, you could consider building a detached garage down the garden, and extending your drive down the side of the house to reach it.
Check that you have enough room for the car to pass through: a typical small family car needs about 1.8m (6ft) of clear space between obstacles.
Where space beside the house or access past it do not exist, your last resort is to site a garage in your front garden, but this may spoil the appearance of the front of your house (and may also be unacceptable to the local planning authorities — see RULES AND REGULATIONS).
SELF-BUILD OR KIT GARAGE?
Once you have made a decision about where you can site a garage, you have to think about whether to buy a kit garage, or build one from scratch.
The main advantage of building your own — or getting a local builder in to do it for you — is that you can satisfy your requirements precisely, cope with all sorts of little local site difficulties, and create a building that is a good match for your house style.
The disadvantages are the time it takes to build, and if you're employing a builder, the cost — likely to be several thousand pounds for even a simple single garage.
Kit garages also have their advantages and disadvantages.
Plus points include the availability of a wide range of standard sizes — you should be able to find at least one to fit your site — and the fact that the manufacturers have gone to great lengths in recent years to improve the poor appearance that older prefabricated sectional buildings traditionally suffered from.
Prices are very keen too — from under £1,000 for a basic model.
Above all, once a suitable base has been laid, your garage is up and working within about 48 hours, and often within a day.
In short, unless there are serious reasons why a prefabricated garage is out of the question, it is probably your best choice on all counts.
PICKING THE RIGHT KIT
Once you have decided to go the kit route, your first step is to send off a request to several manufacturers for illustrated brochures (you will find a list of the major manufacturers at the end of the article, and  it is also worth checking the Yellow Pages for firms operating in your area).
The biggest firms maintain a network of show sites across the country, so you can make one trip both to collect literature and to view the garages.
With smaller firms, you may be near enough to visit the factory, or they may offer to put you in touch with some of their customers in your area.
Whatever arrangements you make, it's always best if you can see the buildings in the flesh, so you can examine the way they're put together, and have a close look at the various features offered before making a final decision.
Here is a summary of the main features to look out for.
STRUCTURE:
Almost all the kit garages available are modular structures, built either by fitting concrete panels to a steel frame, or by bolting the panels directly to each other.
A couple of firms still make traditional garages in treated softwood or Western red cedar; note that these will generally have to be sited at least 1m from property boundaries to satisfy the requirements of the Building Regulations.
STANDARD SIZES:
Most kit garage manufacturers offer detached single, double and twin garages (the latter have two single doors and an optional internal partition wall), in a range of standard sizes.
There is a much smaller choice of sizes if you want a lean-to garage, and generally only single garages are available, on the very reasonable grounds that if you have space for a double garage you have room for a detached one!
If you haven't even got room for a single lean-to garage, you could always consider building a carport.
Standard widths start at around 2.4m (8ft) for single garages, and 4.5m (14ft 9in) for doubles.
Lengths generally start at about 5m (15ft 6in), and can be increased by adding extra modules to the side walls of the building.
If space permits, always buy a garage a little larger than you really need, in case you acquire a larger car one day.
Some firms also offer extra-high models, for vehicles higher than normal family saloons — camper vans and the like.
ROOF PROFILES:
Kit garages come with a choice of either pitched or flat roofs, formed from corrugated or ribbed sheeting (usually asbestos-free fibre cement) on less expensive garages.
If the garage has a ‘flat’ roof, it will have a slight drainage slope, which may be to the side or the rear.
More expensive garages may have tiled pitched roofs, with gables either at the front and back of the building or on the side walls, allowing you to match the roof style and the finish to that of your house if you wish.
EXTERIOR WALL FINISHES:
There is a range of wall finishes available, so be prepared to hunt around for one you like or one which most closely matches your house.
The commonest are rough spar or aggregate finishes, and imitation brick and stonework; all can be painted if required.
Timber fascias and barge-boards are standard, while many pitched roof garages feature timber-clad gable ends.
You may be able to choose rigid foamed plastic as an alternative finish for the eaves and gables if you want a maintenance-free building; if you do, discuss it with the manufacturer at the ordering stage.
GARAGE DOORS:
The up-and-over door is a standard fitting on all garages, with different manufacturers offering a choice of steel, timber (softwood or red cedar) or plastic — either grp (glass-reinforced plastic) or upvc (unplasticised polyvinyl chloride).
A wide range of style is available from the plainest (and cheapest) slatted finish, to elaborate panelled types.
Traditional side-hung timber doors in softwood or cedar are offered as an option on some garages, and are standard on extra-height models.
Whichever type you choose, make sure that adequate locks and other security devices are either built in, or available as optional extras, or consider the ultimate burglar deterrent/luxury, and go for an up-and-over door fitted with an automatic door opener.
EXTRA DOORS AND WINDOWS:
So-called ‘personal’ doors, positioned in the side or back wall of the garage, are useful if you want to use your garage as a workshop or utility room, and are essential if your garage blocks access to the side of the house.
Doors leading directly from a lean-to garage to the house must meet the Building Regulations requirements concerning fire spread: if you plan such an installation, notify your supplier and confirm with the Building Inspector that the provisions made are satisfactory.
Windows, either fixed or opening, are worth including if you plan to use the garage for d-i-y or car maintenance purposes.
Their positioning is generally flexible, but there may be restrictions on the number you can install.
Again, pay particular attention to the security of personal doors and any windows you choose to install.
OPTIONAL EXTRAS:
You may be surprised to find that gutters and downpipes are regarded as luxuries by most kit garage manufacturers, and having them as part of the kit can add as much as £150 to the price on large double garages.
Other popular extras include partitions to separate workshop or utility areas from the main garage, shelving systems, and even built-in workbenches.
Check the prices against what you can buy or install yourself before ordering.
PRICES:
Prices range from under £1,000 for a basic single garage, to nearer £5,000 for a double garage with a tiled pitched roof: it all depends on the size and finish you choose.
Whichever garage you select, check price lists carefully.
Some quote all-in prices inclusive of VAT, while others itemise everything separately, and then add the VAT to the total.
To illustrate how misleading this can be, for a typical double garage with a base price of just under £2,000, optional extras like cedar doors, a partition, and guttering, plus VAT at 17.5% can take the final price up to almost £3,000!
RULES AND REGULATIONS
Whether you need planning permission and/or Building Regulations approval for your garage depends on how big it is and where it stands.
For planning permission purposes, a garage is treated as a home extension if it is attached to the house, or stands within 5m (16ft 6in) of it.
Within the permitted development rules for home extensions, this means no permission is needed, so long as adding the garage doesn't result in the volume of the house being increased by more than the permitted  development allowance.
This is:
50c m, or one tenth of the volume of the original house, up to a maximum of 115cu m for a terraced house.
70cu m, or 15% of the volume of the original house, again up to a maximum of  115cu m for other properties.
If you have already extended your house in the past, you may have used up part or all of the allowance, and you will have to apply for planning permission for the garage.
If the garage is more than 5m from the house, it is treated as an outbuilding for planning permission purposes.
This means that no planning permission is needed, unless the garage is more than 4m high (ridged roofs) or 3m high (flat ones).
Note, however, that planning permission is needed wherever the garage is sited if:
It projects beyond the face of the house fronting on to a highway.
Its construction results in more than half the original garden area of the house being covered by buildings (particularly relevant
to garages built in the gardens of terraced houses with rear access).
You will also need planning permission if you have to create a new access to your property from a classified road, and if you do, you'll need the consent of the local highways authority to cross a footpath or verge to reach it.
It is their job to provide a crossover from the road to your property.
Life is much less complicated as far as Building Regulations approval is concerned.
Detached garages with a floor area of less than 30sq m (325sq ft) are exempt from control, so long as they are constructed wholly of non-combustible material (which most garages are), or are more than 1m from the boundary in the case of wooden buildings.
However, attached lean-to garages are treated as home extensions, and must have full Building Regulations approval, especially as far as fire precautions are concerned.
Broadly speaking, it's best to ask your local authority about whether any official approval is needed before going ahead.
If none is required, they will be only too pleased to tell you.
ERECTING A KIT GARAGE
Once you have chosen, ordered and taken delivery of your kit garage, all that remains is to put it together, and here you have several options.
You can put down the concrete base and build the kit garage yourself; lay the base but let the garage manufacturer build it; or leave everything to him.
To illustrate the cost differences of these options, one firm will sell you a typical mid-price single garage kit for around £1,200.
If they build it on your base, the price is £1,575.
If they carry out the complete installation, you pay just under £2,300.
The choice is yours.
If you decide to lay your own base, the garage manufacturer will supply a detailed specification for you to follow for the slab size, thickness, and concrete composition (definitely a job for ready-mixed concrete).
And if you intend to erect the garage yourself, you will of course receive comprehensive instructions that tell you where everything goes.
SELF-BUILD GARAGES
If you decide that kit garages do not offer what you want, or you have a particularly awkward site to cope with, you may decide that you have no option but to design and build a garage to suit your requirements.
There is nothing to stop you doing the entire job yourself if you have the time and the skill.
If you do not, call in an architect or surveyor to do the design work for you, and a local builder to carry out the actual construction.
Whichever route you choose, you have the opportunity to select precisely the style, layout, size, materials and finish you want, maybe even to add on an extension, with a room above the garage, and perhaps a workshop behind.
Remember, though, that the same planning and building rules apply as for a kit garage; and the job will almost certainly cost you more than a kit garage would.
FINDING THE MONEY
Unless you have a healthy bank balance, you'll probably need to arrange finance for your new garage.
Extending your mortgage is the best way of doing this, but a personal loan could be a better bet for amounts below about £2,000, because of the costs involved.
It's generally cheaper to steer clear of garage manufacturers' own hire purchase schemes unless the quoted APR is unusually low.
Don't forget to contact your house insurance company, and ask them to increase the buildings cover accordingly to include the new building.
Tell your car insurance company too; with your car now garaged, they may offer a reduction in their premiums, which will partly offset the rise in your buildings insurance.
POSTSCRIPTS
There is one point you can be sure of: the cost of adding a garage to your property will be more than recouped when you come to sell it, since everyone values the added space and security it offers.
Ask any estate agent!
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION…
Avon Manufacturing Ltd ,Includes automatic door opening 
Cardale Garage Doors Ltd ,,Includes roller doors, feature windows in ‘stained glass’, & automatic opening gear 
Catnic Ltd ,,Includes automatic opening system 
King Door Products Ltd ,,Includes automatic door openers, three-point locking 
Chapman, Williamson & Partners ,,Motador d-i-y remote control opener only 
Above: Abon's arched Imperial door in cedar wood on galvanised steel frame
Left: Catnic's tongued and grooved Diagonal Cedar door, supplied ready to finish
Above: Maintenance-free glass-reinforced polyester, Georgian panelled Arundel door, with ‘woodgrain’ finish; and below; textured steel Carlton, both from Catnic
Above: From the Apex timber door range, the Tudor style, made from hardwood with Cedar or Redwood facings, can be base coated or fully finished to order
Left: Sturdy's Premier garage range has flush, hardwearing Durite walls, and a  choice of five door styles
Above: This Apex Tudor garage door can be supplied unfinished, for you to paint yourself
Below: The Marlborough garage, from Compton's De-Luxe Brick range, is available with red or sandstone ‘brick’ colouring.
All concrete panels are reinforced with steel, and garages have a choice of six door styles.
Left: Available in widths up to 10ft, Leofric's Lighthorne garage will fit the widest of cars.
And if the space you've got is lengthways, it will even give you a two-car long garage instead, it's available in any length over 14ft (in 2ft increments).
It has a softwood front fascia, ‘brick’ front piers are optional for this concrete-panelled garage
Below: Cotswold's Cheltenham gives you a substantial double garage at a budget price.
The silver stipple is one of a choice of three finishes; side-hung pine door is standard
Left: New from King Door Products is three-point locking for its doors, and this stylish brass-lacquered lock and handle
Right: A choice of 8ft or 10ft widths from Headen's new-look Ryton garage, with full-width, double doors clad in red cedar.
Sections are steel-framed steel cladding
UPdate
REMEMBER TO TREAT ROOF TIMBERS BEFORE INSULATING
Everyone knows the value of loft insulation in keeping warmth inside the house, making it more comfortable and more economical to run.
In the cold and possibly damp environment of the loft, roof timbers are at considerable risk from rot and woodworm, so it is worth treating your loft timbers with a good timber preservative before laying insulation.
It's difficult to get at the timbers once you've insulated, so get the job done properly and carry out the treatment before insulating the loft.
Cuprinol 5-Star Complete Wood Treatment is ideal for protecting loft timbers.
It kills wet rot, dry rot and woodworm, and penetrates deeply to protect against future attack.
For safety and efficiency, clear the loft and prepare the wood by vacuum cleaning it.
You can then treat the timber by spraying or brushing on two generous coats, working backwards towards the loft hatch.
Allow the fluid to dry before laying the loft insulation.
IMPROVED PERFORMANCE AND DURABILITY FROM CORDLESS DRILLS
Four cordless drills and drill/screwdrivers have been introduced into the Proline range by Black & Decker.
These high-performance, rugged tools are claimed to offer the best value for money on the market for the enthusiastic d-i-yer and tradesman, and for the first time offer the possibility of a battery recharging time of just a quarter of an hour.
Prices range from £81.95 to £106.95 for the drills, with charges ranging from £17.95 for a two-hour charge model, £35.95 for a one-hour charger, to £129.95 for a 15-minute charger.
Spare battery packs cost from £29.95 to £44.95.
Full details in our test report in a future issue of DIY .
SPECIAL HELP WITH PLUG FITTING
Wiring a plug can sometimes be frustrating, but not any more with the new Strip and Fit from PowerBreaker.
This device provides a safe, simple, and quick way of cutting and stripping the ends of electrical flex, first by removing the tough outer insulation, and then by baring the inner wires.
It can even strip insulation from television co-axial cable.
The Strip and Fit also has an integral screwdriver which can be used in any of three positions to fix wires in the terminals of the plug and to replace the outer cover of the plug.
The PowerBreaker Strip and Fit costs about £5 from Texas Homecare and other leading high street stores.
JUST A MAINS COLD WATER SUPPLY IS NEEDED FOR A LOW-COST SHOWER
Electric shower units like those in the Opus range bring the pleasure and convenience of instant hot showering within the reach of everyone.
In common with other models in the range, the Opus 2 low-cost 7kw design requires only a cold water supply, making it quick and easy to install.
Water temperature is set by a single control which adjusts the water flow.
Safety factors include a neon indicator lamp to show when heat is switched on, and anti-scald cut-out with an automatic reset, which switches off the heater at a pre-set maximum temperature.
The compact white splash-proof cover is highly resistant to damage, with all cable and pipework connections safely concealed, in line with BEAB standards.
The white wipe-clean flexible hose ensures maximum standards of hygiene, and matches an adjustable-height white slider rail.
Alternatively, there is a de-luxe chrome fixed wall-bracket for the detachable handset.
It is recommended that the installation is carried out by a qualified tradesman, or, at least, is checked by one.
JOBBING NOTEBOOK
SAVING WATER
Our dry summers have highlighted the fact that water is a commodity which can run out, and higher bills have focused minds on water economy.
now you can buy a simple d-i-y kit which can regulate the flow from any given tap.
Each kit comprises four white jumpers, four black washers and three sizes of regular coloured red, orange and green.
Full instructions are included, and all you need to add are an adjustable spanner, cross-point screwdriver and penknife.
Savings of up to 50% per annum can be made from each tap converted.
1
Cut off the water supply to the tap to be converted, then unscrew the retaining screw holding the tap handle.
The screw may be hidden beneath a coloured plastic disc, which needs levering out
2
With the handle removed, loosen the top headgear.
It is wise to apply counter-pressure to the tap body while using the spanner, to avoid strain on the basin
3
Remove the headgear, then use a flat-bladed screwdriver to lever out the existing jumper
4
Take the Eco-no-miser white jumper, place the black washer over the screw thread and screw the self-tapping orange regulator up to the black washer.
Place the complete unit into the body of the tap.
It should fit and be free-moving.
If not, unscrew the orange regulator and replace with a smaller green or larger red one.
5
Remove from the top and push the shaft of the white jumper into the hole in the base of the controller.
Replace the original jumper
6
Re-assemble the tap, ensuring the controller is fully tightened.
Turn off the tap, then restore the water supply to the tap.
If the flow is too fast, repeat the sequence, fitting the larger red regulator; if too slow, use the smaller green one (if not already used)
Price per kit including postage is £9.95.
Further details are available from Water Save Products (Europe) Ltd 
FAST WALL REPAIR
For a really speedy repair to damaged plasterwork, there is a low-cost repair film called Patch-over.
It is about the thickness of a coat of paint, and has a strong adhesive which sticks instantly to most surfaces, and cures to an even stronger bond.
The repair film is available as patches or as a 3.5m long strip.
Full details from Patch-over 
1
Rake out any loose material and ensure area is dust-free
2
Apply the film over the damaged area, pressing in firm contact around the edges.
The film will become drum-tight
3
Paint over the repair, extending the paint on to the surrounding area
4
A perfect, invisible repair completed in seconds.
Use strips for cracks in plaster
REDECORATING A TIMBER FLOOR
Even standard floorboards can look attractive if carefully prepared, sanded and sealed.
But because of the area involved it is best to hire an industrial sanding machine to clean away dirt and any old finish.
Borrow a small edging sander at the same time to finish close to walls.
1
Use hammer and nail punch to sink all protruding nails.
Draw any tacks remaining from previous floor coverings
2
Fill large gaps between boards with strips of wood cut to a wedge-shape.
Apply glue; hammer in place, then plane smooth.
3
Use masking tape to seal around doors to contain the dust — even though the sanding machine has a dust bag.
Experiment with the machine until you get the feel.
Start the machine with the abrasive belt clear of the floor…
4
then lower the machine until the abrasive belt touches the boards
5
Make your first passes diagonally across the floor in parallel runs
6
Then make runs parallel with the boards, using a finer abrasive belt
7
Sanding across boards will level off any irregularities between boards
8
But a hand scraper may be needed to clear old finish from hollow spots
9
The edging sander will smooth out uneven areas, and get right up to the skirting board
10
When sanding is complete, use a vacuum cleaner to pick up all remaining fine dust — especially from between boards
11
Apply your first coat of varnish or seal with a lint-free rag, working it well into the timber
12
Further coats can be applied by brush or roller, allowing each to dry before a further coat is applied.
Then a light sanding between coats, and a dust, will ensure a really good finish
REPAIRS TO SUPPORT A CEILING CENTREPIECE
In older properties, where ceilings are of lath and plaster, the weight of a plaster ceiling centrepiece can pull the plaster keying away from the laths, causing the whole centre to sag alarmingly.
1
To make the centre secure, locate the nearest ceiling joists or joists which the centre overlaps.
Drill holes in the centre; slightly countersink the holes
2
Then use screws with small plastic washers to secure the centre to the joists, taking screws and washers below the surface of the plaster
3
Gain access to the ceiling from above and chip a way the damaged area of plaster keying
4
Pour a sloppy mix of plaster of Paris over the damaged area to form a new key
5
Fill the holes in the centrepiece with matching plaster and make good any other damage
6
Apply a thin bead of plaster around the rim to hide any crack
HANGING A STEEL DOOR
The door illustrated here may look pretty ordinary at first glance.
But beneath that neat and attractive exterior lies a steel door which can't rot, twist, split or warp.
It is four times stronger than its equivalent in hardwood, offering excellent security.
Ever-True galvanised steel doors come in an attractive range of styles, solid or safety-glazed, and each has a severe weather rating, with magnetic weather seal and full thermal break as standard.
For maximum security, a matching hardwood door frame is recommended.
our feature shows the fitting of both frame and door.
If you require more information, contact Ellbee Steel Door Systems 
1
Check that the components of the hardwood door frame go together neatly…
2
Then apply waterproof wood adhesive to joints, assemble and secure with brass screws.
Drill start-holes to avoid splitting.
Check that the frame is square by measuring the diagonals before the adhesive sets 
3
The completed frame.
This is a good time to treat surfaces which will be hidden with clear preservatives.
Fit a suitable damp-proof membrane around the frame to isolate it from the surrounding masonry, then fit the frame in the opening.
If necessary, use wooden blocks as spacers.
Secure with frame fixers, taking care not to deform the frame
4
If using the existing door frame, remove the old door and its hinges
5
Remove any existing weather bar by prising it away with an old chisel
6
Fill all holes and recesses with a wood repair compound or waterproof wood stopping.
Smooth when set
7
Remove the new door from its aluminium frame then position the frame within the timber door frame
8
Slide it into place so the aluminium frame is tight up to the rebate…
9
then mark the position of the lock striker box
10
Remove the aluminium frame and cut out the hole for the striker box.
Refill the aluminium frame and check it is square
11
Screw the aluminium frame in place, using the pre-drilled countersunk holes.
Be sure the hinge screw holes are left free
12
Make driving screws easier and avoid splitting the timber frame by pre-drilling all holes
13
Fit the lock striker box in place using the screws provided
14
Cut the timber seal carriers to length, mitring the top corners
15
Check for fit…
16
Then cut the other ends flush with the bottom of the door frame
17
Run a bead of mastic sealant in the seal carrier grooves and fix in position on the door frame.
use waterproof adhesive and rustless pins
18
Cut the rubber seals to size and press into the slots in the seal carriers.
These are a push-fit 
19
Fit the vertical seals first — full length of the frame…
20
Then add a horizontal strip at the top of the door
21
Remove the magnetic seal from the aluminium drainage sill, then measure and mark the sill for size
22
Use a hacksaw to cut the sill to length.
It should be a good push-fit
23
Cut a rebate in the sill so it fits around the seal carriers
24
With the drainage sill in place, drill down through the pre-drilled holes into the frame below.
Secure with the screws supplied
25
Apply waterproof mastic sealant between the drainage sill and the seal carriers.
Cut magnetic seal to length and insert into the slot in the drainage sill.
Then fit the black plastic draught excluders to the drainage holes in front of the drainage sill
26
Hang the door within the aluminium frame using only the two outer screws in each hinge.
Leave the screws loose.
Adjust the door up or down to ensure equal clearance between door and frame.
Tighten the screws.
Then insert a wood screw in each central hinge hole, screwing into the timber door frame
27
Slide the square-section spindle into the upper part of the lock (the lock is already fitted to the door).
Then locate the handle assembly over the spindle and drill holes for the self-tapping screws supplied.
Screw in place, then repeat the operation on the other side of the door.
28
Trim the drip bar to length, leaving a 2mm gap either side.
Using the drip bar as a template, drill holes for the self-tapping screws supplied.
Fix the bar in place
PAINTING THE DOOR
The door has a factory-applied coat of primer, so further coats of primer are not recommended, but a good quality exterior paint must be applied.
If glazed panels are fitted to the door, fill countersunk screw heads in the window frame(s) on the inside of the door with a fine surface filler.
When dry, rub down to provide a smooth surface for painting.
Before applying paint to the door, lightly clean the surface with white spirit to remove any dirt or grease.
Do not close the door until the paint has thoroughly dried.
All hardwood should be treated with stain preservative or a good quality exterior varnish to protect the timber.
INSTALLING A NICHE
First, cut a suitably-sized hole in the interior wall leaf, using bolster and club hammer.
The hole required is small enough to need no lintel support, but if you have any doubts about the stability of the wall area above the proposed hole, consult your local Building Control officer.
Ensure that no masonry falls down into the cavity, where it could interfere with the wall ties.
On an exterior cavity wall, a damp-proof membrane will be required behind the niche.
Again your Building Control officer can advise on this.
Test that your niche fits the hole.
1
Drill and plug the wall, and screw the bottom section of the niche to the wall, using the mirror plates provided
2
Now offer the niche to the hole, making sure it sits correctly on the base section
3
Screw the top section in place, again using the mirror plates
4
Use filler to make good all joints between sections.
Wipe any surplus filler away with a damp rag while still wet
5
Insert the ground glass base into the base of the niche.
If a further shelf is wanted higher up, small holes need drilling to take the mounting studs.
If required, the completed niche may be painted with a matt emulsion paint
CONNECTING A MIXER TAP AND WASTE
Fixing a three-hole mixer with pop-up waste may look a little complicated, but if you follow through in a sequence of operations it's not too difficult.
1
Connect the nozzle to the mixer unit, then position the tap assembly under the basin as a unit and screw the flanges of the tap headwork to the tap heads
2
Smear the flange of the pop-up waste with sealant such as Plumber's Mait, then screw the pop-up body in place, working from the underside.
Screw the cable waste to the lift rod
3
Screw a 1¼in P-trap to the pop-up body, then connect to the waste pipe — in this case with a reducing coupler
4
Water pipes seen here are linked to the basin by corrugated, 15mm connectors.
They can be bent by hand to the desired shape and secured by compression fittings
SUPPORTING GARDEN POLES
Rotary clothes lines, umbrellas and some lawn games require a firm fixing for the poles that support them.
Concrete fixings spoil the look of a lawn, and poles set directly into the earth often loosen in wet weather and begin to lean.
Larch-Lap produces a universal garden pole support that requires no digging or concreting, just a hammer and screwdriver.
1
Loosely assemble the four metal toothed sections to form a cross around the plastic tube provided.
Tighten the bolts until a good push-fit, then remove cross
2
Pre-form a hole around 12in deep, with a slightly smaller diameter than the ground tube
3
Place a block of wood over the plastic tube and knock into the ground, occasionally placing the clothes line pole into the tube to check the tube is vertical
4
With 1in of the plastic tube above ground level, place the cross piece over the tube, teeth facing downwards, and hammer the cross and tube flush with ground level.
Continue to hammer the cross pieces only, until they are 1in below ground level
5
Place a few pebbles in the bottom of the tube to aid drainage before inserting the clothes pole, umbrella etc.
If as here, the pole is less than 1¼in diameter, roll the two rubber bushes (supplied) over the bottom of the pole and spaced 6in apart.
‘Screw’ the pole into the tube
DEALING WITH DAMAGED GUTTERS
Where metal guttering shows signs of deterioration, but it isn't serious enough for replacement, use self-adhesive flashing tape to protect the damaged areas.
This should be used in conjunction with a special primer.
1
Remove all loose and flaking material with a wire brush, then apply primer to the area to be covered.
Remove the backing tape from the flashing, and press the strip firmly in place, smoothing down edges so there is no obstruction to the free flow of rainwater
2
If the fault is only at joints, clean away loose material, prime, then merely use strips of flashing tape to seal the joints.
Again, press smooth so water will flow freely.
The tape used here was Evostik Flashband, plus primer
LAYING CARPET TILES
For a warm, attractive and practical floorcovering for the kitchen, carpet takes some beating.
To make laying easy, carpet tiles are on the ideal choice — in a grade which is able to withstand kitchen conditions.
If there are recesses for items like washing machines and dishwashers, be sure to remove these to allow you to tile right back to the wall.
This will ensure the easy removal of these  appliances should servicing be necessary.
Our choice for this laying sequence was Heuga carpet tiles, full details of which are available from stockists, or from:
Allow your tiles to acclimatise at room temperature for at least 24 hours before laying — especially if they've been stored in cold conditions
1
Ensure the floor is clean, dry and level.
The carpet tiles can be laid over ceramic or stone tile floors
2
On the back of each tiles is an arrow indicating pile direction.
To achieve a broadloom effect, lay the tiles with e arrows facing in the same direction.
Arrows at right-angles produces a chequered effect
3
Start by drawing a straight line 50cm from the principal wall, then strike a second line at right-angles to this.
Use these lines to calculate where the tiles should be cut.
Try to avoid narrow cuts.
In heavily trafficked areas, use complete or nearly full tiles 
4
A trial run along both lines is recommended to ensure that planning is correct.
To avoid narrow cuts, you may have to adjust your guide lines
5
Fit carpet tiles along the first two lines, then cut in the end tiles (see photo 8).
To prevent tiles slipping, the use of an anti-slip solution or small patches of double-sided carpet tape are recommended.
These two rows of firmly fitted tiles create the ideal base from which to complete the laying
6
Now cut in the tiles to the principal wall, then continue tiling by building up a pyramid shape.
Where necessary, continue to use the anti-slip solution or double-sided tape
7
Working out from the pyramid shape already laid, use the weight of your body to keep the laid tiles flat.
Ensure that each tile is pushed tightly against its neighbour
8
To cut-in a carpet tile, turn the tile over, carefully calculate the area to be cut, and mark it accurately on the back of the tile.
(Remember you are working in reverse!)
Ensure that when the tile is cut and turned over, the pile direction will be correct when put in place.
Use paper templates to cut difficult shapes
9
Use a sharp craft knife and steel straight-edge to score the backing of the tile…
10
‘Crack’ the tile along the cut
11
Still cutting from behind, cut through the top fabric.
Always use a sharp knife, and always cut away from the hand holding the tile to avoid accidents
12
When fitting is finished, vacuum clean the whole carpet area and replace any appliances
HEUGA HOTLINE
During January, exclusive to DIY readers, Heuga will be operating a telephone hotline with a team of experts ready to help you solve any problems relating to their carpet tiles.
Call any weekday (9am to 5pm) from January 2nd–31st on 0296 314408.
OILING A LOCK
When a key becomes hard to turn, it's time for a little lubrication.
Be sure to use a dry lubricant — oils tend to attract dust, which will eventually cause the lock to seize.
The aerosol dry lubricant illustrated contains ptfe powder — the non-stick ingredient used for coating pans.
The microscopic particles bond themselves to metal surfaces, providing long-lasting lubrication.
If you have difficulty locating Slick 50 , contact the information service telephone 0533 881 522.
ADHESIVE REPAIR
After repairing a china ornament with a clear resin adhesive, hold pieces firmly together with clear adhesive tape until the adhesive sets.
After removing the tape, pare away any surplus adhesive with a razor blade.
Any visible glue line can be disguised with enamel, applied with a fine camel-hair brush.
Apply only in thin layers, coat on coat.
Keeping a hot house
Most modern central-heating systems work very well, especially if they are regularly serviced, but things can go wrong with even the best-maintained system.
You can tackle the simpler problems yourself.
LEAKS FROM THE SYSTEM
Leaks can have very serious consequences in terms of the damage they cause to your home — especially if they occur on the central heating system.
The contents of most systems are not the nice clean water that comes out of the tap, but a disgusting black sludge which will ruin floorcoverings and be very difficult to clean up if a leak occurs.
When you spot a leak on the heating system, first switch off the boiler.
Then turn off the stop tap on the supply to the feed-and-expansion tank, attach a hose to the lowest draincock on the system, and lead it to a gully or drain outside.
Open the valve to empty the system.
With the pipe drained, you can attempt a repair.
If the puncture is in the middle of a pipe run, cut through it at the puncture site, and remove about 20mm of pipe so you can reconnect the cut ends with a compression fitting.
If you don't have an appropriate fittings available, use a pipe repair putty, a pipe repair tape, or some pvc insulating tape, and a section of garden hose and some strong wire to make a temporary repair.
Remember, when refilling the system, to add  a corrosion inhibitor via the expansion tank (see CORROSION-PROOFING).
Try curing leaky compression fittings either by tightening up the capnuts, or by opening the fitting and winding ptfe tape over the olive before reassembling it.
With capillary fittings it is usually impossible to resolder a leading joint because the pipe will contain some water.
So, dismantle it and fit a compression joint in its place.
If a radiator starts to leak (usually as the result of internal corrosion), try adding a radiator sealant at the feed-and-expansion tank.
This is pumped around the system and is effective at sealing pinhole leaks.
If this fails to work, turn off the radiator's isolating valves, and undo the valve couplings so you can drain it completely, ready for replacement (see below).
NOISY PIPEWORK
Central heating pipes expand as they heat up and contract as they cool down, and this can cause irritating ticking or creaking noises.
To cure the problem, check points where pipes pass through holes in floors, joists and walls, and pack pipe insulation around them.
Do this too where pipe runs are held rigidly by pipe clips, and remove any clips close to right-angled bends to allow the pipe to expand freely.
If you can hear a humming noise in the pipework, the cause may be the pump speed being set too high.
If you have this problem, try reducing the pump speed slightly (see BOILER & PUMP PROBLEMS).
Call an expert in if the noise persists.
Cure noise from filling cisterns by replacing the ballvalve with a newer quieter type (see BALLVALVE PROBLEMS).
Banging sounds emanating from the boiler may be due to a build-up of scale or to air being drawn into the system.
See CORROSION-PROOFING & DESCALING for more details.
BALLVALVE PROBLEMS
If the ballvalve on the feed-and-expansion tank jams open, it could cause the tank to overflow (remember that the overflow pipe is really just a warning pipe designed to warn of a leaking valve, and it may not be able to cope with the flow if the valve is fully open).
Jammed closed, the tank will run dry, and this will cause possible damage or overheating of the central heating system.
If the problem is an overflow, check the float before blaming the valve itself.
If it is partly submerged, it has sprung a leak and filled with water.
Tie up the valve, unscrew the float, and buy a matching replacement.
If the problem is an overflow, check the float before blaming the valve itself.
If it is partly submerged, it has sprung a leak and filled with water.
Tie up the valve, unscrew the float, and buy a matching replacement.
If the float is still afloat, the fault probably lies within the valve.
Old brass types such as the Portsmouth valve contain a piston with a washer on the end, and this wears out, allowing the valve to drip.
Turn off the water supply to the valve, and dismantle the valve by using pliers to remove the split pin holding the float arm, then unscrew the end cap and prise out the piston.
Hold the piston with a wrench and use another to unscrew the washer cover, then prise out the old washer and fit a replacement.
Clean the valve out thoroughly before reassembly.
More modern valves contain a diaphragm instead of a washer, and are generally far more reliable.
If they give trouble, the diaphragm usually needs replacing.
This involves unscrewing the retaining nut, removing the end cap and plunger and prising out the old diaphragm with a small screwdriver.
Note which way it was fitted, insert the new one the same way round, then reassemble the valve.
The sequence of operations is similar for all diaphragm-type valves.
If the valve has jammed shut, causing the feed-and-expansion tank to run dry, again turn off the water supply.
Then either dismantle clean, lubricate and reassemble the old valve, or remove it and replace it with a more modern and reliable one.
COLD RADIATORS
All the radiators should be at approximately the same temperature on a well-designed heating system — unless radiators are individually controlled by thermostats.
However, a variety of problems can occur which will result in one or more radiators on the system being only lukewarm or even stone cold.
What you do depends on whether the cold radiator is the only one affected, or whether others are cold too.
If just one radiator is cold, start by checking that the radiator valves are turned on.
Open the handwheel valve at one end of the radiator, and remove the cap from the lockshield valve at the other end.
Use pliers or a small spanner to turn the spindle to full on, noting how many turns this took so you can then restore it to its original position later.
The next thing to check is whether there is a build-up within the radiator of air or the gaseous by-products of corrosion in the system.
This is particularly likely with radiators at the top of the system.
A partly-filled radiator suffering from this problem will feel hot at the bottom and cool at the top.
Open the air vent with a radiator key and see if air or gas is forced out.
If this is the cause of the problem, hot water will run into the radiator and displace the trapped air.
Close the vent as soon as water starts to dribble out, and check that the feed-and-expansion tank still has water in it after the radiator has been topped up.
See BALLVALVE PROBLEMS if it hasn't.
The final common cause of a cold radiator is a build-up of sludge — another corrosion by-product — which can block the inlet or outlet to the radiator.
Sludge can also cause cold spots along he bottom of the radiator without completely blocking the flow.
To get rid of it you usually need to remove the radiator (see below) so you can flush out the sludge.
If you find that more than one radiator is cold and they are all upstairs, the heating system may be starved of water due to losses not being replaced via the feed-and-expansion tank.
If this tank contains no water (it should be about one-third full when the system is on), check the operation of its ballvalve (see BALLVALVE PROBLEMS again).
The problem could also be caused by a blockage in the circulating pipes, caused again by sludge.
Try increasing the pump speed for a short while to shift the blockage, or drain down the system so it can be flushed through and refilled (see CORROSION-PROOFING AND DESCALING).
Lastly, on systems with zone control, the problem may be caused by a faulty motorised valve which is isolating part of the system.
It is generally best to leave valve servicing and replacement to a professional plumber.
If all the radiators are cold, there are several possible causes.
The pump may have jammed or failed (see BOILER & PUMP REPAIRS again), the room thermostat may have packed up (replace it), or a faulty motorised valve may be diverting water from the heating system.
If the problem is a faulty valve, again call in expert help.
Note that some types of motorised valve cannot be serviced and have to be replaced (a job that will entail draining down the entire system), but on many newer models it is possible to replace the valve motor and free the valve spindle if it is jammed, without having to interfere with the plumbing.
BOILER PROBLEMS
It is generally best to leave maintenance and repairs of central heating boilers to an expert service engineer, and to have your system serviced at least annually to keep it in good condition.
However, there are some simple faults with gas boilers which you may be able to diagnose yourself and so assist the service engineer in selecting the right parts to bring with him.
Pilot light problems are one of the commonest boiler faults.
The pilot light burns continuously on most boilers, and lights the main burners when the programmer switches on the main gas supply.
If the pilot light goes out for any reason, a heat-sensing thermocouple detects the fault and prevents the main gas supply from operating.
The pilot light is usually situated at the front of the boiler, next to the burners, and it should be visible through an inspection hole.
If it is out, try relighting it with a match, so long as there is no strong smell of gas.
A failure to relight suggests a blocked jet, which needs cleaning and adjusting, or a failed thermocouple which needs replacing.
On boilers with piezoelectric ignition, simply push the ignition button; if it won't work but you can light the flame by hand, the ignition device is faulty, and again needs replacing.
If the temperature of the heating system seems erratic, the fault may lie with the boiler thermostat.
Try altering the setting on the thermostat dial; if nothing changes the thermostat is probably faulty.
Replacing these faulty parts is a simple job for an engineer.
When you call him out, describe what you think the fault is, and give him the make and model number of your boiler if possible.
PUMP PROBLEMS
The commonest problem with central heating pumps is jamming, either after a period when the pump has not been used, or due to sludge in the system clogging the impeller.
Fortunately, many types of pump can be restarted without having to be disconnected and dismantled.
They have a slot on the end of the drive shaft, and by turning this with a screwdriver you can generally free the impeller inside.
Turn off the pump's power supply first.
TYPICAL CENTRAL HEATING SYSTEM
Points to check on your heating system and its controls
Is the ball valve in the cold water cistern working efficiently?
A modern valve will be less noisy too
Has a corrosion-inhibitor been added after cleaning out the system?
Give radiators a periodic check to ensure that no air or gas is trapped
Has the hot water cylinder got an efficient thermostat control?
This must be in close contact with the tank
Invest in a modern sophisticated programmer, which can give considerable fuel savings
If you have individual radiator thermostats, remember that room doors must be kept closed
A modern room thermostat such as Challenge Electronic's Optimiser can save on fuel bills.
If the impeller won't move, you will have to remove the pump for cleaning.
It should have an isolating valve on the pipework at either side.
Turn these off, disconnect its power supply and undo the couplings so you can lift the pump out.
Take it to the sink and run water through it while trying to rotate the impeller.
When it is free, replace the pump, open the isolating valves, and bleed air from the pump chamber via the bleed screw before restoring the power supply.
If the pump still will not run, or it is noisy — a sure sign of worn bearings — it is probably in need of servicing or even replacing.
It's a good idea to run your central heating pump for a few minutes a week in summer to prevent it from seizing up when the system is not in use.
CORROSION-PROOFING AND DESCALING
Corrosion occurs within heating systems by electrolytic means, due to the presence of different metals (copper pipes and steel radiators), and the result is the gradual eating away of the steel to form iron oxides — the brown or black sludge that is so familiar to any d-i-y plumber.
The process causes leaks and blockages around the system, and is a major contributor to pump failure.
Fortunately, it can be prevented by the addition of special chemicals to the water in the system.
Scale build-up within heating systems is also a problem, especially in hard water areas.
Every conventional wet system takes in small amounts of fresh water from time to time, and these introduce a fresh supply of mineral salts, which build up as scale deposits in the boiler and the system pipework, as well as fresh oxygen, which aids further corrosion.
The result of a build-up of scale is boiler noise and a gradual loss of boiler efficiency.
Once again, chemicals can be added to remove the scale.
To give your system a clean-out you need to descale it thoroughly, then drain it down, flush it through with clean water, and refill it with fresh water, to which a corrosion inhibitor has been added.
Attach a hose to the system draincock, tie up the ballvalve arm in the feed and expansion tank, then open the valve, draw off two or three buckets full of water, and close it again.
Now add the descaling liquid to the feed and expansion tank as per the maker's instructions, and run the pump to circulate it thoroughly round the boiler and the system pipework.
Next, turn off the boiler, programmer and immersion heater, close the stop tap supplying the feed-and-expansion tank, and open the draincock.
As the system empties, open all the radiator air vents, working from the top downwards until the system is empty.
Refill it by closing the draincock and restoring the water supply to the feed-and-expansion tank, and turn the system back on so you can pump the clean water round again and remove the last remains of the descaling.
Drain it down again and refill it once more with fresh water, closing air vents one by one as radiators fill up.
Finally, add the corrosion inhibitor at the feed-and-expansion tank as directed by the chemical manufacturer.
Check that you use the correct chemical for descaling if your system is more than 12 years old, because of the risk of leaks occurring as the scale is dissolved.
You also need to use the right corrosion-proofer.
There are different types for cast iron or steel boilers and for copper tubular types, and another type specially formulated for use on systems with aluminium radiators.
If you are unsure what you have, get expert advice from the manufacturer.
When refilling the system for the last time, do it via the draincock rather than the feed-and-expansion tank, to lessen the risk of airlocks.
You must use a double-check valve on the hose supply to prevent the risk of back-siphonage contaminating the mains water supply if you use this technique.
REPLACING A RADIATOR
If a radiator starts leaking and a leak sealer does not work you will have no choice but to replace the radiator.
Select a new radiator that is the closest possible match to the existing one in terms of height and length.
New radiators come in metric sizes, and if the one you are replacing is an old imperial size, go for one fractionally smaller than the original if possible.
It is easier to fit an extension to the inlet of a narrower radiator so the pipes can be reconnected than to alter the pipework to cope with a wider one.
The first step is to isolate and disconnect the old radiator.
Close the handwheel valve at one end, and remove the cover of the lockshield valve at the other end so you can close it by turning its spindle with pliers or a small spanner.
note the number of turns this takes, so you can repeat the setting once the new radiator is connected, thus maintaining the balance of flow through it.
Place a shallow container under each valve connection, and loosen one of the couplings with a spanner.
Brace the valve body against the wall as you do this, to prevent it turning and fracturing the supply pipe below.
Undo the coupling slightly so water can trickle into the container, and open the air vent to increase the flow rate.
Do up the coupling again whenever you need to empty the container.
When the radiator is empty, undo the other coupling and stuff tissue paper or rag into the radiator inlets, to stop sludge dripping out as you lift the radiator off its brackets and carry it out of the house.
You will have to remove the old wall brackets, since the new radiator is highly unlikely to fit them, and then measure the back of the new radiator so you can fit the new brackets in the correct position on the wall.
Fit the air vent and blanking plug to the top inlet tappings of the new radiator, and screw a valve tail into each of the bottom tappings.
You may need a special large hexagonal key called a radiator spanner for this.
Wrap ptfe tape around each fitting before screwing it into place in the radiator.
You can now hang the new radiator on its brackets, and check that the old valves can be connected to the valve tails.
Add extension pieces if necessary to bridge the gap between the new valve tails and the old valve body, then reconnect up all the valves.
open the valves to allow water to enter the radiator, with the air vent open to allow air to escape.
When the radiator is full, close the air vent, reset the lockshield valve to its original setting, replace its cover, and open the handwheel valve to allow water to circulate right the way through it.
MOVING A RADIATOR
Basically, what you have to do is to rehang the radiator in its new position, and then divert the flow and return pipework to it.
It's generally a simple matter to work out how the circuit pipework is run, and what re-routing will be needed to reach the new radiator position.
The aim is to find the shortest pipe runs from there to the circuit pipework.
It's generally easier to plan for entirely new pipework, with the existing runs simply capped off and left in their present place.
Next, identify which are flow and which are return pipes.
The former get warm first when the system is switched on from cold.
Label the pipes you will be working on to avoid confusion later on.
Before starting work, turn off the boiler at the programmer (gas or oil-fired systems); let solid fuel boilers go out and cool down.
Then turn off the water supply for the feed-and-expansion tank, drain the system, and disconnect and remove the radiator and its brackets as described earlier (see REPLACING A RADIATOR).
It you're reusing an old radiator, fix the old brackets to the wall at the new radiator position and rehang the radiator.
If you're installing a new radiator, fit the new valves, air vent and blanking-off plug before you finally hang it on its new brackets.
You can now run in the new pipework by whatever method you have selected.
Start at the new radiator position and work back towards the point at which you will connect into the existing pipework.
Cut in a tee at this point, and connect up the new runs.
Then cut back the pipe tails to the old radiator position, and cap off the pipe ends.
Finally, with all the connections made and checked, you can refill the system.
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION…
Gas systems, & fires with back boiler
Optimaster room thermostat
Thermocet range of gas-fired stoves, some with boilers
Controllers & thermostats 
A Baxi Bermuda living flame fire-front, compatible with back boiler
Thermocet Dauphin high-efficiency cast iron stove, from a traditional range stocked by Frampton's Fireplace Centre
WHAT'S NEW
TOWEL WARMERS
Potterton Myson give new meaning to the term towel rail with their extensive range of towel warmers.
The Multirail units offer a decorative feature for the bathroom, combined with ample storage.
These are available for connection to the central heating system, or as sealed electrically-operated units independent of the heating system.
Then there are combined radiators and rails, tubular towel warmers, and oil-filled units.
Finishes range from a white polyester-coat stove-enamelled finish to chrome, brass and gold plate — to suit all tastes and purses.
Further details of ranged and sizes available from:
THE THINKING CONTROLLER
The Dataterm advanced central heating controller is designed to take all the guesswork out of programming.
No matter how erratic the weather, the unit will decide what time to switch on — based upon what time you want to get up and the temperature you want.
No matter how many times you are in or out of your home, the unit can cope.
The timing control allows your heating to come on up to six times a day, with each time set at a different temperature.
Each day of the week can also be different again.
Independent hot water control is another of Dataterm's benefits.
You can have up to three separate start-up times a day.
If you need more hot water at any other time, just one touch of a button will give you a tank-full of hot water at any time you need it.
Price of the control is £325.50.
Further information is available from:
HEATING WITH STYLE
The traditional cast-iron stove, centrally situated in a room has offered an efficient means of heating for centuries, burning a range of solid fuels.
Now these attractive stoves are available for use with both natural and propane gas.
Under the name Thermocet, there are ten gas models all manufactured in highest quality cast iron and thermostatically-controlled, with outputs up to 10.5kW.
Highly heat-efficient — over 80% on some models — the stoves are quick and simple to install and are virtually maintenance-free in operation.
For details of these and a wide range of heating appliances, contact: Or visit the showroom and see the fires in action.
HEAT RETRIEVAL TOO
The value of a condensing boiler is that it retrieves most of the expensively generated heat from flue gases and puts this heat back into the system.
This is a benefit offered by the GVM C21 condensing combi from Leblanc.
The boiler produces hot water for the radiators as well as instant hot water whenever required, without the need for a bulky tank or cylinder.
A fan is used to retrieve the flue gas heat, utilising a stainless steel condensing coil.
In its condensing mode, the unit achieves up to 95% efficiency, contributing to reduced fuel bills.
The GVM C21 has an output of 21kW (72,000 Btu/h) and has a flow rate of 9.5 litres per min.
Further information is available from:
SMALL, SAFE AND CONVENIENT
Finrad, specialists in radiator technology and manufacture offer a wide range to suit all needs including their new Finrad Convectoradd 105 which, despite its small size and weight has a very high heat output, allowing heating to be located at windows.
All pipes connections are concealed within the length to give a neat appearance, and the surface temperature is much lower  than the average radiator, so it is safe to touch and needs no bulky enclosures.
Details available from 
FOR A HEALTHY HEATING SYSTEM
Corrosion; heat-loss; boiler noise; pump failure; cold spots on radiators — all are problems which fall within the scope of the Fernox range of corrective solutions.
The range includes Fernox Superfloc, a mild universal cleanser for central heating systems; Fernox DS-40, a vigorous cleanser for systems with serious problems; Fernox MB-1 corrosion-proofer and noise preventive; Fernox CP-3, a cleanser for copper tube boilers; and Fernox Copal, to protect aluminium, as well as cast iron, steel and copper.
Then there are leak-sealants, Fernox LX-X jointing compound and Fernox ES-1 internal leak sealer for sealing small leaks in inaccessible places.
For frost protection there is Fernox FP-PH for use with MB-1 and CP-3, and Fernox Alphi-11, a fully inhibited anti-freeze suitable for systems containing aluminium, and for solar systems.
Useful leaflets entitled Fernox ,The professional answer to cleansing central heating systems , and Fernox ,the professional answer to central heating problems are available free from 
BACK-UP SUPPLIES
A central heating system encompasses a range of ancillary equipment, and DES Electrical Wholesalers offer a very wide selection of materials including cables, wiring accessories, switchgear, heaters and towel rails, water heaters, thermostats and elements, immersion timers, central heating controllers and trunking.
They have seven branches, but a fast mail order service is available from their Stratford-Upon-Avon branch.
Phone 0789 415424.
Getting lofty ideas?
As families grow, the home appears to shrink proportionately until it seems to almost bulge at the seams.
If the need for an extra room does not warrant the additional expense of a larger house, the solution may be to rise above it all.
In past decades the roof void in most houses has been just that: a black, dusty hole in which to dump unused goods out of sight.
Converting the loft could be the least expensive way of providing more space and adding a little value to the property.
ROOF CONSTRUCTION
‘Can I convert my loft?’
Some types of roof construction make loft conversion a little more expensive than others, some make it almost impossible.
Most can be developed to some degree, but could be restricted on size, headroom and shape.
Houses with a mansard roof cannot be converted, as the first floor rooms are already in the roof space.
Trussed roofs will require additional support to the roof; and unless considerable structural alterations are made, a typical Victorian terraced house with a central staircase will require new stairs from a bedroom.
This may not be desirable where the room isn't large enough to be partitioned from the stairs.
Other structural details may also provide unexpected features for the conversion.
It's largely a matter of what you want from the loft, and how much you want to spend.
‘How can I tell what type of roof I have?’
Pop your head into the loft and take a look around.
If your rafters have a continuous cross-member on the underside, with a couple of struts, or less, to the centre of the loft, then you will most likely have a traditional rafter-and-purlin type construction, which is the most straightforward to convert.
A trussed roof prevents free movement around the loft, as there are many timbers to climb over or through.
Should you find that your roof is home to bats or other species, protected under the Wildlife & Countryside Act 1981, you must consult the Nature Conservancy Council for advice on the best way to deal with them, for the minimum disruption to both the animals and the household.
Further information and a free booklet,Focus on Bats , is available from your local branch of the NCC.
‘Where do I start?’
Before committing yourself to anything involving payment it's important to establish whether there are special conditions restricting or preventing the usual development rights.
For example, listed buildings, properties within a Conservation Area, a National Park, an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty, the Norfolk and Suffolk Broads, or those protected by a deed of covenant, may not be permitted any change to the roof line.
Simply ask your borough council planning department, who will be able to advise you.
REGULATIONS
‘Is that all planning is?’
No.
The purpose of the planning department is to control local development to preserve the aesthetic appearance of the region.
You may need full planning permission, based on the submission of detailed drawings.
Where the proposed development faces a highway, full planning permission is needed.
A highway for this purpose is defined as including footpaths, bridleways and byways.
A loft conversion with a dormer window to the rear only, which does not face a highway, and does not exceed 50cu m of the volume of the house, or 40cu m for a terraced house, does not need planning permission.
As for a very rough guide this would be one moderate sized double bedroom.
The flat, Velux-type roof window may be installed to any aspect, including facing a highway, without planning permission.
Because there is no projecting dormer, there will be less headroom, as the slope of the roof is retained in the conversion, but proportionately more light will enter the room.
Retaining the roof slope can add to the character of the conversion with a variation from regular box-shaped rooms.
The more slopes to a roof, the greater the scope for the unusual, but they can restrict size.
The flues of back-to-back fireplaces can also add an interesting feature to the centre of some conversions.
This type of chimney construction, where the fireplaces were built on interior walls, is common in older detached properties, especially bungalows.
All developments, however, will require Building Regulations approval.
‘Not more regulations?’
Afraid so.
The Building Regulations are to safeguard the health and safety of those in and around the building.
Certain methods of construction must be carried out, but this does not mean that the building inspector has full control over the quality of workmanship.
‘I'm losing interest already.’
Don't.
Most of the regulations are someone else's problem: the  architect's or the builder's; the latter sometimes being both.
An increasing number of builders now offer a service of drawing and submitting plans, although an architect may be more creative.
COSTS INVOLVED
‘What's it going to cost?’
The cost of drawing up plans will depend on where you go, but this is one occasion where you can afford to choose the cheapest.
Unless the plans meet all the regulations, they won't be passed until they are amended to conform.
You shouldn't pay a penny until they're approved, so there's no risk.
The drawing fee should include the fees for planning permission, if applicable; and the Building Regulations full plans application (but not the inspection fee).
Approval and inspection fees are set by central government, which means that wherever you live in England or Wales, the price will be the same: planning permission £46; Building Regulations plans approval £35.25; and £105.75 inspection fees when the work commences.
These figures include VAT, and are for loft conversions only.
No fees are payable for improvements made towards increasing the health, safety and comfort in a disabled people's home.
‘I'm going to be spending a lot of money, and I can't afford to take chances on the builder’
An understandable concern in view of the bad publicity given to some builders in recent years.
Recommendation is the best advertising for any company, so ask around.
Don't be afraid to knock on doors where loft conversions have been carried out, and ask about the builder, the workmanship, and the manner in which it was conducted.
You don't want a firm whose  work of good, but who may leave you high and not-so-dry for a few weeks.
Alternatively, you could approach one of the trade organisations, which will give you a list of your members in your area.
Some will guarantee their members' work for a small fee, usually about 1% of the estimate.
Once you have a few names, ask for estimates, but be sure to explain exactly what you want when it comes to details not included on the plans, such as the pattern of Artex on the ceiling, or the style of the doors, or perhaps you'd like hardwood stairs.
Good communications will often secure good working relations with no misunderstandings, if it is clearly explained that those details must be specified in the estimate.
With the building trade in heavy recession, you may find builders approaching you once the council publishes brief details of your planning application (if planning approval was necessary) in the local press under the heading of Public Notices.
The council may also approach a couple of neighbours each side to see if they have any legitimate objections to your proposals.
‘Builders want stage payments, don't they?’
Stage payments, small sums paid as the work progresses, is a normal practice, which helps prevent cash-flow problems for the builder, who must pay bills, wages etc.
You would be prudent not to pay deposits or any money in advance: many people have paid deposits to companies which have gone bankrupt a few weeks  later.
Always get something tangible first, and pay for not more than the work done.
That may be difficult to judge, but let your instincts and civilized debate guide you.
DIY WORK
‘Can I reduce costs by doing some work myself?’
There's a great deal that a competent d-i-y enthusiast can undertake himself: the majority of it is hammer-and-saw work.
An understanding of architectural drawings would be an advantage, but isn't essential.
‘Would the builder mind that?’
Most would probably cower at the thought, but some may be prepared to co-operate.
The problem is professional pride, and let's be honest: some d-i-y work can be appalling, and the builder has got to work with this.
If you make a hash of any of the work, he may worry that his reputation could be jeopardized, and could charge extra for putting things right.
And are you sure that you can get your bit done in time for him to continue?
‘We can't really do much, then?’
You can still do a lot, but you'll need a different approach.
You will have to be the builder, technically speaking.
That means that you will have to find and hire different tradesmen for the bits and pieces you can't do yourself.
This way the work can proceed at your own rate, and without the problems already mentioned.
Such undertaking does bring certain responsibilities.
You mustn't forget to send off the notice to commence work, along with the inspection fee and the subsequent inspection notices, at the correct stages.
You will be held responsible for ensuring that all work adheres to regulations.
This is not as frightful as it may sound: with self-build projects the council inspectors are usually very helpful, although you shouldn't badger him/her relentlessly for advice, and employing reputable tradesmen should eliminate any problems with outside labour.
‘How much can we actually do?’
Quite a lot; but two main areas that should be left to a builder will be all structural work to the roof, such as forming the dormer windows, and alterations to the rafters; and supplying and fixing the additional staircase, which must be correctly fitted and properly secured.
It may need to be tailor-made, and therefore it's best left to the experts.
You can do much of the remaining internal work yourself, not only saving a lot of money on labour charges, but a considerable sum in VAT at the current rate of 17.5%.
Work that you can do yourself includes converting or changing all the first-floor doors to half-hour fire protection doors.
The door stops will also need changing to ½in thick, and they must be glued and screwed into position.
The existing ceiling joists must also be fire-protected with an overlay of glass fibre insulation, and new joists installed.
Consult the building inspector on this, or include this with the structural work.
Stud partition walls with a glass fibre infill, door linings, floor decking, ceiling timbers for flat ceilings, and boards (not forgetting the electrics before the plasterboard) are all within the scope of the competent amateur.
Built-in furniture is also worth consideration at an early stage, as there will be a strict limit on what can be brought up through a loft hatch or new stairway.
There are plenty of books in most libraries explaining building construction and the Buildings Regulations in simple terms, but do ensure that they are not out of date.
The current Building Regs are the 1985 edition: books published in 1986 or later should be reasonably accurate.
Extending the heating system, which may require a new boiler for the larger loft conversion, and moving water tanks, electrical work and plastering is best left to qualified professionals.
If you're extending the plumbing and drainage to incorporate a second bathroom, you may have to notify the water authority in order to comply with all the water regulations.
‘Is there anything else?’
Just one thing: don't forget that once work is underway, you should increase your building and contents insurances.
Done in a sympathetic way, a loft conversion can blend in almost anywhere.
This dormer was added to a period property by Priory Loft Conversions
Top: Installed in a corner or against a wall, the Squarestair Spiral from Loft Centre Products makes the most of available space
Above: top-hung GHL Velux roof windows combined with vertical elements and pleated blinds
Right: Laminated pine type GGL Velux window turns through 180 for easy cleaning
Above: Your attic may be the perfect place to convert to a bedroom with en-suite bathroom.
Space-saving fitted furniture is Fayance, with Jupiter suite, from Grahams
Left: Sleep under the stars with this easy to install Orion roof window from Ubbink
Above: An unusual loft conversion with a made-to-measure Andersen window installed in a gable and wall
Below: Need inspiration or advice on working on your loft?
Loft Shop branches have room sets, stairs, windows, etc on view
SPOTLIGHT ON WINDOWS & STAIRS
If you're thinking of converting your loft for use as a habitable room, you'll need to add windows for light and ventilation, and a stairway as a permanent means of access.
Roof  windows are easy to install, as all the work can be done from inside the loft, without the need for scaffolding or ladders.
Most roof windows have ventilators built into their frame so the room can be ventilated even when the windows are shut, and they're also double-glazed.
Accessories sold with the windows usually include remote controls, and roller and Venetian blinds in  an assortment of colours, as well as blackout blinds (to completely exclude light), and exterior blinds (to reduce solar heat gain).
Depending on your roof type, and whether your windows need to provide a means of escape to comply with the Buildings Regulations, there are three basic types.
The models illustrated are from the Colt Roto range, available through branches of The Loft Shop.
Provided there is space you will be able to install a traditional-style staircase for access to your loft conversion.
This is a job for a skilled carpenter.
In many  situations you will need to use one of the space-saving stairs specially designed for lofts.
These can be made to measure if required, but some, such as spirals and the straight stairway, can be bought as kits for you to assemble yourself.
The four models shown are available from Loft Shop branches.
There are 27 variations, including a standard straight flight, and a fixed low-cost ladderway in a self-assembly pack, for temporary access.
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION…
Fold-up, zig-zag stairways
Aluminium alloy fold-up loft ladders
Timber & aluminium fold-up loft ladders, space-saving staircases
Colt Roto roof windows, space-saving staircases, loft ladders, materials for converting lofts: 17 branches
Loft conversion company working in South of England & Midlands
Fold-up aluminium loft ladders
Slab, loose-lay & pipe insulation
Space-saving stairways, electric folding stairs, spirals and traditional staircases
Loft ladders, space-savers, spiral staircases
Orion roof windows
Range of fold-up aluminium loft ladders 
1.
Self-assembly timber stairway, with paddle-shaped steps; adjustable for different floor-to-floor measurements, up to maximum of 3m.
Only 660mm wide.
Additional handrail optional.
2.
Pre-assembled timber stairway with paddle-shaped steps, ranch-style handrail and newels.
Available as straight flight, quarter-turn, or double-quarter turn.
3.
Traditional stairs, custom-built, but from only 600mm wide.
Spindles and balustrades can be turned to match existing staircase.
Can be straight, single or double-wind configuration.
4.
Timber Squarecase, made to order, in five ‘square opening’ sizes, from 1200 to 2000mm.
Designed to fit into a corner or against a wall.
5.
MOE (Means Of Escape) roof window, hinges at top to provide opening dimensions to conform with Building Regulations.
Pivots at centre and reverses for easy cleaning.
6.
Model 520 roof window, suitable for roofs with low headroom or low pitch.
Hinges at top, and pivots at centre, through 120°.
Lockable in three positions.
7.
Model 320 roof window, suitable for any loft.
Pivots at centre, through 180°.
UPdate
ALL THE LATEST HIRE TOOLS IN NEW CATALOGUE
The latest New Generation catalogue from HSS Hire Shops features a wide range of technically advanced tools for the skilled d-i-yer as well as the tradesman.
Tools included are a lightweight folding ladder that goes in a car boot; a 1.3m ladder-frame, easy-climb alloy tower; a lightweight vibrating plate for settling concrete paving blocks, that will fit into the smallest of cars; a copper tube T-end joiner; a skip loader; a 10m two-man hydraulic lift; Alligator saw; a tree stump chipper; and even a bouncy castle!
The new catalogue is free from any HSS shop — telephone 0800 28 28 28 to find your nearest branch.
A WIDE RANGE OF POWER TOOL ACCESSORIES
Piranha is a new range of power tool accessories that fits all makes of power tools.
The accessories come in three distinct qualities — Standard, Superior, and High Tech — so that you can choose the quality of the accessory needed for the job in hand, and the quality of finish required.
The High Tech range includes innovative products such as the Curved Tooth Carbide Circular Saw Blade.
The curved tooth cuts faster and smoother than the usual block-shaped TCT tooth.
Other products in the High Tech range include Piranha High Tech Metal Drill Bits, with a special ground tip for greater accuracy, and a longer life than conventional drill bits; and Piranha High Tech Professional Masonry Drill Bits, which are designed for fast drilling and high performance in harder materials like granite and concrete.
Piranha accessories are available from most major power tool stockists.
NEW DESIGN FOR WATERPROOF BATHROOM FLOORCOVERING
Waterproof, economical and easy to clean and dry, cushioned vinyl floorcovering is an ideal solution to the flooring problem of the water-splashed bathroom.
Top manufacturer Forbo-Nairn has added a second design, Mosaic, to its Cushionflor Bathroom World range.
The range now offers two patterns in 10 soft colourways sympathetic to current bathroom decor trends.
Mosaic is a small pebble effect, in five duet-tone pastel colourways, available in a 2m width to allow a seam-free fit in most bathrooms.
Nairn recommends coving up to skirting board height to make maintenance even easier.
The range has a seven-year domestic wear guarantee, and costs £15.73 per sq m.
PAINT VOUCHER WINNERS
The winners of the £50 Dulux Weathershield vouchers in our October competition are the 50 readers listed below:
BOSCH PHG 600 CE HOT AIR GUN
Hot air, or ‘heat’ guns are almost a disposable tool amongst tradesmen who carry out a lot of paint stripping and decoration.
The will often buy the cheapest on the market and throw it away when the element is worn out.
Most d-i-yers will probably be less demanding, often only using a heat gun when they have just moved home, or to redecorate a room.
Most power tool manufacturers have a gun in their ranges.
Bosch has three, the 600 being the top model.
At 2000 watts, this is a very powerful tool, and Bosch has built in a temperature control as well as a blower control (rather like the ‘speed’ switch on a hair dryer).
The trigger is a three-position rocker switch, turning the gun on and selecting one of two air speeds: this allows rapid or slow heating up — useful when working with very delicate materials such as plastic or plastic film.
The PHG 600 CE shares the same body as the other guns in the range, the main difference being the addition of a rotating temperature controller on the back of the body.
This is clearly marked A to E and allows the temperature to be steplessly controlled.
According to the instruction leaflet, each letter corresponds to approximately 100°C, giving the gun a heating range up to 600°C.
This tool is a long way from the cheapest heat guns.
As well as the above controls it has a detachable heat insulation shroud.
This tube of black plastic at the front of the gun is turned and pulled off to allow the nozzle to be used in particularly tight spots.
This may be handy for thawing pipework located in a recess.
However, care must be taken not to touch any part of the exposed nozzle as this quickly heats up.
Setting up and using the gun is straightforward, with the heat settings clearly marked on the rotating barrel (temperature is infinitely variable).
Several layers of old paint on an exterior door were removed in substantially less time than with a set-speed budget rival.
It was the quick start-up time as much as the heat capacity that speeded things up.
Once you have used the gun, it can be left to stand facing upwards thanks to a sprung metal supporting clip on the base of the handle.
This feature is not as gimmicky as it sounds, as putting down a very hot air gun where it will not do any damage can often be a problem.
It seems a pity that the gun does not come with a reflector nozzle (to work near window panes without cracking the glass, for example), but this is only a minor point.
The wattage of the tool makes it much more versatile than a basic heat gun, and a range of uses are possible — from warming plastics for bending, to soft soldering of metal pipe connections.
The PHG 600 CE is a very well specified machine that would prove a good investment for those doing a lot of varied stripping work (especially where bare wood is to be exposed and scorch marks would ruin the appearance).
The heat control may prove useful if you are planning some of the other uses mentioned as well as stripping paint.
If you only want to take a few doors or windows back to bare wood for repainting, there are many other cheaper guns that would do the job.
WHAT IT COSTS
The Bosch PHG 600 CE Hot Air Gun costs £68.97.
FOR FURTHER INFO
Plastic front nozzle is removable for tight corners, such as under kitchen units
Powerful heat settings made stripping easy and quick
Rotating back plate alters temperature in stepless increments
Prevent accidents by standing the gun upright to cool down
PSS 9.6V CORDLESS PALM SANDER
Palm sanders are not a new phenomenon, but they do seem to be growing in popularity, certainly with the trade buyer.
This is not surprising as these compact orbital sanders are very convenient to use and light in weight.
This lightness makes the palm sander especially useful for overhead work or large areas of wall.
Robert Bosch faced an awkward dilemma when designing this cordless version of the palm sander.
Cordless tools are sold on their convenience and ability to be used anywhere.
However, making a palm sander with an added battery increases the weight — a major disadvantage for such a tool.
The PSS 9.6V is therefore a compromise.
Most palm sanders weigh around 1kg (2lb), whereas this machine is 1.65kg, including the battery pack.
This is still a relatively light machine, but the weight is equivalent to a conventional half-sheet orbital sander.
After the recommended three-hour charging time, the tool was tested on old paintwork, plaster and rusted metal.
Three quarter-sheets of 60, 120 and 240 grit have thoughtfully been included as standard.
The 9.6 volt motor provides a 20,000 orbits per minute sanding rate, as high as larger machines.
Slightly more time was needed to abrade paintwork, compared to a corded tool, but there was no noticeable difference on smoother surfaces.
The sander was exceptionally quiet to use.
If you are used to handling an ordinary palm sander, the oval grip will be familiar.
The extended ‘tail’ which houses the battery pack makes the PSS 9.6V slightly bottom heavy.
Some users may find it more convenient to grip the sander by this pack rather than on top.
Although weight has been increased, the machine is still compact enough to be used in tight corners such as on deep shelving and door frames.
The front and both sides are not hindered by the battery, and these are the areas that do most of the work.
Unfortunately, no dust extraction facility is included with the machine, and a dust mask should therefore be worn.
The paper clamps are the long metal sprung levers found on the Bosch professional range, and these were trouble-free and certainly quicker to use than the push-lever types found on some models.
The only other control on the green plastic body is a front-mounted on/off switch.
Eight nickel cadmium batteries are grouped together inside the handle pack.
In use, the pack is held on to the tool by a single metal strap, but the pack is recessed so far into the machine that this was perfectly stable.
Charging the batteries is simply a matter of pushing the pack into a holder attached to the charger.
All are standard with the machine.
An LED tells the operator that ‘rapid charging’ is taking place.
After the three hour charge-up, the pack is automatically switched over to normal charging, to preserve the battery life.
Bosch should be congratulated for not only providing a clear LED charge light, but also for giving precise instructions on the disposal of these potentially harmful batteries (Now recycled by Bosch).
This surprisingly compact machine is more expensive and slightly heavier than its corded rivals, and we feel that a dust extraction option should have been included.
If you have a lot of sanding to do away from a power source, the Bosch is a well made, quiet sander that is just the job.
Like all the new cordless machinery, the tool is only as good as its batteries and this sander requires a full charge to be effective.
WHAT IT COSTS
The Bosch PSS 9.6V cordless palm sander costs £109.02, including VAT.
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION
NiCad battery pack is clipped into back of machine.
Batteries can be recycled by stockists
Sprung metal clips hold abrasive sheets in place, making paper-changing very quick
Sanding metalwork outside is easier with a cordless model
Lightness allows use on doors and ceilings without DIY tired arms
SA55 E ELECTRONIC JIGSAW
Like almost all jigsaws on the d-i-y market, the Peugeot SA55 E is a 350 watt machine with a 3,000 stroke rate per minute.
This type of power tool has always been a popular ‘first buy’ for d-i-yers wanting a powered saw.
It is safe, easy to use, and versatile, cutting wood, plastic and metal.
The Peugeot has a plain, slightly ‘boxy’ appearance.
The only controls are a variable speed dial mounted on the top of the trigger, and a small lock-on button.
The 1.4kg machine has five indented speed settings, from 0 to 3,000.
Low settings can be used to cut metalwork or ceramic tiles, mid-range for plastics, and the ‘E’ setting for woodwork.
One of the best features of the machine in use is the ease with which the sole plate can be moved.
When a cut has to extend up to a wall, for example, the sole plate can be moved back, out of the way, by turning just one central screw.
Like all jigsaws, bevel cutting is undertaken by adjusting the sole plate from 0–45°.
Unfortunately there is no guide fence, and no holes for a guide fence to be attached, and freehand bevelling is very awkward.
Using a clamped wooden batten as a guide, the saw performed well, and the polished sole plate produced little friction.
Again only one screw is adjusted, and there are indentations on the plastic body which ‘hold’ the plate at a true 45°.
This is a good design feature which is absent on some other saws.
Using the machine in its most typical mode, cutting sheet materials and softwood up to 55mm thick, the SA55 E performed very well.
The square shape becomes a virtue, as the blade can be taken right up to a wall or back of a cupboard.
A very short length of cable is supplied with the machine, and this proved annoying unless an extension lead was used.
On the plus side, a fold-down Plexiglas cover is fitted to the front of the saw, ahead of the blade.
This keeps sawdust out of the way without obstructing the line of cut.
The clear plastic guard made the SA55 E clean to use and increased the efficiency of the dust extraction facility, which is a rear-facing port in the handle of the machine which will take most types of vacuum hose for dust extraction.
Changing the blade is done by means of two slotted screws in front of the blade.
Only four or so turns of the screw secure the blade, and quick changes were possible after a little practice.
A novel feature is the ability of the metal block to hold blades facing forwards or sideways.
This ‘tri-axial’ feature makes sawing in tight corners or taking a few millimetres off the bottom of a fitted door very easy work.
Three free blades are supplied with the machine, for wood and metalwork.
We fitted a thinner section scroll saw blade to test the cutting ability on tight curves and corners.
The cutting action is very positive, and the trigger is large enough to use easily if the operator is wearing protective gloves.
Jigsaws are a good purchase for the d-i-yer trying to build up a reasonably comprehensive tool kit.
Their versatility means a circular saw is not always needed.
The Peugeot can be recommended as a good buy, especially as it is electronic (meaning the blade doesn't jump when started) and has the ‘tri axial’ facility which may be useful in tight corners.
WHAT IT COSTS
The Peugeot SA55 E jigsaw costs £52.99 (including VAT).
Sole plate adjustment is via a base screw.
The plate can be moved from side to side and backwards for tight corners.
Cutting angle adjustment is very easy on the SA55 E. Plastic indentations hold the plate at 45° either way, if needed
Two screws hold the blade in position and only require a full turn with the screwdriver to loosen the mechanism
Tri-axial blade positioning is good for tight corners.
Jobs such as cutting floorboards, are easier in this mode
TEC LM100 GLUE GUN
‘Hot metal’ glue guns have been on the d-i-y market for some time.
The principle behind all the models is much the same — a cylinder of solid glue is forced through a pistol-like tool.
When the trigger is pulled the adhesive having been heated to melting point is squeezed out of the front nozzle.
Corded, cordless and even gas-powered guns are now sold, and the advantages for the user are speed of setting time and convenience.
The TEC LM100 is a corded gun which operates at a lower temperature (almost 70° lower is claimed by the manufacturers) than most models, making possible the bonding of heat-sensitive materials such as polystyrene foam, fabrics and thin film material.
The gun can even be used to stick decorative pieces onto inflated balloons.
Although the gun works at a lower temperature than its counterparts, warm up time was still around average — five minutes from plugging in.
The tool's temperature controller is self-regulating and keeps the heating element at a steady 130°C.
Using the gun is exceptionally easy, thanks to a ‘long reach’ trigger which exerts enough pressure to push the melted glue through the nozzle at a steady rate.
This seems to be a major bugbear of some guns, making them harder work than applying the adhesive from a tube.
We tested the TEX with the company's own low temperature general purpose glue sticks, the TEC-Bond LM44.
The standard round 1.8mm nozzle provided a fairly accurate glue line and a strong bond was formed on wood, china, plastic and even foam.
If you need to reach into awkward joints or spread glue on a large area, two optional screw-on nozzles are offered.
The glue sticks are pushed into the rear of the body chamber and as one is used another is fed into the gun, allowing a continuous supply of heated glue.
Several design features, found on some, but not all, such guns have been incorporated into the TEC LM100.
Firstly, a power ‘on’ light at the rear of the handle lets the user know things are warming up — this is a simple device which prevents the operator leaving the gun on.
Secondly, a hinged clip-on stand and squared handle bottom allow the tool to be stood upright in use.
Weighing only 280gm, the TEC LM100 falls into the middle bracket of glue guns, above the ‘hobbyist’ miniature variety and just below the large trade tools.
We found it one of the simplest to use because of the trigger action and the compact shape.
As importantly, a fully enclosed heating element and rubber nozzle guard make it difficult for users to accidentally burn themselves.
The glue joints made were typical of this type of adhesive — almost instant and relatively brittle.
The glue should be spread on one surface only and if the material is cold to the touch, it should be gently warmed to ensure a better bond.
Surplus glue is easily trimmed away with a sharp knife.
For the d-i-yer, the TEC LM100 offers a quick and convenient way of forming bonds that are not under great pressure.
Picture framing, jigs, household repairs can all be made providing there is a nearby power source.
WHAT IT COSTS
The Tec LM glue gun costs £19.98 including VAT.
Packs of TEC Bond LM44 (1kg) are £8.16.
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION
Low temperature melt sticks are pushed into back of gun and trigger pressure forces the melted glue out of the nozzle
Folding wire stand stabilises the gun when not in use
Glue guns are ideal for low-load joints, such as the mitred corners of a kitchen cornice
Tec LM100 gun comes with universal glue sticks, which will join china, plastic, rubber wood and metal
YOUR SAY
If you've an interesting story to share, we'd like to hear from you.
We pay £5 for every letter published.
Write to:.
QUICK-MARCH
We bought an old Victorian house on the Isle of Wight, in need of a great deal of renovation.
After a few months the initial enthusiasm for d-i-y started to wane, and the pace slowed right down as most of the rooms were completed.
Then we had very short notice of an impending visit.
Panic!
We still had two rooms left to decorate: those intended as a spare bedroom and playroom.
There were only 24 hours to go, but we were determined to make a good first impression.
My husband cut the woodchip and pasted it.
I hung and trimmed it.
The children, aged seven and nine, followed close behind with emulsion and paint roller.
In between my husband muttering ‘I don't believe this!’, we all had a good laugh and enjoyed the challenge.
Unbelievably, it all dried out without a bubble, and was duly admired by our visitors the following day.
Definitely more luck than judgement!
ML Anderson, Ryde, Isle of Wight
NOT FLOORED
Having decided to improve our kitchen floor by laying ceramic floor tiles, I was faced with the problem of cutting them to shape around door architraves, etc.
I developed the following system, which worked most effectively.
Holding the tile hard against a metal vice, I hit the corner with a small hammer, knocking off the back of the corner (about ¾in at a time).
This created two new corners, which I treated in the same way, and so on till I achieved the shape marked out.
The secret is not to get too greedy and try to knock off large pieces: aim to knock out the back of the tile at the corner, which weakens the front, and then gently hammer the front, a bit at a time.
Practise first.
P Johnson, Weeping Cross, Staffs
STAR LETTER PRIZE
This month's Star Letter prize winner will receive £50 worth of JB Weld adhesives.
JB Weld is a complete adhesive range which can fix all your d-i-y requirements.
Its innovative Coldweld compound actually etches the materials together: the secret combination of liquid steel and non-toxic chemical hardener results in a product which fixes, fills and bonds any surface to any surface.
JB Weld works on iron, steel, aluminium, bronze, brass, copper, pewter, all woods, ceramics and plastics, and its applications are endless — mechanical, automotive, plumbing, around the home, and around the garden.
It is odourless, resistant to very high temperatures, and does not shrink.
Call 0753 683311 for more information.
STAR LETTER
AWKWARD MITRES
When using a mitre box or block for cutting mitres, some sections are more difficult to hold in place — dowel rod is a good example.
I've found that gluing a strip of sandpaper, or better sill, wet ‘n’ dry, to the base of the box/block gives a much better hold.
Use a grade suitable for the material you'll be cutting, then even light pressure will hold most materials firmly.
BG Slight, Woodgate, W Sussex
BRUSHED CLEAN
A good painting day, and you find your paint in the shed, but, oh dear, you've forgotten to clean the paint brushes again.
The turps in the jar has congealed to a semi-solid jelly around the brushes.
Sound familiar?
Well all is not lost.
Place your paint brush on a firm surface, and brush out the clogged, congealed paint with a steel brush.
Once most of it has been removed, put the paint brush back in clean turps for about half an hour, and repeat.
Result — a ready-to-use paint brush — and you've also prevented your steel brush from rusting!
D C Benton, Highwoods, Essex
WRITE TO REPLY
Your article on wood floors (November 1991) provided an excellent overview of the many different options available.
I would like to point out though, that your reference to maintenance is not relevant in all cases.
Whilst many strip wood floors do require in-situ sealing and regular polishing thereafter, this does not apply to Junckers' floors, such as the one shown in your step-by-step guide.
All our floors are supplied with a durable factory-applied seal.
This means that they require no further sealing and little actual maintenance.
From day to day, this is limited to sweeping or vacuuming, with a spot application of seal should wear ever become evident (in the domestic situation, this can often be as long as five years from the date of installation).
No polishing is needed, and as long as the seal remains intact, the floor will look good and give long service.
Hopefully, this knowledge will save many householders a great deal of elbow grease!
Martin Smith, Junckers
GOING STRAIGHT
Most d-i-y tiles probably start out with a plain metal straight-edge, but find that it quickly slews off line when scoring a shiny tile surface.
I found that ordinary narrow masking tape was the answer.
A strip stuck to the underside of the rule worked beautifully: no more slipping, frustration, or wasted tiles!
RI Johnson, Rowlands Castle, Hants
WASTE NOT
When cutting off the nozzle of a new bottle of pva glue, the contents will eventually dry out unless the hole is sealed again.
I use a small piece of putty over the nozzle for speed and short-term storage; but if I'm not going to be using it for a while, I take the top off and place a small piece of Clingfilm over the bottle, then screw the top back on again.
This also works for other glues, sealants, etc.
DG Ribbons, Golcar, W Yorks
PAPER TEST
Make sure your house is thoroughly draught-proofed by testing windows and doors by closing them on a piece of paper.
If you can pull the paper out easily, the seals probably need replacing.
R Spencer, Coventry, Warwicks
NO GRIP?
A spanner will slip on worn nuts, resulting in even more wear on the nut.
Try smearing the spanner jaws with light oil, then dipping them in fine sand.
Often this gives just enough friction for the spanners to grip.
If this doesn't work, try it with Molegrips.
Don't forget to replace the nut with a new one afterwards.
G Oscroft, Halfway, W Yorks
HANDY STORE
A short length of plastic rainwater pipe, fixed with pipe clips to the underside of my garage roof beams, makes an ideal store for thin timber rippings.
It means I've always got a ready supply of paint stirring or glue sticks.
P A Symonds, Exning, Suffolk
HOOKED UP
I was giving the chimney a quick sweep.
Adding the screw-on cranes until the brush emerged from the chimney, I pulled it down amidst a great cloud of soot — but the brush must have come unscrewed half-way, and there it remained.
The chimney stack was too high to consider pushing it down, so I had to try fishing it out.
First I tried a thick square of foam on the end of a sweeping rod; then a large wire hook and a garden net; then, in desperation, a cluster of S hooks on an octopus-style luggage elastic.
Holding my breath, I hauled it down, twisting as I pulled.
It worked!
There was my sweep's brush, caught in the snare, brought safely down to earth again.
P B Smith, Workington, Cumbria
GAP FILLER
I've found that polystyrene ceiling tiles make an ideal filler for large gaps in floorboards.
Cut the tiles to the required width with a sharp craft knife, and just slip into place.
You can also use them for blocking gaps between skirting boards and floor — it's much cheaper than wood beading.
A Hyde-Chambers, London SE1
Make sure you only use a fire-retardant grade of polystyrene tiles ,and never paint with gloss ,as this creates a fire hazard — Ed .
PAPER IT
When wallpapering a room, pin a left-over length inside a wardrobe or cupboard door so that it ages along with the paper on the walls.
Then if you ever need to make small repairs, the patch will blend in with the rest.
And save offcuts for lining drawers and covering shelves.
C Orchard, Great Cheverell, Wilts
READER'S STORY
ROUND THE BEND
It might seem a little crazy to move house rather than decorate the kitchen, and then finish up taking on an almost derelict house instead.
But that's what I did.
Looking back on it, I've decided I must have been clear round the bend!
I've always been a d-i-y enthusiast, but it's been more through lack of funds than genuine enthusiasm — not exactly a good basis for totally renovating a derelict house.
We'd been in our first house for just over five years, and I'd served my d-i-y apprenticeship then, improving slightly as each room was restored and decorated.
The kitchen, the second time round, was a different proposition, however; it was too small, and further cramped by an intruding chimneybreast.
It just seemed a total waste of time to bother redecorating it — the only solution seemed to be removing the chimney, adding an extension, or both.
My wife and I finally decided that moving would be the answer.
A fourth bedroom would be rather nice, and it would be cheaper to move than extend the kitchen and add a bedroom.
It would also be a lot less work.
Who was I kidding?
Umpteen four-bedroomed houses later, we were wondering if it really was the right thing to do: every time we found just the right place, the surveyor's report showed movement of the north wall, or some other equally expensive-to-repair problem.
We scratched our heads.
Then suddenly, our house was sold, and we were still at square one.
Our helpful estate agent threw details of every conceivable abode at us, hoping to earn from both ends.
And eventually one stuck.
We'd been prepared to buy houses with flaws invisible to the naked eye, but now we'd fallen for one with all its flaws only too obviously visible.
The price was about the only thing about the house that was right, but we'd both fallen in love with it right away.
Built in the late 19th century, it had been hardly touched since.
Decayed, warped and neglected, it stood proudly on its solid foundations, displaying a still sturdy brick frame.
Between exchange of contracts and completion, we cleared the garden.
Although only 10×20m, it encompassed nine trees, two of them about 7m high, and only 2m from the back of the house.
We even managed to acquire a small grant towards the costs, as the house had been declared uninhabitable and was zero-rated (in the pre-Poll Tax era).
At the same time we also removed two enormous chimneybreasts, which terminated in a shared 5m-high, six-pot stack.
Moving was no problem, as the houses were only a few streets apart.
Storing the furniture and the bits and pieces we didn't need immediately was a bit more difficult.
My wife devised a simple coloured sticker system: green for long-term storage, white for accessible, and none for ‘needed now’.
Except for a few stickers falling off, it worked reasonably well.
We had a 100% retention on the mortgage until the major work was done, and meanwhile were managing on a bridging loan — it was a bit like living in a house with no roof, hoping that it wouldn't rain (which we more or less were doing).
But the children loved it.
They piled up bricks and pulled out nails in our builders' yard of a back garden, had a roaring bonfire every other night, and went to Nan's for a bath.
It took almost two years to complete — but it was worth every bead of sweat.
And now it's almost finished, except for one last job.
I must just go and finish decorating the kitchen.
PJ Richardson, Westcliff-on-Sea
NEXT MONTH
Some of the major features to be included in the March issue
SUN ROOMS
In the past few years we have seen conservatories grow in popularity.
Perhaps our review will persuade you to join the trend!
DECOR IDEAS
Not everyone has a natural knack for choosing colours and patterns.
This special feature tells you how to succeed with interior design.
BASEMENTS
You may be one of the lucky people to have a basement in your house.
Are you making the most of it?
We can show you how to.
JOBBING NOTEBOOK
Amongst a wide range of jobs — glazing a door, building a garden wall, renewing kitchen door fronts, fitting magnetic double glazing, roof repairs, ceiling repairs  
UPdate
BELT CLIP MAKES TAPE MORE VERSATILE
Extra value and appeal has been added by Stanley Tools to its three blade-locking Galaxie II measuring tapes, with the addition of steel belt clips for extra convenience when working.
The Galaxie's black plastic casings are tough enough to withstand knocks, and fit comfortably in the hand.
The yellow blades have black and red metric and imperial markings for clarity, while the special anti-rust blade treatment, followed by two layers of protective lacquer, ensures a long, corrosion-resistant life.
Sliding ‘tru-zero’ end hooks guarantee accurate measurement.
The tapes are available in three sizes: 3m/10ft (£4.81); 3.5m/12ft (£5.42); and 5m/16ft (£8.64), from Stanley stockists.
WINE CELLAR — IN A KIT!
The ultimate in d-i-y!
A wine cellar in a kit to hole between 400 and 1600 bottles, depending on the size of the kit chosen.
All it needs is a 2m diameter hole, which can be in the kitchen, conservatory, garage, or wherever.
It can be installed by Wine care in about a week, or you can buy the kit and dig your own hole.
Wine Care will help with Building Regulations approval; planning permission is not required.
Prices of the kits start at £2,300.
Yes, they are French!
PRECISION ELECTRIC WALLPAPER TRIMMER
With a new battery-operated tool from Germany, called the Aris Precision Cutter, it is claimed that even the most ham-fisted wallpaper hanger can get a perfect finish every time.
It is said to end the days of peeling soggy wallpaper off the wall and having to trim it with scissors or a knife.
The new lightweight trimmer will accurately cut wet or dry wallpaper flush to skirting boards, ceilings, light switches and any awkward corner or window frame, to leave a perfect smooth edge.
Simple and safe to use, it will follow contours and will cut any weight of wallpaper, including double overlaps, which can be trimmed without lifting from the wall.
The excess is easily peeled away to leave a perfect matching join.
Using two ‘C’ type batteries (or four for heavy-duty jobs), it will trim approximately 100 rolls of wallpaper.
The reversible blade can be quickly replaced and spare blades are readily available.
The trimmer, complete with the heavy-duty battery housing extension, is available by mail order from Oceans West for £19.95, including post and packing.
CO-ORDINATED CERAMIC WALL LIGHT SWITCHES
A range of ceramic wall light switches has been introduced by Concorde Ceramics.
The range offers a choice of colours, either plain, or with hand-applied designs.
The designs have been specially chosen to complement the Concorde range of porcelain finger plates and door knobs.
The wide-ranging designs include a teddy bear switch for children's bedrooms.
Their gold band design on ivory, white, and black backgrounds is very well suited to living room areas.
The plain colours in pastel shades are designed to blend in with patterned wallpapers, or to co-ordinate with a personal choice of colour schemes.
The range includes single and double switches, and dimmers, which are easy to install by replacing existing wall switches.
Price start at £9.99.
Switches are available from Selfridges, and selected d-i-y stores.
NEW CORDLESS DRILLS
Three new models of Peugeot cordless drills all include a removable power pack with a three-hour charge time.
Compact and well-balanced, Peugeot cordless drills incorporate a lock-off switch to prevent accidental discharge of the battery, a trigger-controlled reversing switch, and a rotation b rake for instant chuck stopping.
Prices start at £104.57 for the 63CPE model.
Garden rooms
A small garden that can be taken in at a glance can soon become boring.
Divide it, and enjoy two for the space of one.
With a central lawn and borders around the edge, this garden would have lacked character, but internal hedges and a patio overhead had been used to create distinct areas that can be explored like the rooms of a house, each with a new mood and style.
Suggested planting
How to plant a hedge
Prepare the ground thoroughly by digging a trench about 25cm (10in) deep ant 45cm (18in) wide.
Fork garden compost or manure into the bottom and sprinkle a handful of bonemeal to each metre.
Most hedges can be planted in a single straight row, but for a denser, wider hedge plant in two staggered rows.
firm the plants well and water thoroughly, then mulch to suppress weeds.
Use composted bark or coir
Keep well watered until well established.
To protect evergreens from wind burn and  desiccation in the winter, erect a windbreak made from a fine-mesh net placed on the windward side 
SPECIAL OFFERS
LOFT LADDERS
ONLY £58.00
Above your head is probably a vast amount of space, which can be used for storage and a whole range of activities — the loft.
If you have a space problem, then the loft could be just the place to put to good use.
Getting into the loft however is a problem: a good loft ladder provides the simplest solution.
It is instantly available, and slides neatly out of sight when not needed.
Such a ladder is the Goldstar three-section loft ladder.
This needs a minimum hatch opening of 18×18in, an arc clearance in the loft of 41in, and it will suit a floor to top-of-joist height of up to 9ft3in.
This superbly presented loft ladder is easily installed, and in no time at all you will be able to use that extra space in your loft.
A special feature of the Goldstar is the twin handrails, which makes access by young and old alike that much safer.
Use order code GLL on the order form.
We are offering this quality loft ladder at only £58 including VAT, delivered to your door anywhere in the UK, including offshore islands.
STEP LADDERS
ORDER BOTH — SAVE £2.00!
ONLY £35.60
Due to the exceptional demand for a quality platform step ladder in our Special Offers last year, this year we are offering the Goldstar four-tread step ladder.
This step ladder is Kite marked, and has a Class 2 duty rating, which makes it suitable for all household needs; it is also widely used by professional tradesmen.
Two integral handrails give confidence to the user, as do the deep comfortable treads.
Once on the platform, the high guard rail and large platform, with special non-slip diamond tread patterns, all combine to ensure comfort and safety.
An additional feature of the Goldstar step ladder is the useful tool tray which fits neatly on to the handrail, making a place for tools to be kept within easy reach.
The height to the platform is 34in — a handy size for most household tasks.
The Goldstar step ladder is on special offer to our readers at £35.60 , including VAT, delivered to your door anywhere in the UK, including offshore islands.
Use order code GSL on the order form.
If both the loft ladder and step ladder are ordered at the same time there is a £2 reduction off the total price.
Please note:Our offer is for a four-tread step ladder — the photograph shows a five-tread version, but the style and quality will be exactly the same.
ROVERTRAIL
ONLY £17.95
How many times have you reached the top of a ladder, only to find that you've forgotten to bring the power drill up with you?
The Rovertrail has been invented for just that situation (and many others, of course.)
The usual coiled electrical flexible cable consists of about 5m of cable, with a plug on one end and the socket mounted on a reel at the other end.
UK manufacturer Input has gone a step further and coiled not just one, but two 5m flexible cables into the same body, and instead of just the one socket on the body of the reel, they have but another socket on the end of the second trailing lead.
This means that you can use the Rovertrail in the usual way, at the foot of the ladder for your power drill, sander, etc; but you can also hook the socket-ended trailing lead through your belt, and take it up the ladder with you to work higher up with power tools.
We are offering this invaluable aid to power tool use at only £17.95 , including VAT, postage and packing.
Use code RT on the order form.
MONSTER CARRI-ALL
ONLY £12.99
Useful for carrying just about anything, the new Monster Carri-All from Harcostar is made from tough woven polypropylene for strength and durability.
It stands 17½in high, measures 26½in in diameter, and has two handles strongly sewn into the top and bottom for carrying and tipping.
A reinforcing plastic strip is also supplied, to feed into a slot sewn around the top: this keeps the ‘Monster’ open while you fill it.
So whether you're tidying away some of those large toys that the kids had for Christmas, and have got fed-up with, storing a few treasures in the loft, using it as a laundry or shopping basket, or even to clear up the garden rubbish, the ‘Monster’ will take it.
With a carrying capacity of 160 litres, you'll find the list of things you can sue it for is endless.
Our price for the Monster Carri-All is just £12.99 , including VAT, postage and packing, delivered anywhere in the UK.
Order two for £24.95 for extra value .
Use Order Code MCA on the order form.
ADVICE CENTRE
BUYING HAND TOOLS
In an age where the power tool is king, it is easy to forget the huge array of hand tools available to the d-i-yer.
Here is a guide to some of the hand tools you'll need for a range of d-i-y activities.
BASIC FIXING TOOLS
Perhaps the simplest of all d-i-y jobs is putting things up — things like pictures, curtain tracks, shelves, and cupboards.
In each case you've got to make a fixing of some sort — either driving a nail or a screw.
Nails are easier to use than screws; all you need to drive them is a hammer (see below).
However, it's not easy to drive nails exactly where you want them, especially into walls, and it's difficult to get them out again once they're in.
Screws are better:; they provide a more secure grip, and can be undone easily if you want to move things.
The only trouble is that you need separate tools to make the hole and to drive the screw.
Drills:Requirement number one is a drill.
For this job there's little point in buying a hand drill; invest in an electric drill , ideally one with a 13mm (½in) chuck, variable speed control and hammer action, so you can tackle a wide range of drilling jobs in all sorts of materials with just one tool.
However a hand drill can be a useful extra tool for making holes in locations remote from a power supply, or simply for a one-off drilling job in the workshop for which it is not worth unpacking and setting up a power tool.
For actually making the holes, you need some drill bits .
Buy high speed steel twist drills for making holes in wood, plus two or three masonry drills for making holes in walls.
Twist drills are sized in millimetres or in fractions of an inch, and are sold in sets as well as singly.
Masonry drills are sized by numbers that match screw gauges, or in millimetres.
Screwdrivers:For driving the screws, you need a screwdriver.
To be precise, you need several screwdrivers, because screws come in several sizes and have heads of different types.
For the driver to work efficiently, its blade must match the slot or recess in the screw head.
If it slips out, it will damage whatever you're fixing.
You can probably get by with just two flat-bladed screwdrivers of different sizes for driving slotted screws, plus one cross-point driver for cross-head screws (Pozidriv and Supadriv are the commonest types; a No 2 size screwdriver will drive the most widely-used screw sizes).
Most screwdrivers have plastic handles; choose ones that feel comfortable in your hand.
Measuring and marking:There are a couple of other tools you'll find invaluable when you're putting things up.
The first is a retractable steel measuring tape , to help you get your fixing holes the right distance apart and at the right height.
Choose one with a tape at least 3.5m (12ft) long, marked with both metric and imperial measurements; it's a good idea to choose one with a lock so you can take long measurements without the tape coiling up.
The second tool is a small spirit level , invaluable for ensuring that you fix things like shelves and curtain tracks to a true horizontal.
Choose one about 600mm (2ft) long with a metal body, and both horizontal and vertical indicators; then you can use it for getting things plumb too.
Add a pencil , so you can mark the positions of screw holes, draw guide lines and so on.
Hammers:Despite what we've said about the superiority of screws for making secure fixings, a hammer is a tool no home should be without.
You need one for simple jobs like driving picture pins, and for all sorts of other tasks like nailing down loose floorboards and mending fences, not to mention any woodwork you may be assembling.
Choose a claw hammer, which can pull nails out as well as drive them.
One with a metal shaft and a moulded rubber handgrip will stand up to more abuse than one with a wooden shaft.
GENERAL DIY TOOLS
Apart from putting things up, you're bound to carry out a variety of odd fixing and repair jobs around the house.
A few general-purpose tools will come in handy here.
A sharp knife:There are all sorts of d-i-y jobs where a sharp knife is invaluable — laying floorcoverings, cutting electric flex, trimming roller blind fabric and the like.
Choose a trimming knife with a retractable blade, so you can carry it around safely, and buy a selection of blades for it — ordinary cutting blades, perhaps a laminate cutter, a blade for cutting sheet floorcoverings, and a padsaw blade for making small cutouts in wood and other materials.
A tenon saw:Even if you plan to do no more carpentry than cutting a veneered chipboard shelf to length, you've got to have a saw.
A tenon saw will cope with most small sawing jobs on thin boards and on timber up to about 50mm (2in) thick.
Choose one with a 300 or 350mm (12 to 14in) blade and a plastic handle (which won't split or crack like a wooden one).
Invest in a try square too, so you can make sure your saw cuts are absolutely square.
A Surform:If you are working with or repairing wood, there are likely to be a variety of shaping jobs you'll have to tackle.
A Surform, which is a general purpose plane/rasp, is ideal for working with wood and man-made boards, and can tackle metal and plastic too.
Surforms come in a range of styles, including flat rasps, planer-files, round files and block planes.
All have replaceable blades.
A junior hacksaw:You're likely to have to tackle some small metal-cutting jobs from time to time.
Examples include cutting through rusty screws and bolts on things like gutters, and mending plumbing leaks.
A junior hacksaw takes cheap, throwaway blades which are simply snapped into place in the frame; choose one with a plastic handle for more comfortable cutting.
Adjustable spanners:You'll often be confronted with nuts and bolts of various types that need tightening or loosening — on domestic appliances, plumbing systems and so on.
Obviously, in an ideal  world you'd have a different spanner for every nut, but for the time being a couple of adjustable spanners will come in very handy (you need two because often you will have to grip a nut as well as a bolt).
Choose one small and one medium spanner, to cope with a wide range of nut and bolt sizes.
A pair of pliers:Pliers are a real jack-of-all-trades tool — they'll grip all sorts of things you may be trying to undo or tighten up, bend things like stiff wire or metal sheet, and crimp wires together if you're doing any electrical work.
 Choose a pair of combination pliers with fine and coarse serrated jaws and a wire cutter near the pivot point; plastic hand grips make them more comfortable to use, and also provide protection against the risk of shock during electrical jobs.
A filling knife:Lots of simple repair jobs around the house involve the use of filler of one kind or another — patching cracks in plasterwork, filling holes and defects in wood, replacing old putty in window frames and so on.
A flexible filling knife with a square-ended blade is invaluable for all these jobs; choose one with a stainless steel blade which won't rust.
WOODWORKING TOOLS
What hand tools you need for woodworking projects depends on the answers to two questions.
Firstly, will you be tackling general structural carpentry and simple furniture making only, or are you intent on becoming a master cabinetmaker?
Secondly, do you want to use traditional hand tools wherever possible?
Your answers will dictate the contents of your tool kit — over and above the essential general-purpose tools described earlier.
Let's assume you'll be just a general-purpose chippie, doing jobs like building stud partition walls, laying floorboards and perhaps making fitted furniture using a lot of man-made boards.
For cutting wood:For general cutting work you'll need a panel saw .
For curved cuts you'll need a coping saw , and for making cut-outs within a workpiece a padsaw will be invaluable.
For shaping wood:For reducing wood to the cross-section you require, you'll need a smoothing plane .
You can shape it using traditional hand tools such as rasps and spokeshaves .
For cutting joints:When it comes to cutting joints, recesses for hinges, and mortises for locks, a set of wood chisels is essential.
Bevel-edge chisels are more versatile than firmer chisels because you can undercut with them; you need at least four, in 6, 12, 18 and 25mm (¼, ½, ¾ and 1in) widths.
Choose plastic handles rather than wooden ones, so you can drive them with your claw hammer instead of a mallet.
You will need an oilstone to keep them sharp.
For joining wood:Talking of hammers, it's worth adding a small pin hammer to your tool kit, for driving small nails, glazing sprigs and the like.
A staple gun is also worth having, since it allows you to make instant fixings of thin sheet materials, fabrics and floorcoverings, with one hand free to position the work while the other fires the staples.
For drilling wood:For making holes in wood, the power drill reigns supreme.
However, if you prefer to stick to hand tools, a hand drill will tackle small holes, and a brace and bit larger ones.
You will need a selection of twist drills for the former, and wood bits in various sizes and patterns for the latter.
A countersink bit for your hand or power drill enables you to recess screw heads below the wood surface; a nail punch lets you hide nail heads beneath a blob of filler.
Lastly, it will pay you to expand your selection of screwdrivers , both flat-bladed and cross-point types.
If you have a lot of repetitive driving to do, it's worth investing in a spiral ratchet screwdriver with a range of inter-changeable bits.
For assembling and finishing wood:For assembling the fruits of your labours, some cramps will be invaluable.
There are many different patterns on the market; add them to your tool kit as you need them.
You can also use a portable workbench as a vice to hold larger items.
The last stage in any woodworking project is the final finishing ready for decoration.
You can do this by hand with abrasive paper and a sanding block .
BRICKLAYING TOOLS
The bare necessities for successful bricklaying are relatively few.
For a start, you need a bricklaying trowel for spreading the mortar bed in which each course of bricks or blocks is laid, for buttering mortar on to the end of each brick before you place it, and for trimming off excess mortar afterwards.
To keep your courses level, you can buy a bricklayer's line and pins , or you can improvise one with string and large nails.
A spirit level is a must, and it's a good idea to have one reserved for this job, rather than to use your smaller ‘indoor’ level, since it will inevitably get knocked around a bit and gradually become covered in mortar.
Pick one at least 1m (3ft) long for accuracy.
Another essential is a pointing trowel , for finishing off the pointing between courses neatly.
Depending on what profile you want to achieve, you may also need to improvise with lengths of dowel or similar implements.
For cutting bricks and blocks, you need a brick bolster and club hammer ; don't try to emulate the professional and cut bricks with the edge of your bricklaying trowel.
Buy a bolster fitted with a plastic hand shield to protect your hand from badly-aimed blows.
PLASTERING TOOLS
If you're going to tackle plastering or rendering work, you need another group of specialist hand tools.
First comes the plasterer's trowel or steel float, with which you actually apply the plaster to the wall.
To go with it, buy a metal hawk , a square of sheet metal with a handle attached to one side, on which you carry the plaster to the wall surface; you can make one from plywood with a softwood handle if you prefer.
A wooden float with nails driven through it is useful as a devilling tool, to key the wall surface between coats; again, you can improvise one if you wish.
PLUMBING TOOLS
If you're likely to be tackling full-scale plumbing installation work rather than just mending the occasional dripping tap, it will pay you to collect some  specialist hand tools.
you can of course cut copper pipe with a hacksaw, but you will get better results with a pipe cutter ; this also includes a reaming tool to remove the burr form the inside of the pipe.
Keep your hacksaw handy for cutting plastic pipe, however.
When it comes to bending pipe, a bending spring is essential; it supports the pipe wall as you make the bend, preventing kinking.
You need a different spring for each pipe size you're working with.
On large jobs, it will pay to have a pipe bending machine ; this will repay its hiring cost in terms of the number of elbow fittings you will no longer need.
For making joints in copper pipe, what you need depends on what sort of fittings you are using.
With capillary fittings, you can use a blowlamp to melt the solder.
With compression fittings you need a pair of spanners — either open-ended ones to match each size of fitting you're using, or a pair of adjustable ones otherwise.
No special tools are needed to make push-fit or solvent-weld joints in plastic pipe.
There are three plumbing tools with a unique purpose which you may find it useful to have in your tool kit.
the first is the crowsfoot or basin spanner , which enables you to do up or undo backnuts and top connectors in the restricted space behind baths, basins and sinks.
Second comes the immersion heater spanner , an outsize model for fitting immersion heaters in their bosses in hot water cylinders.
Third is the radiator bleed key used to open the air vent on water-filled radiators to allow air to escape.
Apart from these specialist tools, you will also need to borrow general-purpose tools from other sections of your tool kit for many plumbing projects.
ELECTRICAL TOOLS
Electrical work requires very few specialist tools.
Most of the time you will be using general-purpose tools such as drills, saws, and hammers, or simple tools such as a trimming knife or pliers.
One invaluable tool is a wire stripper , which removes insulation from flex and cable cores neatly and efficiently, without damaging the conductors inside.
Buy an adjustable type with plastic handles.
Side cutters are useful for cutting both cable and flex to length, and for trimming cores neatly when they have been connected to terminals.
A small electrician's screwdriver with an insulated blade is essential for making connections to terminals in plugs and other electrical accessories; kill two birds with one stone by buying the type that incorporates a mains tester in the handle, so you can test whether terminals are live before working on them.
FINANCIAL
WOULD YOU BORROW FROM YOURSELF?
Would you like a low-interest loan?
Then a credit union may be the answer.
There are now some 275 all over the country: they're savings-and-loans clubs owned and run by their members.
Interest on loans is fixed by law at a maximum 1% a month, a true rate of 12.68%.
On a loan of 100 repaid in 12 equal monthly instalments, you'd be charged £6.50.
The low rate is possible because loans are made out of members' own savings.
They decide what the annual interest on these will be, typically 6–7% in a large union.
Bad debts are kept low because of the ‘common bond’ which members of a union must share, ie they must live or work in the same neighbourhood, or belong to the same organisation, such as a church.
Or they must work for a particular employer (eg a local council), or in a similar trade or occupation (eg taxidrivers, the police).
You need at least 22 people to start a union, around 50 to make it worthwhile and, by law, an overall maximum of 5,000.
It usually costs up to £5 to join, plus the price of a share, say £1.
You are also expected to start saving regularly, and can typically borrow three to four times what you've accumulated.
Big, old-established unions may lend up to £5,000 or even more (the legal maximum is £10,000), but smaller unions may have a limit of a few hundred, and a new member may only get £100.
Borrowers have to show, in confidence, why they need the loan, and that they are able and willing to keep up payments.
Those who can't pay, eg because they lose their job, may be allowed to pay less until they get straight.
Those who won't pay may go to court.
Both savings and loans are protected by life insurance, and also by insurance against fraud and theft.
As a further safeguard, audited accounts have to be filed each year with the Registrar of Friendly Societies.
If you want to find out if there is a credit union in your area, or if you want to set one up, contact the Association of British Credit Unions Ltd 
HAMBONE by Mike Flanagan
MY SALARY (ALLOWING FOR INFLATION)
YOU NEVER GIVE UP, DO YOU?
REGULATIONS
SMOKE DETECTORS TO BE COMPULSORY
Over the past few years there have been many reports in the national press advocating that all dwellings should be fitted with smoke detectors.
Not surprisingly, these reports have tended to appear at times when fatalities have occurred as a result of fires when occupants have been asleep.
Those who have recommended a change in the law to require the installation of smoke detectors have now got their wish.
The Smoke Detectors Act 1991 has recently been added to the list of statutes which will make it compulsory for builders to fit a smoke detector (or detectors) in all new dwellings.
The term ‘new dwellings’ includes home which are provided by reconstruction or conversion as well as brand new buildings.
Although the act has been passed by Parliament, it is not operative at the moment.
The actual date for it to come into force has yet to be announced by the Secretary of State for the Environment.
However, it is strongly rumoured that this may be sometime in the early part of 1992, when some amendments to the Building Regulations are to be introduced.
The act only gives the powers to enable new dwellings to be fitted with adequate means of smoke detection; it does not give any technical provisions about the necessary standards that will be required.
However, it is envisaged that technical guidance will be given in an Approved Document, which will be available when the act comes into force — this will be similar to the procedure adopted with the Building Regulations.
A consultation document is presently being circulated for comment about the proposed technical content of the Approved Document.
The new provisions for smoke detectors will be enforced by each local authority, as part of its existing Building Control function.
These will apply only to England and Wales: Scotland and Ireland have their own legislation for dealing with building safety matters.
When the act does come into force, builders will have to provide all new dwellings with one or more smoke detectors, capable of giving early warning of fire to all occupants, so that safe evacuation can be effected.
The draft Approved Document suggests that the smoke detectors can be self-contained, but they must be operated from the mains electricity supply.
However, they can have a supplementary power supply to operate them if the mains supply should fail, eg battery back-up.
The detectors must also be sufficiently sensitive to enable them to operate before the density of smoke is such that it is likely to endanger the escape of the occupants.
The adequacy of self-contained smoke detectors is governed by BS 5446: Part 1.
For bungalows and flats where the accommodation is on one level only, it is envisaged that one smoke detector will be sufficient, unless the circulation route (escape route) is more than 15m.
Where more than one detector is required to give adequate protection to a dwelling, they will have to be interconnected so that the activation of one unit will operate the alarm on all the detectors provided.
In order to give maximum protection, the siting of smoke detectors must be such that they are close enough to risk areas where fires are most likely to occur (kitchens or living rooms), and yet be near to bedrooms and other sleeping areas.
Preferably, smoke detectors should be fixed to the ceiling at least 300mm away from any wall or light fitting.
Units which are designed for wall mounting should be fixed between 300mm and 150mm below the ceiling, in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
Self-contained smoke detectors require routine maintenance such as testing and cleaning, so it is important that they can be reached easily and safely.
A position over a high stairwell would not be satisfactory.
In order to avoid false alarms, positions close to heaters and air conditioning outlets should be avoided, as well as cooking areas, garages, bathrooms, shower-rooms or other places where steam, condensation or fumes are present.
The draft Approved Document also contains a provision requiring that the first occupants of a dwelling must receive instructions on how to look after the smoke detector system that has been installed.
This information will probably include simple guidance about the use and care of the detectors, and possibly a copy of the manufacturer's instructions.
The amount of detail given will have to be appropriate to the type of system installed.
Although the obligation to provide instruction about maintenance is to be limited only to the first occupier, it is likely that subsequent purchasers will require the information to be passed on every time the property is sold.
This is a matter which will no doubt be governed by consumer demand.
Finally, failure to comply with the provisions of the Act once it comes into force will render the builder liable to prosecution and a fine.
GARDENING PROPAGATORS AND SEEDS
A simple propagator will help you raise seedlings more easily and achieve more success with cuttings.
A sophisticated one will enable you to germinate many seeds that are difficult without a heated greenhouse, and to root difficult cuttings.
UNHEATED PROPAGATORS
If you only want to raise a few seedlings in spring, and provide a humid atmosphere for some cuttings later, an unheated propagator will be adequate.
Unheated propagators must be placed somewhere warm.
To germinate seeds in spring this usually means a light windowsill.
In late spring, when there is more natural warmth during the day, an unheated greenhouse will provide sufficient extra protection for most seeds to germinate satisfactorily in a frost-free greenhouse.
In a greenhouse heated to about 13°C/55°F, most seeds can be germinated on the greenhouse bench, with the propagator reserved for those that require more warmth.
Inexpensive seed propagators consist of a transparent plastic lid that fits over a normal seed tray or a number of small plastic or expanded polystyrene ‘cells’ held in an outer drip tray.
Those that use an ordinary seed tray can be used to germinate most seeds that you want to sow fairly thickly to provide plenty of seedlings for pricking out into ordinary seed trays later.
The cellular type are best for just a few seeds: sow two or three in each cell and thin to one if more germinate.
The resulting plants are likely to be better because there is minimal root disturbance, and each seedling has a generous amount of compost without competition — but the number of seedlings you can raise at once will be very limited, so use this method for plants like tomatoes, where you don't need many, or those worth special treatment, such as bedding geraniums.
Buying hints:If you want to use the propagator for cuttings as well as seeds, make sure the lid is deep enough — even small cuttings may require 5–8cm (2–3in) above the compost, larger ones even more.
an ability to ventilate the lid will help you to control the humidity and therefore reduce the risk of seedlings and cuttings rotting off; in summer it will help to prevent the propagator overheating.
If you're buying a propagator with inner liners divided into cells, be sure to buy an extra supply of cells so that you can move one batch of seedlings out when they have germinated, and make use of the base and lid for the next batch.
HEATED PROPAGATORS
If a minimum temperature of about 13°C/55°F is difficult to maintain, a heated propagator is worth considering for those plants that require a high temperature to germinate, such as tomatoes, sweetcorn and many bedding plants.
Most of these can be grown on successfully at a lower temperature once they have germinated.
A heated propagator is ideal for a greenhouse with low-level background heat, as the seedlings will be much sturdier than those grown indoors in more warmth but poorer light.
A heated propagator will maintain a higher temperature than the ambient air, but do not expect it to achieve a lift of more than about 10°C (ie, if you wish to maintain 21°C/70°F, the greenhouse should be heated to 10°C/50°F).
Buying hints : Heated propagators are less expensive without a thermostat, but they may become too hot on sunny days in late spring, or when used for cuttings in the summer.
One with a thermostat will cost more, but may save on running costs in warmer weather.
SOWING AIDS
Accurate, well-spaced sowing makes pricking out seedlings easier, and because they are less crowded the seedlings that do grow are stronger and sturdier.
Large seeds, such as sweet peas, are easily spaced by hand, but other techniques are needed for finer seeds.
There are several proprietary seed sowers suitable for indoor sowing.
One resembles a small trowel with a knurled wheel, that sets up a vibration to help the seeds drop off the end in a controlled way — a useful aid for sowing in straight lines.
Another popular type has moulded plastic prongs that make spaced holes when pressed into the compost.
Pressed in shallowly, they can be used for sowing (thin out surplus seedlings instead of pricking out).
The same multi-dibber can be pressed further into the compost to make larger holes for pricking out seedlings sown normally.
Some seedsmen packet small seeds in specially designed plastic tubes that make it easier to sow finely simply by cutting off the end and tapping out the seeds.
SOW IN ROWS
Make life simpler for yourself and better for the seedlings by sowing thinly in rows, rather than scattering the seeds randomly over the surface of the compost.
It is easier to space the seedlings, and they are less likely to become overcrowded before you prick them out.
Use a small split cane the width of the seed tray to make a series of depressions in the levelled compost.
Using finger and thumb, sprinkle the seeds as evenly as possible along the depressions.
Cover with compost.
The seeds should come up in neat, well-spaced rows, and be easier to prick out than thickly sown clusters.
WHAT'S NEW?
Old and well-tried favourites should never be discarded for newcomers until these have proved themselves.
But make a point of trying a few of the most promising new bedding plants each year to see whether they do well in your garden, and match your criteria for a good bedding plant.
To help you draw up a shortlist from the dozens of good new varieties on offer, the accompanying table will help you choose the pick of the bunch.
NEW FOR 1992
Super French marigold
‘Zenith Sunbeam’
Very vigorous and floriferous, with a very long flowering period.
Vibrant yellow.
UNW.
‘Zenith Sunset’
Similar qualities to above, but a mixture of oranges and yellows, some crested.
UNW.
Impatiens (busy Lizzie)
‘Mega Orange Star’
Bright and bold, almost brash, large flowers with a white star or cross on a vivid orange background.
DOB, MAR, UNW, T&M.
Nasturtium
‘Tip Top’
Worth trying if you like nasturtiums but find the vigorous foliage a frustration when it hides the flowers.
These blooms are held on long stalks above the leaves on compacted plants.
Available as separate colours or as a mixture.
DOB.
Petunia
‘Duo’ range
Double varieties suitable for bedding, with masses of flowers.
‘Duo Peppermint Magic’ is pink on white, ‘Duo Rosy Ripple’pink and white and ‘Silver Shades’mauve and purple.
UNW.
‘Super Cascade Improved’
A petunia bred for its pendulous habit, and a good choice for hanging baskets.
Available in separate colours or as a mixture.
T & m .
Verbena
‘Peaches and Cream’
The flowers open coral and turn through shades of apricot and peach then fade to cream.
Flowers of various stages of development make an enchanting combination.
SUT, T&M, UNW.
Who stocks them
New petunia from Thompson & Morgan: ‘Super Cascades’, available as separate or mixed colours
PROBLEM SOLVER
For free advice on any d-i-y problems, write to: Problem Solver, DIY, Link House, Dingwall Avenue, Croydon, Surrey CR9 2TA.
We can reply only if: 1: You enclose a valid Free Advice Coupon with each query.
2: Also enclose an sae.
Each separate query must be accompanied by a valid Free Advice Coupon and an sae and each query should be written on a separate piece of paper.
We regret that we are unable to answer multiple queries that do not comply with these instructions.
And we are unable to supply plans for projects.
FLOOR COVERINGS
Preparing for parquet
I am going to lay some parquet panels on a suspended timber floor .
Is any special preparation needed ?
It's acceptable to lay the parquet directly on a suspended timber floor fitted with ordinary floorboards, so long as the boards are firmly fixed and not warped.
punch down any protruding nail heads and countersink screw heads.
Plane down knots and any other irregularities.
The best way to ensure a good sub-surface is with sheets of hardboard nailed to the boards.
First of all, find the centre of the room by measuring and snapping chalked stringlines on the floor.
Condition the hardboard by brushing its rough face with water — about one litre for a 2400 × 1200mm (8 × 4ft) sheet — then stack the sheets back to back flat on the floor for 48 hours.
Cut these large sheets of hardboard into 1200mm (4ft) squares (they're easier to handle) and dry-lay them along the chalked lines, starting with a single board in the centre of the room.
Adjust the starting point so that you avoid a very narrow margin at the perimeter.
Nail down the centre panel —(rough face uppermost) around the edges, with hardboard nails, 12mm (½in) and 100mm (4 in) apart.
Nail over the surface of the panel from the centre at 150mm (6 in) intervals to give a flat, rigid base.
Repeat for all panels.
Butt up a whole panel against the skirting and mark off where it overlaps the last fixed panels.
Scribe across the panel then saw it to size and nail in the margin.
Cut panels squarely around door architraves, there's no need to scribe to fit the profile as they'll be covered by the flooring.
INSULATION
Internal walls
How are walls best insulated internally?
Drylining with any plasterboard will insulate walls to some extent, but a special thermal board, with an expanded polystyrene backing, will give additional insulation.
Both ordinary and thermal plasterboard are also available with a backing film which makes it resistant to water vapour.
British Gypsum for instance, makes Gyproc Thermal board in four thicknesses, as well as a vapour-check grade; and Gyproc Duplex plasterboard, which has a metallised polyester film backing which is water vapour-resistant.
Boards are simply nailed to a timber framework on the walls, positioned so that the edges and centres of each board are supported.
If sound insulation is also needed, glass fibre matting can be inserted between boards and walls, although to be really effective, this needs a separate timber frame, adjacent to, but not touching the separating wall.
Glass fibre quilts can also be used to insulate loft rooms, where extremes of temperature can make living conditions very uncomfortable.
A general-purpose rolled insulation blanket can be fitted between timber studding and held in place with wire netting stapled to the timber, or a flanged, paper-faced insulation quilt can be used — the paper flange is opened out and stapled to the timber, thus holding the quilt in place.
NOISE
Loft troubles
What is the best way to insulate a roof against aircraft noise?
Where exterior noise sources such as aircraft are a problem, unless the roof is fully boarded, it is a good idea to line the underside the of the roof rafters either with oil-tempered hardboard or waterproof building paper to seal any gaps, and to board over the loft floor.
On the outside, make sure that no tiles or slates have slipped out of position, and cap off any unused flues.
BUILDING
Sealing roof joint
What should I use to seal the joint between a carport roof and the house wall?
You can use a bitumen-backed foil such as Evostik Flashband (there are many other types available): the bitumen backing gives good adhesion to both the masonry a nd the roof sheets.
FIREPLACES
Fireback
I am re-opening an old fireplace and need to install a fireback .
What's involved ?
Firebacks cast in one or two pieces are put into place, and corrugated cardboard is wrapped around the back to provide an expansion joint.
The space behind the fire-back is then filled with vermiculite concrete or a mix of one part lime, two parts sand and four parts broken brick.
This soft filling is intended to allow the fire-back to expand under the fierce heat without cracking.
At the top of the fire-back the filling is smoothed off at an angle of about 45°.
No flat areas or hollows should be left as they could cause smoke problems.
DECORATING
Flaking paint
What causes paint to flake off?
Loss of adhesion is due to incorrect preparation of the surface, or failure to use the correct undercoat.
With emulsion and masonry paint, painting over a dusty, dirty or loose surface is the cause.
It should have been cleaned thoroughly and treated with stabilising solution.
With gloss paint the cause is painting over a dirty or glossy surface without preparing it properly and applying undercoat before the gloss finish.
Painting metal
How do you paint bare metal?
Preparation consists of cleaning and degreasing.
Iron and steel need to be cleaned of rust.
All encrustment and blisters must be scraped off and then the metal is wire-brushed to remove loose fragments.
When cleaned, non-ferrous metals are best brought to a finish before priming with zinc chromate or zinc phosphate.
Iron and steel can also be primed with these materials for interior work, but for exterior work calcium plumbate primer is best.
Calcium plumbate primer can also be used on  galvanised iron, but zinc chromate or zinc phosphate is used on aluminium alloys.
Iron and steel can also be treated with a cold galvanising paint which reacts with a thin layer of rust to form a rust-proof coating that can be painted.
After priming, the metals can be painted in the usual way.
A popular paint for iron railings, gutters and downpipes is black bitumen, which though it loses its gloss quickly still retains its protective qualities.
Rotting woodwork
I suspect extensive rot in a window sill .
How should I prepare it for redecorating ?
Test the surface for sponginess by probing it with a screwdriver and renew rotten timber either by replacing complete sections with new preservative-treated wood, or by cutting-in new sections of wood, or if the area of rot is not too extensive, by repairing the decay using a modern wood repair system as made by Ronseal and Cuprinol.
The basis of both these systems is a wood hardener which strengthens the decayed wood fibres, and a two-part high performance wood filler, There is also a preservative to prevent further wood decay.
In both cases, the wood should be as dry as possible when the wood hardener is applied, and when this is dry, the two-part epoxy-resin wood filler is pressed into the cavity to give a non-crack, non-shrink repair.
A sander will be required to remove excess filler and shape it to match the existing timber.
A second application of filler may be required to fill cavities which sanding reveals.
On completion the repair is primed and painted in the normal way.
Cracked rendering
How do you fill cracks in rendering?
Cracks in rendering should be raked out, cut back to sound material if necessary and then filled with new mortar.
Brush on pva bonding agent, then patch with 1:5 cement: sand mortar to which pva solution has been added.
Painting hardwood
Is any special primer needed on bare hardwood?
Should you wish to paint hardwood for the first time, it will be necessary to coat it with an aluminium primer.
After priming, the correct colour undercoat is applied, followed by two coats of gloss.
If applying two coats, lightly rub down the first coat when it is dry to form a good key for the second coat.
PLUMBING
Poor flow
Our shower flow has become weaker over recent months .
What causes this ?
If a shower is giving a poor flow, the reason will usually be that the shower head is blocked with scale — especially with electric instantaneous showers.
Shower heads should be cleaned regularly with a nail brush; every so often use a descaler to give them a good clean.
These need care in use and the instructions for both the descaler and shower should be followed carefully.
Water hammer
When we turn off a cold tap a loud banging comes from somewhere and then stops .
What is it ?
A loud juddering sound occurring when a tap is turned off or a ball-valve shuts is known as water hammer.
It happens because the water has been shut off too quickly, and the shock to the column of moving water is transmitted to the pipe walls.
In taps, replacing the tap washer and tightening the gland nut will both contribute to stopping water hammer occurring.
With ball-valves the best remedy is complete replacement of the old valve with an equilibrium type; this is designed so the valve cannot be forced open by the incoming water pressure, only by movement of the float arm.
A paddle fitted to the arm of the ball-valve will also prevent water hammer.
It is also a good idea to secure the section of pipe running up to the ball-valve itself to a stout timber post fixed between the loft floor and the roof slope.
This prevents any vibration caused by the cistern being filled from being transmitted back down the rising main.
Weeping joints
How do you fix leading compression joints?
A leak from a compression joint can often be cured by tightening the nuts — use one spanner on the fitting and one on the nut.
If this does not work, you will have to drain down the pipe and remove the fitting.
Take off the old olives: if they are stuck in place, saw through them very carefully at an angle with a junior hacksaw.
Fit replacement olives and reconnect the fitting with two spanners, but do not overtighten.
Leaking capillary joints can be more difficult to repair and will generally need to be replaced.
Drain the pipe and use a blow lamp to heat the fitting until it is loose.
Remove the fitting and thoroughly clean up the two ends of pipe with wire wool, before smearing on flux and putting on a new fitting.
Getting the solder of a new fitting to flow can be difficult if there is some water left in the pipe, and it is often easier to replace a leaking capillary fitting with a compression fitting.
Burst-pipe repair-sealants can be used to make a temporary repair.
If a screwed joint (on a hot water cylinder for example) is leaking, drain down the pipe (and if necessary, the cylinder) and disconnect the fitting.
Clean up the pipe threads with a wire brush and reassemble, after wrapping white ptfe tape round the threads in a clockwise direction.
This will help to make the seal when you reassemble the joint.
Pipe repair
What is an easy way to fix a burst pipe?
One neat solution is to use what is known as a ‘slip’ coupling.
This is a fitting about 4in long with a compression joint on each end, but with only one internal shoulder.
After you have cut out the damaged length of pipe, you put the nut and olive on one pipe and slide the fitting on to it.
Then put the nut and olive on the other pipe and slide the fitting back until the second pipe meets the shoulder.
The nuts are then tightened in the normal way.
WINDOWS
Protecting hardwood
Does hardwood need as much protection as softwood?
Hardwood frames are stronger and more resistant to decay  than the softwood variety, but good protection is still required for best results.
Cared for properly, these frames can have a lifespan greatly exceeding softwood.
If left untreated, hardwood can take on a grey appearance and will soon look dirty.
however, if this happens to your windows, it's still not too late to rectify matters — sanding will restore their former glory, then you can work out a treatment programme to keep them looking good.
DAMP
Blisters on roof
A damp patch has recently appeared on our extension wall .
Near the edge of the roof above ,some fairly large blisters have developed in the felt covering so it seems conclusive that the two things are related .
What has caused the blisters and how should the problem be treated ?
Blisters are a sign that moisture has either got below the felt or that the felt was laid on a damp surface.
Heat expands the moisture causing a bubble to appear.
To repair the defect, first use a sharp knife to make two cuts at right angles across the blister.
Turn back the flaps, allow the moisture time to dry, then brush a mastic compound on to the roof boards and press down the flaps firmly.
Just because you have a damp wall, don't assume the problem has to be directly above it — in other words, where the eaves used to be.
Water, having penetrated the roofing felt (this could even be in the middle of the roof), could run along a joist and give problems with the wall.
Defective flashings
Although the flashing is sound on the joint between house wall and extension, it seems to admit rainwater.
What is the best cure?
If the flashing looks sound but is obviously porous, clean the surface thoroughly with a wire brush.
Then apply a coat of bituminous primer and bed a strip of self-adhesive flashing tape along it.
Use two strips of tape (applying the lower one first) on wide flashings.
Patch tears and holes in the same way.
You can also use these flashing tapes over mortar fillets used to seal wall-roof junctions, provided the mortar fillet is sound.
Condensation problem?
How does condensation develop in fitted wardrobes?
Condensation is particularly likely to occur where natural air circulation is restricted — for example, in the corners of rooms, or behind furniture (especially if it is built in against a cold outside wall).
Even if the structure is basically well insulated, condensation may occur at ‘cold bridges’— as on lintels above window openings, on window reveals, or on ceilings.
Where insulation is poor, the solution is to add extra insulation material — again, in conjunction with vapour barriers where appropriate, to prevent interstitial condensation from occurring within the house structure.
Modern composite materials make it relatively easy to tackle walls, ceilings and floors, and of course double glazing is the accepted solution for reducing condensation on window surfaces.
But it doesn't cure the problem.
WOODWORM
Treatment time
What is the best time of year to spray woodworm fluid?
Spring and summer, when the adult beetles are active, is the best time to spray.
Also, at this time doors and windows can be left open which will allow the solvent and odour of the woodworm fluid to escape as rapidly as possible.
GLASS
Toughened glass
I have been advised to fit toughened glass for safety reasons to a side window .
What exactly is it ?
Toughened glass is glass which has been heat treated to make it four to five times stronger than normal glass, but which gives it the characteristic that, should it break, it does so in harmless tiny fragments rather than the dangerous slivers associated with normal glass.
The crazed breaking of a toughened glass windscreen is familiar to many motorists.
Toughened glass costs much more than normal float glass and it must be ordered cut to size.
WOODWORK
Chipboard screws
I am experiencing problems in getting a screw to hold in chipboard .
What's the secret ?
Normal wood screws are no good when used in chipboard.
Special chipboard screws have a raised thread which bites in the board as they are driven in — often the thread is a double one.
Cover caps are available to mask the heads — these either push into a counter-bored hole (larger than the recessed screw head) or into the cross-head of the screw itself.
DOWN THE PAN
Extracts from the diary of the working supervisor for a small building company, with useful tips on all sorts of building problems.
I left you last month as we were about to remove th old wc in our bathroom refit.
A new wc suite is by no means difficult to fit, but requires a little more attention to detail than the rests of the bathroom.
After all, a badly fitted loo can be a positive health hazard.
It reminds me of when, as a young man just flown from the comfort and security of the parental nest, I rented a small flat.
The late landlord's estate of numerous flea pits was managed by an agent who wasn't too bothered about the slight leak at the connection between my toilet and the drain.
At one point I had pretty yellow fungi growing from the floor, which was right above a store room to the cafe downstairs; needless to say, I never ate there.
Apart from the age of the property, I could tell that the bathroom wc of our refit had undergone some previous modernisation: the old high-level Burlington bell cistern had long been removed.
The flush pipes from high-level cisterns need less room than the low-level types, and the extension pipe at the back of the loo told me it had been moved forward a few inches.
Removing an upstairs wc is different from one on a solid ground floor.
We had already disconnected the water supply, so the first thing was to empty the cistern by flushing, and then remove the flush pipe from the flush pipe horn by folding back the rubber gasket and unscrewing the joint at the cistern.
Some modern types don't have flush pipes: the cistern on close-coupled suites fits directly to the bowl.
We normally start with the part that could possibly give problems: in this case, the wc; the rest can be done another day if absolutely necessary.
It pays to have friendly neighbours or a large bucket at this stage.
On a wooden floor the pan is held with brass screws — hopefully.
I've known them fitted with steel screws which rust in, making it necessary to break the china away and remove the screws later with a pair of Molegrips.
If flexible push-fit couplings haven't previously been used, it will be necessary to break the top of the bend at the back of the unit.
A few strategic blows with a hammer will achieve this without shattering the whole thing, but it's prudent to first bail out as much water as possible from the trap.
Solid floor installations will need lifting off the lump of sharp-sand bedding-mortar, which should be completely removed, and the new installation provided with a fresh mix.
Breaking the top of the bend will leave a jagged projection to gently chisel out, after plugging the soil pipe with paper or rag, to prevent particles going down the pipe and possibly blocking the drain.
Once a small section is completely removed the rest should come away easily.
The mortar joint is attacked in a similar manner, remembering to always point the chisel inward, never out.
Should the collar of the soil pipe (if it has one) break, this is not usually detrimental with today's couplings, as long as the inside of the pipe is not cracked.
Modern plastics and silicones have made pipe connections so easy: no more messing about with tarred hemp and mortar, which inevitably cracked and leaked a few years later.
A clean pipe, a little lubricant, and a good push are all that's needed for an immediate watertight joint.
Removing a cistern is simply a case of undoing the inlet and overflow pipes, which are connected to the cistern with large brass or plastic nuts.
The mounting is usually two screws on soft washers into the wall on the inside.
A lot of wc bowls now have a straight outlet, which fits any kind of fixing with the correct coupling.
You will be asked whether you want an S or a P trap, which often causes amusement: an S trap fits to a soil pipe in the floor, and a P trap to a soil pipe which goes out through the wall.
Well, there we were with a large empty space to fill.
Major problems weren't likely now, and fortunately getting the new pan operating, even without the cistern, didn't take long.
Sanitaryware varies a little in size, and it's important to check positioning before fixing anything: our cistern was about 15mm wider than the original, so it's just as well we did.
Sometimes the inlet pipe can be eased over a little and the overflow trimmed to suit.
This didn't matter to us, as we were putting in new pipework.
Modern push-fit sanitary couplings, of the Multikwik variety, come with their own lubricant, which is liberally smeared over the cleaned pipe and the fitting pushed home.
We still needed an extension pipe, which was trimmed to length to reach the drain and fitted in the same manner.
An angle of up to 10° can be placed on all couplings of this type, without leakage, making them the favourite choice.
An offset coupling is sometimes needed: these are simply turned to achieve the desired effect of connecting higher, lower or a little to one side — particularly important with a standard washdown assembly, where the flush pipe should be kept straight.
Cisterns usually need the main components assembling before installation, and offer the choice of left or right-hand operation.
Again, instructions should be included in the pack.
There are only two adjustments to be made inside: the correct alignment of the handle and pull-rod for smooth operation; and of the ballvalve, to ensure that the supply is fully closed when the level reaches the water line.
Sealing of both supply and overflow connections is always improved with a smear of jointing compound, although in theory this may not be necessary.
Before turning on the water supply it's wise to check all joints: little things like forgetting to roll the flush-pipe gasket over the horn are easily done, and two gallons of water can make an awful mess.