

The 1960s and 1970s
Brian Way and Dorothy Heathcote
Since a whole book could be written about the professional work of each of these innovators, there is a danger that in the process of selection I shall distort or over-simplify.
Indeed, I have blundered straight away by placing them in a context of the 1960s and 1970s, as though in 1970 they stopped!
I have not seen Brian Way for a few years now, since he went to work in America, but if he is continually developing his philosophy and practice at the rate Dorothy Heathcote is refining hers, then there is the added danger that anything written about them is out of date as it leaves the press.
Give or take a few years they are contemporaries, and yet historically people place Brian Way very much earlier.
This is partly because he became known much sooner.
When colleges of education in the 1960s were clamouring to employ Brian Way as their external examiner and his children's theatre companies were a household name throughout the country's education authorities, Dorothy Heathcote was relatively unknown in spite of having held her university post since the early 1950s.
I first met Brian in 1955 and Dorothy just three years later.
Both have had an enormous impact on me as a teacher.
One of the things they taught me was to be independent of doctrine, for their separate advice to me was contradictory.
It is the fascination of these contrasted views of drama in education that I would like to share with the reader as the basis for this chapter.
What these two exponents have in common is their deep concern for the education of children and their considerable reservations about what  goes on in the name of education in our present institutions.
And both of them use drama as a process for children's enrichment — but here the similarity ceases.
Indeed, if you were to ask each what he or she infers from the term enrichment in this context, the divergence of their thinking may become apparent straight away.
Whereas Brian Way's answer might be that drama helps with ‘the release of the real me’(1951), Dorothy Heathcote's might place ‘stumbling on authenticity’(1950) high on her list of enrichments.
Brian Way
A close associate of Peter Slade in their early pioneering days, Brian Way developed the philosophy and methodology of Child Drama along a broader front.
His work embraced children's theatre, classroom drama and the integrated arts.
It may well be that it is the first of these, his work in children's theatre, for which he will be most remembered, for he revolutionised the whole conception of what forms theatre for children might take.
just as Peter Slade had to stand up against a tradition of formalised children's drama, so Brian Way had to educate teachers into understanding that children deserved something better than light entertainment.
The history of children's theatre and Theatre in Education (as it is now called), with its own nice mixture of educational thinkers as its leaders — Bertha Waddell, Caryl Jenner, Gerald Tyler, Gordon Vallins, Stuart Bennett, Roger Chapman, Cora Williams, John O'Toole (1976), David Pammeter, Pam Schweitzer, Geoff Gillham and Tony Jackson (1980), to select a few — to a considerable extent reflects the changing conception of drama in the classroom during these two decades.
If anything, Theatre in Education tends to be ahead of drama in education.
There is unfortunately not the space here to include such a history, but merely to reiterate that what Brian Way was offering  schools in the 1950s and 1960s was far ahead of his contemporaries in the field.
Perhaps his best known innovation, audience participation, is now well documented in his most recent publication (1981)— that we now take audience participation for granted is almost entirely due to the pioneering work of this very able teacher and director.
But we have to examine his other main passion: creative drama, as it came to be called round about this time.
He had a big advantage over Peter Slade in that by the time his seminal publication,Development through Drama , emerged in 1967, the profession, particularly teachers in the Primary schools, was more eager to seize upon his message.
As John Deverall (1979) points out, in that same year our Plowden Committee published its stamp of approval on progressive education.
Child-centred education, at least in the Primary schools, was now seen to be respectable.
Teacher-training institutions were expanding and many of Brian Way's devotees were appointed to lead new drama courses.
(It might be useful to remind the reader at this point that the Speech and Drama movement, although fading at the school level, had become firmly entrenched in teacher colleges where many well qualified Speech and Drama people had gained appointments, colleges such as Trent Park and Goldsmiths', where teacher-training in the arts was not unlike theatre-training.)
Through Brian Way's influence a new kind of college course was emerging that saw drama as the basis for the students' own personal development.
Perhaps the most impressive of these was Loughborough College where that fine, sensitive associate of Peter Slade and Brian Way, Stan Evernden, was the first lecturer to evolve a student-centred drama course for potential teachers.
Indeed the first handbook of drama based on Peter Slade's philosophy emerged from this college where Pemberton-Billing (1965), a tutor there, joined forces with David Clegg, a student.
The training of teachers in how to teach drama requires  some kind of formula.
Development through Drama seemed to provide just this and became a set text worldwide, but as with most formulae, the recommended practice often does not quite match the philosophy.
Curious contradictions can creep in.
When one watches Brian Way teach a class of children, as I have had the privilege to do, one has a strong sense of coherence in theory and practice, but what people take from a theoretical book can often be a distortion of what was actually intended by the author.
I do not suppose, for instance, that Brian Way imagined that teachers would adopt a ‘shopping-list’ method of conducting lessons based on a few arbitrarily chosen activities strung together for children to respond to in rapid succession.
(Just as, in the case of my own work, I did not anticipate that some teachers would begin every lesson with ‘What do you want to do a play about?’.
These misinterpretations can become embedded in practice and, once there, are difficult to eradicate.)
Let us look at some of the assumptions implicit in ‘creative drama’.
There are four in particular that have significant educational implications:(1) the emphasis on individualisation,(2) the encouragement of the ‘exercise’ disposition or mode of behaviour,(3) the widening of activities to be embraced by drama, and (4) the importance of intuition, which I shall discuss under the section heading ‘Dorothy Heathcote’.
1 Individualisation
In carrying the banner for the ‘uniqueness of the individual’, Brian Way has been seen as an articulate and effective militant against the authoritarian stance of traditional education.
Although his writings may not have had the breadth of impact of his ‘human growth’ contemporaries across the Atlantic, such as Carl Rogers (1961) and Abraham Maslow (1954), it is possible that because he offered an unpretentious dramatic model, teachers found his approach more immediately accessible than Rogers' ideology.
It may be, too, that Way's essential  practicality helped to deflect some of the more sensational encounter-group and psychodrama-type experiments from the British drama scene.
But the obvious drawback to emphasising the importance of the individual is that it can lead to unhealthy egocentrism.
If the pupil in the drama lesson is conscious of using drama to help ‘the real me to get out’ then this could be as limiting as the most inflexible authoritarian teaching.
John Deverall (1979), in a fascinating but as yet unpublished dissertation on the ‘Public Medium/Private Process’ dichotomy, draws our attention to authors such as Richard Sennett (1974) and Iris Murdoch (1970), the former deploring the cult of the individual in modern society and the latter arguing fiercely for the arts as ‘unselfing’.
And recently, in education, we have David Hargreaves (1982) pointing out the harm done in schools when the balance of attention is given to the individuals rather than to the group — and this from a non-authoritarian, liberal educationalist.
Such a view begins to turn on its head the old assumption that individualism is the sine qua non of progressive education.
And I wish to argue further that in using drama to promote the individual's growth we have inadvertently distorted drama itself on two counts.
The first is that drama is never about oneself; it is always concerned with something outside oneself.
And secondly, drama is a social event not a solitary experience.
It is one thing to claim that by sharing in a dramatic exploration of a theme I can learn something about myself in the process, and quite another to suggest the drama is for me and about me.
Yet we have trained generations of teachers who think drama is just this, that it is an expression of each child's ego, so that a bewildered teacher feels a responsibility not towards what is being created by a group of thirty, but towards thirty individual creations.
Drama is not about self-expression.
It is a group's expression, concerned with celebrating what people share, what man has in common with man.
When an audience is responding to a play they are identifying what they have in common with the human  beings on stage.
Drama is about similarities not differences, but of course by looking at similarities, differences might well be highlighted.
Thus I claim that for decades we have attempted to change the nature of the art in order to meet the requirements of child-centred education — and have felt guilty because it does not work.
I believe that Brian Way, a man of the theatre, also knows that child-centred drama in a pure form cannot work.
He never actually says this in his publications, rather the reverse, but he offers a methodology that focuses away from the child.
He creates a new set of skills, not the skills to do with refinement of speech that the Speech and Drama experts had a vested interest in, but life-skills.
Development through Drama is a training manual.
2 The exercise mode
Influenced by Stanislavski (1937) in the theatre, Way has devised a parallel training for pupils in schools to help children develop, in particular, sensitivity, concentration and intuition.
He believes that practice in, for instance, mirror exercises, would over a period of time develop these personal traits, so often neglected by a traditional curriculum.
His book offers a wealth of pleasurable activities which have been seized upon by teachers as the ‘five finger exercises’ of creative drama.
Apart from whether or not these exercises are effective (they are certainly found to be enjoyable and relaxing by many pupils), they have given the teacher a secure base from which to work, for the teacher can be very much in charge, dictating the choice of exercise, controlling the length of time for each, selecting the background music where felt to be appropriate or even dictating the moment-to-moment activity within the experience.
As will be seen from the example below, the drama can be far removed from what could be recognised as a child-centred activity:
Continually there is value in the teacher telling the story whilst the class are doing it; everybody works at  one and the same time, discovering for themselves how to do each thing.
To start with, there is little detail in the story; as concentration and absorption grow with experience, the detail can increase by the teacher's approach and type of suggestion.
For example, an early story (it is one of, shall we say, a visit to the sea-side) might start:
One morning you are fast asleep in bed.
The alarm clock rings, so you get up and get washed; then you get dressed; then you have breakfast…‘
…
At a later stage, some detail begins to come in, and the start of the story might run:
‘One morning you are fast asleep in bed; the alarm bell rings, so you push back the blankets and sheets, put on your slippers and go to the bathroom; then you wash your face and hands — and don't forget your neck and behind your ears…’
And at a later stage:
‘So you go to the bathroom and turn the doorknob — push the door open — go inside — close the door gently behind you so that you don't wake up anybody else in the house; now you go to the basin — put the plug in — turn on the tap — it's a very stiff tap…’(p. 196).
The children are required to perform these actions as they hear the teacher's instructions.
Not only does this teaching method put the teacher almost entirely in control, it also invites a particular kind of mental disposition from the participants.
I have called this the ‘exercise mode’ of dramatic behaviour.
In this particular instance it is representational, as the ‘performance mode’ is, for the child is required to describe in action whatever the teacher suggests (as in the example above, ‘So you go to the bathroom and turn the doorknob’), but the ‘exercise mode’has other characteristics that give it a special mental quality.
They tend to be:
(a)
it isolates action as being of interest in itself in a way that does not occur either in dramatic playing or  performing.
It also can isolate one action from another, so that the total sequence is not relevant (concentration on washing one's neck has little to do with the subsequent ‘sea-side’ actions — the action of washing one's neck is but an arbitrary item in a string of actions);
(b)
it is inconsequential, removing any sense of import to do with an imagined situation;
(c)
it is always short-term, so there is a strong sense of doing it in order to complete a task.
This task orientation is not unlike the ‘foreshadowing’ mental set of the ideas game, not perhaps in the example of exercise quoted above, but in those kinds of exercises where you know the outcome before you start.
(For example, ‘you are going to ice a cake, carry it to a safe place — and trip over the cat!’);
(d)
sometimes there is a sense of doing it because it needs practising;
(e)
if it requires a recall of emotion, it is often sufficient merely to switch on the emotion rather than elicit it (as when you trip over the cat!).
Although the quoted example of exercise happens to require a describing of appropriate actions, some exercises place the participant firmly in the ‘dramatic playing’ mode.
For instance, ‘You are going to try to persuade a friend to lend you some money’ places the participant in the experiential frame, as the negotiation will occur and the outcome could take different forms.
This still puts the participant in an ‘exercise mode’ as the dramatic playing that ensues is modified by the task orientation.
The ‘exercise mode’ can be very useful when the purpose is clear to both teacher and class.
There are times when it is important to detach an action or an attitude in order to look at the mechanics of it.
Unfortunately, some teachers, because of the obvious security it gives, give children a total diet of this kind of thing, which is a bit like English teachers giving children continual practice in punctuation or sentence structure without the chance to write creatively.
3 Widening of dramatic activities
One of the ways Brian Way has helped drama teachers is by broadening the repertoire of activities that might be included in a drama lesson.
Like Dorothy Heathcote, he is interested in giving children an educational opportunity.
He is not interested in drama as an important product in itself.
It is surprising to what lengths he is prepared to go to ignore what is essentially drama.
In the first paragraph of Development through Drama he writes:
The Function of Drama
The answer to many simple questions might take one of two forms — either that of information or else that of direct experience; the former answer belongs to the category of academic education, the latter to drama.
For example, the question might be ‘What is a blind person?’
The reply could be ‘A blind person is a person who cannot see’.
Alternatively, the reply could be ‘Close your eyes and, keeping them closed all the time, try to find your way out of this room’.
The first answer contains concise and accurate information; the mind is possibly satisfied.
But the second answer leads the inquirer to moments of direct experience, transcending mere knowledge, enriching the imagination, possibly touching the heart and soul as well as the mind.
This, in over-simplified terms, is the precise function of drama [my italics](p. 1).
In this paragraph we have the basis for Brian Way's philosophy: he is interested in introducing direct experience into education.
This is not new in child-centred teaching, but Way extends the notion of direct experience to exercise of the senses in the way other theatre people like Rose Bruford (1955) have recommended for children.
But whereas Rose Bruford's system of training is rigidly linked with conventional mime, Brian Way offers a much more flexible approach that anticipates much of the kind of sensitivity work of the encounter-group movement in the late 1960s.
In the example above, so that children might imagine what it is like to be blind, the teacher  invites them to deprive themselves temporarily of their sight.
This is a fine example of direct experience — suddenly the pupils are thrown back onto their resources of space, memory and touch.
This is direct experience, but it is not drama — not until there is some pretence involved, some symbolic representation, some intention to make believe.
In which case moving around the room with one's eyes open, as if one could not see, would qualify for drama.
Only in the most narrow sense is dramatic experience direct: one way of putting it is that drama is not itself direct, it only appears to be.
That it appears to be is its power.
Much teaching of drama has effectively removed that power.
This is one of the paradoxes of the educational drama situation — that we have trained a generation of teachers who have not understood the nature of drama itself.
They have not appreciated that Brian Way in advocating so many exercises in direct experience was desperately and effectively fighting a battle against second-hand learning which characterises so much of our traditional ‘empty pitcher’ view of education.
Thus Brian Way opened the door to all kinds of activities (games, relaxation exercises, ‘warm-ups’ and sensitivity exercises, etc.) to be done in the name of drama.
The popular view expressed was that ‘anything goes’, because ‘drama is life’.
It took Chris Day (1975), writing eight years after Brian Way, boldly to affirm that, ‘Drama…is not life’(p. 3).
I also suggest that much of the bewilderment felt by teachers about the nature of the subject that they were teaching can be traced to both Brian Way's and Dorothy Heathcote's disclaimer that drama could be important in itself.
If it has so little status, why bother understanding it, one might ask!
Dorothy Heathcote
Because Dorothy is such a charismatic figure, many people thirst to see her on television or read about her.
Such people are going to be disappointed with what follows, for I shall merely continue to look critically at some of the concepts to which she has given prominence.
I shall also attempt with Dorothy Heathcote, as I have with the other pioneers, to point to innovations or assumptions which are implicit in her work and which she herself may not have articulated.
For it often happens that the things we take for granted are the very things that need most explaining, but to which we give least attention because we are barely conscious of them ourselves.
There is an outstanding example of this in Dorothy Heathcote, and that is her ‘literary’ assumptions about the content of drama.
In this aspect she is linked, as I mentioned in Chapter One, with Harriet Finlay Johnson who attached more importance to content than any pioneers since.
For Harriet Finlay Johnson, knowledge of the objective world was of prime importance and she developed a dramatic process of making factual knowledge more interesting.
Whereas it would have been possible to ask Harriet Finlay Johnson, ‘What are you teaching this lesson?’ and the answer could easily be something like, ‘The Spanish Armada’, one could not expect to be given an equivalent answer from Peter Slade, Brian Way or the Speech and Drama teachers.
Now the content or subject-matter of any particular dramatic experience is for Dorothy Heathcote what gives it significance.
But where she differs from Miss Finlay Johnson is that she looks beyond the facts to more universal implications of any particular topic.
‘I wonder why you keep going to sea when you know it's dangerous’(quoted by B. J. Wagner, 1976, p. 59), muses Mrs. Heathcote to a class of children who are into a drama about pirates — and she from then on carries at the back of her mind the possibility that through the subsequent experience these children might understand something of what drives people to face dangers.
Now this is a literary , thematic way of looking at content.
Just as a novel is about characters in a story sequence and at the same time, at a different level, about many other things, so drama has more than one level of meaning.
And it is the thematic meanings, of course, that allow the participants to enter fantasy or unfamiliar contexts.
It allows, to give another example, Tom Stabler's middle juniors to identify with the Bible story of Jezebel which at a surface level was quite outside their experience.
The teacher's pre-planning ensures that the necessary connections are made.
Tom Stabler describes the process in the Rosens' publication (1973):
The children chose the theme of Jezebel, a foreign princess who introduces the worship of Baal to move the king towards selfish and evil acts.
Elijah opposes, much as people's champion.
Thus the theme offered clear-cut situations and opposing characters as a spring-board to varied developments and with the likelihood of the following abstract possibilities: duties of kingship; nature of law; and claims of a community, etc. (pp. 205–9).
Neither Dorothy Heathcote nor Tom Stabler, who had not done drama before he met Dorothy, appreciated that the above kind of thematic planning was in any way unusual.
And yet as far as many practitioners were concerned it was revolutionary.
Teachers who for years had planned in terms of appropriate actions could not overnight apply their minds to appropriate meanings as well.
In my view this is one of the keys to understanding differences between Dorothy Heathcote and her predecessors in the field.
But of course it requires a two-way thinking operation.
It is not enough to be able to translate a topic into themes: ability to see a theme in turn translated back into action is a necessity.
(It is sometimes amusing to watch an intellectually inclined teacher, happily aping what he or she thinks is a ‘Heathcote-type’ preliminary discussion, thrashing around helplessly incapable of finding a concrete start to the drama.
Many postgraduates after three years of thinking in the abstract feel quite stupid when required to think concretely.)
But because Dorothy Heathcote has always taken the  importance of content for granted it has made her less than tolerant with dramatic activity that appears to lack significantly focused meaning.
Tony Goode (1952) quotes this typically blunt Heathcote statement:
A sort of messy, mucky drama has been going on for years, about unselectivity and conglomeration: ‘Let them have the experience, all of them, every one of them, every minute of every time!’(p. 8).
And then Goode nicely juxtaposes this statement against one of Brian Way's:
…if the approach is through the intellect rather than through intuition, that is, through a tangible and examinable process of understanding and thinking, rather than through an imaginative and emotional and therefore intangible process of relishing and enjoying, irrespective of whether or not there is full understanding (p. 8).
He says that the two quotations demonstrate where ‘Way and Heathcote part company irrevocably’(p. 8), and he is right, but it is interesting to note that they both value intuition.
I think Brian Way has in the past misjudged Dorothy Heathcote's work because he has seen it as intellectual.
Indeed, my emphasis on her ‘literary’ conception of drama seems to confirm the view.
On the other hand we have Wagner (1974) referring to her work as ‘gut-level, drama.
So there is an apparent contradiction here that could usefully be sorted out.
Thinking thematically is in fact not necessarily an intellectual exercise.
To think intellectually about pirates would be to categorise: ‘Ah yes!’ one might say, ‘Drama about pirates could be about ships at sea or fighting or finding treasure or drinking rum, etc.’
Now Dorothy's ‘I wonder why you keep going to sea…’ detaches itself from simple classification; its very phrasing has emotional overtones.
Thus her thematic selections will always have a feeling quality.
In other words she herself is opening up avenues for all sorts of intuitive meanings.
Her thinking is already  personalised : ‘I wonder what keeps you going…etc.’
And it is her intuition that she is dependent on for finding just the right thing to muse about to the class in front of her.
Likewise, she expects the children to operate intuitively in their make-believe, but she believes the intuition can be a refined instrument, accompanied by a high degree of awareness, at its best, bringing about reflection on what one experiences even as one experiences it.
Absorption, so important to Peter Slade, is not a criterion for good quality endeavour.
Hyper-awareness is what Dorothy Heathcote seeks.
I shall be looking more closely at the implications of this point of view later, but here I want to suggest that in emphasising the importance of reflection Dorothy Heathcote has overstated the case.
It seems to me, and we shall look at this in Chapter Seven when we examine the notion of unconscious learning in drama, that there is some truth in Brian Way's claim that relishing and enjoying something without fully understanding it can be of value.
There is, however, an even more fundamental division between their philosophies.
When Brian Way speaks of direct experience ‘transcending knowledge’, he is denigrating knowledge in a way Dorothy Heathcote would never do.
If he means by knowledge an accumulation of inconsequential facts then of course she would agree with him, but one suspects that in his concern for ‘things of the heart’ he is turning his back on the curiosity men share to know the world of objects.
Now it seems to me that for Dorothy Heathcote man's curiosity about the world is the very source of her interest in drama, of her interest in history, of her interest in education and indeed, of her interest in Life.
Early in Chapter One I referred to Marthinus' expression of regret that education persisted in training pupils to see a stone as a specimen and never for itself, to see the handler of a stone as a classifier of specimens and not as important in himself.
Dorothy Heathcote would agree with Way and Marthinus that education as we currently understand it is too biased in this direction, but it is a balance between the two that  she is seeking.
Not, however, a balanced diet made up of a bit of one and then a bit of the other, but an integration between the two.
Now it is how Dorothy Heathcote sees the relationship between the two that sets her apart from most drama teachers.
She is equally fascinated by the stone as a specimen and as a phenomenological object, but whereas those of us working in drama who might agree with the wisdom of this position tend to see ‘personal engagement’ with the world through dramatic action as a proper way of helping the child to know the world, Dorothy Heathcote tends to delay the phenomenological process by a deliberate depersonalising of objects.
I have written elsewhere (Bolton, 1982) that the basic skill of acting is: ‘an ability to engage with something outside oneself using an ‘as if ’ mental set to activate, sustain or intensify that engagement' and I go on to say, ‘I am using the word ‘engagement’as a central feature because it implies a relationship at an affective level between a person and the world outside him' (p. 135).
Now I am virtually claiming in this quotation that drama is about the ‘personalising’ of objects.
For Dorothy Heathcote, whether the object is a shirt, a piece of leather, a chess-piece, a book or a surgeon's knife, the teacher's responsibility is to invite or even compel the children to work from a ‘frame’(used here in the sociological sense of ‘perspective’) that requires not engagement, but detachment .
Each child is to function as an ‘expert’ with all that implies of seeing the surgeon's knife as a specimen, as a tool, as a crafted artefact, as having a history of metal from the earth, of man's invention, of factory organisation, of training in high-quality skills.
This detachment does not and cannot remove affect.
The scientist is motivated by a passion for what is true and a sense of responsibility towards what is true.
Thus the affective is deeply embedded in everything a scientist does, but it is also a process of ‘unselfing’.
This is the kind of frame from which Dorothy Heathcote often (increasingly) wants children to work, and this is why it often  seems to be the case in her work that the pupils are not in role at all— they are merely required to look at something from a particular scientific perspective.
But a ‘drive towards truth’ it might be argued, is surely an attitude the science teacher requires in the school laboratory.
Is not this concentrated respect for the object as a specimen the very antithesis of the arts in education?
Many of us indeed see the arts and sciences as pulling in different directions, ‘different ways of knowing the world’, we might say.
But for Dorothy Heathcote, you can see the angels on the pin-head.
Arts and sciences must be part of each other.
By looking at the one you must see the other.
Only by concentrating on the object can you both analyse it and celebrate it.
Art and science are about how man makes sense of the world he lives in.
Both centre on the object.
The cobbler's song in Hassan is there because man invented a shoe.
The material world is not only the source of man's arts, but the reason for them.
Thus the ‘mantle of the expert’ is always on the edge of society's rituals, myths, emblems, traditions, rejoicings and catastrophes.
By examining the object the child earns the right to share the celebration of it.
This is the key to Dorothy Heathcote's attitude to drama; may I suggest it is also a key to the re-thinking that will have to be done vis-à-vis the arts and the curriculum.
Thus there is a huge chasm between the two protagonists of this chapter.
It is not surprising that practitioners and lecturers who have followed Brian Way's philosophy for all their professional lives feel very threatened.
To them Heathcote does all the wrong things, says all the wrong things, and writes in the wrong way.
She has no choice: she is burdened with both a philosophy and its implementation not conceived of by educators either in drama or in anything else.
I can guess, for instance, that an academic in the drama field, Richard Courtney, was embarrassed by her in the early days because she does not fit his Sladian view of what drama teaching is about.
Whereas he adopted caution, a long-time associate and  friend of Brian Way, Margaret Faulkes Jendyk (1975), expressed her insecurity by writing the most vituperative article I have ever read by one educator of another.
You cannot not react to Dorothy Heathcote.
There is, however, always a danger that her critics are really writing about themselves, defending their own positions, so there has been very little constructive criticism.
Even the medium of an academic thesis (1978) has been used by John Crompton, her colleague at Newcastle University, to express his scorn rather than offer a cool evaluation.
There has also been a great deal of adulation which is perhaps even more harmful for it generates mysticism.
Opportunity has now been presented for someone to take a sober look at her writings which have been collected into one volume recently by Liz Johnson and Cecily O'Neill (1983).
The next chapter will be rather different in both intention and structure, for it will not examine the work in detail of particular leaders in the field nor give attention to the teasing out of any particular principles.
Rather, it attempts to give the reader a general picture of how other practitioners and commentators have responded to the various theoretical strands which the major pioneers have spun for us, and to demonstrate how the community drama movement, right up to the mid-1960s, uniquely outshone in both effort and prestige the work of pioneers in classroom drama.
Summary
In this chapter I have once more attempted to describe the work of two pioneers, while at the same time using their work as a platform for discussion of issues which are crucial to my own philosophy.
In discussing Brian Way, I have suggested that not only has the emphasis placed by him on the individuality of the individual been misleading, it has also put some teachers in a position of distorting the medium of drama itself; and that Brian Way  in practice overcame this problem by including in his seminal publication a system of training in life skills.
He popularised the use of exercise, which, I have explained, dispositionally orientates the participants in a special way.
I further suggested that he broadened the scope of the drama lesson by including all sorts of direct sense experiences.
I argued that drama is not in itself direct, that indeed its power lies in its seeming directness.
Both Brian Way and Dorothy Heathcote believe in the importance of intuition, both for teacher and for pupil.
Dorothy Heathcote's own thinking oscillates between the thematic and the concrete.
This ‘literary’ slant to the drama's content is an important contrast with all previous pioneers, most of whom had given little attention to content.
But more fundamental than this is her view of the scientist's and artist's conception of knowledge.
According to her the material objects of the world provide the common source of that knowledge.
Drama is but one way in which society makes sense of the material world.
To know an object well is to earn the right to celebrate it.
Community theatre and other influences on drama in school
Although I suggested in the last chapter that it was easier for Brian Way than for Peter Slade to challenge the formal drama traditions within the schools, it could not be said that either of them had very much impact on what drama meant and still means to interested people outside our educational institutions.
Innovators of ‘informal’ drama seem in fact to have failed abysmally in their attempt to explain their approach to the public at large and in particular to other subject teachers, headteachers and L.E.A.
officials.
A startling illustration of another educator's naive understanding of the work of drama teachers occurs in a recent publication by David Hargreaves (1982) who recommends that the arts and drama in particular should be given a place at the centre of the curriculum.
But he writes:
The number of drama teachers in schools has grown rapidly for years.
But they are severely constrained by the time-table of forty-minute periods.
School plays cannot be produced within such a framework.
It is not surprising then that school plays (‘theatre’) must in practice be given a low priority.
Most pupils' experience of drama must be confined to ‘drama lessons’ and the easiest way to conduct such a short lesson is to devote it to improvised drama and movement, with its focus on individual objectives.
One of the central functions of drama is thereby distorted (p. 153).
In other words, he sees the informal activities of the drama lesson as a regrettable compromise falling far short of the main purpose of drama, the school play.
It is something of a boost for drama teachers to have someone as eminent in education as David Hargreaves taking interest  in the value of drama, but if the subject is to develop we must find ways of demonstrating its worth more effectively to more such ‘outsiders’.
The lack of communication to others has only in part been due to our own ineptness at salesmanship; it more likely lies in a fairly deeply embedded resistance to drama being anything other than a community art — not just a performing art, a community art.
David Griffiths, in a fascinating dissertation (1970), has documented its history.
It is a history of morale boosting, of public money being made available from various sources from 1918 onwards: to enrich the life in remote villages in danger of being deserted by the exodus after the First World War; to occupy the unemployed in the 1930s on Tyneside; to counter the dreary effect of the ‘blackout’ during the Second World War (this was the first instance in this country of government subsidy); to bring a sense of wellbeing to the community during the difficult years following the war; and in particular, to occupy bored young people.
It was this latter purpose which attracted most money, for in the 1940s and 1950s the government saw the development of youth clubs as one of its priorities.
Drama, more than any of the other arts, became a popular pastime for young people which grew rapidly not just in quantity but also in standards, for the notion of training youth in drama seems to have been conceived from the beginning.
Now, by a quirk of history, the machinery for carrying out such schemes of training in drama was not to be found in normal educational administration, but in the huge network of social services administered by the National Council of Social Services, a voluntary body financed by Carnegie Trust which since 1919 had co-ordinated the work of various national organisations such as the Village Drama Society, County Rural Community Councils, British Drama League, the Federation of Women's Institutes, the National Association of Boys' Clubs, Townswomen's Guilds, the Workers' Educational Association, County Youth Committees, the Standing Conference of  Drama Associations and Hull University's Extra-Mural Department, the only university to take interest in Community Drama.
Thus when there was demand for training youth in drama the holder of the purse, the government, turned for advice not to educationalists, not to speech and drama experts (although there was some overlap here), but to a small group of charismatic figures who for decades had been promoting community drama of one sort or another, promoting it by giving advice, by running courses, by setting up drama libraries of play-texts, by making links with professional theatre, by popularising competitive festivals.
These dynamic people, including Mary Kelly, Frances Mackenzie, L. du Garde Peach, Leo Baker, Robert Newton and Alfred Willett-Whittacker were not merely enthusiastic practitioners, they were far-sighted educators who were giving high status to amateur theatre.
It is important for us to understand, therefore, that what was going on in schools in the 1920s, '30s, '40s and '50s paled into insignificance by the side of community drama.
As David Griffiths tells us, when, in the 1940s and 1950s it was necessary to make appointments to advise on Youth Drama in order to meet the requirements of the new Government project, these people were the experts, already familiar with training schemes, whose advice was sought.
They were invited to recommend likely candidates for the newly-created posts of Drama Organiser to various counties who would oversee all adult dramatic activity including youth work.
Many appointed in this way were ex-professional theatre actors or directors who for various reasons (not always the best) were interested in transferring to the amateur world.
In 1949 the Drama Board was set up by Leo Baker as an examining body to give national qualification to tutors of youth drama.
This represented a most enlightened step, which is perhaps even more remarkable when one appreciates that no educational institution was involved.
The examination syllabus set new standards in the teaching of drama to young people and provided a spectacular  contrast to the out-of-date, circumscribed speech and drama examinations of the Royal Academy, Guildhall and Trinity Colleges.
But eventually Leo Baker, employed as Carnegie's full-time adviser, and certainly the most powerful leader in amateur theatre training in the country, gave way in the early 1960s to another younger yet just as skilful negotiator, Peter Husbands, who was finely in tune with the changing emphasis in the world of drama education.
He persuaded the Board in 1970 to recognise that a new kind of qualification was now required, one that would give status to the more ‘creative’ approach to drama in schools.
In many ways this innovation by Peter Husbands marks the watershed of drama education.
Such was the respect in which the Drama Board was held by teachers, advisers and teacher-trainers alike that the profession as a whole gave support to this new examination, the first (apart from Peter Slade's own certificate in Birmingham) to give recognition to talented classroom teachers.
(The sad demise of this Board in 1981 and the heartless handling of its distinguished Secretary, Peter Husbands, by the D.E.S.
is a story that will have to be told elsewhere.)
When pressure was eventually put on L.E.A.s in the 1950s to take over employment of the various county organisers whose salaries hitherto had been paid from Carnegie Trust funds, most authorities did so on condition that the organisers' work should be extended to schools.
Thus began an era when larger-than-life ‘theatrical’ figures stalked the corridors of even our infant schools.
Thus the ‘real’ drama scene of community theatre at last infiltrated the schools system.
Speech and Drama teachers found themselves gaining unexpected support from ‘the authority’.
It is not surprising that many Primary teachers at this time gave up trying their own hand at teaching the subject, leaving more and more to the ‘expert’.
The chance of drama becoming a tradition in our Primary schools has never been realistic.
It took a new generation of drama advisers to attempt to bring it back again.
A new breed  of drama advisers, trained teachers, interested in the work of Slade and Way were appointed from the mid-1960s onwards.
They inherited a suspicion or even a fear of drama often combined with the unspoken conviction shared by David Hargreaves that drama is a communal, performing art.
Such convictions often remained unspoken for the pressure on teachers to move away from performance has been considerable.
And of course in recent years there has been yet another pressure to move away from Brian Way's methods.
Many of the latest appointees to influential positions are products of Dorothy Heathcote's and my own teaching.
One wonders whether teachers are ever allowed to rest!
The message that teachers picked up most strongly from both Brian Way and Dorothy Heathcote was that the dramatic Process was all important.
Respect for product in the form of dramatic production became eroded and, regrettably, those who believed in the value of drama as a community enterprise gave up the struggle.
School Drama Festivals, Youth Drama Festivals with notable exceptions almost disappeared (there must be a generation of young teachers coming into our profession who do not know what such things are) and even Adult Drama Festivals (probably for different reasons) became less popular.
But in the 1980s we are in a new recession; morale is getting low, and soon the government will seriously turn to the arts as a ‘booster’.
There are already signs (I am actually writing this during the autumn of 1982) of a return to Community Arts.
David Morton, Inspector for Drama in the City of Leeds and a deservedly respected figure among our Drama Advisers, writes in the latest publication on the Arts by the Calouste Gulbenkian Foundation (1982) of recent developments in Leeds.
His initial reservations expressed here suggest that he, like many of us, has spanned an era of reaction against the worst excesses of cut-throat competitiveness and artificiality of performance in favour of the process of a child's personal experience.
One can only admire his  open-mindedness in allowing what would at first seem to him to be a reactionary step.
Origins
The Manager of the Grand Theatre, Leeds, went to see a school dance production, and was impressed by the quality of the work and offered his theatre to the educational establishments so that they would try to reach a wider audience.
This worried me and other colleagues because, at that time, we felt that non-educational criteria were being imposed on school work and he was trying to fill his theatre at a slack time of the year.
We were wrong — he had, and has, a real interest in the development of drama for learning, as well as drama for future audiences.
This festival has developed from this.
The following year saw the establishment of the Leeds Educational Drama Association.
Its executive committee includes teachers, advisers, elected members of the City Council, and managers and directors of all the professional theatres in the city.
The representation on this committee is deliberately political.
It was felt that development of all aspects of drama would be best served by a composite body embracing education, local government and the professional theatre.
The festival now takes place in July at the Grand Theatre, the famous City Varieties, Leeds Playhouse, Leeds Civic Theatre, and three of the local authority's community theatres.
In 1979 the festival embraced the National Festival of Youth Theatres when 14 Youth Theatre Groups from all over Britain joined the Leeds Festival and performed in the city's major theatres and participated in a week of workshop sessions led by national figures such as Henry Livings, Cicely Berry, Willie Hobbs, Sue Little and others.
In 1981, 56 groups participated, including four who will offer street theatre in shopping precincts in the centre of town.
3,000 youngsters, approximately, will participate and  audiences are likely to run at around 15,000, most of whom will be young people.
Why a festival?
The reason for the festival remains as originally envisaged by the Manager of the Grand Theatre, that is, to provide a showcase to a wider audience of the type of performance work that can be seen in schools and Youth Theatre Groups.
The work varies from established to original (improvisation-based) pieces, from opera, rock shows and musicals, to anthology (art, poetry, dance, text, improvisation) programmes from primary and middle schools.
Through this we aim to develop and heighten the drama experience of youngsters within the education service, to link the curriculum work with performance in a professional theatre and the experience which this brings to youngsters, and for groups to share their work with others, often from different backgrounds and cultures.
Achievements
These are difficult to assess.
As a public relations exercise the festival is clearly a success and is now an official part of the civic calendar.
The youngsters clearly learn much from working with professionals in professional theatres and in workshops with tutors from the professional theatre.
However, one still feels that the processes of preparation within the schools and youth theatre groups are the most valuable learning areas, yet, these areas must be heightened by the youngsters' realisation that they will eventually perform in a well-equipped, professional space.
In conclusion
Many people have reservations about festivals of drama for young people, even of non-competitive ones such as this in Leeds.
At one stage I had the same reservations, but in the light of the experience of the last six years and the credibility that the festival has given to drama with elected members, headteachers, and  officers of the Authority, I am convinced that, at any rate for Leeds, this annual festival is helping to develop the quality of drama in the Authority (pp. 44–45).
I think the above account speaks for itself.
It points the way to new directions for the late 1980s and 1990s.
But to return to our historical account, as if the picture was not already complicated enough, the Ministry of Education found its own way of promoting drama — to align it with Physical Education, a policy which was gradually put forward by certain Inspectors for Physical Education over a period of 20 years from about 1945.
(It should be noted, however, that the Staff Inspector with special responsibility for drama, Mr. A. F. Alington, held a more eclectic view as his manual on teaching drama (1961), published some time after his retirement, reveals.)
In 1949 H.M.S.0. published an unusual document,A Story of a School , which was an account of movement-centred education advocated by a Birmingham headmaster, Peter Stone, who was to become one of the West Riding's Physical Education Organisers.
His work with children was an adaptation of Laban's principles of movement which became known in this country during the war.
It had the advantage of not only offering a system of training (that it was intended by Rudolf Laban for the retraining of ballet dancers did not deter physical educationalists from transferring it to colleges and schools), but also of offering a rationale.
A theory was evolved by a few influential educationalists that if a child is given a basic training in Laban skills then he will have the essential grounding for any future specialisation he may care to follow in gymnastics, dance or drama.
Now H.M.I.s with considerable influence, particularly Ruth Foster (Staff Inspector for Women's Physical Education and, significantly, Chairman of the Inspectorate's Drama Panel) and Jim Gill (Staff Inspector for Teacher-Training) took Peter Stone to their bosom, so to speak, and Drama-through-Movement became the official Ministry and then D.E.S.
doctrine, and a view was  subsequently promoted that a child could not do drama until he first learnt to express himself through movement.
(So in some schools keen on the creative arts, children never opened their mouths in drama lessons!)
Let me hasten to say that in many schools, particularly in the West Riding, fine education took place, but far from it helping to increase drama in schools, it had the reverse effect for two reasons:(1) it appeared once more to be something that could only be handled by a specialist — this time a P.E.
specialist, and (2) the conceptual relationship between movement and drama had never been worked out sufficiently for the practical relationship to become clear.
Another curious historical twist to the story is that whereas women teacher-trainers in P.E.
welcomed Laban movement, their male counterparts virtually said, ‘Over our dead bodies!’
So a Primary school headmaster, for instance, could find his school offering movement experience to children who had female teachers to the neglect of those children who were unfortunate enough to have a man as their teacher, and similarly, Movement and Drama appeared as a subject on the time-table in our Secondary schools where there happened to be a woman in the P.E.
department who was interested.
One way or another, drama got left out in the cold.
Fortunately, at a time when this ‘established’ D.E.S.
view of drama was at its peak in the early 1960s, a newcomer appeared among the group of Physical Education biased Inspectors.
John Allen, a man experienced in straight theatre, children's theatre and radio, who, although deeply impressed by the high quality of movement teaching both in the regular D.E.S.
courses for teachers and in schools, nevertheless sought to erode the ‘official’ image by bringing entirely new faces into the D.E.S.
courses.
Thus teachers, advisers and college lecturers had the chance to work with personalities as varied as Colette King, Keith Johnstone, Philip Hedley, Peter James and Robert Witkin.
John Allen became the most well-informed person in the country about what was going on, for the new Minister  of the Arts, Jenny Lee, invited him to survey drama in schools and colleges.
His Education Survey 2 Drama (1967), totally lacking in officialese, lucidly, wittily reports on a rag-bag of activities done in the name of drama and with an almost total lack of rationale behind the subject.
He confirms people's fears when he writes:
It has been surprising, nevertheless, to find how much time is being devoted in schools and colleges to a subject of whose real identity there is no general agreement (p. 2).
John Allen was respected by leaders in all walks of drama education and theatre and consequently was able to give a great deal of energy to getting opposing groups to talk to each other, so that , for instance , in 1970, he was responsible for bringing teacher-trainers in drama and drama advisers together at a conference in Exeter.
As David Griffiths (1970) points out, these two élite factions had not met since the notorious Bonnington Conference in 1948 when war between two views of drama educators was openly declared.
In a letter to David Griffiths for his dissertation, Mary Robson, a retired Head of Drama at Neville's Cross College of Education, recalls the division at the Bonnington Conference eloquently:
After more than twenty years, when details have faded, my main impression of the Bonnington Conference remains the same — the conference of the sheep and the goats, very firmly divided the central aisle of the hall, Drama Organisers on one side, Training College lecturers on the other.
I remember the shock of realising that the two groups were not making any contact — the word DRAMA meant entirely different things to each side.
I had a distinct impression that many of the organisers had had professional theatre experience and that, naturally, their point of view was coloured by this, while the teachers had arrived at the point of realising the potential of drama as a tool of education.
The only person on the organisers' side of  the room who spoke a language I understand, was Peter Slade, a trim, slight figure, quietly expounding his belief in the value of drama in work with children.
He seemed to cause embarrassment to his side of the room, but a sense of doors opening and light coming in to mine (p. 41).
It is not recorded whether there were H.M.Is present at the Bonnington Conference.
Thanks to John Allen and the respective chairmen of the two groups, Brian Watkins (ATCDE Drama Section) and Ray Moss (National Association of Drama Advisers), the Exeter Conference set up a dialogue between lecturers and advisers which has continued in the regions ever since.
Indeed, many share the running of Drama Board (transferred to the Royal Society of Arts from 1981) courses.
The Schools Council
When the Drama sub-committees of the Schools Council English Panel were presented with a proposition from Lynn McGregor, a London teacher with a strong interest in the sociology of education and her own research into Drama teaching on its way (1976), to launch a full-scale research project, the climate seemed ripe for the subcommittee to make a recommendation.
The result was a three-year project conducted by Lynn McGregor, Maggie Tate and Ken Robinson which culminated in a major publication (1977) and an excellent film of dynamic teaching (Take Three ).
The project was most ably supervised by the Schools Council Curriculum Officer, Maurice Plaskow.
A much more modestly financed project was subsequently initiated to look at Primary School Drama (1979) under the directorship of Tom Stabler.
For the first time a fairly extensive observation exercise was initiated involving close reporting of the drama teaching in six education authorities conducted throughout  the period of one academic year.
One quite serious limitation in the original selection of these authorities lay in the criterion for selection which seemed to rest in the main on those authorities whose drama advisers happened to be currently in favour with H.M.I.
This tended to give a certain bias to the work likely to be found in schools, especially as the coterie of advisers who knew each other 's work well, often teaching on each other 's courses and jointly helping to tutor the national D.E.S.
courses in turn, tended to select for observation those schools where they had a good relationship with the drama specialist.
It would have been interesting, and perhaps fairer, to have looked at the drama work in an authority either where no drama adviser existed or where he or she did not have the accolade of inspectorial approval.
Presumably none of the former volunteered for the project!
What they did achieve in terms of breadth was a nice balance among kinds of schools, geographical positions and rural/inner city contrasts.
Altogether 159 lessons were observed by the team.
Sadly one has to conclude, if the illustrations of lessons reported in the published text are anything to go by (and one can hardly conceive that the team held back good lessons) then we still have a long way to go before we can claim with confidence that drama on the curriculum guarantees good education.
The observers met some very good teachers who were working in very unsympathetic conditions within a school, and other teachers who were muddled in their thinking about aims, and yet others who did not know how to bring any educational or artistic guts to the drama lesson.
These things, not surprisingly, are only hinted at in their publication, for that document is mostly concerned with presenting the reader with the team's own rationale.
Nevertheless, I believe that in its veiled way, the report is a very proper indictment of the drama scene — as it was perceived by these three sharp young people in 1974–75.
Where does the fault lie?
We can blame the schools for not providing the right conditions, we can blame the government and local education authorities for not giving  sufficient attention to in-service training, but I think the buck must rest with people like me who had by that date been employed in teacher-training for just over ten years.
We simply had not evolved a theory and practice of teacher-training that works.
Very recently David Davis (1982) has made a scholarly contribution to this field and has been fortunate enough to have the chance to put theory into practice at Birmingham Polytechnic where under the leadership of Brian Watkins a specialist course of considerable merit and vision for P.G.C.E. students has been introduced.
But this is still a rare instance, Likewise, at the in-service level, very few authorities can match the well-conceived programme of courses for teachers produced over a number of years by Geoffrey Hodson and Maureen Price of I.L.E.A. But until we can sort out our muddled thinking that surrounds the subject, there is a danger that the next ‘official’ report will not fare any better.
No doubt the first four chapters of this book, in attempting to describe the confusion, are also managing to add to it!
Let us hope that later chapters clear away some of the murkiness.
In the meantime let us continue to look at the Schools Council Report.
Most writers on education tend to be people well-established in the profession.
Here in Learning through Drama we have a group of three people whose years of teaching combined did not add up to more than twenty.
This is but one way of reminding ourselves what an extraordinarily good job they did of the ‘conceptual framework’, as they called it.
I do not think it can be claimed that they opened up new territory (writings by Dorothy Heathcote and others in the 1970s were concerned with a level of sophistication in drama teaching which the team seemed not to be able to articulate), but in terms of giving some sense of order to the basic functioning of drama the publication deserves to be seen as an important landmark.
The very title,Learning through Drama , pointed many teachers who had seen drama merely as a diversion offered in the name of self-awareness in a more positive direction.
It attempted to  identify the components of learning with a clarity not found elsewhere.
Indeed, the team was so anxious to give recognition at last to the importance of the content of any particular drama, that it seems almost to be reinforcing the dualistic assumption that drama is about attitudes or ideas in the children's heads to be explored and then expressed through the medium.
This further seemed to give encouragement in practice to the ‘go-into-groups-discuss-an-important-issue-and-find-a-dramatic-statement-for-us-to-discuss’ sequence.
Indeed, the term ‘dramatic statement’, to which they become quite attached as the book proceeds, perhaps takes us too firmly in the direction of propositional knowledge translated into dramatic coding.
It is not the authors' intention to give it this gloss.
They assure us:
In a strict sense it is not so much the content of drama which is distinctive, but the way in which it is considered (p. 16).
Nevertheless, John Allen (1979) is right to summarise the overall impression thus:
If it is weak on aesthetics, it is notably strong on pedagogy, almost to the extent of limiting the concept of learning (p. 80).
Weak on aesthetics it undoubtedly is, and yet curiously it is the only book on drama in education lucky enough to find its way into the impressive bibliography of the 1982 Calouste Gulbenkian publication on the Arts in Schools.
What started out as an intention by the authors of Learning through Drama to express ‘a specific point of view’(p. 8) has apparently become the only authoritative reference!
Other Trends
This section will be a brief summary of other influences which have left their mark on the drama education scene.
One of the most popular trends has been that of Drama  Games.
These seem to come from two kinds of sources; either the Theatre Games of Viola Spolin (1963) or an extension of the widening of activities in drama lessons introduced by Brian Way.
Sue Jennings' (1973) approach to Drama Therapy is a good example of all sorts of group and individual game-like experiences being referred to as drama.
Ed Berman, a naturalised British citizen originally from America, over a number of years has set up courses for teachers in the use of games.
So popular was this usage at one time that I recall examining final school-practice for one college when in observing two full days of drama lessons I only saw games, no drama at all.
Clive Barker (1977) of Warwick University has given new substance to the use of games in the training of actors and Brian Watkins (1981) has evolved a theoretical framework conceptually linking drama and game in a way which I shall attempt to build on in the next chapter.
Another American, Donna Brandes (1979 and 1981) has an approach to drama games based on Gestalt Therapy.
The purpose of these games has been in the main to do with releasing energy and reducing inhibitions or achieving group cohesion.
Another form of game which has become popular among teachers other than drama teachers has been ‘simulation’, where elaborate game structures are set up usually involving a great deal of time and application in order to teach some specific subject-matter about the civic planning of motorways, starvation in the Third World or executive decision-making in industry.
One of the earliest publications on this kind of work is by John Taylor and Rex Walford (1972).
Many drama teachers have devised their own versions of this method.
Dorothy Heathcote, in working with Gas Board executives, typically worked through analogy rather than simulation.
One of the important trends in recent years initiated in this country by John Hodgson (1972, 1973, 1975) has been for a number of drama specialists to undertake an editorial role in an attempt to raise the standard of literature on our subject.
Ken Robinson, too, has successfully  taken on the role of one-man interpreter, friend, challenger, articulator and spokesman not only for drama but for the arts in education generally (1980 and 1982).
We are grateful to Ken Byron for setting up a much needed journal in Drama and Dance Education.
A great hole had certainly been left by the demise of John Hodgson's series on Drama in Education and by Young Drama .
Other recent developments have pointed to changes of philosophy.
There is a continuous passionate cry from Malcolm Ross in Exeter University to bring drama back to the Arts fold, a ‘come-home-and-all-will-be-forgiven’ gesture.
A contrary pull may be observed in the polemics of some T.I.E.
groups and a number of London based teachers who want a more honest appraisal of drama education as a political tool.
Combining therapy and politics in an interesting way that still has to reach this country is the work of Bjorn Magner (1972) who, in Sweden, has used a kind of political psychodrama, not in order to point out weakness in our society but to refine each individual's capacity for political awareness.
There are signs of growth, but in case there is a danger of too much optimism, let me remind the reader that as recently as 1978 the Department of Education and Science published a document entitled Primary Education in England in which drama was not mentioned.
The ‘game’ of drama
I have taken the title of this chapter from a Durham University M.Ed. thesis by Geoff Readman (1984).
The literal and metaphorical juxtaposition of drama and game is what I want to explore here.
I am also grateful to Brian Watkins who was the first to put the idea to me that drama is a game.
Much of what I write here will be based on his writings, particularly his book,Drama and Education (1981).
It seems to me his basic analogy is a useful one and well worth expanding — I hope he approves of my attempt to do so!
The first known liturgical drama in England is Quem Quaeritis ?
(Goldman, 1975).
As priests and choir chant the story of the resurrection one priest is instructed to move away as if from the tomb, and then to turn back when another sings in Latin ‘Whither goest thou?’
Thus in a simple action the past tense of narrative is transformed into the present and the presence of drama.
The celebrants are brought into a new relationship with the substance of their celebration.
It is a shared ritual quickened by dramatic action.
This illustration serves to show both what is distinctly dramatic and the kinship of drama to corporate celebration.
Drama is at one with the rituals, the pageants, the festivals and the processions and all the forms with which men and women celebrate.
But its uniqueness, its disturbing habit of making immediate and concrete things which are best revered from a distance has laid it open to charges of ‘magic’ or ‘blasphemy’or ‘sacrilege’or ‘obscenity’.
Western society has generated a deep suspicion from which in the main the other arts have been protected.
As Jonah Barish (1969) has pointed out, embedded in our language is a common usage of artistic  metaphors of which the dramatic ones are unambiguously pejorative.
He cites ‘melodramatic’, ‘stagey’, ‘theatrical’, ‘play-acting’, ‘putting on an act’, ‘putting on a performance’, ‘making a scene’, ‘making a spectacle of oneself’, ‘playing to the gallery’, and compares the implied hostility of such expressions with the more approving tones of terms derived from the other arts: ‘harmonious’, ‘symmetrical’, ‘graphic’, ‘shapely’, ‘well-balanced’, ‘poetic’, ‘in accord’, ‘in unison’, ‘in concert’, ‘chime in with’, ‘in tune with’.
The mediaeval church was divided on the issue of whether there was impropriety in the mimetic representation of holy personages on stage.
One eleventh-century Latin drama, Rouen Pastores, avoided the problem by having a cut-out figure of the Virgin Mary in the midst of the stable scene, other parts being played by real people.
Although disapproval of sacred dramas continued to be vehemently expressed, as, for instance, by Gerhoh of Reichersburg ( 1039–1169 ) who, according to Kolve (1966), warned that he who portrays the rage of Herod is guilty of the very vice he portrays (a deep-seated objection not entirely eradicated today), anxiety about its blasphemous nature was dispelled as more people came to regard it as merely a ‘game’ rather than as a sacrilegious act.
Language usage contributed to this slackening of clerical resistance.
For the dramas were given the generic term of ludus (play) which carried overtones of pastime, merriment and revelling.
And the actors ‘played’; they did not act or perform; they did not, as we would say today, ‘stage’ a performance of the Passion; but rather, they played the game of the Passion .
As Kolve argues, ‘Game’ usages are crucial to an understanding of the mediaeval conception of drama’(pp. 14–15).
Play and game are used interchangeably — it does not matter which.
But what does matter is that relegation of drama to the same order of non-seriousness as game, revellings and disportings, permitted an ‘it's only a game’ attitude — both dismissive and tolerant — to creep in.
To the mediaeval mind, ‘game’ stood in antithesis to  ‘earnestness’, and so what took place on the pageant cart could be equated with other street pastimes.
An ambivalence, however, persisted.
The magic of the drama game with its ambiguous morality and propriety remained as part of its fascination.
The devil on stage might just be the Devil.
Kolve refers to a sixteenth-century story about a player from a pageant wearing his devil's costume while going home, ‘frightening everyone grievously’.
Today very young children at a puppet show or a pantomime may have to be reassured that ‘it is not real’.
Many T.I.E.
teams know what it is like to play in a school for educationally sub-normal children who cannot (or do not want to) distinguish between the ‘baddy’ character and the actor — who finds himself molested as he retreats to his car after the show!
But the conventions surrounding the drama itself usually go some way to counter this kind of misapprehension even in mediaeval times.
Kolve describes the formalities of the Corpus Christi performance:
Formal and repetitive in nature, it played year after year within a specifically limited time and place.
Within those limits special conventions applied, creating a temporary world within the world of real life, and dedicating this created world to the performance of an act somewhat gratuitous to urgent daily concerns.
Once this conventional world had been established, it was easily recreated until it became traditional.
Like all play, this drama depended on formal order, without which progress within a game and pleasure from a game are alike impossible: anyone who breaks the rules spoils the game, makes it a poor and foolish thing (p. 20).
In emphasising form and the ‘gratuitousness’ to daily concerns Kolve is reflecting the writing of the Dutch anthropologist and philosopher Johan Huizinga (1970) who also sees play (in all its senses) as something apart from‘ordinary life’and as a means of ‘creating order’.
In the above discussion the terms play and game have become interchangeable.
I would like to suggest that all  activities that take us outside the practical business of living (sacred worship, carnivals, listening to music and reading a novel, etc., etc.) can be seen as either subsumed under play or as extensions of it.
The constraints, pressures, stresses, necessities and obligations of life are temporarily held in abeyance and we allow this ‘second order’ of experiencing to take over.
As Huizinga puts it, for Homo Ludens , it is ‘non-serious and yet intensely absorbing’.
It is a kind of bracketing-off from everyday events.
As we shall explore in the next chapter, it can be an experience that is both liberating and protecting.
Many writers interested in these phenomena tend to specialise either in child play or in the arts, the former finding clues in the activity which relate to child development, the latter establishing art as an enhancement of what is good and beautiful.
Narrowing the field to either one or the other of these, has sometimes trapped the theoreticians into claiming that they have identified a defining characteristic of their field.
For instance, Arnaud Reid (1982), in arguing that what all the variety of art forms have in common is the requirement of ‘aesthetic intention’, explains:
For — cutting straight through the recurring controversies about whether, because of the varieties of the arts and of the infinity of differences between different individual works, ‘art’ can be ‘defined’— one thing, I think, is clear.
There is something common to all our experiences of art, of whatever kind — music, poetry, painting…, each art concretely utterly different from the others.
It is that any work of art, of whatever kind or genre , must be experienced ‘aesthetically’.
What is called the ‘aesthetic attitude’ or interest in an object, is sometimes described as ‘disinterested interest’.
This is intended to mean that the object is attended to, and in some sense ‘enjoyed’, for itself, ‘for its own sake’, for the qualities it possesses in itself as apprehended, and which arouse our attention and interest (p. 4).
Now I would like to suggest ‘disinterested interest’, enjoying something for its own sake, is a defining characteristic of all ‘second order’ experiencing, whether it is writing a poem, playing football, telling a joke or making a model aeroplane.
In a sense ‘play’ can become the generic term for all these varieties of activity on the basis of ‘disinterest’.
And, by implication, they all fulfil the mediaeval conception of non-seriousness.
But this notion — that one set of activities is serious and therefore by implication another set must be non-serious — is a naive view, for it presupposes that first and second order experiences operate within the same frame and are therefore amenable to comparison.
As Bateson (1973) argues, the psychological frame appropriate in discussing play or games is more akin to a picture frame than to the logical frame of a mathematical set: what is outside the picture frame is irrelevant and one can only make judgements of comparison and contrast on matters within the frame.
One cannot say, for instance, that the artist's portrait is serious but the wallpaper on which the picture hangs is not, or vice versa .
By this token serious/non-serious and even true/false are irrelevant dimensions.
To digress for a moment, that the apparent non-seriousness of play is a paradox is something which many anti-progressive educationists have chosen to ignore.
It suits the purpose of, for example, R. F. Dearden (1976), Professor of Education at Birmingham University, to assume the naive view of non-seriousness and therefore to argue that for this reason even Wendy House play in the Infant School could not possibly be taken seriously as a medium for learning.
Dearden was, of course, joining the ranks of Professors Peters and Hirst in their misguided pursuit of spelling out the logic of education and overlooking its dynamics in doing so.
What such educationists fail to recognise is the high degree of concentration and attention that all kinds of play evokes.
It is a pity that, instead of dismissing it as non-serious, they have not devoted their knowledge and experience to exploring ways in which we might more  effectively (and granted there is plenty of evidence of bad education carried out in the name of free play) harness this natural power for learning.
It is my view that our ‘establishment figures’ in education have held back progress for a generation.
Equally foolish in my view, to return to the central subject of this book, is the insistence by Brian Way that children should be given practice in concentration, for second-order activities are nothing if not absorbing.
Some researchers, Sarah Smilanski in particular(1968), have attempted to show that some underprivileged children cannot engage in play, but lack of concentration is a symptom not a cause.
Indeed, some privileged adults cannot play, but concentration is not the problem!
One of the reasons why play is so absorbing is that it is self-initiated, in a way that is not available to us in the process of combatting, enduring or avoiding the slings and arrows of day-to-day living.
Paradoxically it provides this sense of freedom to choose, but the process of play activity is about limiting the choices.
(It is interesting that Piaget failed to recognise what Vygotsky (1933, tr. 1976) observed about a young child's play: that it is rule-bound.)
In a game the rules are socially constructed beforehand; in creative drama they are negotiated, but this negotiation is often constrained by whatever the ‘rules’ happen to be in the slice of life the creative drama is reflecting.
I now want to suggest that play, games and drama have the same structural basis, that in bringing a sense of order to the randomness of day-to-day living, they nevertheless build on structures embedded in our real social interactions.
It is not surprising that in recent years they have served interchangeably in the hands of various theorists as models of each other.
Sutton-Smith (1971) uses the game model to describe play.
Erving Goffman (1969) and Rom Harré (1979) have used the dramatic model to describe social interaction.
Michael Argyle et al.(1981) have employed the game model to do the same.
Brian Watkins and Lawrence Stenhouse (1981) have used the game model to describe drama.
Both Argyle and Watkins  in using the game model have to play down the competitiveness of games, for neither the social interactions of real life nor of drama are necessarily competitive.
But having made that reservation I would like to press the analogy between drama and game even closer.
The apparently quaint mediaeval notion of ‘playing the game of the Passion’, I want to suggest, brings us nearer both to the way Caldwell Cook approached scripted work with his pupils and (more relevant to what will be discussed in the rest of this chapter) to classroom drama.
Creative drama and game are structurally and anthropologically very close.
What follows is an examination of structure and of how an awareness by the teacher of its significance can help him find the game in the drama.
Drama structures
For the above sub-heading I have deliberately copied from the title of a recent publication by Cecily O'Neill and Alan Lambert (1982), for it is a manual offering guidance to teachers in their planning of projects for drama.
Central to the planning are not clearly defined objectives but clearly defined structures.
The main strength of the book lies in the fact that most of their lesson material is from actual classroom practice.
I shall from time to time use some of their material for further analysis and in order to make clear what I mean by structure.
The kind of structure the authors mostly discuss is to do with how to move from one dramatic experience into another in a way that tightens the pupils' grip on the central issue.
For instance, in a drama project on ‘The Way West’(p. 36) with a class of first-year secondary pupils, the lesson begins with the following sequence:
(1)
The teacher shows a genuine photograph of a group of people who travelled together on the Oregon trail.
(2)
She holds a discussion on why people might choose to undertake the dangerous journey.
(3)
In pairs one partner assumes the role of any one of  the people in the photograph and tells the other (a colleague, friend or relative) why he is tempted to go on the journey.
(4)
Class together again — the second partners report to the rest of the class what they have heard.
(5)
Teacher-in-role starts a class improvisation as if they were a local community in the mid-west hearing what a bright future they might have if only they would abandon their homes and move west.
Now here we have a typical example of teacher-structuring when the topic is not one with which the children are familiar.
The teacher is faced with the persistent problem of how to help children feel the action has started when the truth is they do not have either enough factual or empathetic resources to identify with the historical situation.
Now there is a structural sequence here that reveals thoughtful planning.
Features of this sequence are brevity and variety.
Too long a time with any one of the above steps of the sequence would only serve to emphasise their ignorance, whereas variety offers opportunity for different kinds of engagement.
We can summarise the steps as follows: This is an admirably built sequential structure because although each short sequence is outwardly different, the emotional and thematic centre remains the same.
Each step is but a different way of helping the class to begin to internalise the gravity of a family's decision to lace unknown dangers.
The concept is an enormous one for twelve-year-olds to grasp with any sense of reality, for many children of that age would regard it as fun if their family had to go away to new lands — just as I can recall at that age receiving the news of the outbreak of the Second World War with great joy!
The teacher of ‘The Way West’ knows it is going to take perhaps several  lessons before they really understand, from an adult point of view, what responsibility such a decision entails.
In the meantime the drama has to start and to start simply.
Further analysis of the above five steps could be conducted (for instance, it is worth noting that they are made up of (I) non-drama — 1 (2) nun-drama — 1 (3) drama — 1 (4) non-drama — 1 (5) drama activities) but it is not in the matter of graded steps within a sequence that drama resembles a game: the game element of drama is inherent within each stop .
Each of the ‘drama steps’ is a separate game.
What I want to examine in detail is how the interactional structure of any particular dramatic episode provides the dynamics of a game experience.
In the five steps above there were only two that were dramatic — where one partner had to speak in role and the class improvised.
Now if we look at the first of these in terms of structure we can see that it can be defined as a dramatic exercise , fulfilling the principal requisite of exercise as outlined in Chapter Three — a commitment to a short-term task .
It is a useful first example for us to look at for it seems so simple — and yet even in something as straightforward as this, the structure can be adjusted in quite a sophisticated way.
Let us start the analysis.
It requires a talker and a listener.
There is a ‘slackness’ about such an active/passive relationship.
For the listener, there is nothing to keep her to this role unless she happens to have a partner whose talk is engaging (or, of course, there may be extrinsic pressures of, for example , wanting to please teacher, which because it is always a possible element in children's work I will not keep referring to but will take for granted).
The interactional structure for the talker requires a sustaining of partner's attention.
The psychological structure for the talker requires, broadly speaking, two kinds of pretence:(1) an emotional one of having made a momentous decision and (2) a fictitious factual background.
It is the interactional structure that I am most interested in this chapter, but, as we shall see, the psychological  and interactional structures are mutually dependent.
So in this particular dramatic exercise the interactional structure could be described as ‘one player sustaining the attention of another player’.
But the teacher of this lesson wisely does not want it left as ‘slack’ as that: she qualified the listener's contribution by suggesting she should be in role as a friend, colleague or relation.
Now this not only affects the psychological structure for the listener, it more pertinently affects the dynamics of the interaction.
For the focus of the interchange has narrowed so that the talker's role can demand the attention of the listener's role.
Indeed as friend, colleague or relation, the listener has a choice of responses which were not available to her had the task merely instructed her to listen: she could, for instance, adopt a cool intellectual probing, helping the talker to weigh up the pros and cons, or she could set up emotional resistance to the idea.
Notice the teacher did not add any further instructions for the listener.
Had she for instance dictated that the partner should offer resistance this would have been a relatively crude way of ‘tightening’ the structure compared with instructing the listener to be in a ‘counsellor’role.
On the other hand, the teacher could have injected an element extrinsic to the drama in the structure by warning the listeners beforehand that they were going to be required to make an accurate report to the rest of the class with the talkers assessing their report for accuracy.
The choices for structure can be summarised as follows:
(1)
Basic Structure — one person engaging another.
(2)
Teacher dictates role for listener as friend, etc. but does not specify attitude.
(3)
Crude resistance to idea from listener.
(4)
Sophisticated, neutral questioning by listener.
(5)
Teacher warns beforehand that the reporting back has to be accurate (extrinsic).
This teacher chose not to offer a tight structure to the class.
In choosing (2) she would realise that some pupils would be virtually at (1) for some listeners would not take advantage of the ‘role’ opportunity.
This is of course very  useful diagnostically where the teacher does not know the class.
How the different pairs respond will indicate to her whether any of them are mature enough in drama to structure for themselves.
If she is lucky she may find that at least a few children appreciate that (4) makes for a better drama game than (3), and that (1) is so bland that it doesn't feel like a game at all!
In some circumstances, however, a teacher would be foolish to risk leaving it at (2); it may well be necessary to adopt (3) as an instruction to the class as the only way of engaging their interest.
It is not just children who may be incapable of operating their own structuring within an exercise.
Sometimes adults, inexperienced and suspicious of drama, could not cope with a vague suggestion that the second partner should be in role as a friend, colleague or relative.
It may be absolutely necessary to spell out the sophisticated potential of (4), the counselling role, for their resistance to doing drama may well block them from making connections between what seems a puerile exercise and anything of significance to themselves.
So the teacher has to make the connections for them initially.
And further extrinsic tightening of the structure may be appropriate — the teacher announces beforehand (this is an adult equivalent of (5)) that the talkers are to give an assessment of their partners as counsellors when the exercise is over.
I hope I have made it clear now that although (1) to (5) are basically the same structure, each modification is itself a sufficient change to make it a different kind of game — and thus the experience is a different one according to which is chosen (either by the teacher or the participants themselves).
If as reader, you cannot imagine how different they are in structure I suggest you try your hand at drawing the relationship between the partners for each example.
Structure is a relationship between two elements within a context, and graphics can often show that relationship more clearly than words.
Our starting point for analysing structure happens to have been with an exercise, the form of drama popularised by Brian Way, and yet little attempt has so far been made  by him or by anyone else to show how these apparently slight adjustments within the structure of the exercise can seriously affect the outcome.
With so much emphasis these days on using role-play with adolescents for Life Skills we need to train our teachers to be sensitive to the meaning and usage of structure.
But it is not the exercise mode that interests me the most.
I think, as I have said elsewhere, exercise is a useful device but no more than that.
There has been an advantage in looking first at an exercise because its very ‘task’ orientation often makes the structure explicit, whereas in group drama one has often to look for it.
Indeed I shall be arguing that the drama will only be effective when its inner structure is felt by the participants.
If it is to be felt by the participants then it is not too much to suggest that it should be understood by the teacher.
Let us therefore look at the only example of group improvisation in the five steps outlined by the ‘Way West’ project.
I will quote the full description.
The Meeting
The class are sitting in a circle.
The teacher asks them to imagine that they are in a meeting place in a small town in the Mid-West.
Perhaps it is a school-room, or a church hall.
She explains that she will be taking part in the next activity.
She introduces herself as a representative of the government.
She has come to tell them about the opportunities which await them if they are prepared to make the long journey to Oregon.
The government will give them free farming land and the country is extremely fertile.
They will be much more prosperous if they decide to move.
She encourages the class to ask questions about Oregon, and the kind of journey they will have to undertake to get there.
Questions focus on such subjects as the length of the journey, the dangers travellers might face and the kind of life which would await them in Oregon.
The teacher asks if any of those  present have already travelled in the West and some of the class claim knowledge of the dangers and difficulties of the journey.
The teacher's attitude is positive and she minimises the dangers they are likely to face.
She also stresses that those who decide to go must be hardworking and responsible people, because only people of this kind will survive.
The teacher does not rush the class towards a decision at this point, but asks them to think very carefully before making up their minds.
They must consider what the journey will mean to them and what they will be leaving behind.
They will meet again to make their final decision (pp. 37–39).
Now there is a wide open structural trap here for all the participants, including teacher, for inherent in this scene is the assumption that it is leading to a decision — and decision-making, as every chess player and bridge player knows, is an important element of the game.
But in this particular lesson the decision structure is something of a mirage, for as we have already pointed out at this stage the situation is not real enough for these children to be making anything but a superficial gesture — going through the motions of making a decision.
Some may say yes and some may say no and it will have all the appearance of a decision being made, but the real structure may have been no more than the bland question/answer relationship between the teacher-in-role and the class.
There is no real momentum to be drawn from the structure, other than the poor teacher pushing it along.
A momentum will be found only if a state of tension is created for the participants to provide a dynamic to the action.
Such a state of tension can only be achieved by implanting a hidden structure which must be integral to the situation — and to what the class can understand of the situation.
The authors give a hint as to what that structure might be, in their comments:
The status of the pupils in the activity can be raised and the value of their contributions recognised by  suggesting that some of them may already possess considerable information and experience (pp. 36–38).
There is an implied structure here to do with a competitive outdoing of the teacher's role by the pupils in terms of information and experience.
But there may be a more useful structure implicit in the teacher's role itself — as government spokesman.
Tension can be created either by the sponsor's subtle, superior position of detachment: ‘I am only here to describe the problems; you are the ones who will have to face them’, or, quite differently, a hint of ‘I know more than I am going to tell’, or its cruder version: ‘I am doing a good salesman's job and you are going to fall for it’.
There are thus four versions here that can be expressed in game structure terms.
(1)
Difference of status based on information and experience.
(2)
Incompatibility of vested interests.
(3)
Relative power.
(4)
A trap — to be recognised, avoided and exposed.
Now the teacher entering this role may not be at all clear which of these or mixture of these or other structures is going to be appropriate.
She will respond intuitively as she senses the class's needs, or, rather, she may have to respond to the class's wants .
If the only way to give the drama momentum is to allow through (1) an emergence of crude competition between the teacher and pupils or through the even cruder ‘I'm the baddy not to be trusted’ approach of (4), then she may have to abandon altogether her intention to open up (2), the recognition by the townsfolk that here is an official who cannot know and indeed who does not want to know what the cost of this decision will be to those of us who are faced with it.
The point that I want to reiterate here, before extending this concept of structure theoretically, is that in the drama process the surface meaning of the event, the meaning which in fact would play a large part if we were to tell it as a story —‘And the townsfolk listened to the Government representative and they had to come to  a decision’— may not provide the required game structure.
The drama may not be a ‘decision-making game’ at all.
The real structure is a hidden dimension within the material, making connections with their present intellectual and emotional understanding.
If it is not found and harnessed, no tension will be felt by the participants and the experience will have no natural momentum.
One hears so many discussions in the name of drama from children in role as town councillors arguing about building a swimming baths or an old people's home.
Unless such a discussion in role is backed by real concern about the outcome, there will be no game.
It will be no nearer drama than a debate — although the participants and their teacher may deceive themselves quite happily.
On the other hand, if we look at a later decision-making episode in the same project when the pupils are temporarily in role as Indians who have to decide whether or not to receive a white stranger into their midst (p. 53), this is more likely to have been played seriously as a real game for by then the children, after several lessons on the same project, were steeped in the material sufficiently deeply to respect the rich complexity of the problem.
Having given this example of structuring I perhaps need to make clear some of the terminology I have been using before looking at more examples.
I am using ‘structure’(and specifically interactional structure) to mean the mutual relationship between elements of a dramatic event.
The term structure is taken from the physical world where objects relate to each other differently.
One could say that iron filings relate to a magnet in a different way from cork to water; that a man, bat and ball have a different relationship from man, butterfly net and butterfly.
One might also want to note similarities in relationship.
Such a relationship can be described as structural, that whatever occurs between the above elements is controlled within the parameters of that structure.
Another example would be that two parallel lines have one kind of structure, but two lines that cross have quite a different structure — and  whether they are straight or curved in turn affects the structural relationship.
I am suggesting that this relationship is also to be found in games, in the arts and in life.
There may be little structural difference, broadly speaking, between a goalkeeper guarding his goal, Cerberus guarding the gates of Hell, and a soldier on duty outside an army barracks.
In each case there is a definable relationship between a guard and what he is guarding.
Now structure is an abstraction.
Some structures can be expressed thematically.
For others, as in this example, we seek a language form of definition: we call it a ‘guarding’ relationship.
But when we observe two or more elements and we wish to define a relationship between them, we often turn to a third form of abstraction:we project a feeling quality onto the relationship .
We eschew mathematical or linguistic (at least of the propositional kind) coding and tun to our feeling response.
Thus we say that the feeling quality between two parallel lines is different from the feeling between two lines that cross.
We may say that when a piece of music unexpectedly changes to a minor key this expresses a feeling of foreboding.
It is not of course the case that the interaction between the major and minor keys actually has this quality — indeed there is no interaction as such — we project that feeling quality onto the structure.
(Someone from a different culture may interpret it quite differently).
This projection of feeling onto a structure is often given the generic term ‘tension’.
When in football someone takes aim at the goal we say there is a sudden heightening of tension; when it is all over after a noble save by the goalie there is an equally sudden slackening of tension.
When I wrote earlier of the broad structure of ‘The Way West’ exercise being ‘slack’, I am really projecting a quality suggesting lack of tension onto the structure.
Another way of putting it is that whereas structure denotes a relationship between the elements of anything, tension denotes our experience of structure.
As Robert Witkin (1978) explains, tension/structure provides the  universal in seemingly dissimilar artefacts.
He writes:
The symmetries and ordering of sensate life in tension structures is the profound business of art everywhere.
I suspect that if we were to take a sensate tension structure such as the love-hate paradox that lies at the heart of Shakespeare's Romeo and Juliet theme, we would be able to transpose it into different forms each appropriate to a particular culture, and, provided we had the necessary skill of course, we would be able to do this for all cultures in the world.
It was certainly done most effectively for one culture some years ago when Romeo and Juliet were transposed into the idiom of youth group clash in modern New York in West Side Story (p. 95).
As Geoff Readman rightly suggests, tension is the critical pivot which gives impetus to both games and drama.
Take tension away and there can be no game, no drama.
As I have written earlier, in games the structural relationship which implies tension is often explicitly defined.
If we look at a random list of typical game structures we shall find that they reflect some of life's common interactions and are obviously just as important in drama.
Notice how each of these structures implies tension for the participants.
If we look at some further examples from Cecily O'Neill's and Alan Lambert's Drama Structures , we shall see that many group experiences are dependent on these kinds of simple structures.
In a drama about workhouse conditions in Victorian times with a class of second-year secondary girls (13+), the ‘status’ structure was employed when the girls, in role as inmates, were interviewed by staff whose attitude at best was indifference (p. 117).
Given the tension here was one of humiliation, that can be sufficient in itself to sustain the momentum, especially as this workhouse scene comes at a critical point in the sequence structure — for they have already in an earlier lesson experienced the well-intentioned caring of the ‘lady’ who housed these girls out of pity but was obliged to hand them over to the authorities.
The contrast between being in the lady's charitable care and now in the officious hands of the workhouse staff is an important dynamic.
Additionally, the teacher structured the interviewing for ‘formality’.
Individual ‘members of staff (some of the pupils) were at separate desks with small queues ‘waiting their turn’.
Thus within one scene we have: status, contrast, formality and waiting one's turn making up the ‘game’.
In a subsequent lesson the following episode is described:
The visit whole group 
The inmates are summoned together by the staff for an important announcement.
The workhouse will be visited by one or more very important people — perhaps a magistrate, an inspector of workhouses, or a wealthy benefactor.
The workhouse must be presented in the best possible light.
If the inmates do not co-operate, their few existing privileges will be taken away.
When the staff feel that the workhouse is ready for inspection the visitors arrive.
The teacher, still in role  as Warden, shows them around, and entertains them to tea.
Is it possible for the inmates to make the visitors understand what life is like for them, without arousing the hostility of the Warden?
Can they bridge the gulf between the visitors and themselves?
The visitors may be indifferent to the inmates, or they may be horrified at their plight and wish to help them (p. 119).
The key to the underlying tension here is in the line: ‘Is it possible for the inmates to make the visitors understand what life is like for them without arousing the hostility of the Warden?’
Thus embedded in the scene is the ‘risking’ and ‘manoeuvring’game.
Can they convey something to the visitors without being seen to do so?
I am often asked what skills children have to learn that are specifically drama skills.
Since this has cropped up here I would just like to draw attention to it.
A class that is good at drama will intuitively recognise that the drama lies in the difficulty of conveying that message to the visitors — that is the tension to be enjoyed.
Inexperienced pupils will not appreciate either what is essentially dramatic nor the importance of confining any strategies they employ to solve the problem within the logic of the highly status-bound situation.
In other words there is always the danger that an inexperienced class, given too free a hand, will fail to give themselves any kind of dramatic or authentic experience.
The misguided teacher might well believe that self-expression was all that was needed!
Sometimes in drama a teacher deliberately sets up a structure that appears to lack any obvious game element.
I recently watched Dorothy Heathcote, halfway through a lesson on preparing for robbing a bank, release some junior school pupils into a free-play experience where they were to go down a manhole and then search the sewers under the bank.
She remained in role at the manhole, available as an ear to their reporting-back if they needed it.
Otherwise they were on their own, ‘playing’, but not playing a game for there was no structured game  to play.
It appeared to be a game — of finding things down in the sewer.
But you can only play that particular game when in actuality there is something to find.
All they found was whatever was in their imaginations (not to be despised of course, but the reality of finding something is not available).
Any tension experienced was not in the interactional elements of the scene but in the psychological strain of finding an inner logic to their searching.
What they allowed themselves to find had to fit logically with the knowledge about sewers they had acquired in the first half of the lesson.
A symbolic reminder of the need for this kind of logic was carried in each child's hand — blank paper with which to make notes and sketches of sewer designs.
It is interesting here that we have in Dorothy Heathcote's lesson an example of apparent free-play.
The lesson, the drama, the learning all appear to be at risk because of the relative lack of structure.
But, of course, Dorothy knows in those particular circumstances it was not a risk — the mental parameters fixed by the first half of the lesson controlled the freedom of the second half — and any individual child who could not cope could turn it into a ‘reporting to the boss at the manhole’ game.
Thus, if he needed that status structure it was there for him.
Now a ‘searching for something’ or ‘exploring’theme crops up a great deal in drama and there are many teachers who do not recognise that what looks like a tense, exciting, well-focused structure may be no such thing.
Sometimes you can elect to use this loose form because, as in Dorothy's lesson, the preceding work is strong enough to carry it.
At other times you may knowingly take the risk.
In the next example Cecily O'Neill and Alan Lambert knew only too well what the dangers are.
The sequence is with thirteen-year-olds in a drama about a Lost Valley.
Item 8 in the sequence is described as follows:
The pupils join up in small groups to make a tentative  exploration of their environment.
Each one may be made responsible for a specific task.
For example, seeking out water and food, looking for suitable places to make a shelter, gathering wood, or identifying sources of danger (p. 93).
Typically of experienced teachers recognising the potential weakness of the whole venture (it will in fact only succeed if the pupils are determined to make it succeed — not something one can often rely on!), precautions were adopted such as warning them beforehand to mark out the route they take, and (the final card up teacher's sleeve as pupils start to get killed all over the place) to come in as narrator saying, ‘Suddenly, for no apparent reason, the danger passed and the members returned to safety’!
The basic problem is that the ‘givens’ are not clear enough.
Every good game defines the parameters of what may or may not be seen as a legitimate action.
Exploring the terrain or even setting up camp leave too many things wide open.
Compare this with a ‘puzzle’ structure used by the same authors with a similar age group of children who had asked for a ‘horror mystery’drama.
The Mystery Whole group 
The teacher explains that he will be asking the class to work as one group.
He will take on a role as the head of a special unit in a hospital, and they will need to adopt the roles of experts whose help is needed in dealing with a particular patient whose case is causing him great concern.
It presents a mystery which he cannot solve.
The pupils seat themselves in a square representing the doctor's office.
He greets them in role and apologises for breaking into their busy professional schedules.
He hopes that the discussion will not take up too much of their time, but assures them that their advice and guidance will be of great importance.
He reminds them of the confidential nature of the case: nobody is  to discuss it outside the room.
He then gives them the following details.
Narrative Link 
‘There is a young child in my care at this hospital, who is seven years old.
She was brought here several days ago following a mysterious incident at her home.
One morning her parents found her sitting outside her bedroom door.
When they entered the room they found it to be in a state of confusion.
It was wrecked, they said.
They asked their daughter what had happened but she refused to speak.
She has not spoken since.
She is obviously very shocked, though she is physically well.
The only way in which she has made any reference to what happened during the night has been in the form of two pictures.
She drew them yesterday.
The first one shows her bedroom in its usual state.
The second one shows it in the condition in which her parents found it when they went in there on that morning a few days ago’(p. 156–7).
The ‘head of the special unit’ then proceeds to show the pictures as evidence for the children to discuss and draw hypotheses from.
Now essentially this also relies on the children's using their imaginations to find answers — as in the case of the ‘sewer’ and the ‘Lost Valley’contexts — but the difference is that (a) each ‘find’is given due weight and attention, is publicly shared, evaluated, accepted or rejected,(b) the focus within which their imaginations can have free range is defined from the beginning, i.e. the puzzle is clear —‘what could be a logical solution?’is the name of the game, and (c) the problem-solving does not have to be hurried by action.
Of course, the success of this lesson has to do with more than structure (indeed, I am not suggesting that structure is all a teacher needs to know about!).
In passing, let us note the ‘elegance’ of this particular focus chosen by the teacher.
The class wants something to do with ‘horror mystery’.
The teacher does not make the mistake of finding a game that has all the stereotype  trappings of horror and mystery.
He finds a symbol — two simple drawings — which are intriguing enough to activate each pupil into endowing them with whatever his or her own personal interpretation of horror might be.
Sometimes a most carefully planned game structure is ineffective because it is not for some reason appropriate either to the material or to the particular class.
Included in a report of a National Association of Teachers of Drama conference (1981) there is a detailed account and analysis of a lesson with a group of young adolescents on the subject of a holy community living in twelfth-century Durham Cathedral.
The game structure the teacher planned was a neat ‘horns of a dilemma’ situation where the community's wish to keep their cathedral as a place of sanctuary was to be challenged by the presence of a refuge-seeker who, they suddenly realised, might be the perpetrator of a vicious crime against their own kind.
But all games are dependent on the players having some degree of understanding of the concepts involved.
This particular game can only work if the concept of a vow to give sanctuary is something the participants already have a vested interest in.
Implicit in the notion of a game is that of taking a risk, and one bases one's decision on what it will cost if one loses.
If the children in Durham Cathedral do not have a sense of what it would cost them to break the vow of sanctuary they cannot have much interest vested in keeping it.
Thus what looks like a perfect example of a ‘horns of a dilemma’ structure, turns out not to be so — it was a game that could have been played two or three lessons or ten lessons later.
In other words they needed to experience the ‘sanctuary game’ before they could cope with a ‘breaking of sanctuary game’.
Sometimes it is valuable literally to include a game within the drama experience, and I will finish this subsection with such an example.
Alan Lambert, in setting the atmosphere for drama about Beowulf, proceeds as follows:
Moving round the circle, the teacher faces each pupil  in turn and takes their hand in a special handshake.
He asks each one to say the oath with him.
When he has returned to his place they all repeat the oath in unison.
He holds up a stick for all to see.
This, Beowulf's stick, will be their standard.
He reaffirms his pleasure at once again seeing so many of his loyal friends.
He has called them here to listen to his news.
He tells them of a tale he has heard, of how a monster called Grendel has killed many of Earl Hrothgar's people.
Some of those present say they too have heard this story and speak of what they know.
Beowulf says that he would like to sail for Hrothgar's land and take up the fight against the monster.
He knows that many of those now present will be eager to go with him on this adventure, but first of all he would like to present them with a challenge.
Will they be prepared to undertake some tests which he has devised?
He needs to be reminded again of his companions' great skills.
The tests are designed to illustrate those qualities which may be essential if the adventure is to be a success (p. 207).
And then the teacher unequivocally plays a game — a game within a game, if you like:
Grendel is a cunning monster.
It may be necessary to set a trap for him.
Stealth will prove to be a valuable asset; it has often been so in the past.
In role teacher places a chair in the centre of the circle.
Under it he lays down a stick (‘Beowulf's stick’).
The test is quite simple.
Whoever volunteers will be asked to remove the stick and take it back to his or her place without making a noise.
Another member of the group will be sitting on the chair with eyes closed and will point in the direction of the slightest sound.
The attempt fails if the volunteer is caught in the process of removing the stick.
The teacher adapts a fairly well-known game to serve his purposes here, generally known as ‘Keeper of the  Keys’.
(In its traditional form, a bunch of keys is placed under the chair in the centre of a large circle.
The ‘keeper’ sits on the chair and is blindfolded.
A volunteer tries to retrieve the keys without being caught out and, if successful, becomes the new ‘keeper’).
Since the teacher has already used a stick as a sign of Beowulf's authority he decides to give this additional prominence by making it the object to be retrieved from under the chair.
The person from whom it has to be taken becomes the ‘guardian’ of the stick.
The teacher occasionally provides a commentary which anticipates the kind of adventures in which the followers may become involved: ‘Our standard has fallen into enemy hands but the one who guards it is now asleep.
It will take an act of stealth and courage to rescue it.
See how well our companions perform this undertaking’(p. 207).
The dramatic playing mode of the ‘game’ of drama
We are now in a position to examine the kind of behaviour that is appropriate to the ‘game’ of drama discussed in this chapter.
Not unexpectedly it is the kind of role behaviour to be found in the ordinary playing of games.
A participant in a game adopts a role based on his conception of others' roles, what George Herbert Mead (1934) calls the ‘generalised other’: a child cannot play hide-and-seek unless in ‘hiding’ he understands the function of the ‘seeker’.
His role only exists in terms of the other roles in the game.
As Lawrence Stenhouse (1981) puts it, there has to be a mutuality .
This is true of role in a game and role in the ‘game’ of drama.
John Smith only functions as a goalkeeper when there are others who continue to endow him with that function.
The Durham Cathedral players will only function as protectors of the cathedral and of refugees seeking asylum in so far as others in the drama expect that function from them.
The child who is cast in role as abbot of the cathedral is not identifying with some fictitious character called ‘Abbot’, he is merely taking on an abbot's function vis-à-vis the situation of being in charge of other people in the community, just as the football captain in a game is not playing a ‘character’ of a football captain, he is functioning in the required role of being in charge of his team.
This view of acting behaviour as no more than role function has taken us a long time to understand.
Most drama books write of children ‘playing a part’, ‘playing someone else’, ‘taking on a character’, whereas what is required of children in drama (or at least, in the dramatic playing mode) is that they be themselves, functioning in whatever way the situation demands of them.
It might require them to behave authoritatively, submissively, wickedly or shrewdly; the role might be labelled explorer, prime minister, designer or archaeologist, but they will do no more than adapt functionally to the situation of the drama just as they would adapt to roles required in a game — just as they once learnt to adapt to the limited number of roles imposed on them in real life.
In drama, of course, the range and subtleties of roles are far greater than in games or in life.
Because of this the skill required is often very challenging,but it is not the skill of the performer; it is the skill of bringing oneself to function with a degree of maturity that one's normal ‘life’ role does not demand .
Sadly, this is what Arts educationalists like Malcolm Ross (1978) would deny our children, for he can only perceive of drama as a Performing Art.
In fact the mode of behaviour required has little to do with performing other than keeping open the normal communication channels between people as players do in a game.
A goalkeeper does not ‘perform’ his function in its theatrical sense, only in the sociological usage of ‘perform’which we shall be looking at further in the next chapter.
The same applies to the child ‘performing’ the abbot's function.
This is, of course, what is meant by dramatic playing as it was defined in Chapter Three, the mode of dramatic behaviour espoused by Peter Slade.
The participant makes a choice to enter make-believe play, a game or drama (all three require an ‘as if ’ gloss, although in the game form it is rarely explicit — charades might be the exception); he enters the make-believe play, game or drama with the intention of temporarily ‘bracketing off’practical life so that he might experience this specially contrived ‘present’.
It is happening in the present, and the future can only be guessed at.
It does not have the fore-knowledge of the story form.
A goal may or may not be scored; the abbot may or may not admit the refugee from justice.
I am emphasising the existential quality of dramatic playing here because it is in direct contrast to the expectations of acting behaviour to be found in some educational institutions.
For instance, America is the only country that has seriously attempted to measure children's drama.
If the CEMREL Research Project (1972) is any indication of what is expected it seems American teachers are looking for a child's skill at ‘showing’, and, in particular, ‘showing’ emotion.
A recent book on evaluation in education (Hamilton et al., 1977) quotes from the project:
The teacher gave simple instructions to ‘listen, watch arms, body, etc.’.
The first three children were sad, happy and surprised in turn.
The sad girl rubbed her eyes, commenting ‘Oh, I'm so sad’; the happy boy exuberantly jumped up and down and commented ‘Oh, I'm so happy.
The sun is out’.
Later, anger and fright entered the parade (p. 318).
Later we read a quotation from what is called a ‘characterisation package’:
Some of the boys as well as the girls were quite stiff and unable to use their bodies to convey and represent the emotions being expressed in the material from the composites [i.e. Characterisation package].
Again, the point I want to make here is that the perceptual, cognitive understanding of the expression of emotions in non-verbal ways from pictures, cards, etc. is very different from the expressions of the materials with one's own hands or face or body (p. 320).
The article goes on to quote from Michael Polaryi who, I am sure, would have been horrified to see how intent these researchers are on isolating emotion as something to be ‘switched on’ and ‘portrayed’.
This kind of drama for practice in expressing and communicating emotions is far removed from the functioning behaviour required in the game of drama, where the participants' concentration is not on whether he or she is signalling an emotion but with getting on with solving whatever problem is to hand.
‘Characterisation packages’ are in my view a total irrelevance to drama and to education.
I think there are many American teachers who would agree with me, but those kinds of ‘packs’ have an unfortunate way of creeping onto the desks of teachers who do not know any better and the resulting work may not only be irrelevant but harmful.
But there are those in England, too, who also fail to see that participation in drama has two faces, or rather, a face and a mask: the ‘game’ of drama where a group of participants share a significant experience, and a theatrical performance where a group of actors present the drama so that an audience might have a significant experience.
‘Face’ and ‘mask’may still be the wrong metaphor, for it is too rigid, denying the fluid state of continual remoulding, and it also denies those rare but important occasions when mask and face are indistinguishable.
On the other hand, if we confine our view of drama to that of performance art we may so love the mask we overlook the face.
Likewise it would be equally regrettable if in finding so much satisfaction from the face, we withheld from our children the artistry of creating a mask.
Summary
In this chapter I have attempted to show that early experiences in England of Religious Drama were partially equated with a ‘game’ or a ‘pastime’and as such avoided the charge of blasphemy or sacrilege.
Its apparent non-seriousness  became its safeguard.
Authorities could condone the ‘playing the game of the Passion’.
I suggested that there is a whole range of ‘play’ activities or second-order experiences which are ‘bracketed off’from the practicalities of day-to-day living, activities such as games, art, rituals and celebrations which are man's way of creating order.
Normal criteria of serious/non-serious, true/false are not relevant.
The common ground between games and group drama can be expressed either anthropologically (they are both a form of group celebration) or structurally.
I identified three kinds of structures: sequential, interactional and psychological.
It is the interactional that I examined in the chapter in some detail.
The view of creative drama in schools as a ‘game’ of drama has implications for how we should perceive acting behaviour.
In both games and drama a participant chooses to play.
His intention is to experience an ‘as if ’ context — in a game two friends may agree to behave as if they are opponents; in drama two friends may make exactly the same agreement.
The participant adopts whatever role function is required of him by the context.
A performance mode is inappropriate in the ‘game’ of drama, for a performance mode is concerned with representation .
I used an inadequate metaphor of ‘face’ and ‘mask’, suggesting that performing is more akin to creating a mask for someone else to look at.
Such a metaphor denies the dynamic character of performance which, for instance, can be changed by an audience's response.
We shall look more closely at the relationship between the dramatic playing and performance modes in the next chapter.
Emotion and the game of drama
I have just been watching on television the final scenes from the Royal Shakespeare Company's performance of Nicholas Nickleby .
Poor institutionalised Smike is taken by Nicholas and his sister to their childhood home in Devon.
As they look at what was the garden where they played as children, Nicholas reminisces, ‘We used to play hide-and-seek here, Smike’ The incredulous Smike asks, ‘You …
Hide!?’
‘Only the game,’ assures Nicholas.
‘Play’ is beyond Smike's comprehension.
He knew only too well the pain of really hiding from someone.
In a game the pain of life can safely be recaptured, encountered and switched off as required, for as we have seen, a game and all other forms of playing including the arts are deliberately created second-order experiences, removed from the rawness of living.
The substance of the playing is an abstraction.
In hide-and-seek, a number of people agree for a period of time to abstract from living what they know of the ‘hiding’ function (i.e. that people can be ‘hiders’and ‘seekers’and that places can be ‘hiding places’) and to behave, for the time being, as if only that function mattered.
In drama a number of people agree to abstract from what they know of the ‘hiding’ function and to combine that knowledge with what they have understood about a particular ‘hiding’context, say, King Charles and his followers hiding from the Roundheads (hiders are therefore labelled Cavaliers, and the seekers Roundheads) and to behave ‘as if ’only that function mattered.
(The prime difference between the two is that in the drama there is no need actually to hide — the hiding experience is evoked but not practised.
The secondary difference between the two is that the dramatic context of King Charles opens up an elaboration of  reference points which the simple game does not require.)
The emotional quality of the game experience has been characterised by Vygotsky as having a dual affect.
He says, ‘…the child weeps in play as a patient, but revels as a player’(p. 549).
But this is, I believe, slightly misleading, for although he is right about the mixture of often contradictory emotions, it is wrong to give the impression that the weeping is of the same order of emotional experience related to the child being a patient in actuality.
I wept when Smike died in the television play, and I recall an incident of a nine-year-old girl turning to a particular page of Black Beauty , crying bitterly and explaining through her tears to her grandmother, ‘It's so s-a-d!’
But neither of these was close to the grief we would have experienced in the real presence of death.
The emotional response in a game, play and in drama is a response to an abstraction , to a ‘bracketing-off’ from living, and it can be just as intense — possibly even more intense for, knowing it is a second-order experience, one can ‘release’one's grieving, for example, in a way one would not do in the actual event.
If Smike were to play in a drama that required him to hide from someone, the pain of suddenly being found might hurt, but not with the rawness nor with the permanence of actuality.
And of course, the hurt as Vygotsky suggests would immediately be tempered by the pleasure of knowing ‘it's only a game’.
But the pain is nevertheless real.
This is the basis of all imaginative acts, that through emotion something absent is brought into the present.
Margaret Sutherland (1971) puts it succinctly:
Emotions occur in response to actual happenings; they occur also in response to imagined happenings; and the latter emotions are real, happening in the present, even though they are called up by unreal situations.
In fact, we give a kind of reality to imagined creations by feeling these emotions; in a way we live an imagined situation because it affects us emotionally.
(p. 5)
When I read a novel the emotions aroused in me bring the experience of the events of the narrative into the present, but I am not likely to be misled into thinking it is actually happening for there are enough indicators in the environment to assure me that it is not.
On the other hand if I am in a drama experience my own actions and things about me may trap me into believing I am in an actual event.
The infamous Stanford Prison study experiment (Haney et al., 1973), which had to be stopped because students in role as either prison warders or prisoners forgot they were in role, is powerful evidence of this possibility.
Drama and make-believe play, unlike other second-order experiences, can look like a real event because of the concreteness of the medium.
A headmaster friend told me recently that he had burst into a classroom mistakenly thinking some pupils were up to no good, only to discover it was drama; and I recall one of my own students, in playing the role of a prisoner-of-war camp commandant berating the ‘prisoners’ and warning them that he had ways of finding out where the missing prisoner was if he didn't own up, was somewhat taken aback to hear the voice of the school caretaker call from the other end of the drama hall, ‘There's a boy here, Mr. Ainscough, skulking by this radiator’!
Geoff Gillham (1979), in a paper read to a Cockpit Theatre Conference in 1978, raises the question of why young children are not generally confused by the two.
The answer he gives is that the child freely enters the make-believe world secure in the signals from the real world that the real world is continuing to exist.
Thus we have the paradox that in order to give oneself over to believing in the fiction, one's ‘non-belief’ has to be secured.
Geoff Gillham expands on this point:
What is it that allows such belief to occur in the child when so much, to the observer, is unreal?
Examine a scene from the play where one boy creeps up on another and then springs on him stabbing him in the back with his knife.
The knife — the crucial prop here  — is visually represented by a fist clenched as though round the knife handle.
The sign is adequate for the make-believe (the metaphorical reality) to occur.
I can enjoy the experience of killing or being wounded fully, because I am not killing or being killed.
If the sign were a wooden stick, care would have to be exercised in not hurting or being hurt — the mechanism of the make-believe being blurred by the intrusion of the present objective reality.
If the sign were a real knife, clearly the knife would no longer be a sign but the thing itself…
The make-believe is short-circuited and made impossible…
The creation of a metaphorical reality is achieved through the process of extracting from the present objective situation signals and signs appropriate to an absent significant reality, for use in the construction of that absent reality within the present situation.
BUT
Belief in the metaphorical reality can only be achieved if other signals in the present objective situation affirm that the metaphorical reality is not , objectively, the absent reality for which it stands (p. 3).
Gillham continues to argue that just as the participant is protected from physical hurt by the parameters of ‘it's only a game’, so the same protection applies to psychological hurt.
In view of our discussion above I would like to qualify this and to suggest that there can be a degree of psychological hurt, however fleeting, inherent in the experience.
When a young child plays ‘What time is it, Mr. Wolf?’, she may experience a moment of panic when the ‘Wolf’ shouts, ‘Dinner time!’and chases her.
When the ‘Wolf’ catches her he may obey the laws of the game and avoid physically hurting her, but giving her a momentary fright is a legitimate part of the game.
Indeed it is fairly common for very young children to invite Daddy to be the Big Bad Wolf in order to test the boundaries between reality and make-believe.
The very ambiguity  between real and not real can have its own frightening fascination.
One of the important differences between a game and drama is that in the latter the signals between reality and fiction may be less clear.
A classic example is when the teacher within the fiction assumes an authoritarian role which follows too closely to what the children see as teacher's normal role pattern.
At such times a child is required to have a very strong grip on the nature of the ‘game’ if she is not to be deceived — or the teacher wisely keeps coming out of role in order to establish the difference for the child.
A teacher working with a class she does not know needs to signal reality rather more strongly than when class and teacher are used to each other.
Where the edges between reality and fiction become blurred, there is a danger that the emotion felt is first order, that is, unmediated by abstraction or knowledge of pretence.
The balance between a game and reality is a delicate one, as Huizinga points out:
…as soon as the rules are transgressed the whole play-world collapses.
The game is over.
The umpire's whistle breaks the spell and sets ‘real’ life going again.
The player who trespasses against the rules or ignores them is a ‘spoil-sport’.
The ‘spoil-sport’ is not the same as the false player, the cheat; for the latter pretends to be playing the game and, on the face of it, still acknowledges the magic circle.
It is curious to note how much more lenient society is to the cheat than to the spoil-sport.
This is because the ‘spoil-sport’ shatters the play-world itself.
By withdrawing from the game he reveals the relativity and fragility of the play-world in which he had temporarily shut himself with others.
He robs play of its illusion — a pregnant word which literally means ‘in-play’(from inlusio, illudere , or inludere).
Therefore he must be cast out, for he threatens the existence of the play community (p. 30).
If a conventional game can appear so fragile, how much  more so does drama with its less explicit rules.
We have shown how drama may suffer if there are insufficient signals to remind the participants of the real world but there are other factors which may deter entry into the dramatic fiction.
Prominent among these is lack of spontaneity for which there may be a number of reasons, two of which may be characterised as (1) a high degree of vested interest, and (2) a high concern for one's reputation.
Let us first look at spontaneity generally.
Spontaneity
Both J. L. Moreno (1964) and Peter Slade rightly emphasise the importance of spontaneity.
It suggests being sufficiently ‘within' a situation to allow one's intuition to work.
Lack of spontaneity suggests a high degree of calculation, looking at a situation as if one was not really part of it.
As we shall see in the next chapter, arriving at a balance between these two is often what drama educationalists are seeking.
Another way of describing lack of spontaneity is to say that the participant is ‘holding back’, not ‘letting himself go’, not ‘giving himself’ to the situation.
One of the prerequisites of second-order experiencing is an element of initial submission : it requires a passive/active engagement.
For instance, I cannot actively engage with a book unless I am mentally free to give myself to it — if my mind is on other practical affairs while I am reading or if my reading competence is inadequate then I shall not be able to submit to the experience.
Drama, too, requires an initial act of submission.
So important was this factor to Ed Berman that he used to get the participants formally to ‘make a contract’ to take part before the work started.
Most of us who avoid this kind of extreme nevertheless require from our classes an unspoken contract.
In Dorothy Heathcote's early days of doing drama with adults she would sometimes begin in role with ‘Did you get the message…?’
And her soulful eyes and wobbling chin would be challenging the others,daring them not to join in!
Many kinds of reasons prevail in the drama lesson for participants ‘holding back’.
They may not, for instance, be prepared to risk having any kind of emotional engagement (I recently worked with a group of headteachers for whom this seemed to be a problem); or they may not trust each other or the teacher; or the ‘hidden curriculum, of the group's own dynamics may cut across the drama's requirements (for instance if the strong natural leader within the group is not given her usual leadership function within the fiction); or the group may concentrate too hard on preparing material for ‘showing’ so that they miss out almost entirely on ‘playing the drama game’; or they may dislike drama or really want to perform a play or are simply not in the mood to submit to the experience.
Two deterrents to entering drama are of particular interest.
1 High degree of vested interest
One man's second-order is another man's first-order experience.
Playing football, telling a joke or making model aeroplanes are normally seen as second-order experiences, unless one happens to be a professional footballer, a comedian or a model aeroplane manufacturer.
Sometimes an activity may be both simultaneously.
For instance, I can see that writing this book is a function of my job and as such is part of the responsibility of earning a living, but it is also an escape for me, a kind of haven to which I can take refuge from the hundred and one pressures that impinge on the practical business of living.
Now in drama an excessive degree of vested interest in either the technical aspects or in the substance of the subject-matter can upset the balance so that the ‘game’ of drama and the necessary spontaneity that goes with it disappear.
For instance, concern over a drama examination could for some candidates obliterate the possibility of second-order experiencing.
An executive involved in a role-play exercise in order to improve his management skills might be so determined to learn that his very effort  to do so precludes the necessary ‘submission’ to the experience.
A protagonist asked to play out a scene from her own life in a psycho-drama session may be too anxious about what will emerge to ‘play the game’ spontaneously.
A recent bereavement may make it impossible for a participant in a drama class to join in a drama about the Plague of London or the death of Cordelia.
And it is not unknown for members of a group to manipulate a drama to further their real-life victimisation of the class ‘scapegoat’— so that it is not a drama experience at all but a vicious first-order experience disguised as drama.
For a teacher, of course, drama must be a first-order experience — her vested interest is in the educational and aesthetic welfare of her class.
2 High degree of concern for one's own image
Rom Harré, a philosopher and social psychologist, argues there are but two dimensions along which a man acts: the practical dimension which directs his maintenance of life (this coincides with my use of first-order experience) and an ‘expressive’ dimension, which he sees as the ‘overriding pre-occupation of human life’(p. 3).
This second dimension is concerned with the individual's need for honour and reputation.
He states: ‘The most persistent theme of this work will be the thought that for most people at most times the expressive order dominates or shapes the practical order.’
In conducting his social analysis Harré seems to give little if any attention to play, games and the arts.
It may well be he would argue that all these things are but part of the private man's attempt to gain public approval.
And there is a sense in which this applies, but although I can appreciate his point that seeking a good reputation may well dominate the practical order, if it were also to dominate the activities I have designated ‘second-order’ then it makes nonsense of the possibility of ‘disinterestedness’, enjoying something for its own sake.
However, I am happy to concede that seeking public approval might well at times override and thus eliminate ‘disinterestedness’.
If my attempt at writing  this book was solely or even largely done with public approval in mind, then my ‘haven’ image becomes an illusion.
It is not difficult to think of other examples — the man who takes up golf to be seen with the ‘right sort of people’ the competitor more interested in the prize than the process of winning it; the senior common-room member who cannot converse without showing off.
But the balance is a delicate one, for even the golfer, the competitor and the staff member may become ‘caught up’ and absorbed in the thing itself and enhancement of reputation may at least temporarily be held in abeyance.
The implications of this peculiar kind of vested interest, interest in one's public image, for drama are probably obvious — the participant who wants to be seen as a good actor, for example.
For others it may be the opposite problem, that doing drama is ‘a bit silly’, a childish game, and that to take part is to ‘lose face’.
Sometimes the substance of drama seems to lower one's prestige in the eyes of others — for instance, being in role as a ‘loser’.
It often happens that young children find it enormously difficult to ‘surrender power’.
I can recall a class of eight-to nine-year-olds in Brisbane in which one or two could not cope with being in a submissive role of being hijacked.
One boy had to ‘solve’ the problem straight away by suddenly producing his own gun, even though intellectually he recognised that the ‘rule of the game’was that the passengers were unarmed.
Likewise it is sometimes difficult for adolescent boys who work hard at building an image of toughness within their peer group to drop that image for the sake of the drama.
Indeed, a teacher must respect the need adolescents have to be protected from being made vulnerable by the drama.
Later we shall be looking at ways in which a teacher might deal with this problem.
We shall see, for instance, that it is the modes of ‘exercise’ and ‘performance’that are more likely to give this protection than ‘dramatic playing’, unless, as we shall see, the dramatic playing is projected .
Before we can assess fully the relative merits of dramatic playing, exercise and performance modes, it will  be necessary to re-define the relationship between them, particularly from the point of view of emotion.
The relationship between dramatic playing and performance
So far I have been at pains to make a clear distinction between these two modes.
In Chapter Two I asserted that two contrary intentions are involved: the intention to be , to submit to the experience of an event, and the intention to describe , to communicate an event to someone else.
In terms of emotion one could use a grammatical analogy (see Bolton, 1978) that the ‘occurring’ emotion expressed by a participant is a verb , whereas the emotion portrayed by a performer is descriptive, an adjective, no less.
Such an analogy helps to reinforce the distinctive orientations of the two modes.
Theoretically, it is conceivable that, say, experiencing regret (the verb) at having made a wrong decision and depicting regret (the adjective) are a different genre.
The verb is spontaneous, fluid and not repeatable; the adjective is calculated, static and repeatable.
The verb is subjective, hidden; the adjective is objective, explicit, worn like a badge on one's sleeve, a ‘sign’ of regret.
Empirically it is valid.
Two such distinct behaviours can at times be observed, either by the participant himself or by an outside observer.
As a participant I can feel the difference between genuinely regretting something and signalling such a feeling.
To achieve the latter I have to see myself as an object, to know how my regretting might appear.
An outsider, too, can often distinguish between a child ‘lost’ in what he is doing and a child intent on ‘showing’what he is doing.
We have an example of the latter in its crudest form in the Cemrel Project already referred to on page 102, where each child is required to display a variety of emotions as part of a test.
Not only does the boy ‘wear’ the appropriate external features, he uses words to enhance his simulations: ‘I am  so happy’is his way of making sure the observers get the message!
But having made the distinction clear between the two modes it is necessary now to acknowledge that to see the relationship always in terms of contrary orientations may be an oversimplification.
Although I am anxious to avoid entering into aesthetic theory or acting theory to any large extent it has to be conceded that the topic I have been tackling here, the logical relationship between emotion occurring and emotion described has been of central interest to aestheticians and acting theorists alike.
For instance, Susanne Langer, in most of her writing on Aesthetics has been concerned to establish that emotion expressed through Art is derived from but is not the same as that felt in real life.
Typically, in her third publication (1975) on the subject she writes:
…what the creative form expresses is the nature of feelings conceived, imaginatively realised, and rendered by a labor of formulation and abstractive vision (p. 90).
Any emotion an artist feels undergoes a sea-change.
If he is sad, then his art expresses a sadness, as Ivy Campbell-Fisher (1950) puts it, ‘released from the entanglement of contingency’(p. 267).
But I would like to note in passing that Mrs. Campbell-Fisher's observation could be applied to all second-order experiences, not just the arts.
For example, sadness felt within a ritual could also be an emotion ‘released from the entanglement of contingency’.
What Susanne Langer is saying, however, does seem attributable solely to the arts.
Very few aestheticians, however, look at acting as a phenomenon — Edward Bullough (1912), in his work on Psychical Distancing, is perhaps the notable exception.
(May I also draw the attention of the reader to my own writing on this subject [Bolton, 1977].)
The major theorists on acting, on the other hand, such as Diderot (1957), Stanislavsky (1937), Brecht (1973), Craig (1962), Artaud (1970) and Brook (1968) tend to be interested in a  particular theatrical style while writers on theatre such as Weissman (1965) and Barish (1966) choose to write about acting from a psychoanalytical point of view.
I wish to rely on a model, both elegant and simple, expounded by a philosopher, Alan Tormey (1971), which seems to be not entirely incompatible with most aesthetic and performance theories.
I am grateful to Ken Robinson (1981) for drawing my attention to Tormey's writings on Expression.
His thesis is that there is a double valence to behaviour — expressive behaviour which implies a state of emotional arousal and representational behaviour which ‘detaches the surface of emotional behaviour’, not itself involving arousal.
(This, of course, is compatible with the above verb/adjective analogy which Tormey incidentally also employs.)
Expressive behaviour, according to Tormey (and not to be confused with the way Harré is using the term) points in two directions simultaneously: towards some state of emotional arousal in the person (say, anger or wonder or pleasure); and towards what he calls an intentional object, something outside the person to which the state of arousal is prepositionally related.
(I am angry over an act of injustice or I wonder at the sight of Niagara Falls or I am pleased with my Christmas present.)
We might well be inclined to call this intentional object the context of the emotional arousal for it is the cognitive relationship with a particular context that gives the emotion its particular characteristics.
There is really no such experience of an emotion called anger — there is only my anger, in this context, on this particular occasion.
Notice also that expressive behaviour in this definition does not distinguish between voluntary and involuntary behaviour.
If I jump with surprise when a dog suddenly barks at me, my behaviour is no less expressive than if I shout at it to shut up.
Both entail a subjective-objective relationship.
The critical point is that in expressive behaviours of all kinds, verbal, non-verbal, voluntary, involuntary, there is an aspect of the behaviour that remains hidden, only known or felt by the person experiencing the behaviour.
In representational behaviour, on the other hand, all the meanings are made explicit.
For Tormey one of the ‘purest’ instances of representational behaviour is that of an actor who rages on stage as Lear but who could not possibly be expressing his own rage or he would never complete the performance.
Denis Diderot writes:
If the actor were full, really full, of feeling, how could he play the same part twice running with the same spirit and success?
Full of fire at the first performance, he would be worn out and as cold as marble at the third.
(p. 14)
According to Tormey, the actor is in fact depicting the character's distress, not his own.
In other words, the actor's behaviour is not expressive.
What the audience is watching is Lear's expressive behaviour, not the actor's.
Tormey extends this point to all art.
A painting, a symphony or a play is not expressive of the artist or the performer — it is expressive of itself.
This is not its weakness but its strength: all meanings are made explicit (or rather ‘embodied’ would be a better term, for ‘explicit’suggests the exactness of a diagram, a map, a formula or a telegram) within the art product.
There does not remain within the artist hidden meanings only known to himself.
His skill lies in representing his deepest feelings, not expressing them.
When Tormey cites the art of acting as an example of representational behaviour, he was really talking about the style of acting first attributed to the famous English eighteenth-century actor David Garrick, acting which demanded not the expression of emotion but an accomplished technique by which ‘natural’ expressions of real life became distilled on stage by artifice.
For Diderot, an admirer of Garrick, the key to acting lay in its repeatability.
It is the actor's art to find the conventional sign.
As Richard Sennett (1974) puts it, ‘A feeling can be conveyed more than once when a person, having ceased to ‘suffer it’, and now at a distance studying it, comes to define its essential form’(p. 112).
It would make the writing of this chapter easier if I could call a halt on this discussion of the relationship between dramatic playing and performance and change the topic.
I could then conveniently sum up by pointing out that these various non-educational theorists in introducing concepts such as representation, distillation and repeatability reinforce the importance of the distinction I have drawn throughout the book, for clearly dramatic playing is expressive (in Tormey's usage), spontaneous and not amenable to repetition.
Regrettably it is not as simple as that.
As we probe further it will become more and more necessary to re-assess the relationship between the two modes as dialectical rather than that of opposites.
This is partly brought about by the theoretical writings of Constantin Stanislavsky who confounds the issue for us by bringing emotional expression back onto the stage.
Indeed Charles Marowitz (1978), a director working in the Stanislavskian tradition, refers to acting as ‘An Act of Being’, a phrase too reminiscent of dramatic playing for us to ignore it.
Before tackling this particular challenge to our thesis, let us get off our chest two other similarities.
1
Both dramatic playing and performance use dramatic metaphors, abstractions which immediately qualify the kind, intensity and degree of emotional response — one can reasonably assume that neither the actor on stage nor the child in the classroom is actually going to experience murderous intent, overwhelming grief, spiritual ecstasy or sexual arousal during the drama experience.
Thus even if an actor, following Stanislavsky, allows himself to become emotionally engaged during a performance his emotional response, mediated by dramatic form, can only be an approximation to the character's supposed emotional state.
2
Another aspect which the two modes do appear to have in common is that in neither mode is the participant required to concentrate on the emotion itself (another reason why Cemrel has got it wrong).
Just as the child in dramatic playing concentrates on the task or the problem to be solved, so the advice from Stanislavsky to  his actors is that concentration should be on the mainspring of action in the character's behaviour, not his feelings.
(A misinterpretation of Stanislavsky on this very point, it is interesting to note, gave Lee Strasbourg's ‘Method School’ its distinctive training.)
But Stanislavskian actors are nevertheless concerned in rehearsal and other preparation time with tapping their own reservoirs of emotional memories to find within themselves a sophistication, subtlety or depth of emotional engagement so that in concentrating on the character's actions, a wider, deeper range of emotions may be released.
It is this concern of an actor to build a character and to extend his own emotional repertoire which puts the above attempt to draw a comparison between dramatic playing and performance into a proper perspective.
What a long way we have suddenly moved from the point argued in Chapter Five, that in dramatic playing the participant is adopting a function .
As I then pointed out, finding the character of the Abbot is what the child in the Durham Cathedral play is not required to do.
If we are to admit similarities between the two modes we must not forget differences such as this that remain fundamental.
Nevertheless, we shall find there is common ground, but we need first to pursue the Stanislavskian actor a bit further.
For Charles Marowitz the actor is by definition ‘someone who remembers’.
I propose to quote his definition in full:
An actor is someone who remembers.
On the simplest level, someone who remembers his lines, his cues, his moves, his notes, to do up his fly-buttons, to tie his shoe-laces, to carry his props, to enter, to exit.
Simple things, complex things.
An actor is someone who remembers.
On another level, an actor is someone who remembers what it felt like to be spurned, to be proud, to be angry, to be tender — all the manifestations of emotion he experienced as a child, as an adolescent, in early manhood and maturity.
An actor remembers the ‘feel’ of all the feelings he ever felt or ever sensed in others.
He remembers what happened to other people through all periods of recorded time — through what he has read and been taught.
In tracing the lineaments of his own sensibility, he has the key to understanding everyone else.
On a deeper level, an actor is someone who remembers the primitive primordial impulses that inhabited his body before he was ‘civilized’ and ‘educated’.
He remembers what it feels like to experience intense hunger and profound thirst, irrational loathing and sublime contentment.
He recalls the earliest sensations of light and heat, the invasion of infernal forces and the coming of celestial light.
He remembers the anguish of disapproval and the comforting security of guardians.
He remembers vividly (not necessarily articulately) what it feels like to be isolated, to be partnered, to be set adrift, to be reclaimed.
He remembers that miasmic stretch of time before becoming aware of the details of his own identity.
He remembers the world before it became his world and himself before he became his self.
To be without memory and to be an actor is inconceivable.
An actor is someone who remembers (pp. 26/27).
I have quoted this passage in full, not because I think it is particularly inspired or even well-written, but because it is the nearest attempt I have come across to suggest some of the subjective, hidden meanings that might well make up a performer's luggage when he expresses himself on stage.
For there can be no doubt that Expressive behaviour as understood by Tormey — a state of emotional arousal in a person relating prepositionally to an object (or person) outside that person — is seen by the Stanislavskian School as a proper way for an actor to behave on stage.
He may scorn, tease, insult or placate his stage wife and have appropriate feelings as he does so (bearing in mind the necessary modification we have already  admitted, but modified or not, the response is an emotional one).
We have then two schools of thought in connection with emotion and performance.
In their extreme forms the ‘techniques’ school would have it that an actor's performance is detached from his own feelings during performance, that he represents a distillation of what he understands of the character's feelings; the  Stanislavkian actor, on the other hand, becomes emotionally involved as he performs his role.
It is the latter view which at first sight seems to challenge Tormey's theory, for any ‘expression’ by the actor implies a subjective/objective relationship, the inner meanings of which remain hidden from the audience.
But this is to misunderstand Stanislavsky, for the sophistication of the ‘Art of the Actor’ lies in the skill of making those very subjective meanings available to an audience.
The actor may while he is on stage feel deeply, say, some of the emotional references listed by Marowitz, but Stanislavsky demands that they be simultaneously translated through technique into a form that touches an audience at its deepest level of feeling.
In other words, ultimately even Stanislavsky is concerned with representation , in keeping with Tormey's view of all art.
The two schools of thought then do not diverge to the extent that has first appeared.
As Michael Goldman (1975) suggests, fashions in acting can be seen in terms of the varying degrees to which it is thought proper to expose the private feeling of the actor.
That such a choice between working emotionally or technically can be made is useful for teachers to be aware of.
For instance, Dorothy Heathcote, in working on the Minamata tragedy towards performance, required the sixth form ‘actors’ to remain emotionally detached from their roles, an example of ‘protection’from personal exposure to which we shall be returning later.
It seems we can now qualify our position on the relationship between dramatic playing and performance modes by saying that although the ultimate intention of  the performer is to ‘describe’ an emotional event, the quality essential to dramatic playing, the quality of ‘being’may also enter the performance mode, given the Stanislavsky approach.
In such cases the first signs of a dialectic occur: the actor is both experiencing and describing; an oscillation is set up between these two incompatible grammatical constructs, the verb and the adjective.
The actor, in attempting to subject himself spontaneously to an occurrence and at the same time communicate that occurrence to an audience, is experiencing an unresolvable tension.
It seems, however, that the tension for the actor is but derivative of that tension endlessly defined and redefined by psychiatrists, psychologists and social psychologists in terms of inner/outer reality: I/Me, Ego/Self, or subjective/objective.
It can be argued that the art of the actor is but a sophisticated reflection of what occurs in all human action: a struggle between what is privately felt and symbolically controlled (using ‘symbolic’ in the sense of the ‘public language’of number, words, gesture and sound, etc.), a perpetual state of disequilibrium between personalising and objectifying.
It might be thought that the actor's art also reflects the continual struggle between participants in a social situation to share their private worlds through public media of language and gesture, what Arthur Brittan (1973) refers to as ‘negotiation of meaning’.
This, however, is only partially the case.
Quite obviously the playwright has largely pre-empted negotiation of this kind; also, a theatrical performance can hardly be said to be a social interaction in a normal sense as the actor's concern is to describe to someone outside the interaction on stage — to the spectator.
Dorothy Heathcote (1982), writing in SCYPT, that fine journal for Theatre-in-Education companies, begins the opening paragraph with:
Actual living and theatre, which is a depiction of living conditions, both use the same network of signs as their medium of communication; namely the human being signalling across space, in immediate time, to and  with others, each reading and signalling simultaneously within the action of each passing moment.
We cannot help signing so long as there is another human being who needs to read the signs.
Actions become sign whenever there is more than one person present to read the action (p. 18).
She is right to draw our attention to the importance of signalling in both ‘actual living and theatre’, but it should not be assumed that the same kinds of signs are employed in these two contexts.
The actor is operating virtually in a one-way communication pattern with little room for negotiating.
His signs have to be of a special kind, directed at non-participants in the fiction.
But if we turn now to look at dramatic playing we see that that particular mode does indeed reflect the private/public tension in all respects.
The individual is caught up in the personalising/objectifying dialectic as in life, and because the communication is between participants, the normal interaction of a social context is also reflected.
Participants are free to ‘negotiate meaning’.
In both living and in dramatic playing a participant is continually accommodating to an image of himself as an object in order to communicate with others.
This is the essence of participating in a social environment.
To do this he has to employ language and gesture appropriate to the context in which he finds himself — he may shout ‘Halt!’ or give a salute on an army parade ground, but not at a picnic.
In other words there is a publicly accepted code of conduct which he is expected to perform .
When the army sergeant salutes his officer he is performing, giving the conventional sign that describes the hierarchical relationship between the two men.
Likewise as I pointed out in the last chapter, in dramatic playing a boy may be required to adopt the function of an Abbot of Durham Cathedral, and in so far as he continues to see himself in that role he will continue to signal to others that that is what he is doing.
In other words he will be performing that function, and his words and gestures will be selected  with the intention of describing to others what he is doing.
Dramatic playing, therefore, like life, contains elements of the performance mode.
But we have been using the term ‘performing’ for what the actor does — an act of describing to non-participants who are present as spectators.
In life and in dramatic playing the ‘others’ are fellow participants with whom one is negotiating meaning.
The intention therefore is significantly different although both are concerned with presenting oneself as an object of others' attention and finding a public language to do so.
Let us retain this distinction from ‘acting’ by using the term ‘presentation’in a sense akin to what Goffman (1969) means by ‘presentation of self in everyday life’.
We are applying it not to everyday life, but to that aspect of the performance mode that is, at least incipiently, present in dramatic playing.
Let me try to summarise the point we have arrived at in describing this now complex relationship.
There are two contrary orientations, pulling in the direction of either ‘being’ or ‘describing’.
Neither of these is pure; their relationship is dialectical, each having within itself an element of the other.
A.
Dramatic playing , therefore, is continually in a state of tension between personal expression and finding the public means of presenting oneself, using language and gesture, in order to communicate to the others taking part.
The more heightened the form of that communication, as we shall see in the illustration that follows, the nearer the participant is to reaching the performance mode within dramatic playing.
The most extreme form of dramatic playing would be egocentric play.
B.
The performing mode , therefore, is continually in a state of tension between representing (describing) an experience and actually submitting to ‘being’ in the experience.
The most extreme form of representation will appear to be entirely technically achieved, and the actor's own emotions will be irrelevant.
The most complex form of representation is where expression (dramatic playing) in  the actor exists alongside his attempt to represent to an audience the character's expression.
This Stanislavskian approach requires both considerable sensitivity of feeling and technique.
The element of performance referred to under Dramatic playing occurs as part of a participant's expression but it has such clarity and selectivity of communication to other participants that it acquires the ‘adjectival’, descriptive characteristic of performing.
To distinguish this from the actor's concern to communicate to non-participants, we have used the term ‘presentation’.
If we use a diagram to summarise the relationship it needs to be shown as a polarity, a pull in opposite directions with an imaginary half-way mark balancing the two.
The implications of this dialectic for the teacher ate considerable.
Such a conception allows for a greater fluidity between the two modes than has hitherto been found acceptable.
In the past, as we have seen in earlier chapters, teachers have either confined themselves almost entirely to one or the other of the modes (using terms like ‘creative drama’ in opposition to ‘theatre’) or they have seen them as separate stages in the child's education.
I am suggesting that within the one is the other — in some respects a Chinese Box would have provided a better diagram than a polarisation continuum, although it would have been difficult to decide which box should be on the outside.
This does not mean that I am now suggesting all children should have the chance of performing a scripted play in front of an audience (indeed I doubt whether many young people are likely to be mature enough to cope with  the sophisticated Stanislavsky approach to performance).
What I am suggesting is a more subtle movement between the two.
I need to give an example.
My most recent teaching before I started on this book was in Vancouver with a class of mixed ages — ten to thirteen years, I guess.
An instance of the kind of fluidity I have in mind occurred for one boy who was in role as a ‘robot controller’.
Each time he went into action it was a very private experience for him.
He followed his robots (two children as robot nurses) around, whispering instructions to them and occasionally taking over and doing the tasks for them as he found it difficult to be precise in his instructions.
This was an example of dramatic playing, made more pronounced to those of us watching by the fact that the rest of the class were attempting to work more formally — edging towards ‘presentation’.
In fact his persistent signalling that he was absorbed in his own ‘playing’ was one of the factors holding the rest of the class back.
In preparation for the final session, I designated a ‘robot controller’ room area, roped off, a large placard with ROBOT CONTROLLER in red (I should have added PRIVATE, DO NOT ENTER as a nice re-inforcer of the point, but I did not think about it in time) against a dais on which stood a table and a hand microphone (a television control device which he had carried around with him on previous occasions).
Thus the pressure on him to find what Dorothy Heathcote usefully calls his ‘public voice’ was considerable.
His robot companions were now to operate well away from him across a fairly large room and at key moments in the drama when there was an anticipatory silence from everyone else, he found he had the personal ‘power’, and with some verbal style (and a high degree of repressed excitement as he discovered he could be publicly effective) he presented himself as an efficient robot controller.
He had broken through from dramatic playing to a kind of performance , a ‘presentation’, a subtle combination of personal expression and public code.
As  a teacher it was very important that I recognised this was the new experience he needed.
If I had confined myself to initiating ‘creative drama’ or ‘improvisation’, I might well have remained satisfied with his participation for he was indeed meeting all the requirements of dramatic playing.
In giving this example, I do not wish to imply that the relationship between dramatic playing and performing is developmental — far from it.
There will be times when the movement will be in reverse.
For instance, a group of adolescents intending to look at how a family might drive one of its members to suicide, began their drama by working out the family's relative positions round the graveside, concerning themselves with ‘how it would look if it were a still photograph’.
From the stillness achieved each was then formally (theatrically?) to speak a line of dialogue which would betray an attitude to the dead young woman.
After this performance the class was ready to move to the much more difficult task of using the naturalistic interaction of dramatic playing to explore how the family related to each other in day-to-day living.
Notice this latter illustration concentrating on the externals of a still picture and then having selectively to use a ‘public voice’, carried less risk of inadequate work than if the group had gone straight into dramatic playing, a mode which is often used indiscriminately and without any kind of rigour.
Preparing the way for dramatic playing by first setting up performance and/or exercise modes is often a very necessary part of teacher's structuring.
Indeed, as we shall see in the final chapter, one of the principal skills a drama teacher requires is the ability to recognise the potential and suitability of each mode for the particular topic and the particular group and to recognise that the incipient performance mode in dramatic playing and the incipient dramatic playing mode in performance provide the means for an imperceptible movement between the two.
Perhaps the key factor which leads the teacher to make a decision on where to start and  how to continue is that of ‘protection’ a concept to which we need to devote the final section of this chapter on emotion.
Protection
I cannot stress enough how important it is for teachers to realise that because drama is such a powerful tool for helping people change, as teachers we need to be very sensitive to the emotional demands we make on our students.
The notion of ‘protection’ is not necessarily concerned with protecting participants from emotion, for unless there is some kind of emotional engagement nothing can be learned, but rather to protect them into emotion.
This requires a careful grading of structures toward an effective equilibrium so that self-esteem, personal dignity, personal defences and group security are never over-challenged.
I shall discuss three kinds of protection:(a) performance mode,(b) indirect handling of the topic and (c) projection.
1 Performance mode
Performance mode has its own kind of built-in protection.
One way of using it, as we have already discovered, is to treat the pain of a funeral gathering as a technical exercise.
In other words, instead of trying to simulate grief or whatever, the emotional aspects are held in abeyance in order to make decisions about the external features of the depiction.
There are many advantages of working this way, two of which are that the performance technique required is minimal, well within the abilities of the class to achieve a satisfactory result from their point of view, and that it allows the class and its individual members to control the emotional input.
If they wish they can stick to the bare bones of the task, as an intellectual exercise, but if they feel secure they may inject ‘feeling’ ideas.
The second structure, involved in the line of dialogue round the graveside, is more exposing, for it really tests  each participant's commitment to the affective aspect of the event.
But each is still strongly protected by the very form of the performance mode.
It is stylised, abstract.
It would have been far more threatening to have attempted a simulation of a ‘round the graveside’ dramatic playing.
Briefly, then, for we shall be returning to this same point later in the book, it can be said that the performance mode itself can be protective, either because it is seen to be mainly a technical or intellectual task, or because the dramatic form is powerful enough to enhance whatever the participants' contribution might be.
Sometimes the strong sense of form causes individuals to rise to the occasion or if they do not, their inadequacy can be contained by the form itself.
2 Indirect handling of topic
Some subjects are painful, sensational, controversial or just a bit too exciting.
This is not a reason to avoid them for drama more than any other activity in school can help children find a mature approach to such topics.
But to handle them directly , that is, to open up the central issue that arouses the pain, sensationalism or the controversy is not necessarily the best way of protecting children into emotion.
Indeed, with some topics if the teacher does not handle them indirectly, the class will hastily protect themselves by opting out, fooling around, etc.
There are three ways of dealing with a topic indirectly.
One is to enter a drama at an oblique angle to the main issue.
For instance, I recall David Davis being asked by his class of adolescents if they could do some drama about prostitution.
After discussing what led a girl to become a prostitute they then set up a series of dramas showing some of the stresses (including poverty) a fictitious character had had to face in her early life.
Likewise in setting up a drama for an already excitable ten-year-old class on their chosen topic of a haunted house, I spent the whole of the first lesson as a pub proprietor refusing to show them how to find the house.
Of course, such a device is doing more than protecting  them from an over-exciting adventure; it is also in a calmer way building up their anticipation of a real mystery.
For these young children the haunted house gained in significance as they tackled the immediate problem of the bloody-minded landlord — just as in the ‘prostitution, lessons a more respectful attitude to the problems of prostitution grew as the adolescents actually centred their attention on ‘where poverty can hurt,.
Another, more popular, way of working indirectly is to place the-participants in a role that only obliquely connects with the topic.
Dorothy Heathcote is very fond of employing this structure.
‘Mantle of the expert’ for example, is almost by definition a way of working from an angle of detachment.
(Protection is not its only value, of course— others will be discussed in the final chapter).
Thus in our ‘suicide’ drama the adolescents, instead of being in role as members of the family concerned, could have been neighbours or reporters getting a good story.
In the ‘prostitution’ lesson, instead of being in role as the ‘other poor people’sharing the girl's life, they could have been social workers, town councillors or students on a counselling training course.
The ‘haunted house’ drama could have had its ‘investigators from the British Poltergeist Society’.
A third way of dealing with a topic indirectly, perhaps the most difficult to handle, is to use analogy .
It is difficult, for any misjudgement in the planning by the teacher can seriously affect the validity of the parallel that is being drawn.
The simplest form of analogy is to change the historical setting for the event, for instance, attempting to place The Good Samaritan in a contemporary setting, or doing the reverse of this — taking some contemporary problem such as racism and setting it in past times, in a context between, say, the Jews and the Samaritans or the Greeks and the Romans.
On the other hand, the apparent dissimilarity can be stretched even further (say, using the Odysseus and the Sirens story for the topic of drug abuse) providing the teacher takes care to ensure the group makes the right connections!
3 Projection in the playing mode
Central to Peter Slade's theory of child drama was the distinction he made between personal and projected play (or drama).
He writes:
Throughout the whole of life, Man is happy or unhappy in so far as he discovers the right admixture for his life of these quite distinct manners of using energy.
Both the type of person and the life occupation are connected with the balance of Self and projection (p. 35).
It is his recognition that projected activities draw upon a distinctly different kind of energy (and I include emotional response) from non-projected activity that I think is of fundamental importance.
His classification into personal and projected play represents a hierarchy of abstraction; dramatic activities using oneself as the medium of expression standing at a lower level on the table of abstraction than dramatic activities using media other than oneself.
I would like to extend his thesis in order to establish that the dramatic playing mode can use both personal and projected activity.
To avoid confusion of terms, I prefer to refer to the activities as either projected or ‘non-projected’.
A hierarchy table could look like this:
Let us take the activity of running.
It is the projected activities, the group under E and F, which will concern us in this section, as we shall see that it is projection which protects the participants.
I have divided E and F according to whether they are actively engaged in projecting, i.e. either making something or merely percipients of a ‘running’ stimulus, a much more passive role.
Quite obviously the passivity of, say, looking at someone else's drawing is considerably less demanding than doing one's own.
Both are projected activities, for in each case one's attention is directed away from oneself , which is of course what offers the protection.
(a)Passive projection 
Examples might include having case-study documents of the new intake available as a starting point for a drama about prison; a huge map for a drama about Treasure Island; and architect's designs of Paris sewers for a drama about a bank robbery (I referred to this lesson in Chapter 5).
The list can go on and on: contents of a hand-bag; pages of a diary; newspaper cuttings; an epitaph; school record cards; photographs of housing demolition; map of a street; artefacts of any evocative kind.
An important extension of this ‘passive’ list is Dorothy Heathcote's use of a second ‘person-in-role’(in addition to the teacher)— a tramp, a soldier, a stowaway, Christopher Columbus, etc.
One of the advantages of using a  person-in-role over inanimate objects is that the ‘passive’ stage of watching and listening can gradually change to a more active involvement, as and when the class seems ready, but more important of course is the extra dynamic edge that is brought to the whole occasion by having present someone real and breathing and tangible instead of just a photograph.
One can use both of course.
Chris Lawrence, in working with a class of London children, showed them some photographs of ‘dancers’ whom the children were later to meet and instruct on the movement of animals.
The class spent considerable time examining these photographs, attempting to anticipate the kind of personalities they were to be working with.
Such is found to be the effectiveness of having a second person-in-role (usually another teacher) that Newcastle upon Tyne Drama Advisory Team have cultivated the idea of offering a ‘character’ to the local schools (they call it ‘Rent-a-role’, so that a class in a primary school, say, working on the topic of The Peasants' Revolt can — with sufficient notice of course!— ask one of the team to come into the school as Wat Tyler).
One of the most fully documented projects of this kind is Dorothy Heathcote's (1980) work with a nine-year-old class on Dr. Lister (see also The Treatment of Dr. Lister by John Carroll (1980)).
It will be seen that the variations on this passive kind of projection are infinite.
It does not, of course, have to be the first stage of the drama work.
Injecting a different perspective of this kind part way through a project can also have its uses.
The important point is that it should be used at a time when for some reason pressure is to be taken off members of the class — putting them in what is virtually a ‘spectator’ role can give them time to recover from what had perhaps been inadequate non-projected work.
I say virtually a spectator role, for the teacher is likely still to endow the pupils with a role label —‘I have a patient outside.
I have asked you senior staff here for a special reason.
I would like you to watch me interview him’— immediately lets the class off the hook of having to participate in the normal way.
Notice they are not only  given a reason for observing, which, of course, gives their spectator role a frame through which to watch, but there is also a hint of some responsibility they might have to carry — a necessary engagement is then ensured.
(b)Active projection in dramatic playing 
It would be less passive, but still a form of projection, if in the above illustration I were to add, ‘And doctors…if you wouldn't mind making notes…to help our discussion later’.
In doing this I have further controlled the quality of attention to be expected but it still protects the participants because the centre of their attention is away from themselves.
Likewise, if instead of saying, ‘there is a patient outside’, I could say (out of role), ‘In a short while I will be a patient coming to the consultant's office — how do you want me to play the role?
For instance, when I am sitting on this chair, how do you want me to appear? etc., etc.’
(I recently watched a more formal version of this technique where a class of adolescents was invited to direct the teacher in how to appear as a King of a small Greek State in classical times who had lost his power to a conquering neighbouring state but who did not want to lose his dignity.
The group would be more than spectators for now they have to make active decisions.
Their attention is still projected — in this case through the ‘modelling’ they are doing on the teacher.)
There is, of course, an enormous difference between the private/public demands of the two examples: writing my own private notes protects me rather more than having publicly to make suggestions on how the teacher as ‘patient’ should, say, knock on a door.
The teacher who knows her class will judge best which of these projections the class will be most comfortable with or will be most challenged by.
For the other side of the ‘protection’ coin to be wary of is over -protection.
In the illustrations of projection so far I have suggested that broadly speaking there are two kinds:(1) where the participants are allowed to be passive observers becoming more actively engaged as and when they wish, and (2) where from the beginning the participants are required to do something.
Both of these strategies can keep non-projected dramatic playing at bay for a long time if necessary.
I can recall a class of ten-year-olds designing their own Norman village for several drama sessions before they became engaged in non-projected drama activity (personal play, as Peter Slade calls it), i.e. before they started interacting with each other as villagers instead of through their designs .
Notice both activities qualify as dramatic playing for both carry the intention to ‘be’, to be either designers or villagers, both working spontaneously and appropriately within their quite different functions.
It is not always easy to switch from projected to non-projected drama.
The projected can feel so secure — there is often so much less personal risk in being in role as a ‘headmaster’ examining and discussing case-study documents of a school truant than being involved in ‘reprimanding a school truant’.
One of the ways of making a bridge between the two is to use teacher-in-role.
(c)Teacher-in-role 
The most subtle strategy available to a teacher is that of teacher-in-role, for this device is flexible enough to have any one of the three functions; it can take the pupils' attention off themselves by allowing them passively or actively to use teacher's role as a projection, or it can be non-projective and challenge the pupils to interact.
It is relatively easy to move from one to the other.
I can give an illustration of what I mean.
When I asked a class of five-year-olds what they would like to ‘turn me into’ for a story, they said a witch, and added, a very wicked witch.
Thus they had a chance actively to project onto me whatever ‘wickedness’ they had in their minds.
I did not carry out their instructions very well so they had to be very precise in explaining things to me.
Some of their instructions included reading a spell-book in my witch's house, which had, we established, a door close to where the children were sitting.
I moved to a different phase and involved myself in witch-like pursuits, looking for a special spell (they had already told me what it was to be).
Thus, for a few moments they reverted to passive projection, in role merely as spectators of teacher's performance.
Now my responsibility is to bring them a non-projected activity.
The remarkable thing about teacher-in-role is that it allows the teacher to change into a different gear, as it were, as subtly or as crudely as the occasion seems to require.
In this particular instance, I casually ‘looked through my window’ and muttered to myself that I thought I saw ‘some people’outside my house.
This single action and comment implied a huge transformation in but one simple step, for suddenly we were on the edge of non-projected activity —‘some people outside my house’ places the children in a markedly different relationship to the drama.
They are in danger of losing their spectator status.
The tension rises as they sense the difference.
I moved to the door and ‘opened it’ an inch.
They felt very threatened, although ‘opening the door of my house’ had been one of the actions tried out when the class was directing me in how to be a witch.
But the meaning has changed, for now they are included in ‘dramatic time’ and are much less protected.
Notice how the first step of looking through the window is less threatening than the second one of opening the door.
The window distances to some extent; the door exposes the alarming feeling of not only sharing the same dramatic time but the same dramatic space.
So I ‘open it an inch ’ and thus I delay further, giving them time to take it all in and to adjust to the exposure to what they must ultimately cope with: the witch addressing them directly.
This careful bridging from projection to non-projection is yet another skill a teacher needs to acquire.
Thus the teacher-in-role can decide from moment to moment whether to carry the burden of the pupils' protection —‘My men (a group of ‘passive’ children) have this to say to you' is to be totally protective — or to remove  that protection and hand over the power: ‘My men have something to say to you…!’
Let us conclude this section on protection by tabulating our analysis.
Protective techniques
Performance: Technical
Formal
Indirect: Oblique approach to topic
Distanced role
Analogy
Projection: Passive
Active
Teacher-in-role
Let us look at a sequence in a recent series of lessons with the Vancouver children already referred to earlier in this chapter.
In the first session the group chose the topic of hospitals in the future.
Three phases in the first lesson were as follows:
(1) Designing, in small groups, some special machines to be found in hospitals in the future.
Because they were not enacting any kind of simulation of hospital life, the exercise could be described as INDIRECT.
It was also indirect in respect of role distance — they were ‘designers’, not part of hospital life.
Because their concentration was actively on something other than themselves it could be described as ACTIVELY PROJECTED.
(2) The class was asked to instruct me and one of the pupils in how to behave as a reporter and doctor respectively, the reporter wanting information from the busy doctor about ‘these new machines’ he had heard about.
This has moved into the DIRECT — a doctor who is using one of the machines is involved.
But it remains as ACTIVELY PROJECTED — a totally different kind of projection, of course.
(3) Half the class became ‘doctors’ and half remained as  ‘designers’.
A public discussion was held between the groups, the designers explaining how the machines would work.
This is an extension of the scene they had directed at 2, but they were now all in it.
The finished designs, although offering partial projection were not sufficient to take away the focus of attention from the participants themselves, for they were now all in ‘dramatic time’.
This was therefore DIRECT AND NON-PROJECTED.
These are three simple and fairly obvious examples of protective devices with a topic that did not of itself require careful handling, but when at the end of the lesson they chose to extend their interest in hospitals in the future to ‘finding a cure for cancer’ quite suddenly the subject-matter has become more of a delicate one, with some taboos attached for both the pupils and the adults watching the lesson.
Thus in my planning for subsequent lessons, the person in the drama who might die of cancer was never played by anyone in the group .
A chair was placed in a certain spot in the room for each lesson — Theresa's chair.
Theresa was a six-year-old girl who was going to need our scientific skill and our love.
We saw her doll, always with her on the arm of the chair, but Theresa was never there.
She became there as the week went on and as we seriously, intently were able to talk to her and even comb her hair.
We built up a projection of Theresa, and Theresa's cancer became very real.
This is what I mean by protection — we did not run away from the terrible topic: the use of projection allowed us to face cancer.
Summary
In this chapter we have argued that emotion in drama is real, but that it is nevertheless a modified version of that same emotion felt in an actual event, for the emotional response in drama is a response to an abstraction.
It is also accompanied by the dual affect of satisfaction in  creating the drama.
The emotion felt, although heavily qualified, can be equally or even more intense, as for all second-order experiencing.
For a child to feel free to respond to a make-believe situation, there must be sufficient signals in the environment reminding him that the real world continues to exist.
‘Submitting’ to the experience is a necessary step which a participant may be deterred from taking for a number of reasons, particularly if he has too great a vested interest in the subject-matter or in his own reputation.
According to Tormey's theory of Expression, emotional involvement for the actor is minimal.
Such a theory would seem to support the notion of two distinct orientations of dramatic playing and performing, but Stanislavsky's theory of acting seems to embrace both modes, leading us to consider the model as dialectic , each mode containing the seed of its opposite.
In looking, therefore, for a possible performance element within the dramatic playing mode we discovered that a certain heightened form of dramatic playing, which we labelled presentation , occurred when a significant contribution by a participant was communicated by words and gestures achieving a shared public meaning.
At such moments participants find their ‘public’ voice and do not need the kind of protection they may have relied on earlier.
We discussed the concept of ‘protection’ as protection into emotion not from emotion.
We looked in some detail at some aspects of protection which included certain kinds of technical and formal performance , the indirect handling of painful subjects and projection , the latter including some aspects of the teacher's most flexible strategy,teacher-in-role .