

The nature of education management Allan Osborne
The following chapters in this book will offer the reader a great deal in the way of possible solutions to very specific issues in the management of schools — this one will not — or at least not in the same focused way.
Whether the reader is willing or able, or even desires, to adopt to some degree the approaches put forward will be decided in large part by his or her wider set of beliefs and understanding concerning the nature of schools, schooling and education.
We are all deeply immersed in our own understanding of these things — we live the reality of them every day.
This is not therefore the place to discuss alternatives in these areas yet again, but simply to acknowledge that they do and will affect our response as managers within the education service.
However, an explicit consideration of the broader themes of education management as such is a luxury which fewer people will have had the time, or perhaps the inclination, to undertake.
It may though be useful to do just that, since our perception and understanding of them will also condition the way we approach the more focused sections following.
The basic view to be explored is that the nature of education management is undergoing major change as a result of the Education Reform Acts of 1986 and 1988 — and particularly by the local management of schools and open enrolment elements of the latter.
At the general level there is indeed already a wide consensus that managing schools in the future will be different — but once we move from the most general to more specific views, there is considerable and very important diversity as to the nature of those changes.
At the most simplistic level there is a view which suggests the emergence of a ‘chief executive’ approach to management in schools.
This is a notion often based in part upon perceptions of what is happening or is felt to have already happened in other countries, and the most widely used comparison is drawn with the USA in mind.
This view is rooted in the separation of management and education within schools and suggests a greatly increased emphasis upon the former by senior staff.
The premise of much of  what follows is contrary to that view and is based on the view that to separate the ‘educational’ from the ‘management’processes of schools is a fundamental misconception — at odds with the British educational tradition, with what is actually happening in other countries and even with its own origins in industrial and commercial practice.
It is in fact a very good example of attempting to ape industrial and commercial practice which is either not appropriate or indeed is out of date even in its own context.
We should be looking not at such practice in the past but rather in the future — more of that later.
This is not, however, to imply that nothing is different — far from it.
The ‘chief executive’ view, often put forward as a radical set of ideas, is in fact profoundly conservative — based as it is upon a traditional, hierarchical mode of thought.
A properly radical perspective would look instead at fundamentals — at the shape of schools as organisations, at the relationships between managerial and professional aspects of work in schools and at the whole question of the location of management as a set of tasks and processes; at who does what, where and when in the management process.
In short the simplistic ‘business model’ is no substitute for a much more radical and exciting blend of management of and for professionality which may be within our grasp.
This chapter is therefore an invitation of sorts — an invitation to pause before plunging into the specific issues that follow and to consider some of the broader questions about the nature of education management.
To those who are still reading, firstly my thanks, secondly a warning (this section is filled with questions rather than answers) and thirdly some encouragement to read on, in that doing so may help to maximise the utility of the book as a whole.
For ease of presentation the chapter is structured around the following themes:
The nature of educational change
A managerial perspective
A professional perspective
The location of education management.
The nature of educational change
Managers in schools have long been involved in the management of change of various kinds and at various levels — particularly in relation to the curriculum or elements of it.
West-Burnham in chapter 6 outlines an analysis which can be applied to a wide range of situations from the individual project to a whole school programme.
At this stage, however, it is necessary to examine the relationship between our underlying approaches to managing change per se and the whole question of whether those approaches are applicable to, or congruent with, the task of changing the nature of the management function itself .
Change, whether it be in the curriculum, in assessment, in the relationship between school and community, in resource management or in any other area of school, cannot be managed effectively (in anything other than the short term) without also making appropriate changes to the management structures and processes which are actually attempting to bring about the substantive developments.
For this reason it is appropriate to take a base-line review of the nature of educational change as a whole before proceeding further.
All who work within the education service are acutely aware of the pressure for change at all levels.
From the individual classroom, to the school as a whole, through the local authority and to the national level as represented by the DES, the pressure is enormous.
Not only is there a great depth to the pressure for change, but it also exists on an enormously wide number of fronts — from the National Curriculum through assessment and on to open enrolment and the local management of schools and (for some) beyond that to grant maintained status or other ‘exotics’.
It is important however to dispel the ‘big push’ theory of change — that all we need is one last great effort to climb the next hill or round the next corner and we shall then arrive in the promised land of milk, honey and stability!
Those who search for something and never find it become dispirited or cynical and eventually it becomes very hard to motivate them to climb the next hill.
Those who pin their hopes on highly specified, short range solutions may or may not get it right.
If they do not (and the track record is not good), they will be responsible for leading us up the wrong path (again) and they will create yet greater levels of exhaustion and disaffection.
A more viable approach accepts the on-going nature of educational change — the journey is more important than the destination in the sense that one is real and the other never more than a shifting image.
This is as true for attempts to change the nature of the management process itself as it is for the more obvious areas of change management.
It is also necessary to reflect upon at least one other dimension to the situation.
The dynamic force for educational change this time around (in contrast to the sixties and seventies?) lies not within the profession but is social and political and, in the latter sense, is enshrined in the Education Reform Acts of 1986 and 1988 in particular.
For some, this appears as a rapid move away from the consensus approach to change which characterised education up to the 1970s, and as a move towards imposed solutions at all levels of the service.
We should make no mistake about the political nature of these developments, but a horrified throwing in of the towel is no response on the part of those who would manage the service in the interests of pupils.
Major management questions start to  emerge — questions which can only be answered from an education management perspective.
At root, the educational changes with which we are engaged are fuelled by rapidly changing socio-economic patterns, and the particular political drive given to these at the moment is of much less importance (in anything other than the short term) than we may often feel to be the case.
The present political initiative rests upon a consumer- or market-based perspective as the driving force for change, and upon the belief that managers within the service will respond to that direction.
However, this begs many questions about the ways in which they will respond and some of these issues will be identified later.
It is not possible to establish, even in the broadest terms, educational needs for the present, or the immediate future, without taking into account the fundamental economic and social changes which are summed up in the phrase, ‘a post-industrial society’.
While some regard these changes with optimism and others with foreboding, there is a growing consensus that they are changes of a very different magnitude and nature to anything since the Industrial Revolution — and even that comparison may underestimate the process as far as time-scale is concerned.
While crystal ball gazing is an absorbing occupation, for us the question raised is how do education and education managers relate to this scenario?
The enthusiasm of the sixties (it was not just naivety) would have held that education should lead the whole process, while the cynicism of the seventies and eighties would have us believe that education, that is schools at any rate, can do no more than mirror the society of which they are part.
In reality, of course, the relationship between education and society is much more complex than either view would suggest.
Education does reflect social, economic and political needs or pressures, but in doing so it also subtly refracts the image and modifies the pressures — the balance within the relationship is not constant.
Moreover, on some occasions (and the present scenario could well be one) the economic and social pressures may be pushing in the same direction as educational forces.
That is to say, what educators are promoting primarily as ‘a good thing anyway’ is, on this occasion, likely to receive considerable reinforcement because it coincides with what the economic-technical revolution requires.
We should not regard this situation lightly or allow ourselves to fall into a purely reactive management position.
A proactive approach to education management in the service is required as never before (see Benn 1984).
What then, should this stance be?
Just as it is dangerous to predict the macro-scenario in anything other than the broadest terms, so it is dangerous to attempt to construct educational blueprints for the future — especially in  curriculum terms.
Yet this is exactly what is happening and it is also happening with the schools in a reactive stance.
Having ‘failed’ to find the curriculum or examination version of the Holy Grail for themselves during the sixties and seventies (and having exhausted themselves in the process) the schools are, at the moment, resigned to accepting a string of panaceas from without — the YTS/TVEI initiatives are now being superseded or subsumed by the National Curriculum cure-all.
It is not that these initiatives do not contain good educational practice which is being criticised here (for they do), but rather the way in which they are seen by some as panaceas which can succeed without full professional involvement.
It is in the quality of the management of these initiatives that success or failure lies — not in the ideas themselves.
There is an awesome truth here that managers at all levels must act upon rather than pay lip service to — that is, there will be no educational progress without the full commitment and motivation of the teaching force.
Imposed managerial solutions will simply not work.
These programmes may fulfil the hidden agendas of some of their originators but they will not in their present forms fulfil the real educational needs of the future.
Educators, both from a professional and management position, must become much more involved in developing (rather than simply operating) these programmes which could form the basis of a real way forward.
It is suggested here that the major curricular change of the future lies in what Fullan (1982) has described as the balance between cognitive and social development goals.
While Fullan writes in a wide educational context, his work can be applied directly to the initiatives now underway in the UK:
Currently, the main attention and content of reform is largely imbalanced in favour of the more basic of the cognitive goals, to the relative neglect of higher-order cognitive goals, and to a very strong passivity when it comes to personal/social development goals.
Fullan (1982) p. 289
This imbalance can be strongly related to a very restrictive view of teacher professionality and to an equally restrictive view of the nature of education management.
It is however not in curriculum thinking that Fullan's major contribution is to be found, but rather in the issues he raises about the nature of change as a process in educational terms, and the implications these have for managers in the service.
An important question in relation to change is what Fullan describes as ‘fidelity and variation’.
Should change be homogeneous and centrally directed in both design and implementation or should it be heterogeneous and decentralised?
As he states:
It the direction of the change is seen as desirable and if the means of  implementation are proven and clear, there is nothing wrong with consistent homogeneous implementation.
However, he goes on to say that:
…these conditions are not always or even usually the case…
Fullan (1982) p. 290
Who would doubt this in the context of the post-industrial society?
If variation rather than fidelity is required in the management of change, then the restrictive views of professionality and management currently underpinning much thinking would not seem to be the most appropriate model for the future.
Indeed, Fullan identified several other important ideas; time and change, leadership and change, meaning and change, and the tension between grandeur and incrementalism as strategies for development.
On all of these levels a similar analysis can be drawn — i.e. that restrictive views of teacher professionality and associated management perspectives provide an unlikely vehicle for progress.
This is not the place to labour the points one by one, but the overall position is made clear by looking at what Fullan characterises as the difference between ‘specific and generic capacity for change’.
The implementation of a specific change is not the prime goal.
Indeed, a single success if it is too costly in terms of time, commitment, motivation or any other resource, may be at the expense of future changes — and we may be seeing some evidence of this at the moment in terms of the reactive stance of large parts of the service.
Rather as Fullan (1982 p. 292) says, ‘the goal is to get good at change’.
It would appear therefore that changes in the nature (location?) of the management function must go along with all the other changes with which we are involved.
Put in the language of this chapter, we should not be seeking the Holy Grail in the curriculum or anywhere else, but attempting to create relationships between management and professionality within structures which are good at bringing about change without exhausting or demeaning teachers in the process.
It is to an examination of these managerial and professional perspectives that this chapter must now turn.
Throughout it is held that professionals and managers are people and it is people who should be brought to mind whenever such terms as professionalism and professionality or management and managerialism are encountered.
These characteristics and/or processes start with people and they affect other people — each other certainly, but also pupils.
A managerial perspective
Classical management theory emphasises the conscious creation of procedures in opposition to the interplay of unco-ordinated  activities.
Consequently the basic concepts have been division of labour, organisational structure, job descriptions, but above all — hierarchy.
Perhaps because they were the first in the field, or more probably for deeply rooted socio-political reasons, the classicists have never been seriously challenged — theories have come and theories have gone but the belief in the control function of management has remained — even more so at the level of practice than of theory, although at that level, some insights can be gained.
The most fully developed rationale for this view of management is Max Weber's bureaucracy with its positive emphasis upon rationality, predictability and impartiality.
For this purpose the salient features are the role of ‘office’, the stress on procedural devices, the division of labour and the emphasis on hierarchy.
The whole is tied together by the notion of control although later a distinction was to be made between the authority of office and the authority of expertise.
Certainly, bureaucratic organisational forms and processes can be very effective in the right conditions of a known product or service, ‘mass production’ and stability.
Although, in its pure form, the bureaucracy concept cannot be applied fully to schools, it has been suggested that bureaucratisation is one of the most significant educational developments of the times.
Spence (1981) argues that the theory is powerfully related to school life, seeing classroom behaviour as narrowly prescribed and highly institutionalised as a result of both direct and indirect control, the latter being perhaps more significant:
…a person can be in a cage without being constantly under observation or supervision….
The cage does the regulation of the person continuously, impersonally, unobtrusively until it becomes to its occupant a part of the facts of life.
Spence (1981) p. 68
Others may feel that the cage has become, or is becoming, somewhat more explicit as a result of central government activity — leading to an emphasis upon the direct controls which would have appeared as unthinkable only a decade ago.
This begins to face education managers with a fundamental dilemma — are they inside the cage with the teaching profession or are they to be on the outside exercising a more explicit control function than ever before?
Alternatively, is it possible to find another way altogether, a way which does not simply resolve the dilemma, but one which transforms the problem into a solution?
The general critique of bureaucratic management theory, as applied in the context of education, has long suggested that:.
organisational structure and decision making are considerably modified…when there are large numbers of professionals…
and that:
the bureaucratic-professional dimension exists as a variable for organisational structure within organisations as well as between organisations.
Morgan (1976) p. 22
Hughes summarises the position being outlined here:
It must be granted that there are inevitable managerial problems for an educational system…
because the educational professional using his trained judgement is
…liable to come into conflict with the organisational hierarchy and at least to give the impression that he is only conditionally loyal…
Hughes (1980) p. 243
If abstractions such as‘bureaucracy’ and ‘classical management’theories provide some ways of thinking about the management ideology at work in our schools, what practical evidence do we have?
Within the schools, examples can be easily identified — they may be transitory in some cases, but they reappear in other forms at other times.
They too have in common the notion of control.
One example which springs to mind very powerfully at the moment is the notion of organisation charts and the ubiquitous phrase ‘senior management team’.
This latter idea could lay claim to a basis in ideas of collegiality — but only of a limited nature.
The team would do what the individual could no longer do because the organisation was becoming too large and/or complex.
Collegiality in this form is still predicated upon the idea of control over the organisation.
Genuine collegiality is something essentially different.
From the organisation chart and the senior management team stems the absolute need for detailed job descriptions for all members of the organisation.
An interesting point is that these often become more detailed the lower down the ‘hierarchy’ we look.
Their purpose of course is to ‘get things done’; but what are these ‘things’ and who decides?
Here we need to ask ourselves a whole range of questions associated with the ways in which staff are managed in general and about the ways in which appraisal will be managed in the future — for there are choices to be made there in particular.
Do we see appraisal as a process which in itself will lead to ‘improvement’(the control model), or as something which really only makes sense in the context of a fully developed staff development process?
These examples powerfully affect the relationships between teachers in schools, but the pupils are not immune.
An example in this area, and one of considerable importance, can be drawn from the much discussed academic — pastoral divide which has numerous  origins, including the need to ‘place’ a dispossessed hierarchy during a phase of bureaucratic upheaval.
The creation of formalised (specialised) pastoral systems can be seen as one of the most limiting aspects of school organisation.
Such systems fundamentally imply that many teachers should deliberately restrict their level of engagement with children and that the finely woven (and seamless) web of human relationships can be rationalised, divided, timetabled and generally routinised to such an extent that it can be systemised (or bureaucratised)!
A third example can be drawn from the present fascination with evaluation — this is a particularly powerful example of the distortions which ‘control’ can introduce even though perfectly ‘rational’or ‘acceptable’from a managerial perspective.
What could be more desirable than the need to evaluate the work of our schools?
The great problem is that evaluation focuses upon outcomes rather than processes, and this bias is given increased emphasis in the context of National Curriculum assessment arrangements.
Managers may respond by devising routines which will improve the output results but these will have a dramatic effect upon the processes of education back through the school life of every child.
The massive alienation thus bred may be contained in the context of a stable economic and cultural framework, but when that stability breaks down a different picture begins to emerge.
There is a great need to move the emphasis away from the outcomes of education to the processes, but this raises a whole complex of management questions.
Existing management structures and knowledge bases are on the one hand inappropriate, and on the other largely inadequate, for this task and these inadequacies are very serious constraints; of the two, the lack of adequate knowledge bases for evaluation in a process sense is probably more important but it is also the point at which the greatest development could take place.
It is within the capacity of existing arrangements (the in-service training system) to address the knowledge base question whereas the structural dimension is a far more complex and difficult situation.
The two are not distinct — development of management knowledge bases in this area may of itself be seen as one of the prerequisites and/or pressure points leading toward structural review and change.
While not applicable in a pure form, the notion of bureaucracy provides powerful insights into the managerial processes and ideology of large parts of the education service.
The management of our schools has been conditioned by both the ideology and practice of hierarchy and control to a point at which, in some cases, it must attract the pejorative term of managerialism , a condition under which the artificial needs of managers, organisations, systems, bureaucracies or routines assume dominance over the real needs  of children.
Many would look to a professional perspective to balance these developments in the interests of the clients and it is to an examination of this perspective that the chapter now turns.
Are existing professional forms able to meet the danger of managerialism and how well prepared are they to do so in the future?
A professional perspective
The great weight of evidence is that the employment of large numbers of professionals in an organisation poses ‘problems’ for the application of the bureaucratic or hierarchical management model.
Much of this evidence is drawn from outside the educational world but nevertheless has profound implications in that context.
It is to an examination of this perspective that we now turn, but it is worthwhile to start by asking ourselves why the situation is regarded as a problem rather than a potential ?
Part of the answer lies in the managerial perspective itself and another part in the failure to develop a viable approach to the professional dimensions of schools.
However, it must be said that this paper is not an attempt to cast management in an entirely negative light and then to oppose that with an equally ‘rosy’ view of professionalism — with the implication that management must recede and that professionalism should advance.
Such a view would be far too simplistic for a number of reasons, but perhaps most clearly because there is indeed a powerful and growing critique of professionals in our society — and a critique which is well founded!
We require not a shift in the ‘balance of power and influence’ but an entirely changed modus vivendi between the two dimensions.
At bottom, this critique revolves around the feeling that many groups of professionals (in our case teachers) are organised around professional skills rather than client needs.
Wilding (1981) provides a trenchant account of this critique in the wider framework of all the social welfare professions but much of what he has to say rings many uncomfortable bells in our schools.
An important qualification is that we are looking at groups of professionals and the manner in which they are organised rather than at individual teachers — at this latter level there can be little doubt that many individual teachers do respond to client needs despite the structure around them.
The basic failure is perceived particularly acutely in the social welfare professions, and it is based upon a wide range of features such as the failure of some services actually to deliver the goods promised, failures of responsibility and neutrality, the loss of the service ideal and, in extreme cases, the disabling effects upon  clients.
This critique underlies much of the ‘Great Debate’ which has been in progress since the Ruskin speech of 1976 and which can be seen to have result ed in the 1986 and 1988 Education Acts.
Characteristically, the overt discussion has concentrated upon far more apparently neutral issues — particularly it has focused upon the curriculum — ranging from concern with ‘areas of experience’ to the fascination with TVEI and the whole MSC approach to ‘relevance’, and culminating with the National Curriculum and associated assessment proposals.
The discussion is more neutral only in so far as it is assumed that the curriculum (such a global phenomenon) is no-one's responsibility in particular, and clearly this is so in an individual sense — but it is however the responsibility of the profession to take a leading role in this area and at the moment it is not fulfilling this role.
The initiative clearly lies elsewhere, effectively in managerial levels outside schools; and teachers are reduced to a reactive or defensive position and should not be surprised to feel alternately frustration and cynicism about the whole process.
Alter more than 10 years of ‘debate’ we seem to be little better off than before — indeed the lack of motivation is, if anything, more acute than ever.
Why should this be the case?
It is both unfortunate and revealing that the solutions suggested by Wilding are managerial in perspective — with more planning and more control seen as the crucial ameliorative requirements.
Taking various client groups into the bureaucracy is in itself no real way forward because in that context it can only lead to professional defensiveness of the worst kind.
Rather it is necessary to look at the people involved — the professionals — and understand how they relate both to their clients and to the organisations in which they work, for it is these structures that powerfully condition the primary relationships.
By failing to take this holistic stance and by the adoption of a narrow perspective (the curriculum) within a managerial approach dedicated to control, standardisation and output evaluation, the ‘Great Debate’ has not arrived at the promised land but has been confined to endless wanderings in the wilderness of the present or indeed the past.
The relationship between teachers and pupils is in many ways similar to the relationship between other professionals and their clients, but it is suggested here that in an ideal sense (and in many cases practically too) it does have special characteristics which are fundamentally opposed to traditional ideas of professionalism.
One of these is the notion of detachment between professionals and clients which is wholly inappropriate in teaching.
The clearest statement of this situation was provided by Wilson (1962) and some conclusion can be drawn from the fact that this was so long ago.
Wilson argues that the teacher's role is special both in breadth and depth:
Doctors and lawyers make patients out of persons and cases out of clients…for the teacher the child must, of necessity, remain a whole person.
Wilson (1962) p. 24
While the whole-person approach is having powerful effects upon professional fields such as medicine, other areas such as the law and accountancy retain, possibly rightly, a ‘case’ approach.
In some respects the process in education needs to be carried further because of the time-frame involved:
Because a teacher is concerned with a whole person over a prolonged period of time…so he tends to become involved as a whole person.
Wilson (1962) p. 25
Because this role is impossible to define in terms of its action content it leads to a lack of specificity, difficulties of time calculation and the inappropriateness of contractual obligations — all hallmarks of work in general in our society and all the tools of management and bureaucracy.
If management, as usually conceived, attempts to mediate this role it will either fail utterly because it will be excluded by the people involved, or it will have distorting effects which can only be dysfunctional.
A curriculum conceived in instrumental terms (i.e. as the mediator between teacher and taught) or a crisis-based pastoral system are both powerful examples of this.
Wilson sums it up:
Affection is the first language which man understands, and it becomes the lever by which all other languages can be initially learned….
The strictly professional attitude — to remember that clients are just cases…is simply not possible in teaching.
Wilson (1962) p. 25
The managerial implications are profound in many ways but above all a management framework must be created which facilitates such relationships in the first place and then allows them to flourish.
This approach can only be created on the basis of managerial trust in the professional skills and attitudes of teachers.
Corwin says:
because the situations dealt with by professionals are unique, the professional must be given authority to solve them and to be responsible for the outcome .
Corwin (1965) p. 237 [author's italics]
At issue here is the central theme of professional autonomy, but as the italics emphasise, authority or autonomy (which most teachers would wish for) carries with it an exactly equal responsibility for outcomes (and this is something that teachers need to be much more aware of).
It is a classic chicken and egg situation — autonomy and responsibility are indivisible.
The literature concerning professional — managerial relationships is  reasonably clear in overall direction if not in degree.
The American literature rarely speaks of ‘conflict’ but it does reveal a certain ‘tension’within the relationship.
The European literature, perhaps not surprisingly, does see the relationship more clearly in terms of conflict.
The professional's tendency to resist bureaucratic control has been studied in a wide range of occupations by writers such as Drucker, Kornhauser, Wardell, Abrahamson among others, and the congruence of their findings must be accepted here (Hughes 1980).
In the school situation Watson has found similar tension (1975).
The state of the art in the study of professionals in schools is still represented by the work of Hoyle (1975) who suggested the notion of professionality as a way forward from the sterile debates of whether teaching is a profession in the ‘checklist of characteristics’ manner.
Having disposed of the ideal type approach and the question of whether or not teachers are professionals, Hoyle asks which parts of the idea of professionality are useful in the school context and he suggests two heuristic models of restricted and extended professionality.
Although Hoyle's model can be criticised on the grounds that the ideal types do not exist, or that many teachers exhibit characteristics from both sides of the model, it nevertheless exposes crucial aspects of the relationships between teachers and the organisations in which they work when used in the heuristic format for which it was intended.
The value of professionality is that it focuses attention upon the activities of teachers in relation to pupils, each other and their organisations and it is thus a dynamic concept in opposition to the rather static ‘characteristics’ or ‘descriptive’approach inherent in most studies of professionalism.
A broad outline of the ideas can be provided in tabular form thus:
 Holye suggests that traditionally the individual teacher has enjoyed a high degree of autonomy in the essential professional activity of teaching, but that teachers have had relatively little influence over the broader aspects of school life because of a very limited involvement in decision making (management).
Bearing in mind the general pattern of restricted and extended modes, certain features can be highlighted.
If teachers are to assume a greater role in the control of their own organisations a far wider range of knowledge and skills is required than if they are to remain ‘in the classroom’— they must move from the restricted to the extended approach.
Furthermore, Hoyle suggests that there is indeed a tension between the two approaches — that restricted professionality is unlikely in practice to be capable of extension or, put another way, that extended professionality can only be achieved at the cost of effective, restricted professionality at the classroom level.
This would seem to be unnecessarily pessimistic and may be a conclusion laid at the door of present organisational configurations in our schools.
This pessimism may have some truth given the present management approach within our schools but it is suggested here that if that managerial frame of reference was itself to be radically re-oriented, then teachers' perceptions of their own professionality would also be powerfully affected and they may indeed come to feel that effective classroom activity was positively related to their performance in the wider school context.
One other feature is worthy of note in an attempt to bring together these views of professionals and those outlined above on managerialism.
In the present context there is yet another source of tension, perhaps the most crucial of all.
To the degree that a managerial ideology and practice has tendencies towards bureaucracy and control at the school level, then it will itself create pressure upon teachers towards the restricted view of professionality.
However, there are countervailing pressures since, at the same time, broader educational needs are pulling in exactly the opposite direction and require teachers to operate in the extended dimension in many ways.
Those who would run our schools cannot have things all ways.
They cannot have teachers ready to respond to the rapidly changing  social milieu (the educational needs context) which requires an extended approach to professionality, and at the same time expect to manage them in a modified bureaucracy which is predicated upon a restricted view.
The whole process must be based upon an unprecedented release of energy and activity at all levels.
It is suggested in the final part of this chapter that a different approach to education management is possible.
Such an approach would be centred upon the management of and for professionality and it would be based upon a relocation of the whole management process — away from a top-down managerial philosophy and practice, and towards a genuinely collegiate form which would go far beyond the traditional boundaries of delegation.
In this approach to the location of education management we may begin to find a new relationship between professionality and management, and to explore in a different way the questions of who does what, where and when in the whole management process.
The location of education management
The early part of this chapter indicated that there is already a reasonable consensus that managing schools in the future will be different — equally it suggested that a simplistic ‘chief executive, model is not universally accepted as the way forward, and that such a model is indeed a profoundly conservative one.
It remains however to explore alternatives to that model in the context of the sections above, concerning the nature of educational change and the managerial and professional perspectives involved.
Much of what follows is set therefore in the form of questions which need to be considered by all of us.
Our individual and collective responses to these questions will affect not only our understanding and interpretation of the following chapters of this book but, more importantly, the nature of the school process as experienced by teachers and pupils in the future.
Firstly, it is appropriate to examine some broad themes from the commercial — industrial fields and secondly it is proposed to specify a series of inter-related questions which, taken together, will determine our approach to the location and thus the nature of education management.
While rejecting the detailed application of management approaches from an industrial or commercial environment into schools, we should not fall into the belief that there is nothing to be learned from such experience — for in the right conditions there is.
Those conditions would appear to be obvious but they are worth stating:
1.
That we examine such experience from the position of the best available practice/commentary.
This means not only looking for good  practice in the present but also looking for indicators for the future.
2.
That we look not for detailed application of single techniques in a piecemeal fashion, but rather that we look for the general developments from which we can build school specific approaches which translate the experience into usable school practice.
3.
That we do not, in the process, undervalue the experience that is already available to us in our own schools and those around us — in particular there is a danger that we fail to make use of the managerial ability which all teachers constantly deploy with children, or that experience which schools in different age sections from our own can give us.
This last point is one which is most commonly misplaced.
Within these conditions, some of the broad themes currently exercising the minds of practitioners and commentators in commercial and industrial management are worthy of consideration.
A whole series of CBI/DTI/BIM reports summarised by Constable and McCormick (1987) has created great interest in the condition of British management, and in particular in the training provision made.
The general tenor of those reports is that while much has been achieved, a very great deal remains to be done.
Management development at present is seen as too little, too late and for too few.
The debate, amongst both academics and practitioners, which emerged from these reports is still going on and it is this debate which is of interest to schools.
One of the polarisations which took place has centred on the question of whether management development should be focused on the provision of specific tools/skills for managers (a competency model?)— or whether it would be more appropriate to set out along a more generic path which emphasised the attitudinal and interpersonal aspects of management.
The first of these approaches has resulted in a programme called the ‘Management Charter Initiative’, which is currently planning a nationwide training initiative with a highly flexible approach — bringing together in-house provision with higher education provision and suggesting a laddered approach to management development throughout the whole careers of those involved.
Critics have, however, found serious flaws in the whole approach.
It has been attacked on the grounds that it attempts to relate particular skills to different levels of management, or that it sectionalises/parochialises management thinking.
Above all it has been criticised on the level of the ‘charter’ concept itself.
The idea of the chartered manager is equated with that of the chartered accountant — it implies a threshold level of competence in managerial skills before the ‘intern’ is allowed to practise.
This is very revealing for us in its underlying implications.
Seen in this light, management is an activity which only some people engage in, or as something  which some people do to other people — once they have been chartered/qualified to do so.
It remains a conservative model, based upon control and hierarchy.
In the light of what has been said above about the nature of the relationships between managerial and professional processes in schools, the competency/threshold model currently being developed would seem to have little to offer in terms of meeting the need for a move towards holistic management processes.
Moreover, the cutting edge of management thinking does not fit very easily into this way of thinking — even within the commercial — industrial sector itself.
To take examples from either side of the Atlantic, both Tom Peters (1988) and Charles Handy (1989) are beginning to suggest very different approaches to management, and interestingly they are approaches which reflect far more accurately the needs for collegiate management in schools.
They share a common and deeply significant trend in philosophy, and that trend is to get away from hierarchy and control and to move towards emphasis upon what Peters calls ‘The Front Line People’— and we know who they are!
The major management concern according to Peters is not a concern with techniques but rather a concern with people, and with the division between management and non-management.
He goes on to explore the dynamic nature of excellence and to suggest that quality is really about training and unlocking the potential of the workforce.
This can only be done, he suggests, by moving away from hierarchy and towards a position in which everyone is a manager.
Handy, looking from a slightly different perspective of the whole organisation, comes to essentially similar conclusions — everyone will have to be a manager but at the same time, no one can afford to be only a manager.
It is impossible, he suggests, to run such an organisation by command — only persuasion or consent will do.
Here we may have a glimpse of the future shape of organisation and management theory and practice which is worth on-going consideration in relation to schools.
Seen in this light, management is a political activity and it is an emotional activity too because organisations are about people.
Peters admits that such a sea-change in attitudes is ‘scary tough’ but we need to ask what the alternatives really are.
This starts to look like a way of thinking which would make the task of school management part of the work of all teachers.
Certainly, such views as these do not sit comfortably with managerialism and are equally at odds with restricted professionality .
How do they fit with the demands of the Education Reform Acts of 1986 and 1988?
It may well be possible to find ways of dealing with the demands of the various themes of these acts by yet greater dependence upon  the hierarchical/control model — indeed it almost certainly will be — but at what level of success in terms of the educational needs of the pupils and at what cost to the motivation of staff?
The local management of schools policy appears to threaten the basis of much of what we have known; and there is undoubtedly much concern about some of the ‘new’ skills which will be needed.
We should not be panicked however into top-down/control solutions, for many of these ‘new’ skills which are apparently so daunting at the moment (reading a financial statement?) are easily learnt by intelligent people and in two or three years, at that level, we shall be wondering what all the fuss was about.
The more enduring issues will be concerned with making decisions based upon those statements and with the wider questions of who should be making them and in what way.
These behavioural questions are much more important then the merely technical issues — and so it will be with the National Curriculum and all the other baggage of 1988.
The greatest problem facing schools, now as always, is how to ensure the best possible service to present pupils (this may be called the steady-state operation), while at the same time, developing the creativity which alone will allow us to continue to adapt to change in the future.
If we are panicked into yet greater depths of managerialism, a great opportunity will be lost.
In particular the teaching force will not be regenerated or remotivated in the ways that are necessary (and possible), and which alone will lead to the real and sustained improvements in the quality of the service delivered to pupils.
Rather than fall back on an increased emphasis upon managerialism based upon hierarchy and control, the Education Reform Acts should be regarded as an opportunity to review, not just in a coping way but in a maximising way, the management structures and processes of our schools.
This requires bravery — to go against the ‘safety first’ approach — but, paradoxically, it is possible under LMS, and working with the governing body, to structure schools and their management in ways very different from anything that would have been possible before.
It is suggested here that a new modus vivendi is required between the managerial and professional dimensions of school life.
Within this, the traditional manager has little part to play, but management becomes the key to success as all teachers carry out both operational and managerial roles.
This brings us closer to the meaning of a genuine collegiality — management is here seen as a holistic process — touching everything and being carried forward by all teachers as of right and duty, not because of a limited hierarchical view of ‘delegation’.
Only then will many of the educational tasks now being approached from a quasi-managerial perspective become the focus of properly professional processes.
Conclusion
This chapter started with a number of questions and propositions — it must end with yet more.
The questions are themselves tentative (and surely incomplete) but they are questions of a different order in that they look forward rather than backward.
No answers are offered in any direct sense, rather an invitation to consider the issues in the context of particular schools or situations and to use such a consideration and further develop it as the remaining chapters of this book are read.
The major questions are clearly interrelated in that the answer to any one will precondition the response to the others.
What we are looking at is the development of a decentralised approach to management which by definition cannot be reduced to a few single issues, although the level of management self-awareness is critical in all of them.
In general we should ask ourselves whether we are happy with our responses to the following questions:
1.
Where are the processes and responsibilities of management in the school currently located?
2.
Do current practices reflect a real distinction between administrative and managerial activities?
3.
How do we currently balance our managerial effort between (a) steady state, and (b) development work?
4.
How do we set about prioritising our change programmes?
(Someone somewhere is doing it.)
5.
How do we attempt to bring about a generic capacity for change amongst staff?
6.
Where is the line between management and manipulation?
7.
How do we ensure that management is seen as a set of empowering activities and not as a control activity?
This is particularly important in the resource management context.
8.
Are staff seen as part of the problem or as part of the solution?
The list could go on, and it may indeed be appropriate to add to or subtract from it, but it is to be hoped that the general point is clear enough — that our first need is to have a very clear level of self-awareness about existing management structures and processes as a precondition for undertaking a review of these elements.
Responses to these questions will be varied, and each will give rise to a number of subsidiary questions.
However, an overall sense of direction will be determined by the extent to which we are happy with the answers given.
The following chapters may help to sharpen  
Management information Brent Davies and Linda Ellison
Introduction
This chapter reviews the basic processes that underlie the gathering and use of information for decision making in schools.
It aims to establish principles and practices which underpin each of the succeeding chapters by considering a rational approach to assessing the information processes and needs of each management activity.
If decisions are to be made about the deployment of resources or the implementation of the curriculum then they should be made on accurate and reliable information.
Before management can proceed it needs to understand the key elements in the information process.
The alternative is to manage reactively rather than proactively.
This reactive approach is exemplified by realising, at the time when problems arise, that they cannot be solved without adequate information.
It is much better to evaluate information needs and establish information flows in advance of the decision-making process than to discover their omission at a later stage.
The sections which follow are not about computer-based systems and jargon but focus on the information needs and systems of schools.
As such, the chapter looks at:
1.
A changing environment which is generating the need for high quality information for decision making.
2.
The requirements of an effective information system.
3.
Information gathering and processing.
4.
The relationship between information and decision making.
5.
Information and the level of management activity.
6.
Good management practice.
It is hoped that the reader, after assessing these areas, will have a basis for evaluating the information system in his/her own institution.
1.
The changing environment
The dynamic environment within which educational institutions currently operate was outlined in chapter 1.
A particular feature in recent years has been the polarisation of power away from local education authorities (LEAs) to the centre (government) and to the periphery (schools).
Schools have been given greater autonomy and greater exposure to market forces, both of which are significantly altering their information requirements.
Schools are having to become more complex organisations in order to meet the varied responsibilities which have been devolved to them since the Education Reform Act (1988).
This level of autonomy will result in a changed role for the school from one of administration of policies to one of management of local resources.
For senior managers the change in role is from tactical decision making to strategic decision making, highlighting the need for a significant increase in information flows and requirements.
For example, increased responsibility for school finance results in the need for forecasts of future pupil numbers so that the effect of such numbers on the school's income can be predicted.
Running parallel to the changes in the legislative framework, there is a change in the relationship between schools and their immediate environment.
In the past, schools felt that they could influence this environment.
However, the increase in legislation and in consumer power have altered the balance so that schools, if they are to survive and be effective, must be sensitive and responsive to the demands of the external environment.
This has resulted in an increased need to have accurate localised information, both quantitative and qualitative.
For example, instead of working within an LEA's planned admissions policy, managers must have information that can help them in the recruitment programme which has become possible through open enrolment legislation.
With the increased responsibility and responsiveness has come an increase in the volume of management activities.
This has resulted in a growing need for a more detailed and more formalised information system.
The basic principles underlying a management information system are examined in the succeeding parts of this chapter.
Only by understanding these basic factors can managers appreciate the context before decisions can be made about appropriate technology and other factors that may be needed to deliver the system.
2.
The requirements of an information system
If managerial functions are to be carried out both efficiently and effectively, then it is a prerequisite that high quality information is available to inform decision making at the various managerial levels.
Laudon and Laudon (1988 p. vii) draw attention to this dependence on the type and quality of information provided:
The work of the organisation depends increasingly on what its information systems are capable of doing.
Increasing market share, becoming the low-cost producer, developing new products, and/or increasing employee productivity depend more and more on the kinds and quality of information systems in the organisation.
An information system, therefore, should be reliable and provide:
1.
the right information
2.
to the right people
3.
at the right time
4.
in the right way
5.
to achieve clear objectives.
The sections which follow will examine the way in which high quality information can be gathered and used to inform decision making at the school level.
3.
Information gathering and processing
Information gathering should not take place until a careful assessment has been made of the management tasks and decisions which require information.
It is a fallacy to think that the more information an organisation has the better will be the decisions.
Information must be focused so as to serve precise management tasks.
Figure 2.1 represents the stages in the information-gathering process.
Once the management task has been defined then the type of information required can be identified.
It is only then that the third stage comes into operation, that of the actual data collection.
It is necessary, at this third stage, to define the way in which staff are to be involved and the time-scale for collection.
The fourth stage involves sifting through the data and evaluating it so as to collate and analyse it in such a way as to provide useful information rather than a mass of unrelated facts or figures.
Finally, it is vital that the results of the process are communicated effectively to all relevant parties in the organisation.
This process can be illustrated in the management task shown below.
The application of the five stages to the task illustrated would involve, firstly, the definition of the task.
This is set out in the statement but clarification may be needed as to whether the bands are to be of equal size or that ability grouping determines different sized bands.
The second stage of identifying and defining the nature and type of information required would bring together both quantitative and qualitative information.
This would include test and examination results during the first year, continuous assessment marks and evaluations, form tutors' reports, results of any standardised tests such as those provided by National Foundation for Education Research (NFER) and, in appreciating the continuity of education, indicators and assessments from the primary school reports.
It is vital, at this stage, to define all the useful sources of data before the process starts and not to add on data collection areas as the process proceeds.
The third stage of data collection involves sequencing the collection so that the various forms of data are brought together at the end of the first year.
At this stage management needs to determine how the data will be stored and who is to co-ordinate the process.
The analysis and evaluation of the data to turn it into useful information at the fourth stage involves collating the quantitative assessments and ranking them in order.
It is then important to set against this the qualitative assessments and for management to discuss the relative importance of each type of information before the final decisions are made.
The communication of bands and set lists in Maths then has to take place to teachers, pupils and parents.
Obviously, this needs great sensitivity when dealing with the clients in the form of pupils and the parents.
Readers may wish to apply this information-gathering process to the task shown below.
4.
The relationship between information and decision making
Are information and decision making separate activities or are they part of a continuum and, therefore, inter-related?
This relationship has been analysed by Mason (1975) and is said to consist of: a source , e.g. the school and its activities, from which data is collected and recorded, from which managers draw inferences and predictions which are evaluated and the values and choices of the organisation are followed by action .
This can be represented as shown in Figure 2.2 by Mason (1975 p. 2).
It is important for managers to assess the point at which the information system stops and the decision making begins.
This is because a significant factor is the degree to which assumptions are built into the information system and thereby influence and affect the decision making.
By analysing this concept it is possible to suggest four alternative decision-making systems that vary as the level of assumptions built into the information system increases.
A basic information system merely classifies and stores data.
This is called a data-bank system and a good example is the pupil record system which is kept in a secretary's office.
This may, for example, comprise 200 pupil files in alphabetical order.
If specific information about pupils' ability, eligibility for free school meals, any disabilities etc. is required, then a painstaking search is undertaken each time   for the particular piece of information required.
The time consuming nature of searching through a mass of information for one factor is the main drawback of this approach, although the process can now be made more efficient by the use of electronic databases.
A second approach,a predictive information system , can be used where the information system may have a degree of prediction and inference built into it.
Assumptions now become part of the information system and it is this aspect which must not be overlooked by the manager.
Otherwise, there will be a tendency to rely on the information that the system provides without adequately reviewing the underlying assumptions upon which it is based.
An example of this second approach would be the use of spreadsheets for calculating the allocation of capitation to departments within a secondary school.
The spreadsheet will have built-in assumptions about weightings for age and subject needs.
Any decisions made about allocations are not value-free but are now based on the original assumptions about the weightings.
A third approach is one of a decision-making system where the manager is simply there to approve or veto suggestions made by others.
This increases the significance of the information system to that of a recommender as to what to do based on value and choices but leaves the final decision to the manager.
An example of this would be the operation of a lettings policy in a school.
The head, operating under powers delegated to him by the governors, would set up criteria for the policy and appoint one of the staff to run the scheme.
The member of staff would make all decisions regarding letting with the head not involved in the process but retaining the power of final veto to be applied in sensitive cases!
These decision-making systems have a considerable number of assumptions built into them and there must be an agreed value system.
If this is not the case then the decision-making information system's recommendations may result in considerable problems if recommendations are consistently vetoed.
A fourth approach removes all decision taking into the information system itself and is called a decision-taking system .
This is where management has total confidence in the assumptions and values that are built into the information system.
An example of this is staff cover packages, often used in secondary schools, which allocate cover for absent staff.
These allow the computer to determine who will do the cover for a particular day.
While depending on assumptions being built in about priorities and free periods they relieve the manager of any responsibilities over the final decision.
It can be seen that, as the point of decision making moves more and more into the information side of the system, the significance of in-built values and assumptions expands considerably and the qualitative nature of those assumptions also changes.
In summary, when considering information and decision-making flows there are two key questions,(i) at which point does the information system stop and the decision making begin, and (ii) what is the nature of the assumptions which are incorporated in the information system?
These are the critical management questions that should be asked at the outset before decisions are taken in schools.
5.
Information and the level of management activity
A theoretical perspective which is of considerable value is put forward by Gorry and Scott Morton (1975), who draw on the work of Anthony (1965) in the area of managerial activity and Simon's (1966) analysis of decisions, to develop a sophisticated framework for management information systems.
Anthony classifies management activities into three categories: strategic planning, management control and operational control, and argues that these activities are sufficiently different to warrant different information systems.
This matching of information to activity requirements is in sharp contrast to the straightforward data-bank approach.
Anthony defines strategic planning as:
the process of deciding on objectives of the organisation, on changes in these objectives, on the resources used to attain these objectives and on the policies that are to govern the acquisition, use and disposition of these resources.
Anthony (1965) p. 24
This function is primarily undertaken in a school (within the parameters laid down by the LEA) by the governors, the headteacher and the deputies.
The second category, that of management control, is seen as:
…the process by which managers assure that resources are obtained and used effectively and efficiently in the accomplishment of the organisation s objectives.
Anthony (1965) p. 24
This relates to the middle-management area of decision and control which would be at the head of department and head of year level in a comprehensive school or the allowance holders in a primary school.
The third category, that of operational control, is ‘the process of assuring that specific tasks are carried out effectively and efficiently’(Anthony 1965 p. 24).
This is a situation which would equate to the teaching process and areas of curricular and programme responsibility.
Davies (1984) translates this into a school setting as shown in the diagram.
Gorry and Scott Morton (1975), despite the problems of unclear boundaries between the three categories, find this a useful approach to the analysis of information requirements for management.
The type of information required at each level can now be assessed.
As strategic planning is concerned with broad policies and goals it has to relate the organisation to its environment and predict the effects of any changes in that environment.
The focus of information gathering will be on aggregated information to ascertain general trends so detailed accuracy will not be as important.
This strategic planning process makes use of external sources for information and the non-routine nature of the process will present an irregular pattern of demand for the information.
It contrasts with the information needs for operational control which are well defined, detailed and accurate.
The information will be largely internally supplied and will have frequent use.
The information needs of management control will be obtained through personal interaction.
This type of analysis can be summarised in Figure 2.3 by Gorry and Scott Morton (1975, p. 20).
The areas discussed in these five sections have provided a framework which helps to understand the basic dimensions of management information.
The authors now propose a checklist against which readers might evaluate the introduction of a management information system in their own institutions.
This may be particularly apposite in the context of the introduction of computerised systems.
6.
Good management practice
1.
Is the introduction (or alteration) of a management information system (MIS) desirable because of changing need or is it being imposed from outside?
2.
Have aims and objectives been identified in the early stages and are these goals related to managerial issues?
3.
Has there been any investigation as to what the potential users want from the system?
4.
Has a cost/benefit analysis, in terms of time as well as financial costs, been undertaken before implementation of the scheme?
5.
Has enough attention been paid to the need for adaptability within the system, especially if it has been initiated/developed outside the institution?
6.
Have staff development issues been addressed:
(a)
have managers been made adequately aware of the potential of the system and given help to use it for strategic and management control decision making?
(b)
have steps been taken to optimise the behavioural response of those affected by the change; for example, the effect of transfer of work and changes in roles between clerical staff and decision-makers?
7.
Is there evidence of the scheme becoming more of a predictive tool and aid to decision making rather than working primarily in an administrative function?
8.
is there a regular review pattern established to reassess the aims and objectives, implementation processes and the changing costs and benefits of the system?
Conclusion
It has been a mistake of many developments in MIS to concentrate on solutions in the form of computer packages such as Schools Information and Management Systems (SIMS) in the school sector or Further Education Management Information System (FEMIS) in the FE sector.
Before proceeding down these lines managers should evaluate not only the technical efficiency of such systems but, more importantly, the underlying management questions outlined in this chapter.
Although these basic management perspectives have been established for over 20 years, modern technology often ignores them.
Planning in education management Linda Ellison and Brent Davis
Introduction
Chapter 1 outlined the changing environment in which schools operate today.
School management will have the key task of planning how the institution is to adapt and change to meet the challenge of providing effective education for pupils and students in the 1990s.
The quality of management planning will, therefore, be one of the critical determinants of a school's success.
After establishing a definition of planning, this chapter will examine the following key aspects:
planning in the cycle of management activity
people in the planning process
planning aims, objectives, activities and evaluation
rational approaches to planning
the problems of rational planning in education
a practical framework for school planning.
The conclusion will draw together the advantages of rational planning and provide a ‘checklist’ for effective planning.
A definition of planning
Planning is the managerial process of deciding in advance what is to be done and how it is to be done.
It can be applied to a range of activities which may vary in cost and scale and necessitate planning over differing time spans.
This chapter defines planning as a broad process which involves the establishment of objectives and the formulation, evaluation and selection of policies, strategies and actions needed to achieve the objectives.
The planning process is, thus, one which gathers (either formally or informally), translates and communicates information so that it can be used to make decisions.
In this way it brings together objectives and resources in order to meet organisational goals.
Many people see planning as one of the hard-nosed rational management tasks in organisations.
However, others feel that, because of the speed of change and because of goal conflict between the professionals involved, educational planning is more difficult and has a political rather than rational dimension.
This rational/political dichotomy is true in all planning activities and is discussed later in this chapter.
Chapter 4 will consider a more detailed analysis of rational and political aspects and approaches in relation to the particular process of budgetary planning.
Planning in the cycle of management activity
Figure 3.1 shows the important position which planning should occupy as a preliminary to decision making and implementation.
It reflects the broad definition of planning adopted initially.
The cycle demonstrates that before specific activities can be planned it is necessary to plan aims and objectives.
Once these have been determined, the means of achieving them, in terms of defined programmes and activities, can be considered.
People in the planning process
The introduction to this chapter made specific reference to the need for school management to plan the school's path through the  changing environment.
This was not to imply that planning is an activity which is only carried out by senior management.
Everyone needs to plan and, indeed, every teacher is a manager.
Even the newly qualified teacher manages time, pupils, resources and the curriculum within the classroom.
Although various models are suggested in other literature, it is probably most valuable to apply the levels which were introduced on p. 27.
The planning activities at the three levels can be referred to as strategic planning, tactical planning (or ‘management control’) and operational planning.
The features of each level are shown in Figure 3.2.
Planning the aims of a school
The members of any organisation should have a clear idea of its general purpose which is expressed in the form of a ‘mission statement’ or ‘corporate objective’, defining the business in which the organisation is involved.
This strategic role at the level of the whole school is a planning task for the governors and head, although they would be expected to consult others.
Planning should begin with an analysis of the present position taking account of both internal and external factors and a forecast of future developments, moving on to the definition of broad aims.
The frequency of this planning activity will be partly determined by the rate of change in the educational environment.
It is generally accepted that aims should be reviewed (even if this does not result in alteration) every four years.
A school must decide how best to review and redefine its aims.
Increasingly, the teaching staff participate fully, but the governors and senior management might consider broadening the process to include non-teaching staff and the parents who, after all, are the clients.
It is only when the present position has been assessed and the future intentions stated that members of the organisation can effectively plan towards the achievement of purposeful goal-directed activity.
Because educational institutions are largely staff ed by professionals, there has, in the past, been a tendency to allow individuals a lot of freedom to use their professional judgement in deciding how best to achieve the aims of the organisation.
Indeed, these aims may not always have been stated clearly.
This has led to a situation in which individuals have either tended to pursue their own goals (deliberately) or have misinterpreted (genuinely) the aims of the school.
The result may have been a conflicting programme for pupils.
In the absence of planning there would be considerable frustration and pupils' activities would lack direction.
If a school is to be effective, the staff should all be working in the same direction, rather than pursuing conflicting goals.
Planning the objectives of an organisation
Once the school aims have been stated in general terms, objectives will be set at middle management level within a school and will relate to the achievement of these aims.
However, at the classroom level there may be specific objectives set for a particular session or activity.
These will be drawn up by the teacher and should relate to those set by middle managers.
Objectives will be redefined more frequently than aims, usually at annual intervals or more regularly, following evaluation of existing activities.
If purposeful, goal-directed activity is to take place, clear objectives need to be set for all the organisation's activities.
If objectives are understood by all staff in a school, they will help to form a framework on which the activities can be based.
When planning objectives there are various management points to bear in mind and these will be outlined in the ensuing paragraphs.
While aims are fairly broad, objectives need to be quite specific.
Each should be a clear, concise statement of what is to be achieved.
They should be written so that everyone is aware of what they are.
They can then be referred to and used as a tool to facilitate such activities as decision making, monitoring and evaluation.
The relevance of the objectives should be checked.
They should be appropriate to the stated aims of the organisation, rather than to an individual or sub-group's desire to maximise their own aims.
In the area of education today, much credence is given to the concept of ownership.
It can be shown that individuals and groups welcome the opportunity to contribute to debate and to participate in policy making.
It follows, therefore, that the formulation of objectives should, wherever possible, involve those concerned, whether they are governors, staff, pupils, parents, or outside agencies.
Agreement with the objectives will help to ensure that they are seen to be important and that activity will be directed towards their achievement.
It is particularly because of their potential when evaluating activities that objectives should be measurable .
If some form of quantitative criteria can be established then the evaluation process can be carried out objectively and efficiently.
This highlights one of the recurring dilemmas in education, that is the difficulty of quantitatively measuring many of the desired outcomes of the education process.
Although qualitative data, which are far more subjective, are usually preferred by teachers, there is still a very strong abhorrence of any attempt at output measurement because it is perceived as inaccurate or misleading.
For example, under the broad aim of fostering a love of reading, an objective might be to encourage greater use of the school library.
The logical quantitative measurement would be the number of books borrowed but this does not determine whether these have been read or enjoyed.
The expression of output  in the form of performance indicators (see chapter 10), which were to have been quantitative wherever possible, has caused considerable problems.
It is generally accepted that people are motivated by success and that it is often easier to work towards realistic short-term targets.
This principle can be applied to the setting of objectives.
All those concerned need to believe that the targets are being set at a level which is achievable .
If not, there will be disenchantment because those who have framed the objectives will be perceived to be ‘out of touch’ with reality in the organisation.
There must be a belief that, through purposeful activity, the objectives can be achieved.
However, objectives should not be set which, at the outset, are demonstrably easy to achieve.
If schools are fully to develop their pupils, then challenging activities need to be provided.
Similarly, challenging objectives should motivate staff and encourage creativity.
The time-scales over which different objectives should be achieved may vary considerably, depending on the level at which they are applied.
Nevertheless, a time by which they must be achieved should be stated.
If not, those involved will be unclear about what is expected and monitoring and control will be ineffective.
To summarise, and to use an acronym which will be familiar to some readers, objectives should be challenging and:
When planning objectives, the chart in Figure 3.3 may provide a useful flowchart and checklist to ensure that they meet the criteria outlined above.
Planning the activities
Some people may consider that only certain major activities require planning, e.g. the curriculum or the future staffing.
However, it is more valuable to think of a global school development plan which    brings together all central and support activities.
The components of this plan are shown in Figure 3.4.
Although there should be separate, more detailed plans for each of these areas, their integration ensures that the separate plans are complementary whereas, in the past, compartmentalised planning led to overlaps and omissions.
The importance of thinking in this way is stressed by the Education Reform Act (1988) as this requires the governors to present a school development plan to the LEA annually.
It is not intended that this plan should be ‘cast in concrete’ but, rather, that it should be flexible so that the school looks ahead but remains responsive to future changes in circumstances.
Planning the evaluation
Because the focus of the planning process is on designing programmes to achieve objectives, it is quite common, at this stage, to neglect the mechanism for evaluation.
An organisation maintains its effectiveness by evaluating the extent to which the objectives are realised through the activities.
It is important to plan the evaluation process at the outset so that it relates to the stated objectives.
If the evaluation is ‘bolted on’ at a later date it may not be measuring the success of the original, documented plans.
It is also unfair on the staff if the evaluation process  is not clear in advance; it may appear that micropolitical factors are at work in order to achieve the right ‘result.
Rational approaches to planning
Rational models of planning can be seen to fall into two distinct categories.
(a) Planning with ‘precise’ goals can be likened to the Tour de France in which the participants aim for A, move on to B and so on until the end is reached.
This approach may be possible if educational objectives have a very short time-scale but it does not allow for the change of direction which is often necessary in schools.
(b) The proactive, directional planning approach is usually more appropriate to the dynamic environment in which schools find themselves and to their need to react to pupils and circumstances.
Goals are still identified but they are less well defined.
Directional planning involves identifying barriers and potentials and choosing a course in order to overcome the former and make best use of the latter.
As the dynamic environment unfolds and the planning process responds to change, it may be that the original goals are fundamentally altered.
(See Figure 3.5).
As all readers will appreciate, this change of course occurs quite frequently and sometimes has to be decided upon very quickly.
The ability to respond in crisis is one of the skills which all teachers must possess.
It is easier to do this if one can switch course, yet still be working within the framework of broad objectives.
 Preactive management can be seen as a positive response to changed circumstances with plans and objectives in mind, that is it is facilitated by the directional planning approach.
This structured response is preferable to reactive or crisis management which is found where objectives are unclear, plans haphazard and where the organisation lives from one day to the next.
The problems of rational planning in education
Set against the neat rationality of these advantages must be the particular difficulties of planning in education.
There are, within the teaching profession, as well as in the community at large, diverse views about aims and goals.
There is considerable debate about the value of education for its own sake, rather than as a means to an end.
Even when common goals have been established, conflict may be generated during the planning process because of disagreement about the way in which these goals should be achieved.
Because the business of education is largely concerned with human issues, there will be situations arising which do not fit within the rational planning model.
Because of rapidly changing circumstances, for example in policies or staff availability, there is a need for considerable flexibility in educational planning.
For this reason, some people may even feel that there is little point in planning ahead.
It is possible however to structure plans so that they are responsive to change, particularly when they are formed and later adjusted with the help of a suitable management information system.
The validity of some of these arguments is expressed by Hopson and Scally (1984 p. 125) as shown in Figure 3.6.
This emphasises two of the dimensions, people and time, which impinge upon the planning process.
It is relatively easy to plan the immediate future for oneself but, the further away one goes from oneself and the present, the more difficult planning becomes.
Many teachers have felt considerable frustration when uncertainty, for example at national level, has been used by heads as an excuse to avoid school planning beyond the immediate future.
This problem has been reduced now that schools are required to make some attempt at formulating longer-term school development plans, although it is accepted that they will act as flexible guidelines.
A practical framework for school planning
The nature of the planning process at the various levels needs to be different.
Strategic planning tasks such as the setting of aims may be seen as essentially a people/politics-rich area where sophisticated techniques are not appropriate.
At the tactical level there are planning techniques and technologies which may prove valuable, for example the use of clash tables and computerised timetable systems.
It is uncommon for schools to use processes such as critical path analysis because they can be very time consuming unless used by experts, although simpler versions may be worth considering for example stocks and flows models.
These techniques can be found in a variety of texts, for example Dobson et al .
(1985).
At the operational level planning tasks will be simpler and there is less need to look for complex procedures as it would be like using a sledgehammer to crack a nut.
It is important that the planning process should define how a project is to move from the current position to the desired future position, i.e. the action needed to achieve objectives.
The information could be assembled as in Blocks A, B and C.  
Conclusion
The advantages of a rational approach to planning are given here and the breadth of these should alert the reader to the importance of the planning process in providing guidelines to secure organisational effectiveness.
1.
it involves a review of activities and provides an opportunity for thorough examination of all aspects of the work of the school by those involved.
2.
It minimises uncertainty and helps to anticipate changes for example in demography, social factors, values and employment levels.
3.
By providing clear goals and objectives, it minimises frustration and wasted effort.
4.
It provides a basis for action which includes setting targets and then monitoring outcomes and it motivates those involved.
5.
It helps the organisation to anticipate and minimise difficulties, especially in potentially complex situations, by ensuring that careful consideration has been given to alternative courses of action.
6.
it facilitates the articulation of ends and means.
7.
It helps to co-ordinate resources (especially people) and processes, facilitating the optimum use of resources and time.
This leads to more efficient, effective working and more enthusiastic participation so that tasks are completed and objectives are reached.
8.
It gives an advantage over competitors because it provides a flexible, forward-looking framework on which to base activities.
9.
It provides for greater control as it gives a framework for monitoring and evaluating.
Even the apparently rational model of planning on page 42 is, nevertheless, subject to political pressures.
At the outset of the planning process, the forecasts which are taken into account may have been subjected to bias.
By choosing the ‘right’ data source, individuals or groups may influence the outcome of the planning process.
Further political pressure occurs when generating alternatives and when evaluation criteria are formulated.
It can be possible to preselect the final choice by ‘fiddling’ the criteria.
The political model accepts that micropolitical activity can dominate the organisation so that genuine organisational objectives cannot be operationalised.
When attempting a rational approach to planning it is important to be aware of these political factors.
The reader may like to reflect on his/her own planning approach and assess its validity by comparing it with the following checklist of factors which facilitate effective planning.
1.
The necessary information (external and internal) is available.
2.
The staff at all levels are committed to the project and its goals.
3.
There are clear, precise channels of communication in all directions.
4.
The level of the planning activity is clear to those who organise meetings.
It is ineffective to mix strategic issues with tactical or operational ones on an agenda because it is difficult to change focus.
5.
The various sections of the school function as effective teams and the objectives are clear so that they know what is required of them.
6.
The evaluation process is built in during the planning stage, rather than‘bolted on’ afterwards.
Although this chapter is an entity in itself, it is also a facilitating one in that the concepts and principles outlined here provide a framework to understanding the planning dimensions of the areas of management in the succeeding chapters.
Resource management in schools Brent Davis
The purpose of this chapter is to outline the elements involved in resource management in schools and to apply them to current practice.
Initially, the changing context and framework of resource management in the 1990s will be considered.
Following this a theoretical review will examine the central feature of resource management, the budgetary process, and then move on to consider two main approaches to budgeting.
This will then provide an analytical background against which to review a school-focused case study.
Resource management in the 1990s
The growth in the number of delegated schemes for school finance during the 1980s, culminating in the introduction of local management of schools (LMS) in the 1988 Education Reform Act, is leading to a revolution in resource management practice in schools.
The 1990s is an era in which schools operate with considerable financial autonomy.
The polarisation of power to the centre (government) and periphery (schools) at the expense of the local education authority (LEA) will mean that schools have to adopt sophisticated resource management skills and approaches.
LMS delegates to schools control over the major part of their budgets.
An analogy that is worth considering is that of a landlord and tenant relationship.
The LEA acts as the landlord responsible for capital expenditure, as represented by the school building and major structural work, while the school is responsible as the tenant for everything that goes on inside.
The school, therefore, has in its budget funds for teachers' salaries and other staffing costs, equipment and books, heating and lighting, rates, examination fees and all internal maintenance associated with normal ‘wear and tear’.
Unlike the previous financing system the school does not receive an allocation for each of these items but is allocated a lump sum and has the choice of how much to spend on each category.
The  amount which the schools are allocated is determined by a formula in which at least 75 per cent is based on pupil numbers ‘weighted’ by the age of those pupils.
The key areas of LMS as they effect resource management planning can be summarised as:
1.
Financial delegation
2.
Formula funding
3.
Open enrolments
4.
Staffing delegation
5.
Performance indicators
The dynamic effect of these five factors is considerable.
If parents perceive that the quality of education offered by a school is inadequate, they will move their children to another school by exercising choice through the mechanism of open enrolments .
As pupils move around the system the funding moves with them.
Thus, schools not only have to deal with financial delegation but they have to be very aware of market forces.
The way in which the school is perceived by the local community may depend not only on overt performance indicators such as language and numeracy skills but also on covert performance indicators such as how the pupils behave on the bus going home or smoking outside the school premises.
The amount of money received under formula funding will vary according to the number of pupils coming to the school.
As the school has staffing delegation it will adjust the number of staff by hiring or firing according to this movement of pupils and funding.
The impact of this can be assessed by the diagram in Figure 4.1 (which assumes 100 per cent funding from pupil numbers).
In the diagram ‘fixed costs’ include maintenance, head teacher's salary etc, while a large proportion of the variable costs will be represented by teachers and their salaries.
If extra pupils come to the school the money can be spent on the variable costs, increasing teaching numbers and providing more books and equipment.
This would be represented in the diagram by moving from point A to point C. The converse is true because if a school loses pupils (represented by moving from point A to point B) it is not that the school spends any more on fixed costs but because of the reduction in pupils and hence funding, fixed costs take a larger proportion of the available budget.
The amount remaining for teachers, books and equipment is reduced, making the school less attractive to parents.
Thus, pupils moving around the system can enhance a school's provision if it is a net gainer but cause severe problems very quickly if it is a net loser.
As a result LMS rewards expanding schools and penalises contracting ones.
Financial delegation in the 1990s therefore does not only involve the school having control of its budget.
It means that it has control   in the context of a market-oriented environment which has a dynamic and fundamental effect on the nature of the budgetary process.
Traditional methods of school finance have resulted in the LEA having the critical management responses for resource decisions.
A school has had a restricted spending function when it came to utilising the limited amount of money available to buy books and equipment under its capitation allowance.
The era of local management of schools means that the traditional spending function associated with capitation has to be replaced with a whole school budgetary process and plan.
The next section of this chapter looks at the theoretical aspects which underpin this budgetary process and plan.
Elements and dimensions of the budgetary process
What is a budget and what is the budgetary process?
Schick (1972 p. 16) states that ‘budgeting always has been conceived as a  process for systematically relating expenditure of funds to the accomplishment of planned objectives’.
Irvine (1975) sees a budget system as enabling management more effectively to plan, coordinate, control and evaluate the activities of an organisation.
Hofstede (1968) sees the four basic functions of budgets as authorising, forecasting, planning and measuring.
As can be seen, budgeting is not just a mechanical or technical exercise, a point developed by Irvine (1975 p. 74):
A budget, as a formal set of figures written on a piece of paper, is in itself merely a quantified plan for future activities.
However, when budgets are used for control, planning and motivation, they become instruments which cause functional and dysfunctional consequences both manifest and latent which determine how successful the tool will be.
Simkins and Lancaster (1987, p. 10) summarise the functions of budgets in Figure 4.2.
A useful broad classification is provided by Schick (1972 p. 17) who builds on Anthony's (1965) three-fold classification of management processes:(a) strategic planning;(b) management control; and (c) operational control; and states that ‘every budget system, even rudimentary ones, comprises planning, management and control processes’.
A useful analysis of the way in which different levels of management may be involved in the functions of budgeting is provided by Davies (1984) who uses Anthony's three levels of management and relates them to people in Figure 4.3.
Davis further suggests that these different levels of management may concentrate on different budgetary functions as represented in the matrix in figure 4.4.
An alternative grouping of the functions of budgets is provided by Simkins and Lancaster (1983).
They divide these functions between operational and strategic activities, although a better categorisation could be functional and managerial activities.
The essential functional activities would be firstly, the acquisition of resources which involves the identification and securing of resources and then, secondly, the allocation of resources.
This involves determination of the appropriate amount of resources to be distributed to different parts of the organisation.
The third functional activity is that of spending when decisions are translated into action where, for example, goods are actually purchased.
The fourth functional activity is that of control which monitors and assesses whether resources and activities are allocated as originally planned and authorised.
While these activities are fundamental to ensure that the mechanics of the budgetary process work, it is also necessary to consider the management activities which should take place.
Firstly, a budget should be a planning document in that an organisation should clarify its goals and priorities in a forward looking way and relate them to available resources.
Secondly, the budget is an important part of the choice process.
It should provide the basis for costing alternative courses of action so that the resource implications of decisions can be assessed.
In the final management function of a budget, that of evaluation , the analysis moves to assessing whether that type of expenditure was the best way of meeting organisational objectives.
In summary, it can be seen that there are a number of functional processes which are concerned with obtaining and distributing resources efficiently.
However, reflecting back on Hofstede's definition of a budget system as enabling management more effectively to plan, co-ordinate, control and evaluate the activities of an organisation, it can be seen that there are a number of significant management elements in the budgetary process as well.
The nature of delegated financial control is that decision making in these areas is moved from the LEA to the school level.
Approaches to budgeting
Having assessed the central elements in a budgetary process, consideration will now be given to two broad frameworks into which differing budgetary processes can be categorised.
The two broad categories could be considered as rational approaches, often called rational/economic approaches, and political approaches.
Rational/economic approaches
Rational approaches are based on the assumption that organisations have clear objectives and resource allocation is organised in a systematic way to facilitate the achievement of those objectives.
In essence, after assessing the alternative expenditure options, spending patterns should reflect rational choices in order to maximise the achievement of the organisation's objectives.
In evaluating this approach, it is possible to isolate key elements which underpin a rational budgetary approach.
The first of these elements is that budgets should be objective in that they relate directly to fulfilling the objectives of the organisation.
Expenditure patterns should relate to outputs rather than being characterised by a list of resource inputs.
The latter would be called a subjective budget and would list items in headings such as buildings, staff, rent, rates, capitation, in terms of the total spent in each category, rather than show how part of each category related to a  particular programme.
Hence, objective budgets are often called output or programme budgets.
By using this approach it is claimed that important management processes are facilitated.
These are firstly, the formulation of clear objectives and, secondly, planning, as resources must be clearly related in advance to objectives.
Thirdly, the approach requires that choices are made, as assessing and opting between alternatives is necessary.
Finally, evaluation takes place as criteria in the form of objectives provide a ‘bench mark’ against which to assess performance.
The second key element in a rational approach to budgeting is the base on which the range of choices is to be set.
The traditional incremental approach is one in which last year's expenditure provides a base from which to make minor adjustments (disjointed incrementalism).
This approach is criticised by Wildavsky (1978 p. 501 — 9):
…traditional budgeting also has the defects of its virtues…comparing this year with last year may not mean much if the past was a mistake and the future is likely to be a bigger one.
Quick calculation may be worse than none if it is grossly in error.
There is an incremental road to disaster as well as faster roads to perdition; simplicity may become simple-mindedness.
The alternative to incrementalism provided by the rational perspective is zero-based review.
With this approach there is a need to justify all expenditure and not just that expenditure at the margin or additional expenditure.
As Wildavsky (1978 p. 501 — 9) states:
…the past, as reflected in the budgetary base…is explicitly rejected.
There is no yesterday.
Nothing is taken for granted, everything at every period is subjected to searching scrutiny.
As a facilitator of management activities this imposes an opportunity — cost framework in that it encourages the reappraising of how differing expenditure patterns can best make a contribution to achieving organisational objectives.
It also encourages evaluation because if choice is to be made between alternatives then evaluation of past and future spending in the alternative areas has to be assessed.
The third and final key element in a rational approach concerns the time-scale of the budget.
Traditional budgets have been on an annual time-scale .
The weakness of this is that it fails to view the implications of the spending when it makes its impact but only when the spending actually takes place.
If the planning and choice possibilities are to be fully utilised then a time-scale that allows them to be fully understood has to be in operation.
Therefore a multi-year time horizon budget needs to be implemented.
The rational approach has led to the development of PPBS (planning-programming-budgeting systems) and ZBB (zero-based  budgeting) systems.
However, despite early adoption there have been considerable doubts as to the effectiveness of such rational approaches.
These doubts centre on three points.
First is the difficulty in agreeing on objectives for education and translating them into programme goals.
Second, the information requirements are considerable and the time taken assembling data may work against the efficiency that the organisation is trying to achieve.
Finally, constant review and justification of budgets may deny managers a stable and predictable environment in which to operate effectively.
Brackett, Chambers and Parrish (1983 p. 37) state:
Another lesson implied in the budget reform literature is the importance of simplicity and comprehensibility of the innovation.
Aaron Wildavsky argued that while PPBS had many shortcomings, the fundamental reason for its demise was that no-one knew how to do programme budgeting.
While the same accusation was not explicitly levelled against ZBB, the complexity of the procedures, the esoteric nature of the terminology, the potential for overwhelming paperwork and the inapplicable nature of several of the key concepts oppose acceptability.
Political approaches
Because of the criticisms of rational approaches discussed above, political budgetary approaches show a remarkable capacity to persist.
Wildavsky (1974 p. 13) makes the point that ‘the largest determining factor of the size and content of this year's budget is last year's budget’.
Why should this be so and the rational processes just described not take prominence?
There are three key factors that influence the persistence of traditional budgeting processes.
These can be seen as the process of incrementalism, the influence of micro-political forces and the tendency of organisations to  satisfice rather than optimise goals.
The major factor in the incremental process is that the previous year's budget and level of expenditure is not challenged — there is general acceptance that it is valid.
Attention is given to minor adjustments in the spending pattern or the justification of additional spending.
There is no significant attempt to assess the validity of existing spending patterns.
This approach provides a predictable and stable organisational climate.
It also necessitates very little in terms of information and time requirements compared with zero-based approaches.
The micro-political dimension of budgeting is based on the view that budgetary decisions are not necessarily made on rational — economic grounds but that the deciding factors may be other influences such as the power base of individuals or groups and their  value systems.
Two useful statements which illustrate this are provided firstly by Pettigrew (1973 p. 17):
Political behaviour is defined as behaviour by individuals, or, in collective terms, by sub-units, within an organisation that makes a claim against the resource sharing system of an organisation.
and secondly, by Wildavsky (1968 p. 193):
If politics is regarded as conflict over whose preferences are to prevail in the determination of policy, then the budget records the outcomes of this struggle.
Therefore, gaining resources may not depend on the logic of the case but on a number of other factors.
Greenwood et al .
(1980 p. 29) express this as:
A department's share of scarce resources depends upon the skill of its advocates in the use of essentially political tactics such as knowing how much to bid for, how far to pad estimates, how far to over/underspend, how to ‘read’ the political climate, how to generate and utilise public support.
The way in which the budgetary process is managed by the people involved may be as important as what is being managed as far as outcomes are concerned.
Therefore, asking questions about objectives, planning, choice and evaluation may not be as important as asking questions about political forces at work if resource patterns are to be understood.
Simkins and Lancaster (1983 p. 30), for example, list seven questions for consideration:
1.
Which are the key groups that compete for resources in the budgetary process?
2.
What differences in values and interests exist among them and how are these expressed in budgetary terms?
3.
What sources of power can groups and key individuals bring to bear on the budgetary process?
4.
Who controls the budgetary process itself and what means do they use to do so?
5.
What political strategies and tactics are used to influence budget allocations?
6.
What kind of coalitions are formed and bargains struck?
7.
Who gains and who loses from the budgetary process?
These dimensions should be considered when assessing resource patterns from a political perspective.
A third concept used in understanding political approaches is the organisational process approach.
In a commercial or industrial setting it is often assumed that organisations try to maximise profits as their main goal.
However, the risks involved in profit maximisation may be unacceptable to managers who may prefer to safeguard their position by reducing competition through takeovers instead of maximising profits by competition.
They may also aim to produce satisfactory levels of profit to keep shareholders happy and grant over-generous wage rises to avoid labour conflicts.
The aim is to provide a series of acceptable solutions which meet the needs of the various constituencies that make up the organisation.
Thus, the concept of an acceptable solution which satisfies the different goals and objectives in an organisation may be preferred to the most efficient one on rational grounds.
In a school setting this would mean that differing objectives may be met and individual teachers supported, which would lead to overall harmony but not necessarily maximise purely educational outcomes.
This  satisficing element together with political and incremental forces form the key elements in political approaches to budgeting.
The way in which these concepts relate to the rational perspective in resource management in practice will be analysed in the next section.
A framework for analysing budgetary practice
It is proposed to take the seven functions of budgets on pages 49/50 as the first dimension of a matrix structure to which either the rational economic or a political model can be applied in order to form the second dimension.
Earlier in this chapter the three key elements of rational approaches were identified as: relating expenditure of funds to fulfilling organisational objectives, a zero-based approach to choice and decision making and a multi-year time horizon for budgetary decision making.
Putting these central concepts together with the process indicators outlined by Bush (1986), it is proposed to use the following factors as an indicator of the existence of a rational economic decision-making process:
1.
A clear perception of the choice opportunity.
2.
Analysis of the choice opportunity to include data collection and evaluation of alternatives.
3.
A zero-based approach to assessing alternatives.
4.
Choice of expenditure alternatives to meet organisational objectives.
5 Budgetary time scale to encourage planning over a multi-year time horizon.
6.
Monitoring and evaluation of the efficiency and effectiveness of differing strategies.
If these then represent key factors of the rational approach, the political approach can also draw on the perception of Bush (1986) for indicators of the political model.
The key elements of the political approach identified earlier in the chapter, those of incremental budgetary approaches, micropolitical factors and satisficing behaviour of groups, can be set in  the following framework to provide factors that can be used as indicators of the existence of political decision-making processes:
1.
Group activity and interest groups are the focus rather than the institution as an entity.
2.
There is an incremental approach to the budgetary process.
3.
Goals are seen as unstable, ambiguous and contested.
4.
Decisions emerge after a complex process of bargaining and negotiation.
5.
Decision making is likely to be determined, ultimately, according to the relative power of the participant individual and groups and may involve conflict between the various parties.
6.
There is evidence of satisficing behaviour.
Looking at the elements in the rational and political models of resource decision making, a list of six key factors of indications of behaviour emerges for both approaches.
These key factors combine with the seven functions of budgets to produce the framework shown in Figure 4.5.
In each of the seven categories the rational and political model indicators provide a framework for analysing the budgetary approach that is being used in a particular school.
This analytical framework is used to assess practice in the following case study of a secondary school where the distribution of capitation allowances is a microcosm of resource behaviour.
Case study: school capitation and its distribution
This case study by Davies and Ellison (1987) is based on a survey of all the secondary schools in Cheshire to elicit comments on their practice of capitation distribution.
The aim of the survey was not to produce a set of quantified results from a pre-set questionnaire but, rather, to isolate key management issues which would prove  instructive for schools establishing a formula-based scheme or modifying one and in particular in establishing a formula-based system at Alsager Comprehensive School (the case study school).
The senior management in all the survey schools were concerned with the central problem described by one school as ‘any distribution of monies to departments is fraught with difficulties — each department is aware of its own pressing needs and yet the overall sum available is insufficient to meet the needs of all’.
This problem is best approached by a distribution of money to departments which reflects their needs within the framework of meeting the overall school aims.
Obviously, equity in the distribution of money cannot mean equal shares for all.
Some subjects, for a variety of reasons, are more expensive than others.
How to allow adequately for this difference presents a complicated problem.
Traditionally, an approach has been used where adjustments in previous allocations have been made after qualitative assessments of changed circumstances by the senior management of the school.
There are a number of weaknesses in this approach:
1.
The original base figure which is adjusted annually may bear no relation to the true needs of the department.
Some departments may ‘cope’ and be seriously underfunded!
At the same time others may, through overfunding, be absorbing an unfair amount of scarce resources.
2.
A situation develops in which department heads gain extra resources or prevent cuts in their allocation because of their micro-political skills, rather than because of their departmental needs.
3.
Schools which operate option choices in years four and five and the sixth form may experience a considerable fluctuation in demand between courses which may not be reflected in pre-set department allocations.
4.
it overlooks the need to assess and reassess the needs and changing demands made on department funds.
5.
It may have a dysfunctional effect on staff motivation if figures for capitation ‘appear from on high’ rather than from a more open assessment of needs and available resources.
The experience of some Cheshire schools
The survey schools which have, for a variety of reasons, decided to operate a formula-based approach all took a number of points into consideration when devising their own particular scheme.
While it is recognised that each school may put a differing stress on the varying components in a formula system to match the school's own needs and educational philosophy, the following points seem central to developing a successful formula distribution scheme:
1.
A basic acceptance that there are certain expenses common to all subjects dependent on (a) the number of pupils taught and (b) the number of periods taught.
2.
A method of recognising that some age groups are more expensive to teach, for example, those at examination level which require specific books and materials.
3.
A means of measuring the differing costs inherent in different subjects, such as classroom-based and workshop-based subjects.
4.
Recognition that there are areas to be catered for which lie outside the subject departments and need to be kept outside the distribution mechanism, for example, administration, library, orchestra etc.
5.
Provision must be made for emergencies and a degree of flexibility maintained to allow for changing circumstances, such as the introduction of a new subject or course.
6.
Full and open discussion by all the participants in the scheme.
7.
A review process so that‘weightings’ developed for differing subjects do not become ‘binding precedents’but can be changed and adjusted as experience or circumstances dictate.
The way in which these points are developed into a practical scheme can be seen by the case study school, Alsager Comprehensive School.
This is how one school has used a formula-based system as a management response to a resource distribution problem.
THE INTEREST IN CAPITATlON ALLOWANCES AT ALSAGER COMPREHENSIVE SCHOOL
Alsager Comprehensive is an 11–18 school of 1,400 pupils.
It is organised in year groups and faculties and has been part of the Cheshire ‘Cost Centre’ scheme since 1976.
Previously funds were distributed by the head after he had asked faculty heads to submit their ‘bids’ on behalf of the departments in their faculty and these bids had been discussed at faculty heads' meetings.
While some staff felt that this system was successful, others believed it to be unfair, especially in times of contracting resources.
Criticisms o& the system could be summarised as:
(i)
the lack of knowledge and understanding about the basis for allocation;
(ii)
the perceived lack of rationality when making cuts;
(ii)
the lack of a relationship between funding and pupil numbers in a subject;
(iv)
the fact that an allocation could be related to the influence of individual faculty heads.
The deputy head (curriculum) proposed that a formula approach be considered by faculty heads and most were in favour of developing such a system.
It was quite easy to decide on age weighting and a factor to take account of pupil numbers.
During several formal and informal meetings much of the discussion centred on the following:
(a)
The percentage allocated to a discretionary fund (for curriculum development, library, careers, etc.).
Several people felt that this  figure could determine their acceptance or rejection of the whole scheme.
If the figure was too high, many future decisions could still be influenced by powerful personalities.
On the other hand, faculty heads were worried that a low curriculum development fund would make it difficult to cope with future changes, especially GCSE.
(b)
Subject weighting — it was agreed that Mathematics should form a base of one and figures were suggested for other subjects in order to start the discussion.
Several of the proposals were accepted but, in other cases, subject staff put forward arguments for a higher weighting This discussion gave faculty heads a chance to learn about the requirements of their colleagues and to justify their own weightings.
It was agreed to incorporate most of the alterations, except that a compromise was reached on the Craft subjects.
The Mathematics department felt that their allocation was being eroded as other weightings increased, so they were finally given a weighting of 1.2.
The system which was adopted is based on the chart shown in Figure 4.6.
The senior management of the school had made two broad policy decisions regarding the distribution of resources.
Firstly, based on past experience, they split the cost centre monies 56 per cent to capitation and 44 per cent to other expenditure headings which operate under the Cheshire ‘Cost Centre’ scheme.
Secondly, they retained 25 per cent of capitation monies outside the formula system for discretionary allocations.
As such it can be seen that this is not a zero-based allocation system or a total formula-based system.
The school is operating a formula-based system within fairly rigid parameters.
Age and subjects weightings
The age and subject weightings agreed at Alsager were:
The calculations are made using a spreadsheet so that alterations in data can be quickly incorporated.
This is a very significant advantage as discussions about different weightings are not held up while new calculations are made.
Several different scenarios can be calculated and printed out very rapidly.
Figure 4.7 shows how the formula-based money was distributed in the first year of the scheme.
Most staff at Alsager feel that the new approach is a considerable improvement on the old system for several reasons:
(1)
It is more open — staff can understand the basis on which allocations are made.
(ii)
It has been developed to meet the particular needs of the school.
(ii)
It is more rational, relating to departmental needs by taking account of demographic factors and expense.
(iv)
It can be adapted as circumstances change.
This case study suggests that by moving to a more open formula system rather than the previous ‘bidding’ system, the school is   adopting a more rational approach.
Certainly the opening up of knowledge about finance does enable all heads of faculty to have an organisation-wide view rather than bidding behind closed doors.
However, the weightings adopted may reflect individual bargaining power as well as the more rational assessment of need.
Theory and practice combined
The case study demonstrates that resource management is a complex managerial activity.
It should not consist merely of spending money, in terms of the framework established earlier.
It should be seen as seven functional stages of the budgetary process which take place in a political or rational context.
In the case study, the movement to a formula-based capitation system has had a profound managerial effect.
It is not only concerned with a different method of allocation.
Planning and choosing between alternative systems and evaluating them takes place thus encouraging a more open approach.
This, in itself, can develop a framework of trust within the school.
However, it is difficult to say that it is a rational approach.
The formula framework promises a rational approach but, in fact, the contrary may be the case.
The initial distribution between capitation and other expenditure followed an incremental approach as it was based on previous patterns of expenditure.
There is no evidence of examining outputs and relating expenditure to them.
Instead it is merely an input distribution system.
The weightings are based on agreement between the faculty heads and this may be a function of their power and past spending allocations rather than an objective assessment of need.
The system does not take a zero-based view of needs but has an incremental approach as the formula is replicated from year to year.
Therefore, it can be seen that the application of the rational and political framework is a valuable way of identifying the underlying approach to budgeting in a school.
The way that schools handle this relatively small amount of the total budget can be an indicator of their management approach in the larger framework of LMS.
Schools have always been involved in issues of resource management such as the allocation of capitation allowances.
They have also allocated staffing once the level had been determined by the local education authority.
What LMS does is radically expand the area of school responsibility.
Do schools take their small-scale budgetary approaches, built up over the years by dealing with capitation, or do they reappraise their resource management approach?
The challenge is to reassess the role of resource management on two fronts.
Firstly, it is important to look at the stages of budgeting and move from the functional processes of acquisition, allocation, spending and control to the more strategic resource activities of planning, choice and evaluation.
Secondly, the opportunity exists  to reassess the rational or political approaches to resource management practice.
By not addressing these issues school management would be failing to seize the opportunity of LMS and would merely be extending the previous resource practice into the new era.
It is hoped that the reader will use these perspectives to reassess practice in his/her school to meet the challenge of the 1990s.
Human resource management in schools John West-Burnham
There is a need to consider the range of possible models of human resource management (HRM) drawn from outside education.
The models are used here to develop principles which inform staff management in schools.
These principles are identified as leadership, team management, performance management and organisational design.
The potential of each perspective is considered and the chapter concludes with a summary of the factors needed for the successful implementation of human resource management in schools.
The principles, processes and skills of HRM are among the most neglected and misunderstood aspects of education management.
The effective management of teaching staff has either been nonexistent, regarded as a low priority or actively denied.
There has been little understanding or recognition of the rights of teachers as employees let alone as adults with needs, expectations and aspirations.
In essence the principles of pastoral care for children have not been extended to adults.
This raises two issues.
Firstly, who cares for the carers?
The demands upon teachers, reflected in concerns about stress, morale and motivation, are indicative of the lack of a supportive infrastructure and appropriate management processes and skills.
Secondly, the integrity of pastoral systems and management processes is contingent upon their being reflected in all aspects of school management.
This situation is explained by a variety of factors:
1.
‘No time for management’
Schools have ‘no time for management’(Handy 1984 p. 18).
The technical and professional activities of teaching staff are perceived to be so important that the task predominates to the subordination or exclusion of the process.
This is reinforced by Handy's view that  schools have a multiplicity of purposes and these are not discriminated between or prioritised, nor do they include any reference to the management of adults.
2.
Professional status
The aspiration to professional status is a major constraint upon effective management.
The historical and social claim to professional autonomy is counterproductive in an environment where pedagogic autonomy is increasingly inhibited, entry to teaching is controlled by DES policy and not by a professional body, conditions of employment are nationally prescribed and major management initiatives, such as staff development, appraisal, recruitment and promotion, are increasingly subject to DES guidelines.
3.
Diffuse structures
The management structures of schools generally bear little relationship to the principles o& effective staff management.
Structures have been used to implement pay scales rather than principles of organisational design.
This is reflected in the artificially tall pyramids found in management structures in secondary schools and the often ambiguous rues of deputy heads in primary schools.
Similarly, the pastoral-academic split in secondary schools reinforces the notion that, in education, form does not follow function.
4.
Organisational schizophrenia
Handy's (1984) phrase encapsulates a major problem in the management of teaching staff.
The evolution of the role of teachers and the view of the social purpose of schools have led to a multiplicity of demands on teachers which are not necessarily compatible and may be contradictory, if not actually mutually exclusive.
This is best exemplified in the ambiguous, or sometimes non-existent, aims and objectives of schools.
There are three issues associated with institutional aims and objectives:(i) the extent to which they are aims and objectives rather than social platitudes and/or moral aspirations;(ii) the extent to which objectives are differentiated from aims and are capable of implementation; and (iii) the extent to which they refer to teaching and non-teaching staff as well as children.
Limited management perspective
Personnel management in general has been a ‘poor relation’ in all organisations but particularly in education.
The increasing recognition of the importance of human resource management in the industrial and commercial sectors is only now being reflected in schools.
This is indicated, for example, in the absence of management training in initial teacher training, problems in responding to the demands made by Circular 6/86 and the uncertainty surrounding the introduction of teacher appraisal.
The problem is further  exemplified in the limited reference to staff management issues in the preparation of teachers for middle and senior management roles.
6.
Political control
Effective staff management in education is highly problematic because of the fragmented and diversified centres of control.
Few organisations have to cope with the range of different inputs at national, LEA and institutional level.
Nationally imposed conditions of employment and salary scales have to be managed at LEA level and then implemented at school level.
Policy at national and LEA level is politically motivated and does not always reflect principles of effective management.
7.
Children
There is an implicit expectation by teachers that the needs and rights of children are paramount — if necessary to the exclusion of their own.
This is reflected in high levels of commitment and professionalism which may result in stress and burn-out.
The practical outcomes of these factors are illustrated in the research of Torrington and Weightman (1989).
They characterise the management of secondary schools as having a number of features — many of which may be attributed to the absence of effective staff management policies.
Teaching and non-teaching staff in schools are a seriously under-utilised resource.
This is particularly true of women teachers and non-teaching staff.
Senior and middle managers in schools often lack an explicit management role.
This is due to a lack of clarity in role definition, lack of training and inappropriate deployment of non-teaching staff.
Schools are often task-centred to the detriment of effective personal relationships, inevitably compromising decision-making procedures and perceptions of individual credibility.
The picture that emerges from this research is one of schools working very hard to stand still.
Individuals often deploy enormous amounts of energy to relatively little effect because they are carrying out functions for which they have not been trained or which are inappropriate to their status.
In essence, schools are often reactive and the individuals within them victims because of a lack of management skills, procedures and perspectives.
The changing context of educational management requires schools to adopt proactive staff management strategies in order to come to terms with a range of complex issues:
1.
The introduction of performance management through appraisal-linked staff development.
2.
The need to have staffing strategies appropriate to LMS and increased institutional autonomy.
3.
The need to develop equal opportunities policies.
4.
The recognition that institutional improvement and quality management have to be reflected in staffing policies and processes.
5.
The recognition of an ageing cohort of teachers and the need to manage morale and motivation.
6.
The recognition of good staff interpersonal relationships as fundamental to all management processes and important as a model for pupils
7.
The need to incorporate non-teaching staff into all aspects of effective institutional management.
8.
The need to develop systematic succession planning linked to individual career development.
9.
The need to develop management procedures which are understandable and credible to the institution's environment.
10.
The need to recognise and treat adults as adults.
a model for HRM in education
The term ‘Personnel Management’ has been widely used for 50 to 60 years to describe a range of activities, a body o& knowledge and a set of skills associated with the recruitment, administration and development of staff.
The culture of personnel management was essentially subordinate to the technical activities of the organisation (witness the relative status of personnel and training departments in many industrial and commercial organisations).
This led to a view of people as a cost, to be controlled and administered.
Equally, the growth of the personnel function tended to minimise the responsibility of all managers for the effectiveness of staff management, either denying the significance of skills for managing people or delegating personnel issues.
Human resource management emerged in the 1980s to compensate for these shortcomings.
HRM does not invalidate the procedures and skills of personnel management but, rather, places them in a different conceptual framework.
Staff become an asset in which to invest, to be developed so as to help the organisation achieve its aims and objectives.
The cultural shift is, therefore, from control to enabling; to providing people with the resources, targets and opportunities to contribute to the growth of the organisation whilst enhancing themselves.
The danger in the education system is that there will be an emphasis on procedures and practices at the expense of personal growth and relationships.
In Torrington and Weightman's (1989) terms the work of managers may be defined as ‘agendas, lists of things to be done’ which are achieved through networks —‘cooperative relationships with people who can help to get things done’(p. 112).
Effective management simplifies agendas, enhances and enables networks.
Effective staff management is, therefore, as much concerned with ‘why’ and ‘how’as ‘what and ‘when; In other words, organisational processes are as significant as organisational tasks and the one should inform the other.
Handy's (1984) analysis of the education system identifies a tripartite culture: in primary schools children are ‘workers’, in secondary schools they are ‘products’ and in post-compulsory institutions ‘clients’.
Although dominant task orientation has particularly explicit manifestations in the management of secondary schools, it is equally significant in the relationships between adults in other sectors.
Parallel with the shift in emphasis epitomised by the concept of human resource management is the growing emphasis on ‘excellence’ and ‘quality’as the criteria for effective management.
The movement for excellence is most widely known through the work of Peters and Waterman (1982).
They identified a variety of factors which were found to be held in common by a number of American companies recognised as meeting the criteria for excellence.
1.
A bias for action: effective organisations are not inhibited by bureaucratic structures but are proactive in anticipating problems and generating solutions.
2.
Close to the customer: ensuring that the products and services provided are those which are actually required.
3.
Autonomy and entrepreneurship: the culture of effective organisations recognises and rewards creativity and initiative; failure is not penalised.
4.
Productivity through people: people are seen as the sole basis for success which is developed through respect for the individual expressed through trust.
Contributions from ail are expected, recognised and rewarded.
5.
Hands-on, value-driven: management is about the implementation of values which are explicit and form the basis for action.
6.
Stick to the knitting: identifying that which is done best and ensuring that every aspect of management is geared to maintaining it.
7.
Simple form, lean staff: effective and successful organisations have simple management structures, i.e. autonomous teams focused and co-ordinated by central management which is not disproportionately top-heavy.
There are obvious problems in applying principles derived from American commerce and industry to British schools but these criteria do provide a basis for analysis.
Total quality management (TQM) is an approach to management based largely on the works of Crosby (1979) and Deming (1982).
The principles were first applied in Japanese industry but are now finding increasing acceptance in the UK.
The essence of TQM is the process of reducing costs by improving quality, so enhancing customer satisfaction.
A crucial contribution of TQM theory is the redefinition of the concept of the customer.
Although, traditionally, customers are perceived as external to the organisation, TQM defines all working relationships in terms of customer satisfaction and quality is defined in terms of conformity to customer requirements.
The notion of quality is encapsulated in the related principles of conformance to requirements and fitness for purpose.
This presupposes detailed definition by customers of their requirements and the development of processes to ensure that those requirements are met.
It is these processes which provide the principles for staff management and enhance the quality of working relationships within the organisation.
Crosby (1979) proposes 14 steps to quality improvement and these are complemented by Deming's four points.
Although there are some significant variations between these writers, they do identify a number of implications for staff management.
Firstly, quality is the primary responsibility of senior management who must transmit quality values to all but must also build quality into managerial relationships, notably through communication, commitment, recognition and providing facilitating structures in the context of explicit objectives.
Secondly, quality is achieved through effective teams where the outcomes of inter- and intra-team relationships are as significant as the technical functions of the teams.
Thirdly, quality is only possible where every component of the organisation's needs is defined and appropriate training procedures are identified and implemented in order to improve the staff selection process.
Fourthly, detailed evaluation and monitoring procedures must exist which are used as the basis for managing change.
Finally, there needs to be a commitment to continuous improvement through development.
Drawing on the insights identified above — combining the principles of human resource management, management of excellence and total quality management — it becomes possible to propose four principles for human resource management in education (see Figure 5.1).
1.
Leadership: concerned with vision and growth rather than sustaining systems.
2.
Team management: concerned with task and process and the quality of personal relationships.
3.
Performance management: providing the means to enhance competency and stimulate development in order to achieve organisational objectives.
4.
Organisational design: establishing a structure where form follows function and which contributes directly to institutional purposes and processes.
It is not possible to discriminate between the components of each category.
All are interdependent and each principle in turn depends   upon the effective management of appropriate processes which require relevant skills and qualities.
Leadership
Leadership is central to the effective management of educational institutions.
Successive HMI reports have identified the quality of leadership as the crucial determinant in creating an ethos which allows a school to operate to maximum effect.
Leadership is axiomatic to human resource management and it is impossible to draw neat boundaries between the various principles identified in this chapter.
Leadership is about vision, motivating, managing teams, creating appropriate structures and being as concerned with the people as the tasks.
The centrality of leadership has led to a significant body of literature which analyses leadership styles, the nature of power and authority and the relationship of the leader to the organisation and external bodies.
At the same time there has been an uncertain  analysis of the relationship between management and leadership.
Classical theories of management have tended to see leadership as a sub-set or function of ‘management’ as an entity.
The full implication of this approach will be discussed below but in the education system this has led to leadership being confused with technical competence (the headteacher as leading professional) or with implementation (the headteacher as administrator).
In the context of HRM neither of these approaches is appropriate or effective.
In essence, the conceptual change involved is encapsulated in the formula that leadership provides the context in which management takes place and that leadership is about people while management is about resources.
There is an inevitable tension in applying this maxim to schools — the notion of collegiality based on a community of professionals may inhibit the scope for individual leadership.
In direct contradistinction to this is the legal/administrative role of headteachers which, combined with the lack of time, compels a focus on routine procedures as is demonstrated in the research of Morgan, Hall and McKay (1986) and Torrington and Weightman (1989).
Both pieces of research stress how little time is spent with adults and how much time is spent either teaching or in fragmented and relatively trivial administration at the expense of creating effective personal relationships and articulating a sense of common purpose.
There is clearly no general agreement within the education system as to what the functions of the headteacher are; it therefore becomes difficult, if not impossible, to generate criteria for effectiveness.
An analysis of the traditional functions of heads might produce the following list:
1.
Leading professional: the ‘expert’ practitioner providing examples of good practice as teacher/academic and carer.
2.
Boundary manager: controlling the relationships between the school and its environment, acting as focal point and figurehead.
3.
Manager: co-ordinating and controlling, decision making and monitoring implementation, setting structures and deploying staff.
4.
Administrator: carrying out routine procedures.
5.
Policy maker and planner: determining values, establishing aims and objectives, prioritising and communicating them.
6.
Conflict manager: resolving disputes, acting as a mediator.
7.
Facilitator: providing guidance, advice and acting as a resource for personal and team development, i.e. facilitating motivation, stimulating effective communication and providing recognition and feedback.
The empirical work of Morgan et al .
and Torrington and Weightman would seem to indicate a significant emphasis on 1, 2 3 and 4 with substantially less stress on 5, 6 and 7.
This goes to the heart of the issue of implementing HRM in educational institutions.
An emphasis on technical activities and on what is often, essentially, administration implicitly denies that staff are an asset.
Leadership in the context of HRM requires an emphasis on policy making and managing interpersonal relationships and the effective delegation of other functions.
The problem is further exacerbated by the prevailing view as to the nature and constituents of leadership in schools.
There are a number of models which seek to explain the components and implications of different approaches to leadership which may actually serve to compound the problem:
trait theories
style theories
contingency theories
Trait theories stress the personality of the leader above all other factors — leadership requires a range of inherited characteristics or personality traits which are given priority over the job nature and demands of the job itself.
Selection for senior posts is therefore more important than training; if people who display the appropriate qualities are placed in the correct context then they will flourish.
There is no consensus view as to what constitutes the most desirable traits but qualities such as intelligence, initiative, self-confidence, enthusiasm are regularly featured in studies.
There are obvious problems with this approach: there is no common definition as to the components of these qualities, there is no reliable method of identifying them and a list of qualities may well include contradictory elements.
In spite of these qualifications, this approach has dominated the selection of leaders in the education system.
Selection methods based on references and panel interviews, without systematic job and person specification, give preference to intuitive judgements which inevitably focus on traits.
Academically the traits approach has been very largely discredited, partly because of its lack of precision and partly because it has demonstrably not worked in identifying the most effective leaders, yet it is still the most commonly used approach.
Style theories are a much more sophisticated means of analysing the implications of different types of leadership.
Blake and Mouton (1978) developed a model which allows a comparison in terms of the relative significance attached to the dimensions of concern for production and concern for people .
Concern with production is defined in terms of task completion while concern with people is related to the emphasis on the needs of the individual, i.e. a process orientation.
By examining the two dimensions, it becomes possible to identify a range of leadership styles and their practical implications:
‘The impoverished manager’ has low concern for task and people, minimum effort for production and minimum involvement with staff.
‘The authority — obedience manager’ has high concern for production and minimal regard for people who are essentially means to achieve the task.
Results are obtained but at the cost of personal relationships and the outcomes are not necessarily the optimum possible.
‘The Country Club manager’ has high concern for people, low concern for production.
Achievement of the task is secondary to the avoidance of conflict and the maintenance of social equilibrium.
However, this may generate stress by inhibiting innovation and creativity.
‘The organisation manager’ has moderate concern for both people and production; he/she is likely to stress high concern for ethos but, under pressure, is more likely to opt for a production orientation.
‘the team manager’ has high concern for both production and people and works to integrate both by helping individuals to meet their own needs through the organisation.
The team approach balances task and process, optimising both and seeing people and production as being inextricably linked — high output depends on high personal satisfaction and commitment.
Blake and Mouton argue that although the team approach is an ideal it can be worked towards by a process of diagnosis and training.
Blake and Mouton's analysis is effectively complemented by the best known of the contingency models — Adair's (1983) model of action-centred leadership.
Adair argues that any working situation produces three sets of needs for the people involved and therefore effective leadership is determined by the variables operating in a given situation:
1.
Task achievement: attaining objectives, planning the work, allocating resources and monitoring progress.
2.
Team development: creating a cohesive unit, enhancing morale and team consciousness, improving communication and setting and monitoring standards.
3.
Individual needs: giving praise and recognition, resolving conflict and facilitating individual growth and development.
Effective leadership seeks to integrate these three elements so that each is optimised and enhances the other two.
As with Blake and Mouton, there is a clear emphasis on the importance of people as well as task.
The components of Adair's three elements indicate the factors that are relevant to effective leadership.
However, there is still a need to discriminate between the management skills appropriate to completing the task and the leadership qualities relevant to meeting individual and team needs.
What is important is the relative significance to be attributed to task and process and the extent to which leadership is concerned with the minutiae of institutional administration or the vision and mission of the school.
The principles of human resource management (seeing people as an asset) and TQM (stressing the importance of integrity in all relationships) lead to a definition of leadership as a facilitating and  empowering function.
If leadership is linked to motivation theory and the notions of expectancy and valence accepted, then leadership becomes a creative and enabling function.
The role of the leader is to facilitate motivation and, in practical terms, this means:
1.
Creating and sustaining a vision that is communicated and lived.
2.
Negotiating targets to help individuals to achieve organisational goals.
3.
Providing resources to ensure that targets can be met.
4.
Ensuring that individuals have the knowledge and skills to work effectively.
5.
Providing explicit guidance on standards and levels of performance.
6.
Giving recognition, feedback and reward where appropriate.
Hodgson (1987) provides a useful synthesis of this approach in distinguishing between leadership and management:
The components of leadership are, therefore, seen in terms of effective skills and qualities rather than cognitive technical knowledge.
The traditional approach to the training and selection of headteachers has been on the basis of technical competence reinforced by practical experience.
Selection procedures have thus been largely exercises in historical data gathering, confirming the ability of candidates to do their present job rather than the one for which they have applied.
If the leadership of educational institutions is to be effective then a number of fundamental changes are needed.
There must be systematic and detailed definition of the qualities appropriate to a particular post which recognise the leadership content of the role.
Secondly, it is necessary to identify the leadership function which permeates all levels of the institution and thus develops a culture of creativity that discriminates between leadership and management, so enhancing both.
Thirdly, appropriate training and development strategies must be established which are based on analysis and creating the capability to act; such training is thus confrontational and enabling.
Within schools, structures and procedures must be created which discriminate between management and leadership and allow each to function appropriately.
Fifthly, selection procedures must be introduced which are based on accurate and relevant person and job specifications and which are predictive in nature.
Finally, appraisal procedures must be established which monitor and enhance the individual's ability to work to maximum effectiveness.
The practical manifestations of leadership as opposed to management in schools include:
Communicating an explicit attainable and unique vision.
Displaying a positive commitment to the vision, the institution and the people.
Recruiting, reinforcing and developing talent.
Celebrating and learning from success, establishing excellence as the basis for action.
Delegating as much as is reasonable and appropriate, creating autonomy and responsibility.
Building and working through teams.
Recognising and rewarding success.
Working through personal relationships.
Team management
Few components of managing are as abused as the concept of the ‘team’.
As a label it conveys a sense of purpose and purveys an often spurious impression of coherence and integrity in working relationships.
Applying the label often serves as an imprimatur of management respectability.
The emergence of curriculum teams in primary schools and senior management teams in secondary schools indicates the potency of the concept.
However, the principles of effective team management are often not reflected in the practice.
This is demonstrated by the research of Murgatroyd (1985) and Torrington and Weightman (1989).
Amalgamating their insights produces the following factors which indicate the problematic nature of teams in schools:
1.
There is too much emphasis on the tasks (agendas) of managing and not enough on the processes (networks).
2.
There is insufficient emphasis on working for action and too much on the formulation and debate of principles.
3.
Teams are often reactive and concerned with routine.
4.
Teams are insufficiently concerned with their own social needs, i.e. they ignore their own need for development and social maturing.
The outcomes of working in such ‘teams’ will include: poor communication and/or high level of conflict, limited or conditional commitment, poor quality decision making with limited innovation, inhibited implementation, confused objectives and poor motivation compromising performance.
These factors not only impose limitations on the ability of the team to work effectively in achieving its outcomes but detract from its credibility in its relationships with other teams.
In the case of the ‘task’ team, its ability to complete the task effectively is constrained; for the senior management team it may lose authority and credibility, and in the case of the team-structured organisation all procedures are compromised.
There are a large number of variables influencing the effectiveness of a work-group and the extent to which they are effectively managed will determine how far groups, coalitions and regular meetings become teams.
The crucial determinant of team effectiveness is the extent to which teams are deliberately created and managed to be the means by which the organisation functions as opposed to being purely symbolic structures.
Effective teams must have a specific and real function, be an integral part of the organisational structure and be proactively managed as a social entity.
This approach involves:
the deliberate selection of members of the team
the training and development of members of the team
the development of the team itself
managing relationships with other teams
relating the team to the organisation as a whole in structural terms
relating team objectives to organisational objectives.
Managing effective teams is thus a matter of achieving synergy between a variety of elements (see Figure 5.2).
In order for synergy to be achieved then three elements of team management need to be addressed: building, maintenance and review.
Team building
The composition of teams in schools is rarely the result of systematic analysis of functional needs and recruitment by logically derived criteria.
The determinants are usually historical, concerned with status, the result of ‘opting-in’(or ‘opting-out’) for a variety of motives and  inappropriate delegation.
The stages in the development of a team may be identified shown as in Figure 5.3.
As Figure 5.3 illustrates, it may be derived that teams which are not effectively constituted will have difficulty moving out of the forming and norming stages and that the majority of their time will be spent in these activities (see Figure 5.4a).
The outcome for such a team will either be failure to achieve the task, or the imposition of dominant leadership, or the formation of a sub-group.
Whichever outcome, the credibility of the team and the motivation of its members will inevitably be compromised.
By contrast, an effectively constituted team will move through each of the stages, spending a maximum amount of time in the ‘performing’ stage (see Figure 5.4b).
The determinants of effective and ineffective teams include a wide range of variables, but two which are particularly relevant in this context are the basis on which the team is constituted in terms of the definition of roles and the way in which the relationship between those roles is determined.
Belbin (1981) has found that one of the key determinants of a team's success is the nature of the interaction in terms of the qualities brought to completing the task.
He argues that status, technical knowledge and experience are not necessarily the most significant determinants of an individual's contribution.
In fact ‘alpha’ teams (composed of high achievers) may perform less successfully than those made up according to Belbin's criteria for effective task achievement.
He identifies eight role types which refer to the potential contribution in terms of behaviour rather than knowledge or status.
The types that Belbin identifies are:
Company Worker: capable of converting plans into action, working systematically and efficiently; a stable and controlled member of the team.
Chairman: controls and makes best use of the team, is able to balance contributions towards an objective; stable and dominant.
Shaper: pushes the team towards action, sets objectives and looks for outcomes; dominant, extrovert and anxious.
Plant: innovates, generates new ideas and approaches, problem solver; dominant, intelligent and introvert.
Resource Investigator: the team's contact with its environment, generates ideas and resources; intelligent, stable and introvert.
Monitor Evaluator: analyses problems and evaluates contributions; intelligent, stable and introvert.
Team Worker: supports and reinforces, improves communications, fosters team spirit; stable, extrovert and flexible.
Completer-Finisher: ensures attention to detail, maintains schedules; anxious and introvert.
There are a number of implications which may be drawn from Belbin's approach.
Use of his self-analysis inventory can help an existing team to diagnose the behavioural factors which might explain its failure or success.
Failure of a team might be explained by an imbalance of team types, the absence of crucial roles or a mismatch between team role and hierarchical status.
The potential of Belbin's analysis for team management includes clarifying team needs when recruiting new members, allocation of roles, identifying training and development needs, constituting new teams and serving as a basis for team review.
Although there are problems in directly transferring Belbin's analysis into educational institutions there does appear to be the basis of using it as a means of managing the issues identified at the start of this section.
Team maintenance
Systematic approaches to team building can pre-empt many of the problems of effective team management but there is an equal need for Murgatroyd's (1985) notion of ‘self-renewal’.
Teams need to be developed in terms of their ability to interact and to make use of systematic approaches to problem solving.
In order to achieve this, teams have to work towards the situation where the knowledge and skills of all members are fully utilised.
Just as it is necessary to ensure full involvement of members, so the time available has to be used to best advantage.
However, the efficiency of team management has to be balanced by the effectiveness of working relationships so that the outcome reached is not only the ‘best fit’ decision but also enhances team relationships and generates full commitment.
The enhancement of team relationships can only be achieved if team maintenance is perceived as a learning process following the established models of action learning (see Figure 5.5).
The significance of this model is that the task is one component of the team maintenance process and is relative to the evaluative, reflective and planning elements which serve to enhance interpersonal relationships whilst ensuring maximum ability to complete the task.
The qualities which are required to maintain and enhance a team include:
specific, understood and accepted objectives
open and authentic communications
a high level of mutual trust and reciprocated concern
recognition of conflicts and direct resolution of them
detailed understanding of the knowledge, skills and qualities of the team
consensus decision making
distributed leadership
respect for individuality
team relationships which are dynamic, growing and derived from personal and team learning.
In essence, effective teams spend as much time on the how as on the what .)
Achieving this situation is not a random outcome but is the result of adopting a proactive process-based approach to all aspects of team working and the provision of appropriate training.
Such training needs to be centred on a range of skills including: active listening, consensus decision making, conflict management, negotiating agreement, creative problem solving, self-appraisal and group dynamics.
These skills not only facilitate the functioning of the team but the training process itself becomes a team maintenance activity.
Team review
Review is axiomatic to the working of effective teams and is not a post facto activity but is implicit in every aspect of the team in terms of task and process.
The place of review may be summarised as shown in Figure 5.6.
In practical terms this means that any team activity has three components rather than one.
Planning and reviewing should be  implicit in any team meeting — as much as the actual activity.
Thus the traditional formulation of an agenda needs to be changed so that a meeting starts with clarification of purpose, agreement on timing, allocation of tasks and consolidation of process issues from previous meetings.
The completion of the agenda then needs to be followed by a review process, either formal or informal, which analyses the factors contributing to a successful or unsuccessful activity in terms of the perceptions of all the individuals involved.
This review process should result in an agreement of action to be taken at the next meeting to consolidate and celebrate strengths and to overcome weaknesses.
Such a process is essential to help a team to mature because it is only through reflection that a team can emerge from the forming and storming stages.
The major inhibitions to this process are a natural reserve, the fact that people may not be used to being open about their feelings, a lack of trust caused by limited understanding and, finally, reserve brought about by the relative status of team members, personality and gender issues and a lack of training.
These difficulties may be overcome in a number of ways:
1.
The use of active learning, experiential training techniques so that skills are developed in a non-threatening environment.
2.
The use of a facilitator to lead analytical review sessions and to provide data on team behaviour.
3.
The use of an analytical inventory to provide a focus for review sessions.
Effective teams are one of the most powerful tools for effective management of institutions.
Much of what has been discussed in this section applies as much to children as it does to teaching staff.
However, team development is not a substitute for individual development — the team is only as effective as its individual members in terms of their qualities and skills and their ability to use these in conjunction with others.
Performance management
One of the most significant indications of the lack of importance attached to staff management in education is the low priority attached to motivation and development.
A cursory study of motivation in education reveals a multitude of studies of pupil motivation but virtually none of teaching staff, let alone non-teaching staff.
The concept of professional autonomy could be seen as militating against recognition of the need to manage motivation or to engage in systematic development.
There is no clear theoretical model to explain the relationship between motivation, job satisfaction and performance.
A number of  models exist which can help to develop a conceptual framework to explain motivation at work.
All human behaviour may be characterised as being subject to drives aimed at achieving a goal in order to satisfy a need.
The achievement of a goal will serve to reinforce the behaviour and so establish a causal connection between needs and goals.
Much of the rhetoric surrounding motivation is based upon a number of misapprehensions, each of which may be answered:
1.
Morale and motivation are the same — motivation is an individual, unique and subjective phenomenon.
2.
Managers can motivate staff — motivation is at the control of the individual, therefore management policies can only support, reinforce or enhance the individual.
3.
Motivation is an ‘event’ in itself — motivation is made up of a number of factors of which the most important are the perceived value of the outcome to the individual and the correlation between that outcome and the effort necessary to achieve it.
Motivation is therefore about action.
4.
Motivation is a product of determination — it is also a product of ability and performance.
For the manager the critical relationship to understand is that between the potential ‘drive’ of an individual and the nature of needs.
There are a number of classifications of needs but three broad categories are generally adopted:
(a)
Economic — pay, security and external factors.
(b)
Social — relationships and involvement in the organisation.
(c)
Personal — a subjective response to work and how it meets needs for growth and satisfaction.
The way in which these needs might be managed is considered in two contrasting theoretical models — content theories and process theories.
Content theories are concerned with explaining those things which actually motivate people at work arising from needs, expectations and goals.
If content theories are concerned with what motivates then process theories are concerned with how motivation works.
They are therefore concerned with the variables which influence the initiation, direction and continuance of behaviour.
The most widely used content models are those of Maslow and Herzberg.
Maslow suggests that human needs operate in a hierarchy, that people are always wanting and expecting and so the satisfaction of one level of the hierarchy stimulates demand for the next level.
Maslow's hierarchy has been traditionally represented as a pyramid (see Figure 5.7).
There is a clear distinction between what might be termed ‘lower order’ needs and ‘higher order’needs and the strength of the   model is based upon one level becoming dominant as the subordinate need is satisfied.
Thus, only unsatisfied needs motivate, although the relative levels of satisfaction may be variable.
Maslow's model is obviously not empirically based but, even as the basis of a conceptual framework for managing staff, it has severe limitations:
1.
it ignores the possibility of altruistic behaviour which may reject subordinate levels in favour of self-actualisation.
2.
For some individuals self-esteem may be more important than social needs.
3.
In some instances the imperatives of lower order needs may preclude the possibility of following higher order needs.
4.
Self-actualisation is too vague a concept to usefully inform managers.
5.
Continued satisfaction of a need may lead to its relative significance being diminished.
6.
Satisfaction of higher order needs may well change the perception as to what constitutes satisfaction of lower order needs.
7.
Work is only one of a potential range of sources of satisfaction.
8.
It is not possible to assume a homogeneous workforce.
9.
There is no conceptual link in this model between satisfaction and performance.
Subsequent theories (notably the work of Herzberg (1974)) have attempted to overcome these problems.
Herzberg developed a more sophisticated analysis of the significance of higher and lower order needs.
His analysis of attitudes to motivation and work developed a distinction between two elements, hygiene factors and motivators — dissatisfiers and satisfiers (see Figure 5.7a).
Hygiene factors are essentially extrinsic and motivators are intrinsic.
Hygiene factors are concerned with dissatisfaction with environmental issues so that, for example , improvement of pay or working conditions will not motivate but will only remove dissatisfaction.
This is not to diminish the importance or significance of these factors; workers have a right to proper working conditions and appropriate management behaviour.
This raises significant problems in the education system where, historically, responsibility for hygiene factors has been fragmented and of disputed significance.
Equally, the management of motivation in education has been problematic — for many of the reasons identified at the start of this chapter.
Herzberg stresses the importance for motivation of the organisation of work, the quality of personal relationships and the potential for development.
This leads to two significant practical outcomes of Herzberg's work, job design and job enrichment.
Both are concerned with an explicit recognition in managing a workforce that the way in which the organisation is structured, work is delegated and responsibility apportioned have direct relevance to managing performance.
However, concentration on what motivates, as in the content theories, ignores three substantial issues:
The fact that an individual's perception of his or her needs will change over time and context.
Management practices based on hierarchical/satisfier/dissatisfier approaches ignore the complexity of human behaviour.
it is not just what motivates so much as what motivates and how it might be achieved.
In response to these issues, process models of motivation have emerged which recognise the complexity of the relationship between the what and the how.
Process or expectancy theories of motivation are based on the premise that people are motivated by the expected outcomes of their actions.
Motivation is therefore a causal relationship between effort expended, the performance attained and the reward related to the performance.
The potential of a factor to motivate is, therefore, contingent upon the perceived relationship between the value attributed to the outcome, the likelihood of performance leading to the outcome and the existence of  the skills, knowledge and capability necessary to achieve the performance.
A person's behaviour is determined by a subjective evaluation of the strength of the correlation between:
This approach differs from content theories in a number of significant ways:
There is no hierarchy of needs — what motivates is the individual perception of what is significant at a given moment.
There is no classification of outcomes — individuals are motivated by their dominant value system.
It becomes impossible to have a macro approach — motivation is a subjective phenomenon.
Porter and Lawler (1968) developed an expectancy model which identified the causal relationships between the various factors influencing behaviour.
The strength of motivation depends on, firstly, the VALUE attached to outcomes and the perceived EFFORT-REWARD relationship and, secondly, on the amount of EFFORT expended.
However, managing these principles has to take into account the fact that:
effort alone will not necessarily produce performance.
ABILITIES and TRAITS and ROLE PERCEPTION will determine how effective effort is;
if effort, abilities and traits and the role perception are right then PERFORMANCE will result;
rewards are the outcomes which are deemed appropriate by the individual; they may be intrinsic or extrinsic.
For motivation to be sustained there must be PERCEIVED EQUITABLE REWARDS which will then engender SATISFACTION.
Lack of such satisfaction will compromise the value placed on the outcome and so diminish motivation.
Expectancy theory stresses the complexity of managing motivation and helps to place the emphasis on working with the individual's self-perception and perception of their job.
It stresses the significance of the outcome to the individual and the correlation between the outcome and the effort necessary to achieve it.
Motivation is therefore about action.
Implications for managers
1.
Rewards need to be appropriate to the individual, i.e. valued and possible
2.
The causal link between effort, performance and outcome has to be viewed in individual and subjective terms.
3.
Outcomes have to be negotiated, not set arbitrarily.
4.
Managing motivation is concerned with understanding the individual and managing the variables.
5.
Managers therefore need the interpersonal skills to identity and understand individual perceptions.
6.
Job design, appraisal, target-setting, feedback and review are the practical activities associated with managing motivation.
Managers cannot motivate; they have to operate procedures which allow them to identify, support and reinforce individual perception and this is best done through appraisal linked to professional and personal development.
The appraisal of staff in the context of development and motivation is concerned with managing individual perceptions and relating them to organisational needs.
Appraisal is therefore not about identifying individuals for financial reward or promotion nor is it about penalising ‘poor’ performance — they are separate management processes.
In order to improve and enhance performance, appraisal must conform to the following criteria:
It is developmental, being the diagnostic component of a structured and systematic approach to the management of training and development.
It is formative as it is based on qualitative judgements which are the basis for future action
It is negotiated, i.e. it is based on shared perceptions of performance relative to agreed criteria.
It is continuous, since it is a long-term strategy to enhance individual performance in the context of institutional objectives.
It is hierarchical, i.e. it is the process by which the managerial relationships of the institution are expressed and developed.
It is internal, because it is concerned with the institution's performance and the quality of its internal relationships.
Appraisal is thus a process of negotiating individual targets in order to improve personal performance and so enhance the quality of educational provision.
If appraisal meets the criteria outlined above then a number of benefits accrue: more systematic identification of agendas for staff development, improved communication, enhanced self-awareness and improved self-analysis, improved management of learning and greater opportunities for recognition and praise.
However, these outcomes are contingent upon a supportive infrastructure of values, processes and skills which integrate what the school exists to do with appropriate management strategies which are carried out by individuals with relevant skills and personal qualities.
The structure for managing performance in educational institutions can be illustrated as shown in Figure 5.8.
Such a structure requires that aims and objectives are explicit and differentiated.
Many schools produce aims which are essentially vague aspirations and objectives which are unattainable as they are not translatable into actions nor can their achievement be measured.
By these criteria many schools consistently ‘fail’ as they publish the same objectives every year.
Once initial aims and objectives are established then all other processes and outcomes are functions of, and subordinate to, them.
Thus the skills, knowledge and qualities of individuals appointed to the institution are formulated in such a way as to contribute to the achievement of institutional aims.
Equally, training and development is based on the formulation of the current situation being diagnosed against stated outcomes and used as a vehicle to ‘close the gap’ in individual and organisational terms.
In order to work this process requires leadership in the terms discussed earlier in this chapter; it also requires ‘open’ management expressed through consultative procedures, effective delegation and a climate conducive to review, target setting, monitoring and evaluation.
It is also contingent upon the avoidance of the rationalistic fallacy that there is only one correct view of the institution.
This implies significant negotiating skills in order to diagnose, manage and reinforce the outcomes of individual motivation.
However close the match of management behaviour to the criteria described, performance management can only work in the broader context of managing change through learning (see chapter 6).
Organisational design
The relationship between effective management of staff and organisational design is essentially that of form and function.
No amount of leadership, motivation or team development will work unless the school is structured in such a way as to support, reinforce and facilitate the development of people.
Urwick (1947) summarises this in the following terms:
Lack of design is illogical, cruel, wasteful and inefficient.
(p. 38)
Drucker (1968) reinforces this point even more emphatically:
Good organization structure does not of itself produce good performance…
But a poor organization structure makes good performance impossible, however good the managers…improving organization structure will always improve performance.
(p. 273)
An organisation that is not appropriately structured can experience the following problems:
low motivation and morale and in extreme cases, anomie
poor quality decision making
ineffectual co-ordination
potential conflict
inability to convert principles into action
role conflict
inflexibility when faced with change
inhibition of potential
a waste of the resources of talent, money and time.
It is difficult to establish the precise rationale for the traditional hierarchical model which pervades the educational system.
From the smallest primary school to the largest secondary school, the dominant model is the hierarchy expressed in terms of line management with the division of work into compartments with a clear span of control.
There is a tension between this pseudo-rational structure and the notion of schools as professional communities.
The illogicality of the existing hierarchical model for educational institutions is highlighted by applying the following criteria:
1.
Does form follow function?
To what extent is the learning process of the classroom reflected in the working relationships within the institution as a whole, i.e. do schools practise in their structures what they preach in their aims?
2.
Is there clear line management?
Is it the right of individuals to know for what they are responsible and for whom and to whom they are accountable?
Does the linear structure of schools reflect the reality of working relationships?
3.
Do duties, authority, responsibility and relationships correlate?
How real are many so-called management posts in schools, e.g. deputy heads in primary schools and middle managers in secondary schools?
Is the notion of a ‘teaching head’ compatible with effective leadership?
4.
How large are work teams?
In most educational institutions teams are imbalanced; if they are too large or too small they will be dysfunctional.
5.
How much authority is delegated?
To what extent is delegated responsibility matched by authority and discretion?
6.
Is the structure balanced?
What is the ratio between those who teach and those who administer and manage?
7.
How are sub-units co-ordinated?
For example, is the division between academic and pastoral functions appropriate and is a departmental structure appropriate to managing cross-curricular factors, especially when the pupil experience is not divided into compartments?
8.
Are working relationships defined and public?
Schools rarely have explicit aims and objectives which are translated into individual and specific job descriptions, targets and performance indicators.
9.
On what basis are work teams established?
Are the criteria managerial or are they historic, incremental, random and ad-hoc ?
10.
Does the structure facilitate development?
To what extent is the structure capable of change, adaptation and development, allowing for individual development and sensitivity to the external environment?
In many cases schools manifestly do not meet these criteria.
The movement away from a tall hierarchy to a flat hierarchy, a matrix model or a team-based structure will always be artificial if the infrastructure of pay, delegation and management roles is not amended.
Equally significant is the extent to which traditional structures are appropriate and relevant to the changing demands upon schools.
The implementation of local management of schools, the national curriculum, appraisal and the need for marketing all impose demands upon institutions which will be impossible to meet if existing structures are retained.
The challenges facing schools are considered in detail throughout this book but in essence they require a management response.
The practical components of such a response are discussed below but one perspective is crucial with regard to organisational structure; it should reflect the integrity of relationships and be a vehicle for effective management.
Simplistic hierarchies do not meet this criterion.
Handy (1989) has developed a model which might serve as the basis for determining the future structure of schools.
The Shamrock organisation is made up of three (or possibly four) elements.
The first is the professional core who are essential to the organisation and who manage its professional knowledge, giving the organisation its distinctive character.
Work which is not central to the organisation should be contracted out to the second element which provides specialist services which increase expertise and diminish costs.
The third element is the flexible labour force, part-time and temporary employees who provide expertise and skills in response to changing needs.
The fourth leaf of Handy's Shamrock is the client or customer.
He points out that in many areas, especially service industries, organisations have improved their efficiency and effectiveness and increased the perception of quality by getting the clients to do the work — self-service outlets are an obvious example.
Although Handy's model is essentially abstract it does assume significance when schools are placed in the context of local management of schools and the National curriculum.
The Shamrock organisation offers some interesting implications for the future organisational design of schools:
1.
A genuinely professional core can be created which has a specific focus: the delivery of the national curriculum.
2.
It is necessary to question the extent to which such a core needs to be organised in terms of hierarchies or fragmented by function.
3.
Teachers should not seek to be involved in every aspect of the school — administrative/clerical, catering and many aspects of the pastoral function should be contracted out to specialist providers.
4.
LMS may well increase the use of part-time and short-term contracts and these will need to be managed in such a way as to enhance and support the core.
5.
The core will need to recognise that it does not have a monopoly of expertise and knowledge.
The community, parents and pupils themselves have significant contributions to make.
For example, a major constraint upon effective management of human resources in secondary schools is the notion that the curriculum can only be delivered by one teacher in one classroom teaching one subject to one class.
The use of pupil-managed learning has profound implications for the more effective deployment of skilled resources.
Conclusion
This chapter offers a number of critical insights into the introduction of human resource management in schools.
The movement from theory into practice raises two main issues.
The first is a recognition that much of what has been described above already exists, but needs to be made explicit and systematic; and secondly, there must be a recognition that partial attempts to change are almost inevitably doomed to fail in that they will always be compromised and administered by the history and culture of many schools.
Human resource management in schools requires a total approach which has the following components:
1.
Headteachers being leaders and not teachers with ‘extra jobs’.
2.
Senior staff and middle managers having an explicit management role and being trained and developed to do it.
3.
A vision which is translated into genuine aims and attainable objectives that inform job design, delegation, the creation of work teams and operating procedures.
4.
Recognising that management structures and procedures exist to facilitate action and are not ends in themselves.
5.
Making time and releasing creative energy by incorporating the community and children into management processes so that they can contribute to, rather than be subjects of, school management.
6.
Recognising that the integrity of the learning process applies as much to adults in schools as it does to children.