

The Geography of the Outer Hebrides PROFESSOR W. RITCHIE Department of Geography; University of Aberdeen 
The 200 km long island chain of the Outer Hebrides has 119 named islands of which only 16 are now permanently inhabited (Boyd, 1979b).
The archipelago contains a unique series of landscapes that are produced, in essence, by a combination of peripheral position and geological development.
Exposure to the Atlantic on the west gives rise to a cool, moist climate that is characterised by periods of powerful winds.
The Archaean bedrock of Lewisian gneiss provides a stable basement platform upon which recent land-forming events such as glaciation, sea level changes and ubiquitous peat-development have been superimposed.
On these surfaces of glacial deposits, wind blown sand, peat and exposed bedrock successive waves of settlement have cleared, burned, grazed and cultivated, while others have turned to the seas for sustenance.
The intricate spatial pattern of these islands is revealed in Figure 1 (a and b) which illustrates the dominance of high ground on the east side of the Uists and in the central area of South Lewis/North Harris, from which a local ice cap developed in Devensian times.
The east-west lines of sea lochs penetrating inland from the Minch, and the straits dividing the islands from each other interrupt the arcuate sweep of the chain of islands.
Equally important is the contrast between the fault-bounded east coast which plunges to deep water in the Minches and the shallow sea bed west of the islands; a submerged platform which extends to one of the most extensive areas of continental shelf in Britain.
These east-west contrasts are shown in three schematic, annotated transects, through South Uist, Harris and North Lewis (Figures 2, 3 and 4).
Clearly these transects are not comprehensive and omit the distinctive nature of mountainous Barra or the sandstone based Eye Peninsula near Stornoway or the many small uninhabited islands, but these transects highlight the distinction between the low Atlantic coastlands with machair-land and crofting settlement on the west, and the areas of empty mountains and the extensive peat-covered plateaux of the east and most of the interior regions.
Settlement and associated communications have two main elements; coastal crofting townships — now mainly on the west coast (but during the population peak of the 19th century settlement was much more widespread)— and small nodal towns at east coast ferry and fishing ports.
Stornoway, the administrative, service, commercial and transport centre dominates the pattern of settlement and is the only multi-functional town in the region.
Other local service centres are at Castlebay, Lochboisdale, Lochmaddy, Balivanich (especially as a result of its military base and airport), Leverburgh, Tarbert and Ness.
Fishing, crofting agriculture (recently boosted by massive E.E.C.
investment), tourism and weaving underpin the fragile economy which is or has been augmented by local centres of enterprise such as the oil platform fabrication yard at Arnish near Stornoway (now closed), the rocket-range support base at Ballavanich, the military developments at Stornoway airfield and scattered small scale initiatives such as fish processing and, notably, salmon farming in sheltered bays and sea lochs.
In fact, the Outer Hebrides, especially in the coast sea lochs, could be described as the most important area along with Shetland for salmon farming.
In 1989, an N.C.C.
report on Fish Farming indicated that more than 50 sites are in the Outer Hebrides with the most important concentration being in the Uig area of Lewis.
In contrast, the most extensive land use is moorland sheep grazing with some West Highland type sporting estates (deer forests) especially in south Lewis and north Harris.
The distribution of machair land in the islands is also shown in Figure 1.
In a region of bog and rock, the shell-sand based machair, dunes and sand plains provide areas of richness and fertility.
Developed from a vast influx of sand that was carried onto the low rock basement by a rising sea level over the last seven or eight thousand years (Ritchie, 1985), machair with its essentially base-rich, alkaline, free-draining soils has provided a distinctive landscape element.
The level sand plains appear to have been attractive to settlers throughout pre-historic and historic times (Ritchie, 1979).
Although there are records of floods and sand storms, especially  in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, machair provides both arable and grazing land and it is the focus of most Hebridean crofting agriculture (Caird, 1979).
From an ecological point of view the maritime, calcareous dune and pasture areas provide zones of exceptional richness and diversity; a diversity that is enhanced by the system of non-intensive agriculture (Roberts, Kerr and Seaton, 1959) and the close juxtaposition of moorland, loch and marshland habitats.
As an index of this environmental richness, Figure 5 shows the distribution of Sites of Special Scientific Interest in these islands (see appendix); a land designation that is about 10 per cent of the total area.
The distribution of machair (Figure 1, a and b) may be used as a means of identifying differences between island groups.
In Barra and adjacent islands, machair is widespread but occurs as discrete bayhead units, although Eoligarry machair is a distinctive peninsula joining the northern part of Barra to the central massif.
In the Uists, the machair is almost continuous along the west and north coasts, and here the area of machair land is almost ten per cent of the total land area.
In Harris, there are large areas of machair in the southwest around the inner sheltered sea areas collectively known as the Sound of Taransay.
In Lewis, machair is a small percentage of the total area and it occurs in a variety of forms; small bayhead units, larger east coast elements north of Stornoway, complex beaches and strands in the southwest at Uig and semi-continuous expanses between Barvas and Ness on the northwest coast.
There are other geographical differences between the islands.
In Lewis, the familiar Lewisian bedrock is replaced north of Stornoway by sandstones and conglomerates.
Unlike the islands to the south, Lewis and north Harris had a large local ice cap (von Weymarn, 1974, Peacock 1984).
Shore platforms and possibly raised beach elements are also found in Lewis.
Nevertheless, the overall impression in all the islands is of coastline submergence; a process that appears to have occurred over the last 8,000 years or so with the amount of sea level rise being estimated as approximately 5 m.
Perhaps the most striking difference between the northern and southern islands is in the distribution of mountains where the high series of peaks (averaging 550 m above sea level) of north Harris and south Lewis have no equivalent elsewhere.
In the Uists, the distinctive east coast barrier of mountainous ridges (rarely more than 300 m high), reflects geological structure, and is the most striking feature of Long Island topography.
Similarly, the broad, low, peat-covered plateaux of central and north Lewis is repeated only in central North Uist where it resembles similar extensive, windswept and empty surfaces in mainland Sutherland and Caithness.
Geologically recent submergence has also produced a series of islands, some inhabited e.g. Eriskay and Berneray, and some now empty and abandoned e.g. Fuday, the Monach Islands and Pabbay.
This submergence has also produced the myriad skerries and islands of the inter-island straits, notably between North Uist and South Harris.
On land, the analogue to the skerries are the countless ice-scoured and structural lochs and lochans, some of which are tidal.
These provide an intricate pattern of interconnected and convoluted water bodies which have considerable ecological interest and value.
Except where crofters and their antecedents have skinned-off the peat for fuel, deep, treeless blanket bog (blackland ) covers all the low ground of these islands.
Near some crofts however some areas have been improved by liming and surface seeding and elsewhere grazing, drainage and muirburn have altered the natural vegetation cover.
Land that is cultivated or grazed intensively near the croft is often referred to as inbye to distinguish it from common grazings and more distant fields.
For thousands of years, poor drainage and an excess of rainfall over evapo-transpiration has favoured sphagnum peat growth.
Peat remains a vital island fuel but little if any is exported and there is no industrial use such as whisky distilling.
Peat moorland, especially at low altitude, was used in the past for cultivation, normally potatoes but sometimes cereals.
The technique used was lazy-bed cultivation which is a form of hand cultivation.
A few patches of such use can still be seen today, especially on small islands, but the practice has almost disappeared.
Essentially, two parallel trenches are made and the turf is folded over towards the centre.
The total strip is usually over one metre wide.
Seaweed or other dressing might be applied in this central raised area where the crop is planted, and the trenches provide drainage.
Good crops were raised by this labour-intensive form of cultivation.
Literally thousands of patches of old lazy-beds can be seen throughout the Hebrides today as a clear testimony to land pressure, especially in the 19th century.
The two main part-time occupations in the crofting communities are tweed weaving with the managerial, marketing and assembly units being in Stornoway, and various types of fishing.
Fishing is vital to the economy, especially in Barra, Eriskay and different parts of Lewis.
Minch and Atlantic fisheries are augmented by onshore and coastal fishing for valuable shellfish, including crabs and lobsters.
Recently, there has been a rapid increase in fish farming, especially salmon, in the sea lochs of Lewis and Harris and elsewhere.
Of great local importance are military establishments, especially the garrison in Benbecula which services the NATO rocket and missile firing range on the northwest coast of South Uist.
Tourism, served by some large hotels but mainly bed and breakfast facilities in many croft houses, is of considerable significance.
Car ferries to Castlebay, Lochboisdale, Lochmaddy, Tarbert and Stornoway link the islands with the mainland at Ullapool and Oban, and Uig on Skye.
There are also small inter-island car ferries including the recently opened routes to Eriskay and Berneray.
There are scheduled flights between the islands, and daily air services to Glasgow and Inverness.
These modem developments contrast with the situation earlier in this century when for example there was no bridge between Benbecula and North and South Uist, and crossings had to be made across the beach at low tide.
It is often said that the best index of the geography of an area is the distribution of population in space and time.
The Outer Hebrides is no exception and Figure 6 is a compilation from the 1981 census data, and it shows the low population density and the extent of areas that are effectively uninhabited, in response to overwhelming environmental and topographical difficulties.
Census returns also show a steady decline from a late 19th century peak where arguably there was gross overpopulation, a situation that was remedied by drastic reorganisation of tenure and agricultural use and emigration,(Caird, 1979).
The 20th century has seen a steady decline to the present total of 31,801 (1981 census) with particular areas showing local reversals e.g. Benbecula with the advent of the rocket range in South Uist.
Nevertheless, the level of population is now approaching a dangerously low level in some areas and this is compounded by the age structure with a relative lack of young adults in the population.
Similarly, the economic base is fragile and overdependent on specific local and possibly transient opportunities e.g. military bases, industrial and commercial initiatives e.g. the oil platform fabrication yard at Arnish, and some Highlands and Islands Development Board sponsored enterprises e.g. fish processing factories.
The tourist industry is also highly seasonal and subjected to fluctuating cycles.
In a sense, history is repeating itself in that the sequence of development in the past has also contained local ‘boom’ elements such as kelp gathering in the 19th century or the bulb growing schemes in the 1960's, both of which foundered in response to changes in external economic imperatives, although at the outset there were high hopes that unique local resources i.e. seaweed and disease-free sandy soils, would provide enduring employment opportunities.
The geography of the Outer Hebrides is thus a fascinating product of the interplay of physical and human factors with powerful historical undertones.
Peripheral position, the friction of distance, the lack of natural resources and an absence of low cultivable ground combine to provide a restricted and disadvantaged economic base.
Celtic cultural and linguistic traditions, the difficulties of crofting (which is most effective on a part-time basis) and, here and there, implants of modern industry, sophisticated communications and strategic installations characterise the social and economic geography of these islands.
In these respects, the islands share the common attributes and problems of regions on the distant fringes of densely populated  urban-centered economic and social national structures.
Overall, there is an abiding impression of emptiness, of a natural pace and rhythm and of a traditional way of life that has all but disappeared from superficially similar island communities elsewhere in the Highlands and Islands of Scotland.
The Geology of the Outer Hebrides C. D. GRIBBLE Department of Geology and Applied Geology; University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8QQ 
Introduction
MacCulloch (1819), and later, Murchison and Geikie (1861), provided the first accounts of the geology of Lewis and Harris and the other islands which constitute the north east-south west chain of islands called the Outer Hebrides, which lies some 70 km west of the northern Scottish mainland.
In 1923, Jehu and Craig produced the first detailed account of the geology of this region, and followed it up with further accounts between 1925 and 1934.
Thereafter, several research papers were published on the Lewisian complex, including Dearnley (1962), Myers (1970, 1971), Coward (1972, 1973) and Coward & and ; Graham (1973); and other papers have been concerned with the geology of the igneous complex of south Harris, and in particular, the anorthosite intrusion cropping out in the south east (Davidson 1943; Dearnley 1963).
A new geological map (The Outer Hebrides) on a scale of 1:100000 was published by the British Geological Survey (BGS) in 1981, and a detailed report on the entire region is in an advanced state of preparation.
The most recent published works on the geology of the islands as a whole are by Watson (1977) and Smith & and ; Fettes (1979).
Geological history
The Outer Hebrides are composed primarily of metamorphic gneisses and igneous rocks of Precambrian age, apart from a small area near the town of Stornoway in Lewis, which has rocks of either upper Palaeozoic or lower Mesozoic age resting unconformably on the Precambrian rocks.
The Precambrian metamorphic rocks are collectively known as Lewisian, the name being obtained from the Isle of Lewis where they were first described and recognised.
The Lewisian rocks formed during the late Archaean — early Proterozoic eras, roughly indicating a time span of from c. 2800 m.y.
to c. 1600 m.y.
This length of time can be divided into two events in Scotland, originally recognised on the N.W. Scottish mainland: namely an earlier Scourian and a later Laxfordian, the boundary between the two events being dated at approximately c. 2200 m.y.
A great thrust, the Outer Hebrides Thrust or Fault, terminated the Laxfordian sequence of events, and this thrust can be recognised at the present day as a feature on or near the eastern seaboard of the entire Outer Hebrides chain of islands (see Fig. 7).
Rock types
The Lewisian gneiss.
This comprises either quartzo-feldspathic gneiss or hornblende gneiss, often with intercalated amphibolite sheets.
The quartzo-feldspathic gneiss contains quartz, feldspar and hornblende as the principal minerals, variable though small amounts of biotite, and with iron ores and apatite as the common accessory minerals present.
In general, the gneiss is quartz-rich but variable in character, and with hornblende patches and acid veins occasionally present.
The hornblende gneiss is similar in character and mineralogy, but hornblende is invariably the most abundant mineral present.
The amphibolite bands and lenses are more or less biminerallic, with hornblende by far the most abundant mineral, often occupying more than 75 per cent of the rock, and with feldspar as the other mineral present.
The grain size varies from coarse to fine grained, and the rock has a banded appearance.
The textures and general characters of the gneisses suggest that these rocks have been metamorphosed to high grades such that they are migmatised (melted) in places.
Although it is difficult to determine what was the original material from which these rocks were derived, the general consensus of opinion is that the original material was of igneous origin, with the old term orthogneiss being used to describe these rocks in the past.
As well as the Lewisian orthogneisses described above, several outcrops of metamorphic rocks occur which were undoubtedly derived from sedimentary rocks, and the old term paragneiss has been used to describe these, although this has now been superseded by the simpler term metasediments.
Metasedimentary rocks are common in south Harris where they occur on a large scale in well-defined belts extending for considerable distances; up to 15 km in places.
The metasediments include calcareous and graphite-bearing gneisses, quartzites, various marble bands, and dark-coloured garnet-bearing schists.
In general these rocks have been subjected to high grade metamorphism, have a variable grain size, and occur in north west-south east trending belts, although they have also been recognised as small discontinuous lenses, a few metres in length, intercalated with other gneissic rocks.
The geological map, Fig. 7, shows the distribution of the main Lewisian types.
The metamorphic gneisses throughout the Hebrides have been eroded to a gentle, undulating landscape as can be seen in central Lewis.
The igneous rocks
Igneous rocks occurring in the Outer Hebrides can be ascribed simply to one of three main groups: a) the igneous complex of South Harris, including the eastern Basic Gneiss of South Uist; b) the granites and pegmatites; and c) the basic dykes.
a) Intrusive igneous rocks occur in south Harris and western Lewis particularly, as well as in a few other localities, of which eastern South Uist is the most important.
In South Harris a complex of igneous rocks, ranging from basic to acid types, has been intruded into the metasediments there.
The igneous complex is elongated in a north west-south east direction, and includes norite, anorthosite, tonalite and diorite as the main rock types present, all of which have been metamorphosed since their intrusion and are termed meta-igneous rocks by the British Geological Survey in the published map, with terms metanorite, meta-anorthosite, etc. being used.
The igneous complex is composed for the most part of very resistant rocks, and less erosion has taken place here than with the other rock types, so that this region contains some of the highest hills in the Outer Hebrides, such as Roneval, Bleaval and Chaipaval.
Other high hills in the Outer Hebrides are found where the igneous rocks of eastern South Uist crop out, and include Ben More and Hecla.
The igneous complexes described have been dated at c. 2200 m.y.
All the rocks described so far, that is the Lewisian gneisses and the igneous intrusions, were subjected to several phases of metamorphism and deformation, so that the mineralogy and fabric of each of these rock types are a result of its complex geological history.
b) At the end of the Laxfordian events affecting the Lewisian rocks a suite of granite intrusions and accompanying pegmatite dykes and veins were emplaced c. 1750 m.y.
ago.
Their greatest development is in west and central Harris and western Lewis.
A central body of granite trending NNW — SSE is flanked by a marginal belt of veined gneisses, the veins dying out away from the central body of granite.
The granites throughout the Islands tend to be coarse grained and grey or pink in colour, and with the accompanying pegmatites very coarse grained and pink or reddish in colour, similar to the typical Laxfordian pegmatites on the Scottish mainland at Loch Laxford.
Erosion of the granites gives rise to a barren, rolling landscape such as is seen in the Uig Hills of western Lewis, and steep, inaccessible sea cliffs such as are present in western Harris.
c) Several phases of dyke emplacement took place: 1) an early group which were intruded between the Scourie and Laxfordian events and which comprise mainly basic types, particularly metadolerites.
The amount of deformation these dykes have suffered has been used to unravel the main structural differences between the Scourie and Laxfordian events.
To put it simply, structures cut by the dykes must be Scourian, whereas structures affecting the dykes must be Laxfordian.
2) Several suites of basic, unmetamorphosed dykes have been emplaced into the rocks of the Outer Hebrides.
These include Permo-Carboniferous quartz dolerites occurring as a swarm of east-west trending dykes in North Barra and South Uist which are cut by slightly later thin monchiquite dykes; and much later north west-south east trending Tertiary dykes found in a belt across southern Lewis and Harris.
Sedimentary rocks, unaffected by metamorphism, crop out in an area from Stornoway eastwards to the Eye Peninsula and northwards along the coast to Vatisker Point.
The rocks primarily consist of unfossiliferous conglomerates the age of which is not known with certainty, other than being post-Caledonian, but they are considered to be of probable Trias age.
The outcrop pattern near the coast shows offsetting by a couple of small east-west trending faults.
Major thrusts and faults
The most important thrust affecting the Outer Hebrides is the Outer Hebrides Thrust, a low angle thrust, dipping to the east, and cropping out along the eastern seaboard of the island chain (Francis and Sibson 1973).
The thrust is shown on the map, Fig.7, as also is the wide zone of rocks affected by the movements on the thrust plane.
The rocks in this zone have been affected by crushing to various degrees, the most severe effects being found close to the actual thrust plane itself.
The Survey describes the gneisses in this zone as: gneiss with cataclasite fabric meaning gneiss that has suffered crushing; mashed gneiss meaning gneiss that has been severely crushed; and pseudotachylite — close to the actual plane of the thrust, meaning gneiss that has been crushed so severely it is now a black, flinty, very fine grained or glassy rock.
The pseudotachylite is considered to have been formed in places as molten material, by heat generated from frictional sliding along the thrust plane.
In many places this molten material was then injected into the fractured rock formed by the thrusting movements, and later, when it solidified, a veinwork of pseudotachylite occurred throughout the gneiss, ‘welding’ it together and eventually producing a resistant rock which, in some areas, gives rise to higher hills as at Eaval in South Uist.
Later, in Caledonian times, c. 500 m.y.
to 400 m.y.
ago, the Outer Hebrides Thrust was reactivated, and the movements produced more crushing along the thrust plane, with the production of mylonites, which are pale coloured, very fine grained, schist-like bands of crush material occurring at irregular intervals along the line of the thrust.
As well as the crushing effects described above, many of the rocks in the thrust zone suffered hydrothermal alteration.
This is particularly evident in the igneous complex in south Harris, where, for example, the anorthosite — a wedge-shaped outcrop of rock trending eastwards from Roneval hill — is almost completely altered at Lingara Bay in the east, from a pale purple, feldspathic rock to a dense, white rock, composed to a large extent of epidote group minerals.
This type of alteration is called saussuritisation, and other similar types of hydrothermal alteration can be recognised in the other igneous rocks of the igneous complex of south Harris where they crop out in the thrust zone.
In South Uist, a valley called Allt Volagir is considered to lie on a north — south trending fault, which may represent an off-set of the Outer Hebrides Thrust.
Numerous faults affect the rocks of the Outer Hebrides, the most important of which are those trending north west-south east, and east-west.
The most important north west-south east faults include one from Loch Seaforth to Loch Roag in Lewis, and two inferred faults between North Uist and Benbecula, and Benbecula and South Uist.
Two important east-west faults which occur are from Loch Leurbost to Loch Roag in Lewis, and from East Loch Tarbert to West Loch Tarbert in Harris.
The Outer Hebrides Thrust, and all the important faults mentioned above can be found in the geological map Fig. 7.
Topography and overburden
In summary, the metamorphic gneisses and related rocks give the Outer Hebrides a subdued and undulating landscape, with occasional hilly areas which represent either igneous complexes as in south Harris and eastern South Uist, or ‘welded’ gneisses in the vicinity of the thrust as occurs in North Uist.
North west-south east and east-west trending faults have also affected the landscape with many of the sea inlets and valleys having this orientation.
Relatively recent glaciation has stripped off any residual cover the rocks may have possessed, leaving them barren, particularly where granitic rocks crop out as in north Harris and western Lewis.
Glaciers have also gouged out the weaker rock along the lines of ancient faults, and deepened the existing valleys there.
This glaciation has given the Outer Hebrides a complex relief of rock  knobs, and small, peat- or water-filled hollows, and intersecting linear grooves or valleys often occupied by lochs and lochans.
In some places the glacial deposits were reworked by small glacial streams and rivers leading to occasional, small deposits of fluvio-glacial sands and gravels which are often used throughout these islands as sources of aggregate for building purposes.
Near the shore, old raised-beach deposits can be observed throughout the region, representing changes in sea levels at about the same time as the glacial episode.
Geomorphology and Soils of the Outer Hebrides G. HUDSON Macaulay Land Use Research Institute, Craigiebuckler, Aberdeen 
The arcuate island chain of the Outer Hebrides is underlain by rocks which are amongst the oldest in Britain, principally comprising Lewisian gneisses with some granites and younger sedimentary rocks.
The soils, however, are of relatively recent origin, having formed since the end of the glacial epoch when the pre-existing soils and regolith were destroyed.
The glacial drifts on which many soils are developed are widespread in Lewis and occur sporadically in Harris, North Uist, Benbecula and South Uist.
Some soils however are on yet younger materials, the peats and windblown shelly sands which formed subsequent to the glaciations.
The principal factors influencing the processes of soil formation in the Outer Hebrides are climate, parent materials, topography and vegetation, and the distribution of soil types in the islands reflects the variations in these environmental factors.
Soil formation
In the Tertiary period, weathering produced a deep regolith (Fitzpatrick, 1963), the remnants of which exist in the Outer Hebrides at a few sites protected from severe glacial erosion (Glentworth, 1979).
The general form of the landscape, low-lying in North Uist, South Uist and Benbecula, gently undulating in Lewis and mountainous in Harris, was established well before the Pleistocene glaciations, when the islands were covered by ice, whose movements were affected by radial outflow from a snow accumulation centre on Harris.
Mainland ice flowing from east to west at the time of the glacial maximum was diverted northwards around Harris, whereas the smaller, isolated hills on North Uist, Benbecula and South Uist provided little restriction to the regional movements.
Intense glacial erosion exploiting faults and other lines of structural weakness removed the weathered regolith to form the distinctive topography known on North Uist as ‘knock and lochan’.
‘Crag and tail’ features, having lodgement till on protected lee slopes of rock knolls, occur sporadically, and in Lewis till was deposited to form an extensive plain.
As the main ice-sheet receded, englacial and supraglacial materials were left as moundy morainic drifts in North Uist, Benbecula and South Uist.
Following the ablation of the major ice-sheets, there was a resurgence of valley glaciation in Harris and locally in South Uist, during which bouldery morainic drifts were deposited, principally in valleys.
At this time also the surrounding country was exposed to periglacial activity.
The distribution of these and other parent materials is shown on Figure 8.
Sands and gravels deposited by water flowing from the melting glaciers are restricted to a few localities and there are no major raised beach deposits resulting from sea level changes relative to the land surface.
Rather more recently, plains of windblown shelly sand have formed extensively along the west coasts of North Uist, Benbecula and South Uist and in localised bays around Harris and Lewis.
The machair and dune systems developed contemporaneously with the extensive peat cover which dominates the landscapes, particularly in Lewis and North Uist.
The cool wet climate (Birse, 1971) of the islands affected soil formation in two ways.
The low potential water deficit has resulted in many waterlogged soils having subsoils with anaerobic, reducing conditions which restrict plant rooting depths.
Secondly, the waterlogged soils remain cold in spring, and organic matter resulting from vigorous plant growth breaks down only slowly and peat has accumulated widely in the islands.
The machairs, however, are coarse-textured, readily permeable and base-rich, and organic matter breakdown under the aerobic conditions and good nutrient supply in the calcareous soils is more rapid.
A number of soil landscapes can be recognised in the Outer Hebrides related mainly through solid geology, glacial drifts, weathering and the accumulations of shell sand, peat and alluvium.
Five major landform regions related to soil parent materials (Figure 8) are described here and form convenient groupings for describing the soils.
The regions are:
1.
Machair and associated dune systems
2.
Till-covered plain
3.
Hummocky moraines
4.
Rock-controlled lowlands and low hills
5.
Mountains
Machair and associated dune systems
The machairs, gently undulating shell sand deposits, and their associated dune systems cover about 120 square kilometres and occupy long stretches of the western sea-board of South Uist, Benbecula and North Uist.
Many bays on the west of Lewis and, more especially, Harris also have areas of these shelly sands, often confined between scenically dramatic rocky headlands.
The deposits have varying proportions of shell fragments and, according to Mather and Ritchie (1977), four-fifths of the beaches have a lime content of more than 40 per cent.
The lime-rich soils have high values of some properties, especially pH, which is 7.5 to 8.0 in subsoils and 6.5 to 7.5 in topsoils.
The machair landforms have been described by Mather and Ritchie (1977) and Ritchie (1979) as hilly, hillocky, undulating and plain and they also state that 87 per cent lie below 50 metres and 18 per cent below 10 metres O.D. Gneiss hills with smooth slopes facing  the prevailing winds occur in some localities and blown sand has accumulated up to 100 metres on Eoligarry Hill (Barra) and to 150 metres on Pabbay (Sound of Harris).
The hinterland of the machair plains is generally low-lying with slow landward accretion of sand taking place into wet hollows or lochs.
A general traverse from sea to the inland edge crosses the beach sometimes a storm beach with steep shingle banks, and rises into a dune fringe with a fragile vegetation cover of dune plant communities.
The dunes protect the low lying and gently undulating machair plain behind from ingress of the sea at spring tides and in storms.
Away from the dunes the machair level rises gradually before falling again towards wet hollows or lochs at the landward edge.
Erosion has, in some areas, removed much of the sand lying above the water-table and the resulting equilibrium is maintained by the wet soil conditions which inhibit cultivation or erosion.
There are five main subdivisions: dune systems, gently undulating land lying above the influence of the ground-water table, level land close to the water-table, eutrophic peaty wetlands and rocky terrain with windblown sand.
Firstly, active and stabilised dune systems with irregular or moundy landforms comprise dune ridges and hillocks up to 30 metres high but, more usually, 5 metres high and 10 to 20 metres broad with intervening hollows and channels.
The principal soils are calcareous regosols, consisting of weakly developed A horizons overlying raw sand, often with buried A horizons indicating former land surfaces.
Poorly drained calcareous ground-water gleys, in hollows between the dunes, are locally extensive in areas having dune slacks, where deflation of the sand has reached the water-table.
The raw dune elements are colonised by northern marram grass dune pasture (Robertson, 1984) dominated by marram grass (Ammophila arenaria ), with eyebright-red fescue dune pasture on the more stable soils with incipient A horizon development.
Occupying the zone behind the dune systems, on gently undulating to level land below 20 metres elevation, are freely drained, brown calcareous soils and calcareous regosols, where the water-table lies below soil profile depth.
Erosion or accretion of sand by wind action is evident throughout and soil genesis is truncated by erosion or fossilised by deposition.
The soils are relatively stable and have a dark grey-brown A horizon over light brownish grey or pale brown B horizons and white, shelly sand C horizons.
Humus in the topsoil reduces infiltration into these soils and standing water accumulates on the surface after periods of heavy rain though such flooding is of short duration.
Cultivations, with a two-to five-year rotation in many areas, attempt to leave the inverted turf fairly intact and are relatively shallow, to avoid exposing the loose subsoils to wind erosion.
Thirdly, low-lying level terrain where the water-table is close to the surface, and comprising calcareous ground-water gleys, is common near Loch Bee, Benbecula aerodrome and on Baleshare, North Uist.
Moist or wet soil conditions prevail, the effects of gleying under anaerobic conditions increase with depth and the subsoils are blue or blue-grey in colour under dark greyish brown topsoils.
The rate of removal of shell sands decreases as the erosion surface approaches the water-table and a level surface often remains.
Locally, where the machair borders the gneiss landscapes, the lowest elevations are occupied by eutrophic peats or peaty gleys, and very poorly drained mineral soils form narrow corridors of wetlands fringing lochs or the adjoining land.
Lastly, windblown sand has accumulated up to a height of 150 metres, where rock-cored hills with gentle slopes lie close to beach or eroding dune areas which furnish a steady supply of sand.
Many areas of this terrain with gneiss rock outcrops amongst the windblown sand occur from about 10 or 15 metres elevation.
The gneisses have little influence on the soils apart from creating local shelter, where the windblown sand can accumulate.
This land type occurs on Pabbay, Boreray and Berneray (Sound of Harris) and on the islands from Eriskay to Mingulay, and the soils mainly comprise calcareous regosols.
Till-covered plain
Derived from gneisses, sandstones and conglomerates the extensive glacial tills in Lewis have sandy loam textures.
Locally, near the Butt of Lewis, textures are clay loam where the till is formed from Jurassic rocks of the sea floor and, in the Ness district, there is sandy clay loam till.
Lodgement till on slopes and ‘crag and tail’ landforms are developed locally on North Uist, Benbecula and South Uist.
The land is gently undulating, slow to drain and the cool wet climate  favours organic matter accumulation.
Peat development is widespread and the soils include noncalcareous, humic and peaty gleys which have poor natural drainage and slow permeability.
Shedding sites and steeper slopes, often with shallow coarse-textured drifts, have good natural drainage and carry brown forest soils or cultivated humus-iron podzols having dark grey-brown topsoils and bright ochreous subsoils.
The land occurs as three district types; crofting land, peat-cutting areas and blanket peat.
The land under crofting tenure occurs around the coast and is cultivated in narrow strips interspersed with fallow areas which allow soil fertility and structure to recover.
The soils are principally poorly drained noncalcareous or humic gleys, with some cultivated podzols on shedding sites.
Along the west coast a narrow fringe of land is affected by salt spray and carries a close-cropped vernal squill maritime pasture (Scilla verna — Festuca rubra,Robertson, 1984) much favoured by grazing sheep.
At the fringe of the Lewis peat plain, peaty gleys with some peaty podzols occur adjacent to the inbye land of the crofting townships.
Much of this ground has been reclaimed by man's activities, the peat cover gradually being removed for fuel to leave ‘skinned land’ which is now fenced and reseeded.
Unfenced areas commonly have mat-grass (Nardus stricta ) or heath-grass (Danthonia decumbens ) as dominant species.
The bulk of this till plain carries an unrelieved blanket of peat which provides fuel to the crofters but has not been used commercially.
Locally, there are dubh lochans and areas of eroding peat.
Hummocky moraines
Morainic drift with a typical hummocky landform occupies about 10 per cent of the Outer Hebrides.
This drift, formed as an ablation deposit from the wasting of the main ice-sheet, is extensive on North Uist, Benbecula and South Uist on low-lying ground.
Bouldery morainic drift is also extensive in the valleys radiating from the former centres of ice accumulation in the Harris mountains.
The drifts and, to some extent, the soils formed on them, differ in the two physiographic situations.
Firstly, in the lowlands the drifts comprise poorly sorted loamy sands or sands, with a variable content of stones and boulders.
Below the plough layer or the A horizon in uncultivated soils there are cemented or indurated subsoils.
These hard layers often have platy structure and resist easy penetration by water or plant roots.
The well-drained areas on the mounds comprise brown forest soils and humus-iron podzols.
The brown forest soils have a high level of organic matter in their A horizons and a brightly coloured B horizon.
The humus-iron podzols developed in these readily-leached drifts have been cultivated in many localities and the profiles resemble the brown forest soils, though a sharp change from the A horizon to the brighter B horizon is often evident and iron pans are present in some soil profiles, at the top of the indurated layer.
The acid reaction of these soils has almost certainly been ameliorated by the addition of shelly sand from the adjacent machairs.
Soil water and surface runoff tend to accumulate in the hollows between the well-drained mounds and the soil patterns are related to these variations in hydrologic conditions.
The wet hollows form receiving sites where conditions are reducing and anaerobic and the soils, principally gleys, have organic or humose surface horizons.
The nature of the deposits changes in the valley situation where loamy sand textures are still common, but many stones and boulders are present in the drift.
In narrow valleys surface boulders dominate the landscape.
On valley and hillsides, moundiness is less obvious and the more even surface is broken by stream gullies.
Peaty podzols or peaty gleys occupy the mounds and steeper slopes.
In the hummocky terrain of the valley floor the hollows, channels and gentle slopes are occupied by peat.
Small alluvial fans occur on footslopes and have brown forest soils or humus-iron podzols developed in the coarse-textured stony deposits.
Where exposure is severe due to wind-funnelling in cols at about 200 metres elevation, subalpine podzols occupy the crests of the moraine hummocks.
Rock-controlled lowlands and low hills
Covering about 55 per cent of the Outer Hebrides, landscapes with the underlying rock near the surface have shallow drifts in hollows and crevices.
Generally comprising a gently  undulating to rugged low-lying peneplain, and local valley and hillsides and lower mountain slopes, the terrain includes non-rocky gently undulating land (similar to the till-covered landscape in Lewis), slightly to moderately rocky land with a variety of slopes, and very rocky land with rock pavements or abundant rocky knolls and ridges.
Near the machairs on North Uist, Benbecula and South Uist and amongst the morainic drifts on these islands are areas of slightly to moderately rocky undulating lowlands.
The shallow, stony sandy loam till carries a wide range of soil types, including brown forest soils on well-drained knolls, and noncalcareous or peaty gleys in the hollows.
Crofting townships occupy this land which is largely fenced and comprises improved grasslands.
Peaty gleys and peat are developed on the shallow stony tills widespread on hills near Clettraval (133 metres) and Marrival (303 metres) in North Uist, in the central area of Benbecula and, sporadically, north of the Harris mountains.
Organic surface horizons are often thicker than 50 centimetres, and peat-cutting is practised in easily accessible areas around lochs and roads.
Peaty gleys occupy slopes, mounds and ridges.
Moderately rocky land having peaty soils and comprising about 25 per cent of the Outer Hebrides is especially extensive on South Uist, eastern Benbecula, north of the Harris mountains and on the metasedimentary rocks in South Harris.
Crag and tail features occur throughout, but are especially frequent north of Harris.
Peaty gleys and peat are codominant soils on this land, with peaty rankers occupying rock knolls where glacial erosion has removed all drifts.
On the western seaboard of Lewis and Harris from Great Bernera to South Harris, there are extensive areas of very rocky land comprising dissected lowlands and hills with rock morphology ranging from crenellated to pavement.
Drift is largely absent in this terrain, where glacial erosion was severe and the very shallow soils are mainly peaty lithosols and peaty rankers with some peaty gleys or peat in hollows.
Valley and hillsides with steep, slightly to very rocky slopes and having stony colluvial drifts are common in the hilly country on the eastern side of North Uist and South Uist and in the mountainous terrain of Harris.
The soils are mainly peaty gleys and peaty rankers with some peaty podzols on drier sites.
Surface runoff is rapid as is leaching from mineral horizons, and locally, in channels, there are flushed soils.
The few crags on the steepest ground have associated short scree slopes which, in the well-drained conditions have peaty rankers with well-structured organic horizons.
Mountains
Comprising similar terrain to the previous category, but confined to the high ground above 300 to 350 metres this land includes the summits, ridge crests, plateaux, cols and upper slopes of mountains in Harris and on South Uist.
Intense rock comminution by repeated freezing and thawing has formed a stony drift which shows evidence of vertical and lateral movements of both stones and fine earth material by frost-sorting.
Subalpine soils generally occupy the elevation range 300 to 600 metres in the orohemiarctic climate zone of Birse (1971).
The land is gently to steeply sloping and rocky on ridge crests, plateaux, in cols and on mid-slopes of mountains.
Peaty gleys and subalpine podzols are dominant, with some rankers where drift is shallow or absent.
Flushed peat and peaty gleys occupy the wetter channels and hollows where snowmelt waters converge in the spring.
The podzols occur on exposed knolls and on the steeper slopes.
Above 600 metres in the oroarctic climate zone, alpine podzols and gleys with lithosols and rankers occupy the mountain summits, ridge crests and upper slopes.
Freeze-thaw processes disturb the soil profiles (cryoturbation) and loosen the soil fabric.
Surface organic matter accumulation is reduced but humic material is translocated down the soil profile and stains the subsoils.
Soil classification
The soil classification used here is that adopted in Scotland (Soil Survey of Scotland, 1984) for the 1:250 000 scale soil survey of the whole country during which the soils of the Outer Hebrides were mapped and described (Hudson et al, 1982).
It is based principally on  morphological characteristics readily identifiable in the field.
The soils occurring in the Outer Hebrides are listed in Table 1, their distribution is shown on Figure 8, and brief notes of their characteristics are given below.
IMMATURE SOILS have indistinct or weakly developed horizons, generally restricted to surface organic horizons or A horizons resting directly on little-altered parent material or rock.
They comprise principally:
Lithosols , which are restricted in depth and have continuous, coherent and hard rock within 10 centimetres of the surface.
Only an H, O or A horizon is likely to be present above rock.
Regosols with a thin, weakly developed A horizon, which rests directly on unconsolidated material.
The soils are formed on parent material of windblown sand.
Calcareous regosols contain free calcium carbonate in the parent material, shelly sand.
Alluvial soils are developed on recently deposited freshwater, estuarine or marine alluvium and exhibit little profile differentiation or modification to the parent material.
The presence of an A or an O horizon, together with some mottling and weak structure in the subsoil, are characteristic features.
Saline alluvial soils have high levels of exchangeable sodium and the effects of gleying are clearly evident.
The soils are developed on marine or estuarine alluvium found between the normal high-water mark and the limit of highest spring tides.
Mineral alluvial soils have an A horizon and the effects of gleying can be present.
The soils are developed on freshwater alluvium.
Peaty alluvial soils characteristically have an O horizon which usually occurs at the surface but can be interbedded with freshwater alluvial sediments.
The soils may have a high water-table.
Rankers have H, O or A surface horizons more than 10 centimetres thick which rest directly on hard noncalcareous rock or rubble derived from such rock.
Incipient E and B horizons can be present.
Brown rankers have a brown or dark brown A horizon.
Peaty rankers have an O horizon up to 50 centimetres thick.
NON-LEACHED SOILS are characterised by the presence of free lime and have a neutral or alkaline reaction.
Their lower horizons may show some gleying.
Calcareous soils are freely drained soils containing free calcium carbonate within the profile.
Brown calcareous soils contain carbonate materials in the form of rock or shell fragments.
There is a gradual change between all horizons, the B horizons having a brighter colour than the A or C horizons but showing no morphological or chemical evidence of translocated sesquioxides.
LEACHED SOILS are characterised by a uniformly coloured B horizon, by an absence of free lime and by an acid reaction in their A and B horizons.
Their lower horizons may show some gleying.
Brown earths have a uniformly coloured B horizon, a mull or moder humus type and a moderately acid reaction; usually each horizon merges into the one below.
Brown forest soils are freely drained soils having the properties of the brown earth major soil group.
Podzols have surface H or O horizons successively underlain by a grey, bleached E horizon and a more brightly coloured B horizon.
They have a strongly acid reaction and their B horizons often contain illuviated sesquioxides of iron and aluminium and organic matter.
Humus-iron podzols have surface L, F and H horizons.
A thin Ah horizon, not always present, overlies a pale-coloured E horizon with a low organic-matter content.
The B horizons include a dark-coloured, humus-enriched, upper layer (the Bh horizon) and a bright-coloured lower layer (the Bs horizon), the latter usually containing translocated iron and aluminium.
Some variation in drainage status may be found.
Peaty podzols have an O horizon up to 50 centimetres thick.
The E horizon is generally gleyed.
A horizon of humus accumulation may be present above the iron pan (Bf horizon) which is often continuous and forms a barrier to water or roots.
Below the iron pan the Bs horizon is usually bright-coloured, but some variation in drainage status may be found.
Subalpine podzols have L, F and O horizons.
Beneath the E horizon, which is darkened by organic matter, the Bh horizon is thick and very dark in colour with distinct organic coatings on  small stones.
The iron pan (Bf horizon) is generally weakly developed and discontinuous.
Although brightly coloured, the Bs horizon is often thin and weakly developed, merging into the underlying unaltered parent material.
Alpine podzols have either thin L, F and H horizons with an underlying E or A horizon, or a surface A horizon with bleached sand grains.
The Bh horizon is black and sometimes thick, with small stones stained with colloidal humus; the lower part of the horizon often appears less organic-stained but retains a dark reddish brown colour.
The soil fabric is characteristically loose and shows the effects of freeze-thaw processes which can be intense at high altitudes.
GLEYS develop under conditions of intermittent or permanent waterlogging.
A pale-coloured Eg horizon is often prominent in the upper mineral horizons, beneath which the horizons are grey with greenish and bluish tinges and with ochreous mottling.
These colours are of secondary origin and replace those inherited from the parent material.
Surface-water gleys display strongly gleyed sub-surface horizons, the intensity of gleying decreasing with depth.
The colour inherited from the parent material is more apparent as gley phenomena decrease.
Noncalcareous gleys have no free calcium carbonate in the upper horizons of the profile.
An A horizon is often underlain by an Eg horizon which may be well defined in semi-natural soils.
The soils are often developed on parent materials of moderately fine and fine texture.
Humic gleys have no free calcium carbonate in the upper mineral horizons and have a dark-coloured Ahg horizon.
Peaty gleys have no free calcium carbonate in the upper mineral horizons of the profile.
Beneath an O horizon up to 50 centimetres thick, organic staining of the Eg and Bg horizons is often present.
Ground-water gleys develop under the influence of a high ground-watertable.
The effects of gleying increase with depth and the colour inherited from the parent material is not apparent in the lower soil horizons, which are often grey or bluish grey.
Calcareous gleys have free calcium carbonate in the Bg horizon.
Peaty gleys have a surface O horizon up to 50 centimetres thick and do not contain free calcium carbonate in the upper mineral horizons.
Below the Egh horizon, mineral horizons are intensely gleyed and often humus-stained.
ORGANIC SOILS are formed under waterlogged conditions and contain very high amounts of organic matter down to an arbitrary specified depth.
Peat is an organic soil which contains more than 60 per cent of organic matter and exceeds 50 centimetres in thickness.
It can develop in areas of moderate to high rainfall, low mean annual temperatures and high relative humidity and under the influence of ground-water in depressions or basins.
Eutrophic flushed peat is flushed by seepage waters rich in mineral plant-nutrients and usually supports a wide range of plant species, including reeds, tall sedges and flush alderwood where not reclaimed.
Dystrophic peat is not affected by flushing.
The peat supports plant communities dominated by dwarf shrubs, usually heather.
Climate and Vegetation of the Outer Hebrides I.S. ANGUS Nature Conservancy Council, 17 Francis Street, Stornoway, Isle of Lewis 
Introduction
Plant life on islands, as elsewhere, is most affected by climate, substrate, other organisms, and geographic situation, the last in relation to island size and situation in relation to the source of the flora.
In the Western Isles, climatic influences are almost as important as parent material in determining soil types (more important in the case of peat, the most widespread soil type), while they also exert some influence with regard to biogeography.
Meteorological measurements have been recorded at Stornoway since 1856, though the present weather station at Stornoway Airport was not established until 1942, when the Meteorological Office also began recording from Balivanich Airport, Benbecula (Manley 1979).
Records have also been taken over varying periods from a range of widely spaced localities, including (sporadically) outlying stations such as St Kilda.
Precipitation and humidity
Recorded annual precipitation ranges from just over 1000mm in parts of the Broad Bay area of Lewis to over 2400 mm on some of the higher summits of Harris.
The totals for Stornoway and Balivanich are 1094 mm and 1220 mm respectively.
The high ground of Harris and Uig receive proportionally more orographic rainfall, with the summits receiving about 1000 mm more rain per year than adjacent western coasts.
North and north-east Lewis lies in the rain shadow of these hills; the Uist machairs are too low-lying to receive much orographic precipitation, while St Kilda, with a summit at 426 m, is sufficiently high to develop highly localised weather conditions, with increased rainfall, humidity, cloud cover and wind exposure (Campbell 1974).
May and June are the driest months, together accounting for only about 10% of the annual rainfall, while more than 12% falls in December alone.
Days with measurable rainfall (>0.2mm) are fairly evenly spread over the year, with monthly averages ranging from 17 to 26, and a total of 263 days (Manley 1979), of which 200 are ‘wet’, with more than 1 mm recorded.
On higher ground, the number of such wet days rises to over 220 days per year.
Average relative humidity is high throughout the year, ranging from 80 to 88% saturation, with an annual mean of 85%.
Though snow is observed falling on 47 days a year at Stornoway, it is lying (at 0900 hrs) on only 11 of these days (5 in the Uists).
Late snow beds are rare in the hills, though limited areas may survive on screes in north-facing corries which receive no winter sun and relatively little summer sun.
Snow may also lie later in block screes (which also tend to be located below north-facing slopes because they were mostly formed by freeze-thaw action).
The ecological significance of these precipitation figures in terms of soil moisture may be judged by relating them to the amount of moisture lost through evaporation and transpiration over a given period.
If rainfall exceeds potential evapo-transpiration losses there is a Potential Water Surplus, and a Potential Water Deficit if the converse is the case (Green 1964).
Most of Lewis and Harris and the uplands of South Uist have a very low Potential Water Deficit, as precipitation equals or even exceeds evapo-transpiration in all months of the year, and the uplands of southern Lewis, Harris and South Uist are so moist that even in summer (April-September) there is a PWS of over 500 mm.
This is related to the fact that rainfall increases with altitude, while evapo-transpiration decreases (Birse & Dry 1970).
A long history of water surpluses over much of the area of the Outer Hebrides has led to severe leaching of many Hebridean soils, and to the formation of peaty podzols, gleys and peaty gleys and ultimately peat itself (Hudson et al .
1982).
Sunshine
Average daily sunshine at Stornoway is 3.40 hours, and 3.89 hours at Benbecula (Manley 1979).
The slightly lower figure for Stornoway may be caused by a greater tendency for cloud formation over the land to the west and south-west (the sources of the prevailing winds), while exposed western coasts tend to have good sunshine records (at sea level)(Green& Harding 1983).
That the sunniest months are May and June is related to the tendency for anticyclones to develop in the Atlantic during these months bringing fine, clear weather to the islands, sometimes for long periods (Manley 1948).
The relatively high latitude of the islands means that days in midsummer are long, with very long twilights, with correspondingly short days in winter.
The latitude also reduces the angle at which the sun's rays strike the earth, lengthening shadows and increasing the filtering effect of atmospheric haze (Green 1964).
Steep-sided, north facing corries such as Coire Roineabhail in South Harris may be in perpetual shadow in winter and receive very little sunshine even in summer.
Even where direct sunlight is received for much of the day, its heating effect is severely restricted by high winds and high humidity (Green & Harding 1983).
Wind
The prevailing winds originate from the south and south-west, a consequence of the frequency with which depressions (with their anti-clockwise circulation) pass to the north of the islands.
The average wind speed at Stornoway is 14.4 knots (7.4m/s)(Birse & Robertson 1970) and gales are recorded on 50 days a year (Manley 1979).
Indeed, it has been said that the north-west of Scotland has a higher sustained wind speed than any other inhabited part of the world (Gloyne 1968).
Birse & Robertson (1970) have classified only a few long, deep valleys of the Western Isles as ‘moderately exposed’, with average wind speeds below 8.5 knots (4.4m/s).
Most of the land area was classified as ‘very exposed’, with average wind speeds of 12–15.5 knots, but only the highest summit areas were ‘extremely exposed’, with average wind speeds exceeding 15.5 knots (8m/s).
High average wind speeds tend to stunt the upward growth of plants and encourage the lateral growth of dwarf forms, e.g. of Calluna vulgaris or Juniperus communis , though prostrate forms of the former are not encountered as frequently as expected on exposed mountain plateaux.
A Racomitrium -rich prostrate Calluna heath has, however, been noted at an altitude of only 200 m on Mullach an Reidhachd, North Harris (NB090143)(Brown 1986).
Wind also has a profound effect on plant growth in the Western Isles in that is usually salt-laden, particularly when it has come from the west or south-west, having passed over long distances of wave-tom ocean.
The salt content of the air drops off significantly with increasing distance from the sea, though local variations in topography affect this relationship.
When maximum gust speed exceeds 30 knots, the salt content of the wind increases proportionally as there is more sea spray, and the spray tends to be carried further inland.
(Holden 1961, Randall 1973).
Studies on the Monach Isles National Nature Reserve suggest that salt-laden winds affect taller plants most, so that exposed coastal plant communities tend to consist mainly of low-growth plant forms — not just because of the stunting effect of the wind — but also because of the salt it carries (Randall 1973).
The prostrate form of Calluna recorded from Hirta, St Kilda (McVean 1961), may be linked more to salt-burn than to altitudinal descent of the montane growth form.
In many coastal locations the maritime lichen Ramalina siliquosa may grow in profusion far inland, while cliff-top saltings occur on many exposed western coasts, notable in Uig, Lewis.
Glaux maritima has been reported from cliff-tops over 200 m high on Mingulay (Clark 1956).
Salt-laden winds also increase the salinity of lochs close to the west coast, and may raise the nutrient content and base status of coastal blanket bogs as in western Ireland (Sparling 1967), possibly explaining the presence of plants such as Schoenus nigricans , which grows profusely in some coastal peatlands in the Western Isles.
In conjunction with changing Postglacial sea levels, high winds have driven large quantities of mineral sand and shell fragments inshore and inland to form machair, arguably the single most important habitat in the Western Isles for man as well as wildlife.
While it is well known  that machair may extend as much as 2 km inland in South Uist, less well known is the altitude to which blown shell sand exerts an ecological influence: the dunes at Luskentyre Banks (NG 0699) are up to 35 m high, while the presence of large amounts of wind-blown shell fragments is evident from the presence of charophytes in lochs on Tairaval (NB 1135)(Angus, unpublished NCC report) and at Mangersta (NB 0131)(Biagi et al 1985), both sites being more than 50 m above sea level.
Currie (1988, in litt.) has also remarked on the presence of wind-blown sand high on hills at Cnoc an Fhithich (NF6504) and Ben Eoligarry (NF7007), both Barra; on Beinn Sleibhe, Berneray (NF9283); and on slopes above Traigh an Taoibh Thuath, Northton, Harris.
Wind has played its part in restricting the distribution of woodland in the Western Isles, in conjunction with deteriorating climate in the late Postglacial period (Angus 1987 -Birks, this volume) though grazing and burning of moorland have also played their part.
Today most of the remaining fragments are confined to sheltered gorges or inaccessible crags or to some islands in inland lochs, the latter often displaying a wind-contoured profile.
Aspect is often important in exposed areas in relation to prevailing winds: in North Harris the rare Atlantic liverwort Herbertus aduncus is frequent, but in some areas is more profuse on north-facing slopes, usually around boulders where there is additional shelter.
On the summit ridges Racomitrium is often confined to the lee side of boulders.
Temperature
The truly maritime nature of the climate of the Western Isles is reflected in the way that air temperatures tend to be more influenced by sea temperatures than sunshine.
Thus, according to mean daily temperatures, the warmest months are July and August (12.9°C) rather than the sunnier months of May and June, while the coldest are January and February (4.1°C), displaying a similar, if less marked, lag.
This gives an annual range of only 8.8°C, one of the lowest ranges in Britain.
There are on average 47 days of air frost a year at Stornoway, 33 in Benbecula, and an estimated 20 in Barra.
The latest and earliest dates for frost are about 1st April and 1st December respectively in the Uists, giving a particularly long frost-free period, matched in Britain only in the southern Inner Hebrides and in the Scilly and Channel Isles (Green 1964).
Solifluction terraces are present on some of the higher plateaux (Peacock 1984); solifluction hummocks and terraces arise from alternate freezing and thawing (cryoturbation).
A report of plough marks behind stones on Oreval (662 m), North Harris,(A. Brown, pers. comm.) suggests that these are still active, indicating a marked contrast in frost frequency between some exposed plateaux and the coastlands of the Western Isles.
Some authors have attributed the presence of certain southern plants such as the moss Myurium hochstetteri to the relatively frost-free winters while Clark (1956) believed that local ins of heather were less resistant to frost, resulting in a notable loss of Calluna in Harris in the winter of 1946–47.
In terms of accumulated temperature (day°C above a growth threshold of 5.6°C) the warmest parts of the Western Isles are in southern South Uist and Barra.
Most of the land is ‘fairly warm’ but of course becomes cooler with increasing altitude.
Only the higher summits are ‘very cold’, and there are no ‘extremely cold’ areas with annual accumulated temperature lower than 300 day°C (Birse 1971).
It is now known that many plants grow at temperatures as low as 0°C, albeit slowly, and it is thought that higher temperatures are more important in the earlier half of the year.
New figures for accumulated temperature have been calculated using 0°C as the growth threshold and covering the months January to June inclusive.
The values of this ‘lower quartile of accumulated temperature’ are 1179 day°C at Stornoway, 1265 at Balivanich, and 1311 in Tiree (cf.
Lerwick 954; Kirkwall, 1073; Wick, 1066; Inverness, 1246; Dumfries, 1249; Cambridge, 1413; Penzance, 1658)(Bibby et al 1982).
Oceanicity
Continental climates become increasingly maritime or ‘oceanic’ westwards, an effect superimposed on the expected effect of increasing latitude.
With increasing oceanicity, precipitation increases and is more uniformly distributed over the year, the number of ‘wet’ days increases, and humidity and wind speeds rise, while annual temperature range decreases (Poore & McVean 1957, McVean & Ratcliffe 1962).
All the islands of the Western Isles are classed as ‘hyperoceanic’, this being the most oceanic sector of Eurasia (Birse 1971).
Ratcliffe (1968) has pointed out that lower-lying areas of the Outer Hebrides are rather drier than the mountains of these islands, but are nevertheless much wetter than low-lying areas of the eastern Highlands.
The proliferation of gullies and coastal indentations gives increased humidity on a local scale.
The extreme oceanicity of the climate of the Western Isles has a profound effect on vegetation, so that montane plants grow at much lower altitudes than in more continental areas.
In the Western and Northern Isles and on the north-west mainland of Scotland, it is not uncommon to find montane plants growing at or near sea level, though this phenomenon is probably better demonstrated in NW Sutherland and Shetland than in the Western Isles.
Species exhibiting altitudinal descent in the Outer Hebrides include Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Polygonum viviparum, Oxyria digyna, Salix herbacea, Saxifraga oppositifolia, Sedum rosea , and Silene acaulis (Currie 1979).
The combination of high precipitation, water surpluses, large number of wet days and low insolation experienced in highly oceanic areas is thought to increase the rate of growth and the competitive abilities of bryophytes, notably Sphagnum species, hypnoid mosses and Racomitrium (Poore & McVean 1957), all of which are very conspicuous in plant communities in the Western Isles.
West Atlantic bryophytes are particularly well represented in the upland plant communities of the Western Isles, a feature undoubtedly linked to the high number of wet days on the higher ground of southern Lewis, Harris and South Uist (Ratcliffe 1968).
The Nature Conservancy Council's Upland Vegetation Survey recorded 14 patches of hepatic-rich Calluna vulgaris heath in North Harris, with a total area of 65 ha, the fourth highest figure recorded by the Survey in Scotland (Hobbs 1988).
Liverworts in these communities include Herbertus aduncus, Scapania gracilis, Plagiochila spinulosa, P.carringtonii and Mylia anomala , as well as the filmy fern Hymenophyllum wilsonii (Brown 1986).
The moss Campylopus shawii is another of the Atlantic bryophytes particularly common in wet heaths in North Harris (Ratcliffe 1968,1977b).
The need for a saturated atmosphere may give rise to a particular abundance of these Atlantic bryophytes on NE- and E-facing slopes (Ratcliffe 1968), as noted above for Herbertus aduncus .
Some Atlantic bryophytes such as Pleurozua purpurea (common in many blanket bogs) descend to low levels in the Western Isles.
The combination of climatic factors results in late flowering of many species in relation to their counterparts elsewhere.
This is particularly noticeable on the machair, which usually retains its bare winter appearance till the end of May, and those who wish to see it at its best should wait until mid-June or even July.
Acknowledgements
I am grateful to Martin Ball, Andrew Currie, Mary Elliott, A. S. Maclennan and D. B. A. Thompson for their helpful comments on a draft of this chapter.
I would also like to thank the Nature Conservancy Council's Upland Vegetation Survey and Andrew Currie for allowing me to quote from their unpublished reports.
Floristic and Vegetational History of the Outer Hebrides H. J. B. BIRKS Botanical Institute, University of Bergen, Allegaten 41, N-5007 Bergen, Norway.
Introduction
The present-day landscape of the Outer Hebrides is one of the most distinctive in the British Isles.
It is characterised by being almost completely treeless and by having an almost continuous blanket of infertile acid bog and moorland dotted with innumerable lochs of all shapes and sizes and bare outcrops of the underlying acidic Lewisian gneiss.
Lewis is a wilderness of bog and loch, Harris abounds in bog interspaced by bare rock, cliffs and blockfields, and boulder-strewn mountains, and the Uists are a mosaic of lochs and bogs, bordered on the west by a fertile coastal strip.
There are numerous crofting townships scattered around this coastal strip, wherever areas of calcareous wind-blown shell-sand, sand dunes, and pasture (machair) occur.
Such areas are common along the western coasts of Barra, S. Uist, Benbecula, and N. Uist, and are local on Harris and Lewis.
Machair forms about 10% of the land area.
Away from the species-rich machair, the present-day flora and vegetation are species-poor, with only about 25 phanerogam species comprising most of the vegetation of bog, moorland, and loch.
In a few sheltered rocky glens and on inaccessible cliff ledges and islands in larger lochs, dense stands of scrub of Salix aurita and S. cinerea subsp. oleifolia occur with scattered bushes of Betula pubescens, Corylus avellana, Lonicera periclymenum, Populus tremula, Rosa afzeliana, Rubus fruticosus agg., and Sorbus aucuparia (Spence, 1960; Bennett and Fossitt, 1989).
In these ungrazed areas there is often a lush growth of Luzula sylvatica , ferns such as Athyrium filixfelnina and Dryopteris dilatata , and tall-herbs such as Angelica sylvestris and Filipendula ulmarua .
In a few ravines and glens in the Uists warmth-demanding, southern-atlantic cryptogams occur locally, including the Macaronesian-tropical species Jubula hutchinsiae and Dryopteris aemula .
Their occurrences suggest mild sheltered conditions (Ratcliffe, 1968).
The montane flora is poor, reflecting the widespread, strongly acidic bedrock, the abundance of blanket peat unsuitable for many montane species, and the limited extent of open ground at high altitude.
A few basiphilous species occur locally on cliffs, including Draba incana, Saxifraga oppositifolia, Saussurea alpina , and Silene acaulis .
Lochans in the S.Uist machair provide the only British localities for Potamogeton epihydrus , a plant with a so-called amphi-atlantic distribution centred on eastern North America and the western seaboard of Europe.
Other Hebridean species with comparable distributions include Najas flexilis and Spiranthes romanzoffiana .
Curiously this phytogeographical element in Scotland and Ireland consists almost entirely of aquatic or mire plants (Dahl, 1959,1987; Perring, 1962).
Amongst the bryophyte flora, there are several British endemic (e.g. Oxystegus hibernicus ) or near-endemic species (e.g. Campylopus shawii, Leptodontium recurvifolium, Myurium hochstetten .
Many of the latter group exhibit spectacular disjunctions in their world range, occurring, for example, outside the British Isles only in Macaronesia , West Indies, or Queen Charlotte islands off the west coast of Canada (Ratcliffe, 1968).
The present flora, vegetation, and landscape of the Outer Hebrides thus pose several interesting and challenging questions.
Did plants survive the glaciations in the Outer Hebrides, as Heslop Harrison (1948b, 1953) hypothesised for amphi-atlantic species and bryophytes such as M. hochstetteri ?
Have the flora and vegetation always been as species-poor as today, or has this poverty developed over thousands of years during the post-glacial as a result of habitat loss, soil deterioration, or land-use change?
Was the mountain flora once richer, for example during the late-glacial period of about 13,500 — 10,000 years ago when deglaciation was occurring and soils were more fertile?
Were trees once more widely distributed and more abundant before the onset of human interference, intensive grazing, moor burning, and  blanket-bog development?
If trees were once common, what were the major species — birch, hazel, rowan, oak, elm, alder, pine?
How much of the present landscape is a result of human interference over thousands of years and how much is a result of natural processes of soil degradation in an extreme, oceanic environment?
Was the climate once milder, and hence could southern-atlantic ferns and bryophytes have once been more widespread?
Are their present localities relicts of this wider distribution?
Answers to these and related questions can be provided by palaeoecological studies involving reconstructions of the floristic, vegetational, and by inference, environmental history of the Outer Hebrides from pollen and macrofossil (seeds, fruits, wood remains, etc.) analyses of peats and loch sediments.
Pollen preserved in such sediments provides a record of the local and regional flora and vegetation, whereas macrofossils reflect more local conditions.
An independent chronology for these reconstructions is essential and this is provided by radiocarbon-dating of organic material preserved in the sediments.
Although at first sight, the great abundance of bogs and freshwater lochs on the Outer Hebrides suggests an abundance of suitable sites for palaeoecological studies, on closer examination several are unsuitable for detailed investigation.
Almost all the bogs have been extensively peat-cut for domestic fuel.
Some of the machair lochs have little or no sediment because of intensive wind fetch and wave erosion.
Deposits of late-glacial age that accumulated in small closed basins within glacial drift in the valleys are now often covered by a thick mantle of peat and are difficult to locate except by extensive systematic borings.
In addition many promising lochs and undisturbed bogs (e.g. Goode and Lindsay, 1979) are remote and difficult to reach with heavy coring equipment.
These problems, coupled with the lack of interest amongst palaeoecologists in extreme northern and western areas until quite recently (Birks, 1988), result in comparatively little being known about the detailed floristic and vegetational history of these ecologically unique islands.
Vegetational history before the late-glacial (pre-13,500 years before present)
Nothing is known about the flora and vegetation of the Outer Hebrides in any previous interglacials, as no unambiguous interglacial deposits have, so far, been discovered.
A possible interglacial sequence occurs at Toa Galston, northern Lewis (Sutherland and Walker, 1984).
Its pollen assemblage is dominated by Gramineae, Cyperaceae, and Ericaceae, with a variety of open-ground herbs, all of which occur today on Lewis.
The most interesting macrofossil is Sphagnum imbricatum , which today is local on Hebridean bogs.
The age of the Toa Galston peat bed is not known, as it lies beyond the range of radiocarbon-dating (more than c.47,000 years before present (B.P.)).
Detailed mapping and dating of geomorphological features (Sutherland and Walker, 1984; Sutherland, 1984) indicate that part of northern Lewis was ice-free during the last glaciation and the last Scottish ice-sheet did not extend beyond the Outer Hebrides, contrary to the widespread assumption that this ice-sheet extended to the edge of the continental shelf.
It is possible that the Outer Hebrides supported an independent small ice-cap (Flinn, 1978; von Weymarn, 1979).
This geological evidence raises the question whether any plants survived the entire last glacial stage (ca. 125,000–13,500 B.P.) in the Outer Hebrides, as Heslop Harrison (1948b, 1953) and Dahl (1954, 1955) proposed on the basis of present-day distribution patterns.
Palaeoecological studies of deposits dating from 27,000–15000 B.P. on Lewis and Hirta in the St Kilda archipelago provide important insights into the Hebridean flora and vegetation during parts of the last glacial stage.
An organic-rich silt lens at Tolsta Head, Lewis is overlain by over 2 m of glacial till.
The silt is about 27,000 B.P. and its fossil assemblages suggest a herb-dominated vegetation with Salix (inc.
S. herbacea ) and Juniperus and open-ground taxa such as Artemisia, Lycopodium selago , and Armeria maritima (von Weymarn and Edwards, 1973; Bimie, 1983).
Botanically the most interesting feature is the presence of Koenigia islandica pollen (Edwards, 1979), indicating that K. islandica grew on Lewis about 27,000 years ago.
It is not known today from the Outer Hebrides, being confined in the British Isles to Skye and Mull.
An organic sand overlain by local periglacial and glacial deposits occurs on Hirta (Sutherland et al., 1984).
It dates from about 14,600 24,700 B.P. and contains a herb-dominated pollen  assemblage with occasional grains of Helianthemum , a genus very rare in western Scotland today and absent from the Outer Hebrides.
These recent studies establish the presence of plants, including some arctic, arctic-alpine, and open-ground herbs on Lewis and Hirta during parts of the last glacial stage.
The present geological and palaeoecological evidence suggests that there is a possibility that some taxa with northern distributions today may have survived the entire last glaciation in parts of the Outer Hebrides (cf.
Dahl, 1954, 1955, 1987); however, the glacial survival of amphi-atlantic species such as Potamogeton epihydrus or Najas exilis (as suggested by Harrison, 1948b) or bryophytes such as Myurium hochstetteri, Leptodontium recurvifolium , or Campylopus shawii seems unlikely in view of reconstructed July mean temperatures during the last glacial maximum on St Kilda of 4°C and mean sea-surface temperatures around Rockall of 0–2°C (Sutherland et al., 1984).
The history of these and phytogeographically similar species in the Outer Hebrides remains, as elsewhere, a major phytogeographical mystery.
Late-glacial vegetational history (13,500 -10,000 years B.P.)
The late-glacial period comprises the time of deglaciation after the last glacial maximum, and reflects major climatic amelioration.
This trend was interrupted at about 11,000 -10,300 B.P. by a widespread climatic deterioration that resulted in the redevelopment or expansion of corrie glaciers and small ice-caps in the Scottish Highlands, the so-called Loch Lomond stadial.
Preliminary observations on Harris (Birks, unpublished) suggest that local glaciers may have been present during the stadial in some of the valleys around Clisham, Ullaval, Tirga Mor, and Uisgnaval More.
On St Kilda solifluction and the formation of pro-talus ramparts occurred at this time (Sutherland et al., 1984).
No pollen analyses of undisputed late-glacial deposits from the Outer Hebrides have been published.
As discussed in the introduction such deposits are difficult to locate because of extensive peat cover in the lowlands.
However, the late-glacial of the Outer Hebrides is currently being studied in detail by M. J. C. Walker, J. J. Lowe, D. G. Sutherland, and associates.
The results of their work will be of considerable interest, and will permit important comparisons to be made with the late-glacial flora and vegetation of Skye (Birks, 1973; Walker et al., 1988) and Mull (Lowe and Walker, 1986).
Pollen spectra of early post-glacial age from Lewis (Birks and Madsen, 1979), S. Uist (Bennett and Fossitt, unpublished) and St Kilda (Walker, 1984) provide a glimpse of what the late-glacial flora and vegetation may have been like.
Open species-rich grasslands with Ranunculus ,Plantago maritima, P. major, Thalictrum , and scattered Juniperus and Empetrum nigrum -dominated heaths were probably widespread.
Tall-herb and Salix communities with Rumex acetosa, Filipendula , and abundant ferns may have been common in wetter areas.
On shallow soils and exposed sites, open communities occurred with, for example,Lycopodium selago, L. alpinum, L. clavatum, Armeria maritima, Artemisia, Saxifraga oppositifolia, S. hypnoides, S. stellaris , and  Helianthemum .
The vegetation as a whole may have resembled, physiognomically at least, modern species-poor subalpine vegetation of western Norway.
All the indications are that the Hebridean flora and vegetation were more diverse than today, presumably as a result of the widespread more fertile, unleached mineral soils present immediately after deglaciation and the cessation of periglaciation.
Almost all the species present then still occur today on the Outer Hebrides, for example in the mountains or on open, mildly basic soils on sea-cliffs.
Helianthemum is extinct.
Post-glacial vegetational history (10,000 — O years B.P.)
There are only a few detailed pollen diagrams from the Outer Hebrides that cover all or part of the last 10,000 years, the so-called post-glacial.
Investigations in Lewis (Erdtman, 1924), S.Uist (Heslop Harrison and Blackburn, 1946; Ritchie, 1985), Barra (Blackburn, 1948), Benbecula (Ritchie, 1966), Pabbay (Ritchie, 1985), and St Kilda (McVean, 1961) are unfortunately not sufficiently detailed to permit any useful reconstruction of the post-glacial floristic or vegetational history.
However, they all show very high frequencies of non-tree pollen, mainly Ericaceae and Gramineae.
When calculated on an appropriate pollen sum, they suggest that there was never any extensive, continuous forest cover.
The most complete and reliably dated sequence comes from near Little Loch Roag, Lewis (Birks and Madsen, 1979).
The pollen and macrofossil record suggests that after a phase with  species-rich grasslands, tall-herb, fern, and willow communities, and some open vegetation present soon after the late-glacial, the vegetation cover became complete about 9000 B.P. The major vegetation types were species-rich grasslands, with tall-herbs and fern-dominated stands and small areas of birch and hazel scrub in sheltered areas, perhaps similar to the vegetation today surviving on ungrazed ledges and islands and in protected ravines.
Soils were probably moderately fertile brown-earths.
However, by 7700 B.P. Calluna heaths expanded, presumably as a result of soil acidification and podsolisation.
The dominant vegetation was still grassland and tall-herb communities with Angelica sylvestris, Filipendula ulmaria, Succisa pratensis , and ferns including Osmunda regalis .
There was never any extensive woodland around the site, only scattered birch, willow, hazel, and rowan scrub.
By about 5000 B.P. the widespread regional vegetation had become a mosaic of acid grassland,Calluna heath, and bog.
Tall-herb and fern-rich communities became increasingly rare, presumably confined to areas of locally fertile soils.
There is evidence for significant human influence on the vegetation from about 4000 B.P., leading to further expansion of heather moor, reduction of willow scrub and tall-herb stands, and spread of grassland and pasture with Plantago lanceolata .
There is evidence for some cereal cultivation between 1700–1100 B.P., the time of colonisation of the Hebrides by Scots and Picts.
The above interpretation of the former extent of trees on Lewis has been challenged by Wilkins (1984) on the grounds that birch, pine, and willow wood-remains occur in peats near Little Loch Roag and these indicate ‘the extensive growth of Pinus on Lewis prior to 4500 B.P.’(Wilkins, 1984, p. 258).
Remains of birch, hazel, and, more rarely, alder and pine have been recorded from Lewis, Harris, Benbecula, and the Uists (see references in Birks and Madsen (1979) as well as Wilkins' (1984) own records), although the status of the pine records from the Uists is unclear (K. D. Bennett personal communication).
There is, however,no ‘disparity’(Wilkins, 1984) between the wood-remains on Lewis and our interpretation of the Roag pollen data.
Both can indicate small areas of scrub in local, sheltered situations and a predominantly treeless regional vegetation.
It is perfectly feasible to have sparse tree populations at densities of 0.25 trees ha&sup1;(= 200 trees or less within 2–5 km radius of a pollen site) that are largely undetected pollen analytically (see Bennett (1985) for the basis of these calculations).
The so-called ‘disparity’ is simply that pollen primarily provides an integrated record of regional vegetation over a large area, whereas macrofossils reflect strictly local patterns.
Pine stumps on Lewis date from 4800 — 3900 B.P., suggesting that pine was a late arrival there.
Interestingly, pine reached Skye at about the same time (Birks and Williams, 1983).
It became extinct over large areas of North-West Scotland, including Lewis and Skye, between 4300 — 3900 B.P. (see Birks, 1977; Bennett, 1984).
Reasons for this widespread and spectacular demise are not fully understood, but a combination of climatic change and human activity may have accelerated the replacement of pine on flat and gently sloping ground by treeless blanketbog.
There is independent evidence for a change to a more oceanic climate with increased precipitation and strong winds at 4300 — 4000 B.P. (see Birks and Williams, 1983), possibly resulting from shifts in the Atlantic storm tracks due to changing positions and strengths of the Azores high and Iceland low.
Such a climatic change would severely limit pine growth by causing waterlogging, encouraging bog expansion, and inhibiting regeneration by reducing the number of good seed-years.
Interestingly, Ritchie (1985) proposes that massive sand-blowing and renewed machair formation on Pabbay began at about 4300 B.P. Machair development had been occurring earlier as a result of rising sea-level carrying glacially derived sand across the shallow, gentle off-shore shelf to create early machair beaches and dunes (Ritchie, 1979; Whittington and Ritchie, 1988).
However, development was enhanced after about 4500 B.P. There is also evidence for increased storms and winds at this time elsewhere in the Outer (Simpson, 1966) and Inner (Birks, 1987) Hebrides and from Orkney (e.g. Keatinge and Dickson, 1979).
Ritchie (1985) and Whittington and Ritchie (1988) argue that extensive machair has developed in the last 4000 years and that such a fundamental change in the geography and soils of the west coast would have had great influence on settlement history and patterns in this extreme marginal area.
There is clearly a complex but poorly understood interaction between climatic change, vegetation dynamics, machair formation, sea-level rise, and human settlement in the Outer Hebrides that would repay further study (Whittington and Ritchie, 1988).
The former occurrence of coastal stands of birch, as indicted by submerged wood-remains of mid-post-glacial age off Pabbay, between the Sound of Harris and N. Uist, and on the west.
coast of Benbecula and S. Uist (Ritchie, 1966, 1979, 1985; Currie, 1979) also suggest that the frequency of westerly storms must have been less prior to 4000 B.P. As Currie (1979 p. 227) suggests, ‘the stumps remaining are not likely to be an indication of forest, but rather the evidence of such sheltered locations where small woods survived the climatic conditions, often in areas which are now submerged by the sea’.
Sea-level was 3–5 m lower between 8000 and 5100 B.P., as evidenced by abundant submerged terrestrial deposits along the west coast of the Uists (Ritchie, 1966, 1979,1985).
Work currently in progress by K. D. Bennett and J. A. Fossitt is providing new and exciting insights into the vegetational history of the Uists.
Pollen analysis from Loch Lang, S.Uist (Bennett and Fossitt unpublished) near the famous Allt Volagir ravine (Spence, 1960) show maximum tree pollen values of between 50% and 70% total pollen for the early and mid-postglacial.
The pollen frequencies suggest that woodlands of birch, hazel, oak, and alder were locally abundant with some elm, ash, and willow.
Associates include Ilex aquifolium, Hedera helix, Pteridium aquilinum , and other ferns.
This reconstruction contrasts with the inferred vegetational history at Little Loch Roag further north on the western side of Lewis.
A similar contrast exists today in the cryptogamic flora of Lewis and the Uists, with several warmth-demanding species of shaded rocks and ravines (e.g. Dryopteris aemula, Marchesinia mackaii ,Lophocolea fragrans, Jubula hutchinsiae ) being present in the Uists but absent or very rare in Lewis.
The Loch Lang pollen record and its clear indications of mixed birch-hazel-oak-alder woodlands in the early and mid-post-glacial suggest that these southern-atlantic cryptogams may indeed be relicts from the period of more extensive woodland cover in the mid-post-glacial and these shade-demanding species have survived locally in ravines, gullies, and sheltered block litters on the Uists.
Bog, grassland, and heathland expanded around Loch Lang in the later post-glacial to form the present predominantly treeless landscape of S. Uist.
This expansion was almost certainly a result of a complex interaction between soil degradation, human impact, grazing, bog development, and, possibly, climatic change.
When radiocarbon dates are available from Loch Lang and Bennett and Fossitt's investigations at other Outer Hebridean sites are completed, we will have a firmer factual basis for interpreting the vegetational history and the underlying factors that have influenced the temporal and spatial patterns of the past flora and vegetation in the Outer Hebrides.
Pollen spectra from shallow peat deposits associated with windblown sand on north-east Benbecula and southern Grimsay (Whittington and Ritchie, 1988) also indicate the possible local occurrence of oak, elm, and alder in mid-post-glacial times.
Local-scale studies in the Callanish area of Lewis (Bohnke, 1988) similarly indicate that small pockets of birch, hazel, willow, rowan, and aspen woodland with some Lonicera periclymenum, Melampyrum , and ferns occurred locally in sheltered areas.
Bohncke proposes from detailed pollen analyses of several pollen profiles that human clearance of these pockets began as early as 7600, 5000, and 4200 B.P..
Almost total clearance occurred at about 3500 B.P. The Standing Stones of Callanish are thought to date from 3750 — 3500 B.P.
Walker's (1984) detailed diagram from Gleann Mor, St Kilda is unfortunately incomplete, with much of the mid-post-glacial missing.
The pollen stratigraphy indicates that Salix -dominated vegetation, with a wide variety of herbs was prominent until about 6000 B.P. At about this time Empetrum and Calluna heath, grassland with abundant Plantago lanceolata and P. maritima , and fern-rich vegetation became widespread.
Then there is a hiatus in the profile, with the period 5500 — 2000 B.P. missing, possibly as a result of drying out (Walker, 1983) or, more likely, as a result of prehistoric peat-cutting before 2000 B.P. (Birks, 1987; Whittington and Ritchie, 1988).
From about 2000 B.P. the vegetation was maritime grassland and heath with abundant Plantago maritima, P. Lanceolata, Potentilla , and Ranunculus .
Walker interprets changes in the relative frequency of P. maritima pollen in terms of recent climatic changes, particularly changing storm-frequencies associated with the ‘Little Ice Age’ during the second millennium AD.
In the absence of radiocarbon dates these interpretations must remain untested but attractive hypotheses.
There is no evidence from pollen or macrofossils to indicate any tree or shrub growth on St Kilda except for Salix .
Although climatic changes undoubtedly occurred during the post-glacial, it appears that the principal determinants of regional vegetational change in the Outer Hebrides have been natural soil changes, with widespread leaching, podsolisation, and bog development beginning at  about 7000 B.P. From about 5000 B.P. or even earlier (Bohnke, 1988), human influence has also been an important factor.
In terms of climatic change, the major change in the Outer Hebrides appears to have been about 4000 B.P. leading to the extinction of Pinus in Lewis and Harris and the initiation or expansion of widespread machair development, probably as a result of increased storm frequency and westerly gales.
Changes in wind appear to have been more important ecologically than changes in temperature or precipitation.
It is likely that small areas of birch-hazel scrub were once more widespread in sheltered areas in Lewis prior to 4000 B.P., and that woodland of birch, oak, hazel, elm, and alder formerly occurred in S. Uist.
The report of a nut of Trapa natans , the water chestnut, from Loch Ceann a'Bhaigh, S. Uist (Heslop Harrison and Blackburn, 1946) would, if it is really of post-glacial age, indicate an enormous northward range-extension of Trapa (see Flenley et al., 1975) and suggest a major climatic warming.
The nut was not, however, found in situ , but washed up on the loch shore.
Perhaps the nut is of interglacial age and redeposited from, as yet, undiscovered interglacial deposits within the catchment of the loch.
In the absence of further work, this record remains enigmatic.
A total of 158 taxa have been identified as pollen, spores, or macrofossils from the Outer Hebrides.
Of these, twelve (e.g. Taia, Fagus, Juglans, Abies, Picea, Ephedra, Sarcobatus vermiculatus ) are almost certainly the result of far-distance pollen-transport or secondary redeposition.
Of the 146 taxa that, in terms of their present-day pollen representation, almost certainly grew on the Outer Hebrides, several are now extinct there.
These include Pinus sylvestris, Quercus, Ulmus glabra, Alnus glutinosa, Mercurialis perennis, Koenigia islandica, Helianthemum, Cannabis sativa/ Humulus lupulus , and Anthoceros laevis .
The timing and reasons for these extinctions vary from taxon to taxon.
Soil deterioration, competition, and climatic change may, as on Skye (Birks, 1973) have eliminated Helianthemum in the early post-glacial.
Soil acidification, bog development, and scrub and woodland reduction in the mid- or late-post-glacial may have exterminated Ulmus, Alnus, Quercus , and M. perennis , whereas climatic change around 4000 B.P. probably caused the extinction of P. sylvestris.
K. islandica could have been affected by competition and loss of habitat, as it is confined today to very open, mildly basic wet gravel flushes and, more rarely, fine-grained screes on Skye and Mull.
Land-use changes may have eliminated Cannabis sativa (formerly cultivated on Lewis,— see Bohncke, 1988) and Anthoceros laevis .
Compared with fossil pollen spectra from Skye and elsewhere in the Inner Hebrides, spores of Gymnocarpium dryopteris are conspicuous in the Outer Hebrides by their absence.
Although this plant occurs there today, its absence in the pollen record suggests that it was never common in the Outer Hebrides.
The vegetational and floristic history of the Outer Hebrides can be summarised as one of progressive impoverishment.
Because of their insular ecology, area, distance from mainland sources, and limited habitat range the flora has always been restricted, simply because of the vagaries of dispersal, establishment, and extinction.
The acidic bedrock and associated soils and extensive podsolisation and bog development, in conjunction with increasing storm frequency and human impact since about 4000 B.P. have lead to progressive impoverishment of the flora and vegetation over thousands of years resulting in the poor botanical diversity of the Outer Hebrides today.
Acknowledgements
I am particularly indebted to Keith Bennett and Julie Fossitt for allowing me to quote their unpublished results from Loch Lang; to Hilary Birks and Keith Bennett for reading the manuscript; and to Hilary Birks for word-processing.
The Vegetation of the Outer Hebrides R.J. PANKHURST
Introduction
Several descriptions of vegetation of parts of the Outer Hebrides have already been written, and Currie (1979) provides a review and a commentary on these.
During the later stages of the field surveys which were made for this Flora, the National Vegetation Classification project (NVC) was being carried out.
The NVC is intended to provide a national standard for describing vegetation, in much the same way as a national Flora describes the species, and so it is clearly desirable to refer to the NVC in local Floras.
At the time of writing, the NVC existed in draft form only, but we have been privileged to see this draft in order to prepare the following account.
The following volumes were consulted:—
Saltmarsh
Maritime cliff communities
Calcicolous grasslands
Acid grasslands and uplands
Woodlands and scrubs
Heaths
Swamps and tall-herb fens
Mires and bogs
The following were not available:—
Aquatics
Weeds
Sand dunes and shingle
The resources of the NVC were limited, and they were not able to survey every vegetation type in the Outer Hebrides, so it is quite possible that there are more communities present than have been recorded.
Our own recording efforts were concentrated on species, and we did not usually attempt to record vegetation.
Nevertheless, it is worthwhile attempting to relate the NVC to what is known about the vegetation.
Existing descriptions of vegetation concentrate markedly on islands, rather than the mainland, in much the same manner as floristic exploration has done.
The most general account of vegetation so far published is that of Wilmott (1945) for Uig, but that does not of course use the modern methods for vegetation description.
Useful data with descriptions and records of communities from the machair have been provided by Imogen Crawford (pers. comm.).
Apart from the NVC, useful modern descriptions of Scottish vegetation types are to be found in McVean and Ratcliffe (1962), Birks (1973) and Birse and Robertson (1976).
Unfortunately, none of these has any data for the Outer Hebrides.
Papers which include information on the vegetation of particular islands are given in an appendix.
Definition of communities
The definition of a community does not include any features of the habitat; it depends on the frequency and abundance of species only.
A community is roughly the equivalent of a Braun-Blanquet Association, as used by the Montpellier school of phytosociologists.
For convenience however, the following account is organised in terms of habitats, with definitions and lists of the communities known or suspected to occur within them.
See Robertson (1984) for a handy key to vegetation types in Scotland, which includes some of the communities of the Outer Hebrides.
A community is defined in terms of its constant species i.e. the species which occur in 61–100% of quadrats.
This means that an individual quadrat may not necessarily contain all of the constants, although they are likely to occur nearby.
Communities may sometimes be divided into sub-communities by differential species.
A differential species is one which is strictly  confined to a particular sub-community, and not found in others.
Associate species are those which are not constant but which occur throughout the community with a frequency of 60% or less, and which do not favour any particular sub-community.
Rare species do not form part of the definition of a community, although it may be useful to state in which community the rarity occurs in order to fix its ecological preference.
The Braun-Blanquet Associations are defined by the obligatory presence of rare species, the so-called ‘indicator species’.
This notion is impractical in Britain because the vegetation is often considerably poorer in species than on the continent, owing to the more northerly latitude, so that there are insufficient ‘indicators’ upon which reliance may be placed.
A striking example of this is the Cakile maritima -Honkenya peploides community which is otherwise known as the Mertensio-Atriplicetum laciniatae association, from which Mertensia is nearly always absent in Scotland!
In the following account, localities for vegetation types have been given where these are present on the dot maps of the NVC.
Otherwise, no attempt has been made to equate the vegetation described in the older publications with their modern equivalents.
Saltmarsh
A valuable reference for saltmarsh vegetation is Adam (1981).
See also C. H. Gimingham in Burnett (1964).
Pitkin et al.(1983) describe a number of brackish communities in South Uist, but these are not clearly comparable with the NVC.
Law and Gilbert (1986) have made a survey of saltmarsh in the Western Isles, and their community definitions appear to be closely similar to those of the NVC.
Zostera communities
Stands of Zostera marina or Z. angustifolia .
Defined by the presence of a single species of higher plant.
Vatersay to Sound of Harris 116,18,19,21,22
Ruppia communities
Ruppia maritima or R. cirrhosa occurs in the Outer Hebrides as a species of brackish lochs, and perhaps not as a constituent of saltmarsh as referred to by Adams(1981) and in the NVC.
Nevertheless, the NVC does record this community in the Outer Hebrides (South Uist to north Lewis).
Spartina townsendii community
Defined by presence of Spartina townsendii or S. anglica .
Occurs towards the seaward edge of saltmarshes.
Luskentyre, S.Harris. 12
Sarcocornia (Salicornia) perennis community
This species is confirmed from only one locality in the Outer Hebrides, although plants identified just to the genus Salicornia alone are recorded quite widely.
Nevertheless it is doubtful whether the vegetation in which it occurs is sufficiently well-developed that it could be identified with the community described in the NVC.
Puccinellia maritima community
Defined by Puccinellia maritima as a constant species.
In the NVC, the P. maritima dominated sub-community is recorded from Lewis.
Other species may occur at higher levels such as Triglochin maritima, Spergularia media, Plantago maritima and Armeria maritima .
Other of the subcommunities defined by the NVC probably also occur in the Outer Hebrides, see Law and Gilbert (1986).
Juncus gerardi community
Defined by Juncus gerardi as a constant.
Several sub-communities are recorded in the Outer Hebrides:
a)
Festuca rubra — Glaux maritima sub-community (Lewis, S.Harris, N.Uist).
J. gerardi, F. rubra and G. maritima are constants along with Plantago maritima and Agrostis stolonifera , with frequent Triglochin maritima and Armeria maritima .
b)
Leontodon autumnalis sub-community (Lewis, N.Uist).
J. gerardi, Agrostis stolonifera, F. rubra, Trifolium repens and G. maritima are the constants, with common L.autumnalis and Carex distans .
c)
Carex flacca sub-community (Lewis).
J. gerardi, Agrostis stolonifera, Festuca rubra, Plantago maritima, Trifolium repens and Leontodon autumnalis are the constants, with common Glaux maritima .
Juncus maritimus saltmarsh
Defined by Juncus maritimus clumps with an understorey of Agrostis stolonifera ,Festuca rubra, Glaux maritima and Juncus gerardi .
Not recorded in the NVC, but present in the Uists according to Pitkin et al.(1983).
Blysmus rufus community
Defined by constant and dominant Blysmus rufus with constant Juncus gerardi, Glaux maritima and Agrostis stolonifera , with frequent Triglochin maritima .
Not specifically recorded in the NVC, but occurrences of this community can probably be equated to records for B.rufus .
What is presumably this community is frequently referred to by Law and Gilbert (1986).
To be expected on sandy or gravelly shores where there is flushing with fresh or brackish water.
Eleocharis uniglumis saltmarsh
This community is very similar to the last, except that Eleocharis uniglumis replaces Blysmus rufus .
This community is recorded for the Uists by Pitkin et al.(1983) and Law and Gilbert (1986).
Fig. 9 Machair and dunes, Halaman Bay, Barra 3 June 1976 (A. Currie)
Shingle strandline and sand-dune
There is an account of sand-dunes at Luskentyre in S.Harris by Gimingham et al.(1948).
Pitkin et al.(1983) describe a series of dune and dune-slack communities for South Uist, with detailed distribution maps.
Cakile maritima-Honkenya peploides community (S. Harris, Benbecula, Barra) on sandy  foreshores.
Defined by the two named species, with Elymus farctus and Atriplex species frequently present.
Elymus (Agropyron) foredune community (N.Uist, S.Uist, Barra).
The constant is Elymus farctus (Agropyron junceiforme)while Ammophila arenaria is more or less absent.
Ammophila yellow dune, with abundant or dominant Ammophila arenaria (Barra to Lewis).
Ammophila may occur on its own or with a variety of other species such as Festuca rubra and Senecio jacobea (Huiskes, 1979).
The latter may be what Robertson (1984) calls northern marram grass dune pasture.
Festuca rubra — Galium verum dune (Barra to Lewis).
Festuca ovina is absent from this community,Koeleria gracilis and Euphrasua species are frequent.
This may be the same as the eyebright-red-fescue dune of Robertson (1984).
Potentilla anserina — Carex nigra community (Lewis, S.Harris, Uists, Monach Is.).
Carex nigra is abundant or dominant and C. flacca and Potentilla anserina abundant or frequent.
This might be regarded either as a kind of dune slack or as a type of poor fen.
Also found on dunes is the Variegated horse-tail community, which may occur where there are records of Equisetum variegatum , although it is not actually recorded from the Outer Hebrides.
The other constant species is Anagallis tenella and the community is generally rich in species.
The most important and famous of all Hebridean habitats, the machair, falls under the sand-dune section.
Machair is Gaelic for ‘plain’, and Ranwell (1974) defines it as ‘a type of dune pasture (often calcareous) subject to local cultivation developed in wet and windy conditions in north and north west of Scotland.’
There are many general publications about machair, but until the appropriate volume of the NVC appears, there is not much precise information about machair vegetation available.
Randall (1976) mentions machair communities, which he calls either;
a)
Festuca rubra community with Bellis perennis, Plantago lanceolata and Achillea millefolium , or
b)
mature machair, Festuca rubra community but with high proportion of Trifolium pratense .
According to Crawford (pers.comm.), natural machair is a Festuca rubra — Galium verum grassland with characteristic Ranunculus acris, Euphrasia officinalis, Bellis perennis and Plantago lanceolata .
The lower and damper machair has increasing amounts of Euphrasia, Carex flacca, Potentilla anserina and Gentianella campestris , and is transitional to salt-marsh.
Drier hummocks support Carex arenaria, Sedum acre and Senecio jacobaea .
Hollows contain dense Festuca rubra, Agrostis stolonifera and Potentilla anserina , which is one of the communities of mesotrophic grassland.
Inland the machair grades into mesotrophic grassland and then to fen and swamp communities.
Maritime cliff
Armeria maritima — Ligusticum scoticum maritime rock crevice community.
A. maritima and L.scoticum are constant, as also is Festuca rubra.
Plantago maritima, Sedum rosea and Silene maritima are frequent.
Asplenium marinum is occasional but may be plentiful if sheltered.
The same community, under the name of the Armeria maritima — Ligusticum scoticum association, is recorded for two localities in Lewis by Malloch and Okusanya (1979).
(N.Harris, Lewis)
Sedum rosea — Armeria maritima maritime cliff ledge community.
The constant species are S. rosea,A.maritima together with Festuca rubra and Rumex acetosa.
Plantago maritima and P. lanceolata with Holcus lanatus are frequent, and since this community is ungrazed, it creates a luxurious herbaceous vegetation.
Angelica sylvestris and Silene dioica may be evident.
(N.Harris, Lewis).
Festuca rubra — Armeria maritima maritime grassland.
F. rubra and A. maritima are the constants.
Other frequent species are Agrostis stolonifera, Plantago maritima, Daucus carota and Silene maritima .
(N.Uist to Lewis).
Two sub-communities may occur in the Outer Hebrides:
a)
Ligusticum scoticum sub-community.
L. scoticum is the additional constant, and there may be also Agrostis stolonifera and Holcus lanatus .
b)
Plantago coronopus sub-community.
The additional constants are Agrostis stolonifera, Plantago coronopus and P.maritima 
Festuca rubra — Holcus lanatus maritime grassland.
Characteristic of somewhat sheltered situations, such as towards the clifftops or on lee slopes.
The constant species are F. rubra and H. Ianatus with Plantago lanceolata and Armeria maritima.
Plantago maritima, Rumex acetosa and Trifolium repens are frequent.
(Lewis).
Sub-communities known from Scotland are:
a)
Plantago maritima sub-community.
The additional constants are Lotus corniculatus, Plantago maritima and Trifolium repens.
Scilla verna is frequent here.
Robertson (1984) calls this the vernal squill maritime pasture.
b)
Anthoxanthum sub-community.
Armeria maritima is now no longer constant, though frequent, and the additional constants are Anthoxanthum odoratum, Agrostis capillaris, Rumex acetosa, Poa subcaerulea and Potentilla erecta .
Festuca rubra — Plantago maritime grassland.
The constants are F.rubra with  P.coronopus, P. Ianceolata, P. maritima and Agrostis stolonifera (N.Uist to Lewis).
There are three sub-communities:
a)
Armeria maritima sub-community.
A. maritima is the only additional constant.
b)
Carex panicea sub-community.
The additional constants are C. panicea, Lotus corniculatus, Leontodon autumnalis and Euphrasia spp.
c)
Schoenus nigricans sub-community.
(Harris and Lewis).
The constants are S. nigricans (as the prostrate marine ecotype),Carex panicea, C. serotina, Molinia caerulea, Danthonia decumbens, Euphrasia spp. and Potentilla erecta .
Fig. 10 Moorland at Barvas, Lewis 1 June 1976 (A. Currie)
Mires and bogs
A mire is defined here in the sense of Ratcliffe in Burnett (1964) as a habitat in which the watertable is at or near the surface but where there is lateral water movement.
It is distinguished  from a bog where the water arrives solely in the form of rain from above, and there is no runoff.
For accounts of mires in Lewis, see Goode and Lindsay (1979), Hulme and Blyth (1984) and Hulme (1985).
Sphagnum auriculatum bog pools (Lewis, north and south Harris).
The constant species are Eriophorum angustifolium, Menyanthes trifoliata, Sphagnum auriculatum and S. cuspidatum , while S. recurvum is rare.
Carex limosa and Rhynchospora alba are often found in this community.
Hulme and Blyth (1984) recognise a Sphagnum cuspidatum — Utricularia minor vegetation type for recolonised bog pools in Lewis.
Eriophorum angustifolium bog pools (Lewis, S. Harris).
The Eriophorum is frequent or abundant in bog pools dominated by Sphagnum species in which other vascular plant species only occur occasionally.
Carex echinata — Sphagnum recurvum/auriculatum mire.
Defined by constant Carex echinata , the Sphagnum species and the moss Polytrichum commune .
The Carex echinata sub-community (Lewis) is dominated by C. echinata with C. nigra and C. panicea being less common, and the grasses Molinia caerulea and Agrostis canina.
Eriophorum angustifolium is frequent in this sub-community.
Scirpus cespitosus — Erica tetralix wet heath (Lewis, north and south Harris).
This is a rather variable type of vegetation and is characterised by constant Molinia caerulea, Scirpus cespitosus, Erica tetralix, Potentilla erecta and Calluna vulgaris , but any one or even two of these species might be missing.
Polygala serpyllifolia, Narthecium and Eriophorum angustifolium are preferential in this community.
a)
Carex panicea sub-community.
This typically has much more Molinia and E. tetralix , especially the former, while the other two species are relatively scarce.
A range of different Carex species and Drosera rotundifolia are preferential, and Schoenus nigricans and Myrica gale are locally abundant.
b)
typical sub-community.
This sub-community is highly variable in respect of the dominant species but the Carex or Cladonia species are absent or uncommon.
Again Myrica gale may occur.
c)
Cladonia sub-community.
All the dominants have high frequency here with Calluna the most dominant, and Cladonia species are frequent.
Hulme and Blyth (1984) recognised several vegetation types which might be forms of the above communities involving Calluna vulgaris and Potentilla erecta in disturbed peatland in Lewis.
Scirpus cespitosus — Eriophorum vaginatum blanket mire (Lewis and Harris).
The constant species are Calluna vulgaris, Erica tetralix, Molinia caerulea, Scirpus cespitosus and Eriophorum vaginatum .
The high frequency of E. vaginatum is one of the distinctions between this community and the Scirpus-Erica wet heath, where E. angustifolium is characteristic.
a)
Drosera rotundifolia — Sphagnum sub-community.
This is dominated by either Calluna and Scirpus or Calluna and Molinia.
Drosera rotundifolia and Myrica are preferential here, although the latter is often absent.
The most abundant Sphagna are S.capillifolium and S. papillosum .
b)
Cladonia sub-community.
This is usually dominated by Calluna and Scirpus.
Drosera rotundifolia is uncommon and Sphagna are mush less abundant, while Cladonia species and Racomitrium are much more obvious.
Iris pseudacorus — Filipendula mire.
This community is not specifically recorded from the Outer Hebrides, but Adam (1976) states that it is probably ubiquitous on marshes in western Scotland.
Iris pseudacorus is constant with frequent Filipendula ulmaria and there are usually other weedy taxa present such as Galium aparine, Poa trivialis and Urtica dioica .
Heaths
For a general discussion of heaths in Scotland, see Gimingham in Burnett (1964).
The distinction between a mire or bog association containing ericaceous plants and a heathland proper may not be altogether obvious, but the heath vegetation described under this heading tends to occur in drier habitats.
Calluna vulgaris — Scilla vema heath.
This community occurs on maritime cliffs within reach of salt spray.
The constant species are:
Calluna vulgaris
Erica cinerea/tetralix
Festuca ovina
Holcus lanatus
Hypochaeris radicata
Lotus corniculatus
Plantago lanceolata]
P. maritima
Potentilla erecta
Scilla verna
Thymus praecox
Calluna vulgaris is the most frequent shrub, accompanied by E. cinerea on drier soils but in north Britain E. tetralix or even Empetrum often replace it.
Although the ericaceous shrubs are a consistent part of the community, they are usually much reduced in stature by exposure and grazing, and may be only a few centimetres high.
a)
Erica tetralix sub-community (Lewis, N. Harris and N. Uist).
The dominant shrubs are Calluna and E. tetralix .
The commonest grass is Festuca rubra and the commonest sedge is C. nigra .
b)
Calluna vulgaris sub-community (Lewis).
This is more impoverished than other subcommunities, and is dominated by Calluna accompanied by E. cinerea.
Festuca ovina is more frequent than F. rubra .
Woodlands and scrub
For a general reference on Scottish woodland vegetation, see McVean in Burnett (1964).
There is little in the Outer Hebrides at the present time which can be described as natural woodland.
There are a number of plantations of commercial forestry (Blake, 1966) and some parks, as at Lews Castle in Stornoway.
There are a number of restricted areas of scrub, either on small islands in lochs or in river ravines, see Spence (1979), and Currie (1981b).
There is no record of wood or scrub communities in the Outer Hebrides in the National Vegetation Classification, but the Dryopteris dilatata — Rubus fruticosus sub-community of the Betula pubescens — Molinia caerulea woodland community closely resembles the birch wood in South Uist described by Bennett and Fossitt (1988).
The scrub community of Allt Volagir, also in South Uist and mentioned in the same paper, is somewhat similar, but Betula pubescens is absent.
The constant species of small islands in lochs of Lewis, Harris and the Uists are Sorbus aucuparia, Salix aurita or S. cinerea, Rubus fruticosus and ryopteris dilatata and these might also represent a degraded form of the same sub-community.
Spence (1979) also describes what he calls the Corylus — Primula — Ranunculus ficaria community from rock ledges in Allt Volagir, S. Uist.
This does not seem to correspond to any community published elsewhere, but of course the environment is rather marginal for woodland growth at this locality.
Other characteristic species present apart from the three by which the community is named are Populus tremula, Betula pubescens, Sorbus aucuparia, Salix auritalcinerea and Epilobium montanum .
Mesotrophic grassland
There are no records of mesotrophic grassland for the Outer Hebrides in the NVC, but it is known that the following communities occur:
The Cynosurus cristatus — Centaurea nigra meadow, which is also known from the seaboard of western Scotland.
Arrhenatherum elatius coarse grassland.
Festuca rubra — Agrostis stolonifera — Potentilla anserina inundation grassland (see above under machair).
Cynosurus cristatus — Caltha palustris flood pasture.
There is also the Lolium perenne — Cynosurus cristatus pasture, in which Trifolium repens is  usually abundant, with frequent Holcus lanatus,Festuca rubra and Poa pratensis.
This community is cultivated land and grasses will probably have been sown.
It might be identified on or near machair.
Weeds
The NVC for weeds was not available at the time of writing, but two named communities which are likely to be recognised are:
Pineappleweed trample community (Polygonum aviculare — Matricaria matricarioides), on compacted soil in farmyards, gateways and along tracks.
The constants are Matricaria matricarioides , Polygonum aviculare and Poa annua.
Great plantain trample community (Lolium — Plantago major) in similar places to the last.
Plantago major is constant and Poa annua, Trifolium repens, Lolium perenne and Cynosurus cristatus are frequent.
Silverside (1977) describes the Chenopodium album — Viola tricolor subsp. curtisii association from the cultivated machair of North and South Uist.
The other diagnostic species are Avena strigosa, Anchusa arvensis, Erodium cicutarium, Galium verum, Thalictrum minus, Tripleurospermum maritimum and Honkenya peploides .
This community is probably the result of cereal cultivation Another distinctive weed community occurs after the cultivation of potatoes, containing Myosotis arvensis, Sinapis arvensis, Stellaria medua, Sonchus asper and Papaver rhoeas , with a smaller component of Viola tricolor .
If left unploughed, these communities are eventually replaced by a Festuca rubra — Trifolium repens sward.
Fig. 11 North Uist seen from North Lee 23 June 1978 (A. Currie)
Aquatics
The NVC for aquatic plants was not available at the time of writing, but see Spence in Burnett (1964).
The surveys carried out by the Royal Botanic Garden, Edinburgh (1983,1984 and 1985), contain a great deal of information about the plants in lochs from South Uist to Lewis.
Spence et al.(1979) record the presence of the Potamogeton filiformis — Chara aspera association in Loch Grogarry, S. Uist.
This is also recorded by the RBG, Edinburgh survey of 1983 for Loch Aird an Sgairbh, South Uist.
Other species associated with the dominants are Myriophyllum alterniflorum and Littorella uniflora .
Other named communities which are likely to be recognised are:
Water Lobelia community (Isoetes —Lobelia dortmanna ), at the waters edge or submerged in sandy or peaty lochs and lochans.
Open stands of Lobelia dortmanna with Eleocharis multicaulis and Ranunculus flammula (presumably the same as the community reported in RBG, Edinburgh survey for 1984).
Marsh St. John's wort community (Hypericum elodes — Potamogeton polygonifolius) in peaty pools.
Constants are Hypericum elodes and Potamogeton polygonifolius .
Amphibious bistort community (Polygonum amphibium community) in mesotrophic and eutrophic low-lying lochs and lochans.
Constant Polygonum amphibium with various species of Potamogeton .
White water-lily community (Nymphaea alba) in more oligotrophic lochs and lochans, dominated by the floating leaves of Nymphaea alba.
Ivy-leaved Water crowfoot community (Ranunculus hederaceus).
Constant Ranunculus hederaceus and frequent Callitriche stagnalis and Juncus bufonius .
Swamps and tall-herb fens
None of these communities is specifically recorded in the NVC for the Outer Hebrides (but see Spence in Burnett, 1964, and the surveys by the Royal Botanic Garden, Edinburgh, 1983,1984, and 1985).
The species involved are characteristically tall perennial monocots which tend to form pure stands on the edge of water bodies.
There are a number of species which occur in this way and hence define communities in a rather trivial sense, since there are few or no associates.
Communities based on pure stands of Equisetum fluviatile, Cladium mariscus, Schoenoplectus lacustris, Scirpus maritimus, Eleocharis palustris, Phragmites australis, Phalaris arundinacea and Glyceria fluitans probably all occur in the Outer Hebrides.
The Carex rostrata swamp has a sub-community composed of pure Carex rostrata .
Pitkin et al.(1983) and Chamberlain et al.in the 1984 survey by the Royal Botanic Garden, Edinburgh, both record the presence of both poor fen and rich fen in South Uist and Lewis.
Poor fen is defined in the NVC as a Carex rostrata — Potentilla palustris community.
The constant species are Carex rostrata, Potentilla palustris, Galium palustre , and Menyanthes trifoliata .
Rich fen is the Carex rostrata — Equisetum fluviatile sub-community of this.
Both poor and rich fen occur in the form of ‘schwingmoor’ i.e. as a floating mat of vegetation over water.
Hulme and Blyth (1984) recognise a kind of poor fen from Harris and Lewis which is dominated by Menyanthes but also contains Carex limosa and luncus bulbosus .
Both the above sources also refer to what is evidently the Carex paniculata sedge swamp of the NVC, found in Benbecula and South Uist.
Acid grasslands and uplands
For general reference, see King and Nicholson in Burnett (1964) and Birse and Robertson (1976).
The climate of the Outer Hebrides is such that much of the moorland vegetation belongs to the one of the mire types, and grades into maritime heath near the sea.
Acid grasslands on dry or well-drained soils are relatively scarce.
Most of the following communities are not actually recorded for the Outer Hebrides in the NVC (unless explicitly stated) but might well occur.
Festuca ovina — Agrostis capillaris — Galium saxatile grassland (siliceous grassland).
The constant species are Agrostis capillaris, Anthoxanthum odoratum, Festuca ovina, Galium saxatile and Potentilla erecta.
Festuca vivipara is not present,F. rubra may occur, and Nardus, Deschampsia flexuosa and Molinia only occur in small quantity.
This community occurs in pastures on  better-drained and base-poor soils in north-west Britain and mostly at low altitudes.
Apart from the typical sub-community, there are:
a)
the Holcus lanatus — Trifolium repens sub-community.
According to Hulme and Blyth (1984), reclaimed peatland in Harris and Lewis is characterised by pastures with Trifolium repens, Holcus lanatus, Agrostis canina and Anthoxanthum , which comes close to this sub-community.
These pastures are created by adding shell sand and fertilisers and reseeding with grass mixtures and Trifolium .
b)
Luzula multiflora — Rhytidiadelphus loreus sub-community.
Other species which commonly occur are Agrostis canina, Deschampsia cespitosa and Nardus .
c)
Vaccinium myrtillus — Deschampsia cespitosa sub-community.
Festuca ovina, Nardus and Deschampsia cespitosa are common here.
Fig. 12 Sròn Scourst and Oreval, North Harris 6 September 1978 (A. Currie)
Nardus stricta — Galium saxatile grassland.
Constant species are Agrostis capillaris , Festuca ovina/vivipara, Galium saxatile, Nardus strata and Potentilla erecta , but the Nardus is the most dominating species.
Sub-communities include:
a)
species-poor sub-community, with Nardus as the most abundant plant, with frequent Deschampsia cespitosa and Festuca ovina .
b)
Agrostis canina — Polytrichum commune sub-community, in which there is somewhat less Nardus .
c)
the Carex panicea — Viola riviniana sub-community, which is distinctly richer in species.
d)
Calluna vulgaris — Danthonia decumbens sub-community, in which Nardus dominates, and where Festuca ovina and Agrostis capillaris are often abundant.
e)
and the Racomitrium lanuginosum sub-community (North Harris and Lewis), where Nardus still dominates along with much Racomitrium but few other grasses.
Juncus squarrosus — Festuca ovina grassland.
These are also the constant species, together with the moss Polytrichum commune .
The community typically occurs on peaty soils on gentle slopes or plateaus at higher altitudes.
The sub-communities are:
a)
Sphagnum sub-community, also known as the Juncus squarrosus bog.
b)
Carex nigra — Calypogeia trichomanis sub-community
c)
Vaccinium myrtillus sub-community
d)
Agrostis capillaris — Luzula multiflora sub-community.
Carex bigelowii — Racomitrium lanuginosum moss-heath.
The constant species are Carex bigelowii, Deschampsia flexuosa, Festuca ovina/vivipara, Vaccinium myrtillus, Racomitrium and the lichen Cladonia uncialis .
Other species which may occur are Alchemilla alpina and Salix herbacea.
This community is characteristic of windswept and could-ridden plateaus and hilltops in cold and humid north-west Britain.
Although not recorded in the NVC, it occurs on the summits of hills in Harris and the Uists.
Sub-communities include:
a)
the typical sub-community, and
b)
the Galium saxatile sub-community.
Luzula sylvatica — Vaccinium myrtillus tall-herb community.
The constants are Deschampsia flexuosa, Galium saxatile, Luzula sylvatica and Vaccinium myrtillus .
Quite a range of other species may occur, especially ferns.
The community is confined to inaccessible cliffs or sides of ravines where grazing and burning are unlikely, but where trees cannot grow.
This community has obvious affinities to the scrub vegetation of small islands and ravines described above, but is not recorded for the Outer Hebrides in the NVC.
The sub-communities are:
a)
the Dryopteris dilatata — Dicranum majus sub-community
b)
the Anthoxanthum odoratum — Festuca ovina sub-community, and
c)
species-poor sub-community.
Luzula sylvatica — Geum rivale tall-herb community.
The constant species are Angelica sylvestris, Deschampsia cespitosa, Geum rivale, Luzula sylvatica and Sedum rosea .
Like the last community, it is confined to cliffs where it is protected from grazing and burning.
The Primula vulgaris — Hypericum pulchrum sub-community is recorded in the NVC from North and South Uist.
It often contains Calluna and a variety of ferns, especially Blechnum .
Oreopteris limbosperma — Blechnum spicant community.
The constants are Blechnum spicant, Galium saxatile, Oxalis acetosella, Potentilla erecta and Thelypteris limbosperma .
The community is characteristic of peaty soils on steep sheltered slopes at low to moderate altitudes in north-west Britain, and so is likely to occur in the Outer Hebrides.
Pteridium aquilinum — Galium saxatile community.
The constants are Festuca ovina, Galium saxatile, Potentilla erecta and Pteridium .
This is the formal description of the familiar bracken patch of heath or moorland.
The community is not recorded in the NVC for the Outer Hebrides, but is very probably present where bracken occurs.
The History of Botany in the Outer Hebrides ANDREW CURRIE Nature Conservancy Council, Broadford, Skye 
Introduction
The history of botanical exploration in the Outer Hebrides may conveniently be divided into four periods.
First, the period until 1830 was the time of the early travellers; second, from 1830 until 1930 was the period of early botanists and naturalists; third, 1930 until 1980 was the period of the first ecological studies and also of Professor J. W. Heslop Harrison and Miss M. S. Campbell; and finally the 1980s, the period of the Integrated Development Programme (1982–1987), which gave rise to more intensive research.
A valuable starting point for a study of the flora of the Outer Hebrides is the paper by Dr. H. R. Fletcher (1959) entitled ‘Exploration of the Scottish Flora’, in which he discusses plant recording in that group of islands.
During the following year, N. Douglas Simpson (1960) printed privately ‘A Bibliographical Index of the British Flora’, including a list of published sources for the Hebrides, V.C. 110.
A brief outline of the history is given in my own paper (Currie, 1979).
1.
Period until 1830
Early references to the flora are present incidentally or by inference in accounts by early travellers to the islands or other writers about the islands.
The earliest of these was Sir Donald Monro (1884), High Dean of the Isles, who wrote in 1549 (Darling & Boyd, 1964).
Other early writers include Smollett (1768), Heron (1794), Walker (1812), Walford (1818) and MacCulloch (1819 & 1824), but there were several more, including those listed by Cooper (1979).
Little other than isolated records can be established from most of these, although there are some fine descriptive passages.
Simpson (op. cit.) refers to the tour by Pennant (1774 & 1776), but Slack (1986) makes it clear that Thomas Pennant and his companion the Rev. John Lightfoot did not visit the Outer Hebrides.
It would appear therefore that the first traveller to offer substantial plant records was Martin Martin (1698 & 1703).
Martin Martin was a Skye man.
Traditional Clan MacLeod lands included Harris and parts of Lewis, and at the time of his visit to St. Kilda in 1695, the MacLeods of Skye held the title to that isolated archipelago (Cooper, 1970 & op. cit.).
Martin was for some years tutor to the MacLeods of Skye, and had also been at one time a scholar at Leiden University in the Netherlands.
In 1695, he toured both the Inner and the Outer Hebrides, visiting many of the islands personally.
In 1698, Martin published ‘A Late Voyage to St. Kilda, the Remotest of all the Hebrides’, and five years later in 1703 there appeared the first edition of ‘A Description of the Western Islands of Scotland’.
These accounts contain many references to plants, and probably the earliest records of the species named.
In his important paper, Perring (1953) extracted these records and listed them island by island.
He had to translate early botanical, English, Scots and Gaelic names into their modern botanical equivalents, although it was not always possible to be precise.
In the lists below, names used by Martin are followed by Perring's identification where this is specific.
Plants other than phanerogams have been omitted.
From Lewis are listed Birch, Hazel (Corylus avellana ), Nettle, Reed (probably Phragmites australis ), Golden Rod (Solidago virgaurea ) and All Heal (may be Stachys arvensis ).
From Harris there are Daisy (Bellis perennis ), Clover, Wild White Carrot (Daucus carota ) and Allium Latifolium (Allium ursinum ).
Milkwort is reported on Hermetray.
In North Uist, there are Flamula Jovis (Ranunculus flammula ), Shunnish; Suinas or Shunnas (Ligusticum scoticum ) and Alexander (Smyrnium olusatrum ).
The latter was probably a garden escape, and is not found wild in V.C. 110 today.
From Barra only Curran-Petris (Daucus carota ) is recorded.
The St. Kilda list is as follows:— Sorrel (Rumex acetosa ), Lapathum vulgare (Rumex obtusifolius ), Scurvy Grass (Cochlearia officinalis ), Mille-foil (Achillea millefolium ), Bursa pastoris (Capsella bursapastoris ), Silver weed or argentine (Potentilla anserina ), Plantine, Sage (Teucrium scorodonia ?),
Chicken weed (Stellaria media ), All Hail or siderites (This may be All Heal (see earlier) or may be Galeopsis tetrahit ), Sea Pinck (Armeria maritima ), and Tormentil (Potentilla erecta ).
Perring comments that all but Teucrium scorodonia have been recorded from St. Kilda this century.
The Rev. Alexander Buchan was minister on St. Kilda from 1705 until his death in 1730.
He left behind him a manuscript which was subsequently published (Buchan, 1752).
In this he refers to a St. Kilda man who had occasion to visit Harris and later Skye, and of that trip Buchan writes thus:—‘One of the things he and they with him wondered at most was, the Growth of Trees, they thought the Beauty of Leaves and Branches admirable, and how they grow to such a Height above Plants was far above their Conception.
For there grow no Trees, no not so much as a Shrub on St. Kilda’.
Professor Mark Louden Anderson (1967) researched fully the early evidence of trees in the Outer Hebrides, and I quote freely from him.
‘MacCulloch (1824) the geologist says that there were no trees on Uist’.
And again, ‘Of Lewis.
.. they have long lost their claim to the name of the Birken Isles, as no birch now occurs there.
On the other hand, Heron (1794) says that Lewis was destitute of wood except for a few birches and hazels’.
MacCulloch (op. cit.) also mentions ‘a few stunted plants of poplar, Populus alba’, but these must surely refer to Aspen (Populus tremula ).
Beveridge (1911) refers to former evidence of trees based upon Gaelic place-names.
Many writers refer to tree remains in peat (Martin,(1703), MacCulloch (1819), MacGillivray (1830) and Niven (1902)).
Once again I acknowledge Anderson (op. cit.) for the following:—‘Geikie (1894) states that in Lewis, fully-grown oak, alder, birch and especially Scotch fir, had been found in the bogs and MacCulloch (1824) in respect of the peat in North Uist, includes oak with pine, alder and birch amongst the trees most frequently found’.
Anderson (op. cit.
Appendix D) has assembled records from the New Statistical Account (1845) of occurrences of woody remains in peat bogs, including those from Inverness-shire (North Uist, South Uist, Barra) and Ross and Cromarty (Stornoway, Barvas, Lochs).
He refers also to the island tradition that woods were destroyed by Viking invaders (Danes, Norwegians).
Beveridge (1926) and Elton (1938) described submerged forests off Vallay, Pabbay and other islands of the Sound of Harris, while Ritchie (1966,1979 & 1985) describes intertidal areas between the sound of Harris and South Uist where evidence of past woodland may be seen.
Professor H. J. B. Birks deals fully with this topic and with floristic and vegetational history elsewhere in this volume.
2. 1830–1930
The date 1830 was chosen because it was during that year that the first true naturalist wrote.
William MacGillivray was born in Old Aberdeen, but went to Harris at the age of three and spent eight childhood years there.
He wandered widely throughout Scotland during his university days in Aberdeen and explored what he called ‘the desolate isles of the west’.
His subsequent account of the Outer Hebrides (MacGillivray, 1830) is one referred to by Campbell (1937) as outstanding.
His eldest son, John, wrote about St. Kilda (MacGillivray, 1842) and William MacGillivray himself went on to become Professor of Natural History and Lecturer on Botany in Marischal College and University, Aberdeen.
I am indebted yet again to Anderson (op. cit.) for the following quotation.
‘W. MacGillivray (1831) gives a very important account of the Outer Hebrides.
He writes: ‘Speaking generally, one might pronounce these islands entirely destitute of wood.
In fact, an incurious person might travel from one end of them to the other without seeing a single shrub.
But in the ruts of streams, on lacustrine islets, occasionally along the shores of lakes, and in the clefts of rocks, there may be found stunted specimens of several species of trees.
The common birch, the broad-leaved elm, the mountain ash, the hazel and the aspen are there casually met with.
Willows of a few species are abundant along some of the rills, but seldom attain a height of three feet.
Rubus corylifolia, Rosa tomentosa, Lonicera periclymaenum and Hedera helix are the only shrubs worth mentioning.
‘Here is the observant botanist speaking…’’ f
A memorial tribute to William MacGillivray was published (MacGillivray, 1901) within which some of his works are quoted.
Being primarily an ornithologist, most of these quotations refer to birds, but there are passing descriptive botanical records.
In an account of the Raven in the Hebrides, he says ‘Even the water-lily, with its splendid white flowers, floating on the deep bog, reflects no glory on the surrounding scenery, but selfishly draws all your regard to itself.
(Brit.
Birds, Vol. i p. 509)’.
This intrinsically interesting statement does serve to demonstrate the nature of the botanical information in at least some of the early accounts.
A significant new phase in the exploration of the Outer Hebridean flora commenced in 1841 with the excursion by two recognised botanists, Professor John Hutton Balfour and Mr. Charles C. Babington, along with companions (Balfour & Babington, 1842 & 1844).
They journeyed to Skye, North Uist, Harris and Lewis, and from the Outer Hebrides ‘gave the number of plants for these islands as 311 species of flowering plants and higher cryptogams’.
(Bennett, 1889).
The 1844 publication is another source referred to by Campbell (op. cit.) as outstanding.
Less well known is the Journal (Babington, 1897) which provides some detail of the 1841 journey, incorporating descriptive passages, anecdotal material and some botanical information.
I have extracted the plant records from the Journal, retaining the Latin names as in the text, but relating the locations to those used in this volume (see end papers).
1841
Aug. 10. (19.
North Uist)Papaver argemone, Hippuris, Lycopsis arvensis, Salix herbacea .
Aug. 12. (12 S. Harris)Blysmus rufus .
Aug. 13. & 14. (9 N. Harris)Alchemilla alpina, Luzula spicata, Thalictrum alpinum, Saussurea alpina, Hymenophyllum wilsoni, Aira alpina.
Aug. 16. (27.
Shiant Is.)
Empetrum nigrum, Carex binervis, Lychnis dioica .
Aug. 17. & 18. (1.
Northern Lewis)Lamium intermedium, Juncus balticus, Petasites vulgaris, Sagina maritima, Ranunculus sceleratus, Pyrethrum maritimum, Carex extensa .
These are almost certainly first records for these species.
It is interesting also to note that ‘…people give the roots of the Petasites vulgaris, which abounds, to the cattle in winter’.
This referred to Barvas, and has some bearing upon recent papers regarding the ‘spread’ of Petasites hybridus over the machair (Currie, 1977, Naylor & Cumming, 1892).
Clearly,Petasites has been there for a very long time.
Another major phase in the exploration of the Outer Hebridean flora is shared throughout the British Isles, and can be identified with the work of H. C. Watson.
One of the most significant pioneer works on the British Flora was Cybele Britannica (Watson, 1847–1859)(Cannon, 1978).
Watson was a Yorkshireman who studied medicine in Edinburgh and came under the influence of Sir William Hooker.
He frequently went on excursions with Hooker and his students, and wrote for over forty years on the geographical distribution of the British flora (Fletcher, op. cit.).
Watson went on to prepare two volumes of ‘Topographical Botany’, published first in 1873 and 1874, with a second edition posthumously published in 1883.
He created the 112 vice-counties into which the whole of Britain was divided, and of which the Outer Hebrides became V.C. 110.
This had the effect of focusing attention on the island group as a geographical unit.
Arthur Bennett was a builder and house decorator, living in Croydon, England, who devoted a great deal of time and energy to the study of the Scottish flora.
Between the years 1886 and 1911, he published a series of additional records to the 2nd edition of ‘Topographical Botany’(1886 et seq., 1892b et seq.), including those for V.C. 110, and also a series of ‘Contributions towards a Flora of the Outer Hebrides’(1892b et seq.).
Many of the records were based on collections made for him by W. S. Duncan, who lived in the islands (Campbell, op. cit.).
Fletcher (op. cit.) has commented that during all the years when Bennett was studying the Scottish flora and publishing records, he did not once visit Scotland.
Meantime, other botanists were also working.
Peter Ewing (1890–1895) published ‘A Contribution to the Topographical Botany of the West of Scotland’ and in 1892 ‘The Glasgow Catalogue of Native and Established Plants’.
Ewing revised his Catalogue in 1899 including records from the Outer Hebrides.
In 1898, Professor James W. Trail of Aberdeen commenced the publication of a ‘Topographical Botany of Scotland’, followed by a series of additions and corrections which continued up to 1909.
V.C. 110 featured in these.
Somerville (1889 & 1890) and Shoolbred (1895 & 1899) are two other botanists whose publications were considered outstanding by Campbell (op. cit.), while Stirton (1885 & 1887) and Scott (1894 & 1895) also made contributions.
Nor were the outlying islands being overlooked.
The paper by Barrington (1886) on St. Kilda was one of those commended by Campbell (op. cit.), while Gibson (1891) and Praeger (1897) also contributed to the lists for this most remote of all the outliers.
A paper on St. Kilda by Mathieson (1928) included notes on the flora by Gladstone (1928).
The plants which Gladstone collected went to W. B. Turrill, who published a paper (Turrill, 1928).
Trail (1905) named a short list of plants collected on the Flannan Isles in 1904 by an ornithologist, W. Eagle Clarke, and similarly Bennett (1907) named additional species gathered in 1899 by W. J. Gibson.
A paper on North Rona by J. A. Harvie-Brown included notes of the flora by Barrington (1885).
Somerville (1891) exhibited plants from Mingulay near the southern extremity of the Long Island.
As a result of all of this botanical exploration, Bennett (1905b) was able to publish a ‘Supplement to ‘Topographical Botany’ Ed. 2’, incorporating records to that date.
By 1929, Arthur Bennett, C. E. Salmon and J. R. Matthews had compiled a ‘Second Supplement’ which listed all records up to 1925, including those for V.C. 110.
The final step in this early process of cataloguing the British Flora came when Druce published ‘The Comital Flora’(1932).
George Claridge Druce came from Northamptonshire and travelled all over the land for almost 60 years.
In the Comital Flora, he gathered in one volume all the available information in what Dr. Fletcher called ‘a modern version of Topographical Botany’.
By this date therefore, the recorded flora of the Outer Hebrides was accessible within one volume.
3. 1930–190
The period which commenced in the early thirties was significant in that a new approach to the study of the flora was evident.
Early botanists named and listed plants, but the newer botanists related plants to their habitats and to vegetation communities.
The account of the vegetation of St. Kilda (Petch, 1933) was the first ‘ecological’ account of the Outer Hebridean flora.
This was followed by the scientific report of an expedition to Barra organised by the Biological Society of the University of Edinburgh (Forrest et al., 1936), which included an account of the vegetation (Watson & Barlow, 1936).
In ‘The Book of Barra’(Campbell, 1936) there is a list of plants, while there are later notes by Watson (1939) and Wilmott (1939).
MacLeod (1949) who was a member of the 1935 expedition later revisited Barra and discussed plant ecology.
Elton (1938) was another early ecologist, who provided notes on the vegetation of Pabbay in the Sound of Harris.
Subsequent work on vegetation is fully dealt with by Pankhurst elsewhere in this volume.
A second significant new approach to the study of the flora became evident during this same period.
Early botanists had based their accounts either upon brief visits or else upon information or specimens provided by others.
The newer breed of botanist was prepared to go back year after year, recording on a more methodical basis, with a longer term view to writing a Flora based upon intimate knowledge of the Outer Hebrides.
One of these prolonged studies was motivated by Professor J. W. Heslop Harrison.
Richardson (1970) describes the origin of the study thus:—‘In 1935, as a result of joining an expedition from University College, Dundee, led by his friend Professor A. D. Peacock the previous year, he initiated a detailed ecological and biogeographical study of the islands of the Inner and Outer Hebrides.
These studies carried out with parties of students and colleagues continued for some twenty years…’.
What was planned along with colleagues at King's College, University of Durham, was a comprehensive Flora of the Inner and Outer Hebrides.
‘A Preliminary flora of the Outer Hebrides’ was published (Harrison, 1941a) under Professor Harrison's editorship.
This contained a list of 690 species, segregates in critical genera and hybrids of vascular plants.
A bibliography of earlier publications by the Durham team was included, and the Flora was followed by a succession of further papers up to 1957, either adding to the Flora or dealing with specific localities.
A series of very useful general accounts of the aims, the progress and the conclusions of these studies may be found in Clark (1956), H. H. Harrison (1939), J. H. Harrison (1948)(reviewed Allen, 1951) and J. W. H. Harrison (1939b, 1941a, 1948b, 1950a & 1956b).
Regrettably, the plan to prepare a comprehensive Flora was never achieved.
There was also sadly a degree of controversy with regard to some records, making the work less valuable than it might otherwise have been.
However many of the allegedly doubtful species have more recently been  re-recorded, and the work of Heslop Harrison and his team remains a major contribution which cannot be ignored by any serious student of the Outer Hebridean flora.
The other prolonged study of the flora of the Outer Hebrides was that initiated by Miss M. S. Campbell.
Her account of a visit to the islands in 1936 (Campbell, 1937a) was soon followed by another in 1937 (Campbell, 1938).
In May 1938, Miss Campbell issued a printed appeal for assistance giving her address as c/o Department of Botany, British Museum (Nat.
Hist.).
The appeal was addressed ‘To the Contributors to the New British Flora’ and headed ‘Flora of the Outer Hebrides’.
She wrote ‘During the past two years I have been working (with Mr Wilmott's co-operation) towards the publication of a Flora of the ‘Outer Islands’, concerning which there is a considerable scattered literature, but no comprehensive publication.
The appeal is for help ‘in determining doubtful identifications’ and for ‘notes on any Outer Hebrides material which you may examine in the course of your work’.
The reverse side of the appeal has a useful bibliography.
Sadly, the war years interrupted the programme, though a few short botanical notes did appear between 1939 and 1945.
Undoubtedly the most important publication to emerge from the whole study was ‘The Flora of Uig (Lewis)’(Ed.
Campbell, 1945) and subtitled ‘A Botanical Exploration’.
In addition to plant lists and systematic notes, this contained an account of the vegetation by Miss Campbell's close associate, A. J. Wilmott of the British Museum (Natural History).
Wilmott published a further account of Uig following a post-war expedition arranged by Miss Campbell (Wilmott, 1948).
These annual expeditions became a feature of the study.
In an obituary (Milne-Redhead, 1984) the writer says ‘Meanwhile another botanical interest had developed, with Wilmott's collaboration and Maybud's Scottish heritage, namely an annual botanising expedition to the Outer Hebrides, with a view to obtaining enough material and information to write a Flora.
Other interested B.S.B.I. members used to join in, and the last pilgrimage to the Hebrides was as recent as 1981!’
Something of the character of these expeditions may be read in the account of another field meeting led by Miss Campbell (Campbell, 1961), where the Lewis week is described by Miss U. K. Duncan and the Harris one by Dr F. H. Perring.
I myself met with Miss Campbell in Tarbert, Harris in 1976.
She had sent volunteers out to botanise, and invited me to coffee in the Harris Hotel.
We talked about her plans to write a series of Floras, beginning with one for Harris.
Miss Campbell was later invited to write the chapter on the flora for the 1977 Symposium on the Natural Environment of the Outer Hebrides (Boyd, 1979).
Unfortunately, she had to withdraw from the Symposium, feeling that the effort was too much considering the work that she still required to do on her own Flora.
It was as a result of this withdrawal that I was invited to write the paper (Currie, 1979).
The Provisional Checklist which was Appendix 1 of that paper was examined by Miss Campbell, who made useful comments, but the main support came from Dr F. H.Perring and the staff at the Biological Records Centre.
Miss Campbell died in 1982 without having written a Flora, and in an eloquent obituary (Milne-Redhead, op cit. dhead) the author commented ‘The rich proceeds of these many expeditions are in the B. M. Herbarium, a fitting memorial to her love of Scottish botany, as is her ‘Flora of Uig’(Campbell, 1945)’.
It would be futile to speculate what might have been achieved had these two separate teams felt able to cooperate.
That there was a degree of enmity can be illustrated by reference to short papers by J. W.Heslop Harrison et al.(1938) and Campbell (1939b).
A clash of personalities must have been a factor, one feels.
That the potential for collaboration was there may be seen from the final sentence by J. W. Heslop Harrison (1948b) where he says ‘Still, it must be admitted that much remains to be done, and by many workers; we give a hearty invitation to others to join us in our labours’.
Other B.S.B.I. field meetings took place in Stornoway (Copping, 1977), Barra (Conacher, 1980) and Stornoway once more(Currie, 1984, unpublished but the information incorporated in the present Flora).
Quite apart from the work which went into recording on the main islands of the Outer Hebrides, a great deal of effort also went into visiting the less accessible islands and outliers.
Miss Campbell visited several including Scalpay (Harris)(Campbell, 1944), while Harrison (1941a) gave a list which included Great and Little Bernera (Lewis), Pabbay (Harris) Berneray and Taransay (Harris), Baleshare, the Monach Isles, Eriskay, Fuday, Vatersay, Flodday, Muldoanich, Sandray, Pabbay (Barra), Mingulay and Berneray (Barra).
Following the publication of the 1941 Preliminary Flora, some islands were revisited while new islands were  also visited.
In the following list, I have used for convenience the geographical zone numbers indicated in the map (see end papers).
4.
Great Bernera (Harrison, 1957)
11.
Taransay (Harrison, 1954a)
12.
Coppay (Harrison, 1954a)
13.
Shillay (Harrison, 1954a)
14.
Killegray (Harrison & Harrison, 1950b)
14.
Ensay (Harrison & Harrison, 1950b)
17.
Grimsay (Harrison & Harrison, 1950a)
17.
Ronay (Harrison & Harrison, 1950a)
19.
Stuley (Harrison & Harrison, 1950a)
It should be noted that many other small islands were visited, whose names appear within the text, but not in the titles, of the various papers.
The above list, however incomplete, does however give some idea of the geographical extent of the effort.
Many other botanists have also visited the remote and outlying islands during the period under discussion.
See the appendix for the bibliography of the flora of particular islands.
There have of course been many other visits which were either not documented or else which were presented in an ephemeral form.
For example, many schools, colleges and environmental groups have spent time in remote islands, producing for their own use reports which contain botanical information which remains rather inaccessible.
In concluding this section of the history of the study of the flora of the Outer Hebrides, it is particularly worthwhile to comment upon some published works which have a bearing upon plant conservation or habitat management, and whose authors were conservationists.
Early works (Darling, 1947 & Darling & Boyd, 1964) were of a general nature, but contained a great deal of botanical information from the Outer Hebrides.
Specific to St. Kilda, the study of the Soay sheep Jewell, Milner & Boyd, 1974) similarly contains information about the botany, including plant communities and a vegetation map.
Ratcliffe (1977a) touches on the flora of the Outer Hebrides within the Highland context.
A series of three reports on sand dune machair (Ranwell, 1974, 1977 & 1980) contain a great deal of additional information on this particular botanical habitat.
In a major review of the selection of biological sites of national importance to nature conservation in Britain (Ratcliffe, 1977b), Outer Hebridean sites are discussed in their national context with regard to botany among other aspects.
In particular, Vol. 2 provides site accounts for individual sites, within many of which is included botanical information.
Those with botanical data are listed under habitats below.
1)
coastlands South Uist Machair (a) Grogarry (b) Askernish coast Balranald, North Uist Monach Isles St. Kilda Baleshare/Kirkibost Dunes, North Uist
2)
open waters Loch an Duin, North Uist Grogarry Lochs, South Uist (a) Loch Druidibeg (b) Loch a'Mhachair and Loch Stilligarry (c) Howmore Estuary, Loch Roag and Loch Fada Loch nam Feithean Balranald, North Uist
3)
peatlands Little Loch Roag Valley Mire, Lewis
4)
upland grasslands and heaths
North Harris 
It should be noted that these sites are constantly being reviewed, and other sites added.
See the appendix of National Nature Reserves and Sites of Special Scientific Interest.
On 11th and 12th October, 1977, a Symposium on the Natural Environment of the Outer Hebrides, organised by the Royal Society of Edinburgh and the Nature Conservancy Council, was held in the Society's rooms in Edinburgh.
The object of the Symposium was to bring together as many as possible of the current works in the field, both in review and in original papers, and therefore provide a body of environmental information.
(Boyd, 1979b).
As well as papers describing the physical environment of climate, geology and soils, there were several botanical papers.
These dealt with vegetation, including a provisional checklist (Currie, 1979), machair vegetation (Dickinson & Randall, 1979), peatland vegetation (Goode & Lindsay 1979) and macrophytic vegetation of fresh and brackish waters (Spence, Allen & Fraser, 1979).
Boyd (1979c) provided lists of four National Nature Reserves and 39 Sites of Special Scientific Interest, many though not all of which have been declared for their botanical interest.
These S.S.S.I.s are constantly under review, and while some may have been dropped, others may have been extended and new sites added.
Botany can only benefit from this constant management and review of plant habitats.
4.
THE 1980s
In considering the state of botany in the Outer Hebrides in the 1980s, it is interesting to recall how the aims of botanical study have changed.
In the very early years, people were really exploring; then came the early botanists who identified what they saw and made lists; later came the ecologists who related plants to their environment; by the 1980s conservation of the flora came to the fore.
During this final period, it was an anticipated threat which stimulated a great deal of intense research into both fauna and flora of the Outer Hebrides.
‘An Integrated Development Programme for the Western Isles of Scotland (Outer Hebrides)’ was a five year programme 1982–87.
It arose from Council Regulation E.E.C.
No. 1939/81.
The basic objective of the I.D.P. as set out in that Regulation was to ‘improve working and living conditions in the Western Isles’ through a series of measures designed ’.... to improve agriculture; to improve the marketing of agricultural (and fisheries) products — including the afforestation of marginal land, operations to improve the marketing and processing of agricultural products and measures to develop fisheries, but also measures relating to tourist amenities, crafts, industrial and other complementary activities essential to the improvement of the general socio-economic situation of those isles’.
There was also an environmental objective — to maintain a proper balance between human needs and the natural environment.
Many saw the proposed I.D.P. as a threat to the natural environment, and in particular the machair with its very high botanical and ornithological interest.
The result was that a great deal of effort went into recording the habitats seen to be under threat, and the material collated within the Symposium volume (Boyd, 1979b) proved to be of immense value.
The Nature Conservancy Council is the body responsible for advising the Government on nature conservation in Great Britain, and it took a lead in providing the considerable resources required for specialist survey work.
The reports produced to date are internal documents, and only those referring to botany need be mentioned here.
Pitkin et al.(1983) carried out botanical survey of S.S.S.I.s in the Uists, while Mackintosh & Urquhart (1983) surveyed haymeadows also in the Uists.
In an important commissioned survey, the Royal Botanic Garden, Edinburgh (1983,1984 & 1985) surveyed aquatic vegetation and freshwater macrophytes in the Uists, Lewis and Harris, covering a great many lochs.
N.C.C.
Edinburgh (1986) is the report of the environmental appraisal, Part 3 of which contains the reports of specialist surveys.
The surveys included a major input by voluntary conservation bodies, including a habitat survey of the Uists carried out by the Scottish Wildlife Trust (Philp, 1983).
The botanical information from all of these studies was fortunately available to the writers of the present Flora.
In the end, the damage done to botanical habitats by the I.D.P. was minimal, but it does demonstrate the need for all botanists to be alert to future threats to the environment, even in more remote locations such as the Outer Hebrides.
It is to be hoped that the new botanical information acquired will soon be published in more accessible journals.
Plant Lore in Gaelic Scotland Margaret Bennett School of Scottish Studies, University of Edinburgh, 27, George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9LD 
Amid the ruins on the most remote Highland croft still remains ample evidence of age-old customs and beliefs concerning plants and their significance in the daily lives of the people who lived there.
The rowan tree (Sorbus aucuparia ) or  in Gaelic, which stands in the corner of the kitchen garden or just beyond the house or byre, has protected the home, the family and the cattle from witches and fairies for centuries, and has endured after many a homestead has been deserted.
No Highlander worth his salt would cut one down, nor will he allow his son to do so, even if it means walking many a long stretch to fetch home firewood.
Belief in the power of such plants can be traced back to the time of the Druids; it was certainly part of the belief system of the Celtic peoples, and although it may not be voiced so explicitly as it once was, yet the custom of planting and preserving this special tree is still continued by some people.
Nowadays it is merely regarded as good luck.
In his book The Gaelic Names of Plants (1883) John Cameron notes that the ‘Celts named plants often from
(1),
their uses;
(2),
their appearance;
(3),
their habitats;
(4),
their superstitious associations,
& c ’ and to clarify some of the points he wishes to make he notes comparisons between Scots, Irish and Welsh names.
Martin Martin (1703) who wrote his well-documented Description of the Western Islands of Scotland has left a wide and varied record of many of the plant uses which were at that time extant.
The oldest book source that Highlanders might refer to for plant lore is probably the Bible.
We need not, however, rely solely upon the works of old masters to bring to mind the lore that is associated with numerous plants.
For example, many a small child knows that to alleviate the pain and irritation of a nettle sting he need only reach for the nearest broad-leaved docken,(Rumex obtusifolius) and rub it on the offending part for instant relief.
Cameron's four headings are, however, useful broad categories into which might fall the examples chosen for this paper.
The uses of plants are legion: for medicine, for food and drink, for domestic, agricultural and seafaring purposes, for magical functions, or simply for luck.
To return to the offending nettle (Urtica dioica ) or , it too had its uses: Martin Martin noted that in Skye ‘the tops of nettles, chopped small, and mixed with a few whites or raw eggs, applied to the forehead and temples by way of a frontel, is used to procure sleep’.
He also recorded in Lewis a home-remedy which used the roots of nettles boiled in water along with the roots of reeds, then fermented by the addition of yeast which ‘they find beneficial for the cough’.
Perhaps more convincingly, the nettle tips were (and still are) a spring-time green vegetable, high in vitamins and minerals, a valuable supplement to diet.
Nettle tea, simply made by infusing in boiling water, and nettle soup, were also very common.
On several of the islands the entire plant, boiled in water, was used for dying wool a greenish-yellow colour.
Plants as a supplement for diet were not only important but essential.
Highly valued among a people who claimed its virtues in several ancient songs was , silverweed,(Potentilla anserina ):
[The blest silverweed of spring,
*One of the seven breads of the Gael.]
Before the introduction of the potato the versatile root of the silverweed was commonly boiled in water, roasted on the fire, or dried and ground into meal for bread-making or porridge.
It was especially welcomed by the poor Islanders who were cleared from their crofts  during the infamous Highland Clearances, and at the time of the potato blight many were said to have subsisted on it.
White or pink stonecrop (Sedum anglicum ) was considered to be a delicacy and was given the name, the prince's or lord's food, also known as the English stonecrop.
Even nowadays children at play can still be seen eating the occasional leaf of sorrel (Rumex acetosa ) which is generally called , possibly from the word for ‘sour’, searbh.
Their forebears may well have relied heavily upon scurvy grass (Cochlearia officinalis ) in some areas referred to as , ‘a sailor’ or ‘mariner’, and in other areas called , ‘the thing for scurvy’, or more explicitly, possessing antiscorbutic properties.
It is already widely-known that sailors suffered the dreaded disease of scurvy (in Gaelic), which could be counteracted by eating the food containing the appropriate substance, ascorbic acid.
On land, and in particular in the Highlands and Islands of Scotland, this was certainly not in the well-known form of lime juice, as the Gaels applied their own wisdom for the prevention of the disease.
Martin Martin notes that on a small rocky island to the south of Skye there is ‘a great quantity of scurvey-grass, of an extraordinary size, and very thick; the natives eat it frequently, as well boiled as raw: two of them told me that they happened to be confined there for the space of thirty hours, by a contrary wind; and being without victuals, fell to eating this scurvey-grass, and finding it of a sweet taste, far different from the land scurvey-grass, they ate a large basketful of it, which did abundantly satisfy their appetites until their return home’.
From time immemorial it was a commonly held belief in Gaelic Scotland that where a disease occurred there would be found growing in the locality of its prevalence a plant which would cure that disease.
This idea has raised many an eyebrow, especially during our modern age, yet in 1983 the World Health Organisation launched a ten-year study into herbal remedies.
The intention is that doctors will know which herbs can be used in the treatment of certain complaints.
According to Dr. Desmond Corrigan of Dublin University, ‘it is a fact that 40% of all drugs used at present have a folklore basis’.
The use of the foxglove (Digitalis purpurea ) or , ‘the fairy women's plant’ in Dr. William Withering's 18th century discovery of the drug digitalis is well documented.
It is still one of the most commonly prescribed drugs for heart complaints.
Dr. Corrigan suggests that ‘by the time the World Health Organisation have listed and checked all the herbs which could be used, doctors may find themselves prescribing herbs which were once dismissed as old wives' tales’.
In view of this recent move by the W.H.O., the work of Martin Martin has a large contribution to make.
To cite but a few examples, he notes that a ‘refreshing drink for such as are ill of fevers’ was whey in which was boiled violets (Viola riviniana ),, ‘field bowl’.
Kidney disorders, or the ‘stone’, as such ailments were called, were generally treated with various infusions such as those made with scurvy-grass or wild garlic (Allium ursinum ), in everyday language, and  in poetry.
It was also known as , which has a second meaning, ‘an irritable person’.
The plant was boiled in water and the resulting infusion was said to be an effectual diuretic.
Martin recorded several plants which indicated diuretic properties, some of which had purgative effects, and others which ‘cured the fluxes’, such as the syrup of bilberries.
His observations made in 1695 are not only an important source of early medicine (and therefore of world significance) but are also a vital source of Hebridean social history.
We can now observe twentieth century features of Hebridean kitchen gardens and can recognise a profusion of plants which occur, then sense the continuity of custom as Martin Martin informs us of the uses he observed almost three centuries ago.
This is no mere coincidence but an indication of the antiquity of knowledge among the Gaels who cultivated these plants dose to almost every house they built.
Two very common examples from the same plant family are feverfew and tansy.
The former (Tanacetum parthenium ) is called  in Gaelic and was used as a cure for migraines, while the latter (Tanacetum vulgare ),,(literally translated ‘the French weed’) had a rather different use which was recorded by Martin: ‘To kill worms, the infusion of tansy in whey, or aquavitae, taken fasting, is an ordinary medicine with the islanders’.
If the taste or effect of taking tansy proved too daunting a thought, perhaps the patient might have consoled himself that the suspension of aquavitae could have aided the effects of the medicine if not improved the taste.
In the making of aquavitae certain plants were utilised as additives, such as some members of the Leguminosae or vetch family,, literally ‘mice pease’ and known simply as  vetch, and  or  known as bitter vetch (Lathyrus montanus ).
Because of its aromatic properties it was preferred to spice in the making of aquavitae.
It had other beneficial and related properties too, as Martin notes that ‘the plant itself is not used, but the root is eaten to expel wind, and they say it prevents drunkenness by frequent chewing of it’.
He adds that ‘the natives of Mull are very careful to chew a piece…especially when they intend to have a drinking bout’.
Better an ounce of prevention than a pound of cure!
Sundew (Drosera rotundifolia ) has, according to one interpretation of the Gaelic, a somewhat uncomplimentary name —, said to be ‘the plant of earnach’, a disease in cattle, sometimes identified as murrain, and reputed to be caused by eating this poisonous plant.
It had some redeeming features, however, as it was used, according to Cameron, as a beauty aid ‘much employed among Celtic tribes for dyeing the hair’.
A second interpretation of its Gaelic name is ‘plant with the shields’, a more picturesque one attributed to the shape of the sundew's leaves.
Better known and more commonly employed in the daily lives of the Hebridean people were the plants used for dyeing wool.
The sundew was used in the making of tartan to produce a fine purple, but best known of all is  (Parmelia saxatilis ), a kind of lichen whose Gaelic name has gained more popular currency among English-speakers in Scotland than the equivalent translation, stone parmelia.
It dyes wool a reddish brown colour, distinctively well known and often referred to in either language as crotal .
The lichen is gathered from rocks late in the summer, dried in the sun, then it is placed with the wool in alternating layers in a large pot.
It is then covered with water, placed on a fire, and simmered till the desirable depth of colour is obtained.
Finally the wool is removed, rinsed in water with salt added to set the dye, and dried in the sun.
Attached to this plant and the dye it produces are several beliefs which are especially pertinent to the families of fishermen.
These men will not readily wear garment of crotal when going to sea, as it is said that the crotal plant was plucked from the rocks and will therefore return to the rocks.
It is also believed that if a person drowns wearing crotal the body will never be recovered.
Recipes for plant dyes tested and tried over generations have produced distinctive colours for wool, tweed and tartan.
Some plants are used in their entirety, such as bog myrtle (Myrica gale ),, which produces a fine yellow, or nettle which has already been described.
Others use only the root, such as the yellow flag or iris (Iris pseudacorus ), Sealasdair or Seileasdair, which is dug up after the flower has bloomed.
It is then cleaned, cut up and boiled in water to produce a blue-grey.
The roots of lady's bedstraw (Galium verum ),, produce an orange-red colour which is set by adding alum.
The flowers of the corn marigold (Chrysanthemum segetum ),, gathered in a muslin bag and boiled in water with alum, produce a bright, clear yellow.
The tops of ling heather (Calluna vulgaris ), produce yet another shade of yellow dye when boiled in water, and in fact that entire plant is wonderfully versatile: it was commonly used for thatching houses, and even today the few Highland thatchers that remain will swear it is the best thatch in Gaeldom; it provided beds to sleep on, with the ‘tops up and roots down’ arrangement of the mattress assuring a pleasantly aromatic and sound sleep; it was used in part of the process of tanning leather; and the fresh, young tops of the heather were (and at times still are) brewed into a kind of ale.
Little wonder it is acclaimed in song and story and longed for by the expatriate Scot!
Country folk are well known to observe signs which indicate the weather.
Some of the signs, such as the quantity of berries on certain trees in autumn were for long-range forecasts, while still others could tell the weather for that very hour:(The Shamrock is folding its garments before a heavy downpour) is not only a picturesque saying but tends also to be accurate.
Certain plants have Gaelic names which assign particular qualities to them, such as‘the beer plant’, which is commonly known as hop(s) (Humulus lupulus ).
The product used was made by boiling a quantity of hops with treacle, adding mashed potatoes and salt, then thickening the mixture with flour.
It was later stored in a crock and used in baking.
Yarrow (Achillea millefolium ) has one Gaelic name , ‘the plant that staunches bleeding’, as it is reputed to contain an element which aids the clotting of blood.
This plant has been recorded in the writings of ancient Greeks and Romans who noted that it was especially efficacious in ‘stopping the blood of a wound inflicted by iron’, presumably in battle.
Yarrow is also known as .
One of the Gaelic names for poppy is  ‘the sleep plant’, which is probably Papaver somniferum because of the acknowledged soporific properties.
The most common poppy in the Outer Hebrides is Papaver dubium whose beautiful red blooms brighten the early summer fields.
The shape or general appearance of many plants gives rise to numerous names which have appeal to the senses of sight and smell as well as the imagination.
The mountain everlasting (Antennaria dioica ) with its dainty little furry flowers is known in Gaelic as  literally ‘cat's paw’, while the marsh marigold (Caltha palustris ) is known as  ‘the yellow plant of Beltane’, for it makes its appearance at Beltane, May first, thus marking the second half of the ancient Celtic year.
Red campion (Silene dioica ) with its bright red jagged flowers is aptly known as  ‘cock's comb’, while ragged robin Lychnis flos-cuculi is referred to as  giving the bright picture of a ‘marsh spark’.
The Scottish bluebell (Campanula rotundifolia ) is sometimes called  ‘the cuckoo's hood’, a beautiful image for such an elegant flower.
The greater plantain (Plantago major ) is known as  [Saint]‘Patrick's bowl’.
Hemlock (Conium maculatum ) has the Gaelic name of , which it is suggested by Cameron, is possibly from the word for feathers,.
Although there are also other Gaelic names for hemlock, the Biblical reference in Hosea X. 4 uses this name:(Thus judgment springeth up like a hemlock in the furrows of the field).
Hemlock water-dropwort (Oenanthe crocata ), however, has a Gaelic name that suggests another kind of imagery: bog, meaning ‘gentle deceit’.
It was said to have been given to prisoners as poison from the time of Pliny, and most references agree that it was also the plant with which Socrates was poisoned.
In the Outer Hebrides there is, however, a second and more urgent suggestion of deceit, as this poisonous plant looks very much like water-cress, and therefore one could be deceived into eating it, with disastrous results.
And on another cautionary note, there is the white water lily (Nymphaea alba ), which goes by name of  ‘the white leaf of drowning’…its extreme beauty may lure the admirer to a watery grave.
The common fumitory (Fumaria officinalis ) is known in Gaelic as , which translates as ‘earth-smoke plant’ and is a play on the Latin name.
It was believed that the smoke of this species had the power of expelling evil spirits.
There were several plants which were significant to generations of Hebridean children who were brought up to have a knowledge of them.
Aside from the cautionary tales that accompanied some of the Gaelic plant names, there were some plants that were the focus of childhood games.
An almost universal game was ‘Soldiers’ played with a stalk of plantain:[‘Let's play soldier  ' s’]was the usual invitation to play.
Two children (the combatants) each chose a ‘soldier’ and held battle until one managed to chop off the head of his opponent.
Often the winner could go into battle many times with the one sturdy ‘soldier’ as there were some stems of the plantain which (according to a veteran Uist player) were ‘like grizzled warriors and would knock out hundreds!’
Another plant used in a most imaginative manner by children at play was  ragwort (Senecio jacobaea ) which was the central object of a game called  [’Steal the Crown’].
It was a popular game on several of the Hebridean islands and though there were regional variations, this version is from the Rev. N. MacDonald who was recorded by the late Calum lain MacLean of the school of Scottish Studies in 1953.
Originally in Gaelic (and here translated) it gives a general account of the game which was played as follows:
‘Well, we played it during the interval at school when I was a little boy.
You had always to be on a level piece of ground, you see, with no rise whatsoever and we always had that; we had an excellent stretch of green sward a short distance from the school, and we gathered there.
And it was always in autumn that this game was played because we had a sort of a plant that is very common then, we call it  in Gaelic [ragwort].
And that was plucked out by its roots, and two rows were set up on the green; boys and girls were in each row.
[The Crown]was one of those , one of those plants.
It was thrown there on neutral territory between the two ranks and the person who was successful in breaking through and taking up the crown and running right down…round, circling their opponents, and right round and coming back without being caught, that person was successful.
But he always had to give the next, his companion, a chance, and he himself just looked on.
But if he was caught with the  with the crown, by his opponents before he circled them and came back to his own  allies…then he had to go outside the camp, and he was called a  [maggot!].
Now the side that had more failures (or more  was the side that lost, and the row that had less, of course, was the one that was successful.
And that was the game!’
A few plants are associated with historical lore such as the pink convolvulus or sea bindweed (Calystegia soldanella ), which is called  ‘the Prince's flower’, because it was said to have been originally sown by Prince Charles in 1745 when he landed in Eriskay, and it is still growing on that island.
As stated earlier, certain plants were said to have supernatural powers, often revealing an interesting combination of Christian and pagan beliefs in the one element.
Slender St. John's wort (Hypericum pulchrum ), for example, was in some areas  ‘the flower carried in the arms of St. Columba’.
In pre-Christian times it was carried as a charm against witchcraft, a notion which survived long after the arrival of Christianity.
In Carmina Gadelica (1900), Alexander Carmichael notes that ‘St John's wort is one of the few plants still cherished by the people to ward away second-sight, enchantment, witchcraft, evil eye, and death, and to ensure peace and plenty in the house, increase and prosperity in the field, and growth and fruition in the field’.
It was said to be effective only if found without actually seeking it, and some people who came upon it used to say a prayer such as:
Saint John's wort, Saint John's wort,
Without search, without seeking!
Please God and Christ Jesus
This year I shall not die.
Carmichael states that ‘the plant is secretly secured in the bodices of the women and in the vests of the men, under the left armpit’, while Martin Martin gives an account of a man in Berneray, Harris, who wore it in the neck of his coat to prevent him from seeing visions, and ‘he never saw any since he first carried that plant about with him’.
It was also said to possess curative powers, as did several other plants which incorporate the name of the Virgin Mary or the saints in their Gaelic names.
Clan badges are many and varied, and several have been selected from the local plants.
To cite but a few examples, the thistle is the official badge of the Clan Stewart.
With several species in the Outer Hebrides such as(Cirsium palustre ) the marsh thistle,(Cirsium vulgare ), the spear thistle, and  (Cirsium arvense ), the field thistle, a prospective wearer need not be short of choice.
Bog myrtle (Myrica gale ) Roid, sometimes rendered as  is the badge of the Clan MacArthur; and the MacDonalds and MacAlisters have for their clan badges the heather, already mentioned for its great versatility.
The Gaelic alphabet is represented by eighteen trees, beginning with A,, elm (Ulmus ) and ending with U,, hawthorn Crataegus monogyna )…not quite an A-to-Z of plants, for there is no Z in Gaelic.
Represented here is a mere sampler from an enormous tapestry of Gaelic plant names and their associated lore.
Plan of the Flora of the Outer Hebrides
Each of the species accounts is laid out as follows:
Scientific name, as in Clapham, Tutin & Moore.
English name (from the BSBI standard list).
Gaelic name, if known, from list compiled by J. W. Clark & I. MacDonald, see below.
Status.
Habitat, especially if different from mainland.
First record (introductions only).
Distribution, as list of zones by numbers, with comments if appropriate.
The zone numbers are given in brackets if the record is doubtful.
More precision is given for rarer plants.
In such cases, we may have cited; collector's name (see Appendix) in italic and date, author(s) and date in normal type for literature records e.g. Harrison (1941a), see appendix for bibliography, the herbarium code name for voucher specimens.
In many cases, we have not had enough information to be able to give separate distributions for intraspecific taxa.
Taxonomic notes, including short keys as and when appropriate.
Notes on the Gaelic names
The main published sources of Gaelic plant names are John Cameron's out of print compilation The Gaelic Names of Plants (Blackwood and Sons, Edinburgh and London, 1883; 2nd ed., John Mackay, Glasgow, 1900) and Edward Dwelly's The Illustrated Gaelic-English Dictionary (1901–11, and often reprinted, most recently in 1988 by Gairm Publications, Glasgow).
Dwelly in fact lists many of the plant names in Cameron, on occasion presenting corrected forms of them, but also draws on other sources which he cites at the front of his dictionary.
Names of plants will also be found in a collection such as Gaelic Words and Expressions from South Uist and Eriskay , collected by Father Allan McDonald and edited by J.L.Campbell (2nd ed., Oxford University Press, 1972).
More recently, a short list has appeared in a Gaelic work on biology by MacLeòid and MacThomais,Bith-eolas (Gairm Publications, 1976), while a certain number can be found in dictionaries, old and recent, other than Dwelly's.
There are several quite elaborate private lists in existence, but none of these has yet been published.
As might be expected when the large area in which Gaelic was widespread is considered, plant names may differ from place to place or be recorded in variant forms, and the choice (in most cases) of one name only in the Flora was extremely difficult.
Published and unpublished lists were used in compiling the necessarily limited but, it is hoped, representative selection of Gaelic names that appears here, and help was given by Gaelic speakers in the Outer Hebrides and elsewhere.
Systematic investigation of the authenticity of the names and of their etymology has not been attempted, although the orthography has been brought up-to-date.
This does not, therefore, purport to be a standard list, and it is recognised that an up to date and authoritative list is greatly to be desired.
In many instances Dwelly and others provide only the plant's generic name, and where necessary the different species have been distinguished by qualifiers such as(‘meadow’),(‘marsh’) etc.
Where * appears, the generic name has been introduced recently and is not to be found in the older sources, while names marked ** are based on Irish exemplars, no Scottish names being known, and have been adapted for Gaelic as necessary.
J. W. Clark & I. MacDonald 