

the meaning of theism
theists, atheists and the chance of an argument
In the first chapter I attempt to set out some of the different forms of theism and atheism.
By doing so, I hope to show that the dialogue between believers and non-believers in God can proceed only on the basis of certain common assumptions.
Some theists and atheists can talk to one another, and some cannot.
It therefore becomes necessary to outline what must be agreed upon between both sides if the argument is to be taken further.
To define the different forms of theism and atheism is no easy task, and it requires from the start a degree of modesty and admission that we cannot hope to cover everything!
‘Metaphysics’ has been defined as the attempt by a blind man in a dark room to find a black hat which isn't there.
For the rest of this book an attempt is being made to explore some metaphysical questions so perhaps we are entitled to stumble.
That said, some progress, stumbling or not, must be attempted.
The many forms of atheism can usefully be divided into two categories.
The first category is made up of those who can make no sense whatever of any God-talk.
It is all mumbo-jumbo.
The question of whether God exists is irrelevant because the word ‘God’ has no meaning.
This group would answer the question: ‘Does God exist?’ by saying: ‘I don't know what you're talking about’.
I will label them ‘no meaning’ atheists.
Secondly, there are those with a clear idea of what ‘God’ means.
I will label them ‘meaning’ atheists.
That is to say, they know what it would be like for God to exist, but as a matter of fact they don't think that one does.
‘No meaning’ atheists tend to talk rather as A.J. Ayer talks in Language, Truth and Logic , as if there is no possibility of a Deity existing because there is no possibility of making sense of the word ‘God’:
…if ‘god’ is a metaphysical term, then it cannot even be probable that a god exists.
For to say that ‘God exists’ is to make a metaphysical utterance which cannot be either true or false.
And by the same criterion, no sentence which purports to describe the nature of a transcendent god can possess any literal significance.
Ayer's position appears to be making the rules so that the theist cannot win.
In effect he says: you can't be a theist unless you use metaphysical terms.
Metaphysical terms are meaningless.
Therefore anything you say about God is meaningless.
Some people might imagine that the three positions of theist, agnostic and atheist could be defined as follows: the theist knows there is a God; the agnostic doesn't know whether there's a God or not; the atheist knows there is not a God.
If this were true, there would at least be common ground between the three, in that they all agreed what was meant by the word ‘God’.
The argument could then turn to whether there was one.
But Ayer represents what is probably more often the position of the atheist, namely that it simply makes no sense to talk of God.
Asking whether God exists has no more meaning than a grunt or a belch.
We see here the way in which battle is often joined between theist and atheist.
The theist will want to argue that you cannot talk of God in the way that you talk of other things.
This may require him or her to use what might be called ‘metaphysical’ terms.
But he or she will then have to demonstrate that it is possible to make sense when using such terms.
The argument about God thereby becomes an argument about language.
Rather than arguing about whether God exists, the theist and the atheist find themselves arguing about whether metaphysical terms have meaning.
If we now turn from atheists to theists, we find that the forms of theism can be categorised in a similar manner.
For instance, there is the ‘no meaning’ theist.
An example of this position can be found in the writings of Karl Barth, probably the most famous Christian theologian of the twentieth century.
Barth thought that if we knew what we meant by the word ‘God’, then God must exist.
He expounded his theory in a work on Anselm entitled Fides Quaerens Intellectum (Faith Seeking Understanding).
Barth was deeply impressed by Anselm's so-called ‘Ontological Argument’ for the existence of God — this argument will be looked at in more detail later — but he interpreted it in a particular way.
He thought that precisely because it was impossible for the human mind to construct an idea of God from its inherent mental resources, such an idea could only be given to it by revelation — in other words directly implanted by God Himself.
Because there could be no idea of God in the mind without God putting it there, an idea of God was impossible without God's existence.
Barth therefore concluded that it was correct to argue that if we could define God then God must exist.
It was as if the idea of God in the mind was like a shadow thrown on a wall.
It could not be there unless the object reflected in this way existed.
Barth and Ayer have elements in common.
Both insist that language about God admits of no connection with ‘ordinary’ language, and that in terms of‘ordinary’language it is meaningless.
But where one concludes from this that theistic terms cannot be understood, the other concludes that they are the language of ‘faith’, directly given to the believer by God.
They agree that theological discourse does not make sense in the terms of ordinary language, but whereas for one this effectively consigns theology to the dustbin, for the other it gives it the same sort of status as speaking in tongues.
It represents a direct divine revelation that delivers a capacity for understanding beyond the parameters of normal discourse.
The position of the followers of Barth represents in part a theological reaction to the sort of pressure that theism has been put under by the philosophical school associated with Ayer, ‘logical positivism’.
They have tried to take on board Ayer's claim that theological language is meaningless, but have made of this meaninglessness a kind of superior divine logic.
Indeed, they have found that such an approach protects the believer from criticism.
They admit that theology is meaningless to those outside the realm of faith ('faith' being interpreted as a direct transmission of knowledge to the individual, who acquires understanding on the  basis of a kind of spiritual drip-feed connecting God with the believer).
They therefore feel that their ‘secular’ critics have nothing significant to say to them.
In effect, Ayer has put them in a ghetto and they are happy to remain there, content to be making statements of nonsense in the assurance that what to the believer are the words of God must necessarily appear to the unbeliever mere gobbledygook.
On the other hand, there are those on both sides whom I would label ‘meaning’ theists and ‘meaning’atheists, between whom a dialogue about God's existence can take place.
‘Meaning’ theists do not claim that on the basis of some special gift from God, ‘faith’or ‘grace’or ‘revelation’, they are able to be assured that God exists whilst being quite unable to communicate the grounds of their assurance to others who lack this divine gift.
‘Meaning’ atheists do not make the claim that language about God is incommunicable either — in their case because they do not regard it as emanating from a philosophical No Go area labelled ‘metaphysics’that is pronounced to be beyond the bounds of sense.
‘Meaning’ theists and ‘meaning’atheists are able to accept that a common definition of ‘God’can be found and the evidence for and against God's existence duly weighed and argued over.
In order to advance the debate about God, we need to presume that this debate is between ‘meaning’ theists and ‘meaning’atheists.
But perhaps this is something we presume for our own convenience.
What is the evidence that the argument of the ‘no meaning’ theists and the ‘no meaning’atheists is an incorrect one?
In the next two sections I shall examine more closely the positions outlined by Ayer and Barth.
‘no meaning’ atheists
Language, Truth and Logic makes the ‘no meaning’ atheist position clear in its first chapter, ‘The Elimination of Metaphysics’:
Our charge against the metaphysician is not that he attempts to employ the understanding in a field where it cannot possibly venture, but that he produces sentences which fail to conform to the conditions under which alone a sentence can be literally significant.
So the argument against the theist is that he or she does not produce a meaningful sentence when talking about God.
The conditions under which sentences can be ‘literally significant’ are not met.
But what are the conditions?
And are they the right conditions?
Ayer tells us in the next paragraph:
The criterion which we use to test the genuineness of apparent statements of fact is the criterion of verifiability.
We say that a sentence is factually significant to any given person if, and only if, he knows how to verify the proposition which it purports to express — that is, if he knows what observations would lead him, under certain conditions, to accept the proposition as being true, or reject it as being false.
Ayer gives us an example of what he considers to be a meaningless theological statement: ‘The Absolute enters into, but is itself incapable of, evolution and progress’.
Because, he claims, ‘one cannot conceive of an observation which would enable one to determine whether the Absolute did, or did not, enter into evolution and progress’, then whoever makes a theological statement like the one above ‘has made an utterance which has no literal significance even for himself’.
In one sense Ayer's claim seems reasonable.
If anyone claims to be making a factual statement, then they ought to be able to state what observations would be relevant to determining the truth or falsity of that statement.
But then, many theists would claim that theological statements filled this bill perfectly well.
Take the statement ‘God made the world’.
A theist might claim that there were a number of observations that were relevant to determining the truth or falsity of that statement.
For instance, he or she might make observations about the beauty of the natural world or the complexity of its design, and claim that these were evidence of the existence of a divine Creator.
Such claims might be contentious, but it would be odd to see them as meaningless.
Even the rather unwieldy theological statement quoted by Ayer could be interpreted in this way.
A Christian would argue that the life of Christ represents the Absolute ‘entering into’ human history, whilst denying that this meant God Himself was subject to change.
The claim would be that Jesus of Nazareth represented observable evidence of the divine nature.
Ayer's response to this argument would be to agree that natural beauty, the intricacy of the physical universe, or the short life of a Galilean Jew, represented observable evidence.
But he would deny that they were evidence of God.
In another passage from Language, Truth and Logic he writes:
…
If the sentence ‘God exists’ entails no more than that certain types of phenomena occur in certain sequences, then to assert the existence of a god will be simply equivalent to asserting that there is the requisite regularity in nature; and no religious man would admit that this was all he intended to assert in asserting the existence of a god.
Ayer begins, then, by arguing that anyone claiming to make a factual statement must be capable of saying what observations would count towards establishing the truth or falsity of that statement.
Then the theist offers examples of observations which he or she would claim count for (or conceivably against) the existence of God.
But now Ayer claims that these observations have no meaning as evidence for the existence of a god.
Thus when the theist says ‘regularity in nature is evidence of God's existence’, Ayer replies: ‘All you are saying is that there's regularity in nature’.
But has he any right to tell the theist this?
After all, the theist is seeking to conform with the verification principle and is listing observations which count for or against God's existence.
If Ayer then tells the theist that he or she is still unable to make meaningful theological statements, then it cannot surely be on the basis of the verification principle, the principle by which he claims to distinguish meaningful from meaningless statements.
He is, of course, entitled to deny that regularity in nature establishes or counts for the existence of a god.
But is he entitled on the basis of his own principle to continue to say: ‘Theological statements are meaningless’?
A general reading of the book encourages the suspicion that the principle of verification is being used, not simply to exclude some clear and obvious errors, but to cut out swathes of philosophical tradition that have never been guilty of the crude misconceptions of which they are accused by Ayer.
Thus, in his chapter ‘The Elimination of Metaphysics’, Ayer cites a number of philosophical problems which he believes can be rapidly cleared up through a proper understanding of language.
He believes that the use of the term ‘substance’ is a good example:
It happens to be the case that we cannot, in our language, refer to the sensible properties of a thing without introducing a word or phrase which appears to stand for the thing itself as opposed to anything which may be said about it.
The metaphysician, ‘misled by a superficial grammatical feature of his language’, thereby supposes, Ayer argues, that the thing itself is a simple entity, which can be distinguished from its attributes.
The metaphysician uses the word ‘substance’ of the ‘thing itself’, and thinks of its various properties as attached to it in much the same way that garments become attached to a clothes horse.
The ‘thing itself’, the ‘substance’, is thought of as an object that can be separated from its attributes.
It somehow ‘lies beneath’ them as another ‘thing’, much as the clothes horse lies underneath the clothes.
Ayer identifies here an error made by some philosophers.
But his own position, which is that an entity can simply be defined in terms of‘the totality of its appearances’, is similarly questionable.
Ayer claims that ‘logical analysis’(whatever that is) shows that what makes these ‘appearances’ the ‘appearances of’the same thing is not their relationship to an entity other than themselves, but their relationship to one another.
In fact only some logical analysis shows this.
Most philosophers recognise the fallacy of the clothes horse view of the ‘thing itself’.
But they do not necessarily conclude that a thing is no more than the sum of its attributes.
They agree that the clothes horse analogy is too crude a way of conveying the relationship between what a thing is and the fact that it is.
But a philosophical tradition stretching back to Aristotle's exploration of the relationship between ‘first substance’ and ‘second substance’in The Categories has seen that there are other ways of exploring the issue.
Much the same can be said of Ayer's treatment of existence.
A simpler and clearer instance of the way in which a consideration of grammar leads to metaphysics is the case of the metaphysical concept of Being.
Here again, he concludes that there is a simple misunderstanding of language.
The statements ‘Martyrs exist’ and ‘Martyrs suffer’both contain a noun followed by an intransitive verb.
We therefore might be misled into thinking that they are of the same logical type.
But this would be wrong because, as Kant has  demonstrated, ‘existence is not an attribute’, an additional property which a thing has on top of its other properties like greenness, tallness, or roundness.
Once again, Ayer highlights an error that some philosophers have made, and which Anselm certainly made in his famous argument for the existence of God (which I will examine later).
But most of the philosophers who have written about and explored the nature of being have not been so crude.
They have seen that, in the words of the philosopher G.E.
Moore, there is a difference between the way in which the word ‘exist’ is used in the sentence ‘tame tigers exist’, and the way in which the word ‘growl’is used in the sentence ‘tame tigers growl’.
But they have not concluded that it is a useless and mistaken speculative enterprise to consider what it means to say that something ‘exists’.
To argue that much of the work of philosophers like Aristotle or theologians like Aquinas was based on a simple grammatical error is quite unfair.
What Language, Truth and Logic does is to call a particular philosophical position, rather than a particular branch of philosophy, ‘metaphysics’ and thereby nonsense.
Ayer takes a number of issues examined by all philosophers as part of a broad introduction to philosophy: What is the self?
What does it mean to say that something exists?
What is an object?
He then attacks certain answers to these questions as ‘metaphysics’.
He identifies some real errors based on misunderstanding of language, but then reduces all philosophical positions other than his own to such errors.
As a result an enormous amount of philosophy is scorned and rejected.
In dismissing metaphysics, Ayer is not dismissing an old-fashioned and unnecessary pan of philosophy.
He is trying to exclude a particular approach to many central problems of philosophy.
The question of God's existence is merely one of these central problems.
It is, then, into a more general reductive process that we would place Ayer's treatment of God.
Later in this book, when discussing the divine nature, ideas of existence and of the self that have been part of the debate over theism will be discussed.
There is some similarity between these issues, particularly when it is borne in mind that the theist does not regard God as a supra-terrestrial object for whose existence or non-existence no earthly observations could conceivably be of relevance.
The theist denies that the  boundaries of heaven begin where the boundaries of earth end.
Any theist committed to the view that God is omnipresent must by definition believe that there is evidence of God's presence in the reality observed on earth.
Ayer can, of course, claim that this reality can be understood without recourse to theism.
He can do so in just the way that he believes the totality of appearances can be interpreted without belief in ‘substances’, or that there is no further significance to existence than that it is not a predicate.
But can the verification principle give him the right to do this, when those who take a different view from him feel entitled to claim that they are abiding by that principle?
Cannot they too be committed to the view that philosophy must deal with matters of fact, and that to claim something as a matter of fact one must be able to state what observations would in principle establish its truth or falsity?
Certainly Ayer has a different view of what facts can be construed from those observations than they do.
But can he use that difference to call his opponents' view ‘metaphysics’ and therefore nonsense?
Is he sweeping the pieces off the chessboard rather than engaging in the game?
As a ‘no meaning’ atheist, Ayer attempts to find a principle in terms of which to reject the whole business of theology as meaningless.
I have tried to argue that the principle does not succeed in this task, and moreover that a great deal of philosophy would also be rejected by Ayer's approach.
If Ayer's position were correct, then the argument between theists and atheists could proceed no further.
But what I have tried to show is that a theist could actually claim to be abiding by the Verification Principle when making statements about God.
Those statements may be true or false, but there is nothing in their form to exclude them at the outset from consideration.
‘no meaning’ theists
‘No meaning’ theists make particular use of theological terms that point to a special kind of knowledge delivered to the believer by God.
Words such as‘revelation’, ‘grace’, and in particular ‘faith’ are enlisted in order to justify the idea of an exclusive channel of communication between the Deity and His followers.
In reality these terms have been interpreted in a number of different ways.
I have already mentioned the influence of Barth in the modern day.
This section looks back further into Christian tradition and examines the concept of faith, particularly in relation to the word which it is so often contrasted to, ‘reason’, in order to identify more clearly the stance adopted by the ‘no meaning’ theist.
Before beginning to look in detail at an aspect of a particular religious tradition, the Christian tradition, one further point must be made clear.
When considering the nature of God in later chapters, I set out to include consideration of a range of world religions.
In this first chapter, however, the illustrations are limited to the Judaeo-Christian tradition.
Since the purpose of this chapter is, as I have said, a preamble to the discussion of God's nature, the limitation of scope is not perhaps too serious.
When it comes to asking who or what theists consider God to be, on the other hand, any answer must embrace as far as it can the full spectrum of religious opinion.
In later chapters, then, I hope that I will display a more ecumenical perspective than I manage in this one!
To a Christian, the word ‘faith’ will probably recall the arguments of the Protestant Reformation and the debate about the idea of ‘justification by faith’which has dominated much of Christian history since that time.
The Protestant Reformers argued that salvation was earned by faith and not by ‘works’— good deeds.
But they then had to contend with the response that faith itself might be interpreted as an ‘inner work’, a good deed of the mind.
They therefore adopted the view that faith was not a work because it was an act of God rather than of the human person.
Whereas works were human actions, faith was a gift of grace, a divine action, something implanted in the believer by God — the sort of imagery that Barth refined in his work on Anselm.
Naturally enough, this view of faith as a divine gift rather than the product of a human effort was used to mark off the believers from the unbelievers.
Some people were given faith; some people were not.
It was a fact of life.
To John Calvin, among others, it simply proved that God had pre-destined some to eternal salvation and some to eternal damnation before they were born.
Ask a Christian why he or she believes that God exists, and they might reply: ‘It is a matter of faith.’
Otherwise the questioner wouldn't need to ask the question.
If the questioner persists by saying: ‘At least explain to me what it's like to believe in God’, they will refuse the offer once again.
Faith only speaks to faith.
To those outside, it is all nonsense — an observation that Ayer would be the first to corroborate.
John Wesley discussed faith in these terms when he compared it to a ‘spiritual sense’ in his Earnest Appeal to Men of Reason and Religion :
…as you cannot reason concerning colours if you have no natural sight — because all the ideas received by your senses are of a different kind…so you cannot reason concerning spiritual things if you have no spiritual sight, because all your ideas received by your outward senses are of a different kind…
Wesley has an explanation of why the believer cannot explain to the unbeliever what he or she has learned by faith.
It would be like explaining to someone blind what colour is like.
Once again, Ayer's position proves convenient to this sort of theist.
He is the blind man who cannot see, like many others described in the Christian gospels.
Of course colour-talk (metaphysical language) appears nonsense to him.
It is outside the range of his sense-experience.
When Christians in this tradition talk of reason, on the other hand, they dismiss it as a human work, tainted therefore by sin and liable to mislead.
They see the ‘cunning’ of the serpent in the Garden of Eden as the wiles of the first intellectual (probably a theologian).
The Christian who puts his or her trust in reason commits the folly of hubris, putting faith in something that is human.
Reason has a role, but only when doing the work of faith.
It articulates what is revealed by the sixth sense.
Even in this limited role, however, reason is liable to cause trouble to the faithful, because such articulation requires that the lines of communication between believer and unbeliever are re-opened.
So long as it maintains the idea that believers talking to unbelievers are like people explaining to the blind what it is like to see, reason may be tolerated.
But even the blind can make certain demands for consistency upon those with sight.
I cannot examine here the way in which this view of religious knowledge can be paralleled within other traditions (in the eighth century A.D., for instance, there was a debate within Islam along lines similar to the sixteenth-century Christian debate over faith and works).
Nor can I look at the way in which this view of faith  and reason has influenced contemporary Christian thinking, both mainstream and among the evangelical or fundamentalist groups where it is most in evidence.
What I want to concentrate upon are the different models used in order to explain basic theological terms.
Wesley's model for explaining the nature of faith is the model of perception.
Those with faith are those who can ‘see’, and who may therefore only engage in a limited dialogue with the ‘blind’.
There are limits to what they can say in explaining their beliefs, the sort of limits which we tend to accept when imagining the constraints upon giving a blind person some understanding of what the world looks like (although, as said, it would be wrong to suppose that we could communicate nothing in such circumstances).
Such a model attempts to encourage the unbeliever to excuse the believer from the task of justifying theism.
It seeks to make clear that the task is bound to be an impossibility, because the unbeliever lacks the God-given capacity to understand.
This model of faith is clearly very comfortable for the believer.
As a ‘no meaning’ theist, he or she is protected from the sort of self-criticism that must come when believer and unbeliever are challenging one another on common ground.
But many believers will say that such comfort is precisely what faith is meant lo give them.
They might accept that they are a privileged group, receiving an assurance that frees them to act in the world without fear and uncertainty.
In the context of a thorough-going twentieth-century challenge to religious belief, it is easy to see how this kind of retreat to a self-contained theism becomes attractive.
Yet this position cannot be sustained.
Any claim to ‘special knowledge’ through faith or revelation or grace cannot avoid the task of explaining just what this knowledge is knowledge of.
Any claim to direct acquaintance with God through immediate religious experience has to explain what the experience is experience of Ayer makes this point in discussing what he calls ‘mysticism’.
I cannot be refuted if I claim that my visual sense-field contains a yellow sense-content, but I can be refuted if I go on to claim that there exists a yellow object that is responsible for my sense-content.
Similarly, I cannot be refuted if I claim to experience a religious emotion.
But if I claim that my religious experience is experience of God, then I am not simply talking about my own feelings but about a transcendent being that I am claiming my  feelings to be feelings of.
Therefore, I can no longer be allowed to escape criticism and analysis of my theistic views on the grounds that they are simply a matter of personal experience.
It does not matter whether I claim that God has granted me special revelation, a unique experience, or an unshakeable conviction which I choose to call ‘faith’.
In each case, if I am to claim that this revelation or experience is of ‘God’, and is not simply an expression of some form of mental delusion which should be referred to a psychoanalyst, then I am forced to debate the interpretation that I am giving.
This is the key point.
‘No meaning’ theists talk of ‘self-authenticating experiences’.
That is fine.
But to say that my experience is ‘experience of God’ is to move beyond the experience to give a particular interpretation of it.
What is self-authenticating is the fact that I have had an experience.
But to say that I have had an experience of God, whom I claim to be a transcendent being outside myself, cannot be self-authenticating.
For this is to understand my experience in a certain way, a way that others can challenge and ask me to explain.
The ‘no meaning’ atheist denies that the theist can state what observations would lead him or her to accept as true, or deny as false, the proposition that ‘God exists’.
The ‘no meaning’ theist denies that the theist needs to say anything about the existence of God that is intelligible to those who don't already accept the existence of God as true.
I have found neither position acceptable.
But there is the other form both of theism and of atheism — the ‘meaning’ form.
In the next section we shall look at the position of theists and of atheists when they do not rule out the possibility of dialogue with one another on grounds of unintelligibility, whether the unintelligibility be God-given or humanly made.
the dilemma of ‘meaning theism'
If we accept the position either of the ‘no meaning’ theist or the ‘no meaning’atheist, then the debate cannot proceed any further.
But in the case of ‘meaning theism’ and ‘meaning atheism’it can do.
Since the presumption of both ‘meaning’ theist and ‘meaning’atheist is that each can understand and criticise what the other is saying, the main arguments for and against theism can be brought out by following through the position of either.
My own inquiry  into God will try to make sense of the ‘meaning’ theist position, but in doing so I shall also be making clear — since they encounter one another on common ground — what the view of the ‘meaning’atheist might be.
In the last section we found the ‘no meaning’ theist employing terms like ‘faith’to suggest an exclusive mode of communication between God and the believer.
A very different view of faith is the one explored by John Locke in The Reasonableness of Christianity .
Locke's late seventeenth-century confidence in reason represented precisely the sort of view that Wesley's eighteenth-century religious revival was designed to subvert.
Where Wesley stressed faith as a gift of God, Locke stressed reason as a gift of God.
It is reason, he argued, that is the distinguishing feature of human beings as against other examples of creation.
It should therefore be particularly revered.
And Locke warned against ‘giving up reason for revelation’, which he associated with ‘enthusiasm’(a word that around 1700 meant ‘fanaticism’).
It is clear that for Locke the perception model of faith created an unsatisfactory barrier between those with faith and those without.
He recognised that some understanding is given directly by God, but also that it has to be appropriated by human beings using their reason.
To give up reason for revelation, he argued, is ‘like putting out one's eyes in order to look through a telescope’.
In another passage he argued that ‘God when he makes the prophet does not unmake the man’— in other words God leaves the prophet with his faculties intact in order to judge the prophecy.
For Locke the separate compartments for faith and reason, or reason and revelation, did not exist.
Reason he defined as ‘natural revelation’.
Revelation he defined as ‘natural reason enlarged’.
Faith is ‘a firm assent of the mind’, for which there should be good reason.
As the title of his book indicated, the Christian faith should be a ‘reasonable’ faith.
However, many Christians nowadays, even though they might admire and approve of Locke's preparedness to make faith reasonable, would not be happy with the particular arguments he used to establish that reasonableness.
He has a confidence, typical of his time, that the works of nature provide sufficient evidence of a Deity.
He believed that the teachings of Christ gather together the wisdom of the ages into one source, and present it for the ‘uneducated’ along with a few miracles in order to win their attention and support (much as the outlaw in the Western uses his gun in order to win an audience in a crowded saloon bar).
For Locke, it was possible from reason alone to know that there is a God, and the role of revelation tended to be seen as a way to produce belief among those whose reason was undeveloped.
The Incarnation became a way of instructing the poor and ignorant in truths long since grasped by the wise and philosophically educated!
Such snobbery perhaps helps to explain some of the support which the Wesleyan tradition must have engendered, among people who found the ‘spiritual sense’ of faith a way of rebutting the patronising condescension of the ‘men of reason’.
Wesley and Locke represent the dilemma perceived in religion by many during the modern period of the Enlightenment.
On the one hand there is the position of the ‘no meaning’ theist, occupied by those who talk of faith in the way that Wesley talked of it.
They are certainly comfortable and assured, but at the same time they have no real chance of converting others to their views, at least if conversion means more than expressing the hope that God will send faith to others too.
So far as talking is concerned, they can only do it to each other.
On the other hand, there are those like Locke who belong to the best traditions of the Age of Reason and represent the ‘meaning’ theist position.
They are convinced that religion must make sense to believer and unbeliever alike.
They admit that the truths of revelation or of faith must be accessible to reason.
As Locke said, ‘Tis no diminishing to revelation, that reason gives its suffrage too, to the truths revelation has discovered.’
But those in this tradition wildly overestimated the friendliness towards revelation that human reason would feel, once freed from the shackles of a state compulsion to believe.
They had a cosy assurance in the obvious existence of a divine architect for what they took to be an elegant and attractive world, neatly designed like one of their drawing-rooms.
They understood faith to be an assent of the mind as agreeable to reason as assenting to the existence of objects on a table.
And they still relied on traditional arguments about the authority of Scripture in order to establish certain beliefs that were ‘above’ although not ‘contrary to’reason, for instance resurrection of the dead.
Once the nineteenth century had begun to let Darwin  and Biblical Criticism loose on these twin pillars of their ‘reasonable faith’, it proved eminently easy to dislodge.
From the point of view of many who have traced the development of religious thought over the last two hundred years, theism ceased to be unshakeable long before, in the twentieth century, Ayer and others from the school of ‘logical positivism’ sought to make it impossible.
There has, however, been another tradition of thought associated neither with the ‘rationalism’ of Locke nor the ‘fideism’of Wesley.
This tradition belongs neither to the Age of Reason nor (in Wesley's sense) to the age of faith.
It is a tradition that has refused to claim the certainty claimed by both these camps.
It has neither Locke's confidence in reason nor Wesley's confidence in his spiritual sense.
Unlike Wesley, it engages with the unbeliever on common ground.
Unlike Locke, it does not possess the assurance of having won the argument on that ground.
Its position is that of the ‘meaning’ theist, but it does not claim the certainty of God's existence with which that position is often associated.
‘meaning theism’ and the uncertainty principle
The idea that the theist must be certain of God's existence deserves careful consideration.
This matter is important partly because of the particular status in religious thought of ideas that God's existence can be ‘proved’.
It is also significant because critics of theism have sometimes claimed that theists wish their statements about God to be ‘necessary’ propositions — propositions whose denial involves a contradiction.
It has been pointed out that the only propositions of which this is true are ‘analytic’ propositions — those that contain not statements of fact but rules about language.
It is, therefore, claimed that the desire of the theist to make a necessarily true statement of fact is impossible.
The presumption behind such arguments is that theists wish their statements about God to be propositions that it would be impossible to deny.
Yet if the theist is prepared to admit that he or she does not have to be certain of the truths that they are affirming, this particular criticism of theism fails.
One of the most common complaints against theists by philosophers is that they will not say what would count against their  belief in God.
In a well-known collection of essays,New Essays in Philosophical Theology , Antony Flew argues that believers will never answer the question: What event or series of events would provide sufficient evidence against the existence of God to stop you believing?
Flew thinks that nothing would.
Believers will believe in God whatever happens on earth.
Even a father who watches his son dying of cancer will go on believing that God is a loving father.
For Flew, and for Ayer in Language, Truth and Logic , you realise the vacuousness of religious belief when you realise that it is compatible with any earthly state of affairs whatsoever.
In that same collection of essays, however, an interesting parable is advanced in response to Flew by the philosopher of religion Basil Mitchell.
The parable is as follows: In an occupied country during wartime, a member of the resistance meets a stranger who deeply impresses him, and who assures him that he is on the side of the resistance.
The partisan feels that he can trust the stranger, although that trust is tested in future weeks.
Sometimes the stranger appears in the uniform of the police handing over other partisans to the forces of occupation.
At other times he engages in activities that help the resistance.
The evidence for the stranger's allegiance is therefore ambiguous, and Mitchell makes clear that the partisan's trust in him is not unconditional.
Nevertheless, Mitchell points out that it is of the nature of commitment to come to terms with what may count against one's own beliefs as well as what may count for them.
Mitchell's parable is specifically designed to reflect upon the problem of God's love in the face of evil, rather than of God's existence.
Nevertheless, its point about the evidence for God's goodness — that it is not compelling and that, indeed, there may be moments when it appears that the facts of life may not be reconciled with a good Creator at all— might also be applied to the evidence for God's existence.
In both cases, one could make the point against Flew that the believer does not accept that nothing would count against his or her belief in God.
Of course, certain things do.
Many people indeed have decided not to believe because of experiencing the sort of suffering that Flew identifies with the frantic father whose son is dying.
Believers very often cease to believe because such suffering makes them no longer able  to accept the goodness of God.
There is no reason to suppose that they might not also be swayed to reject the existence of God because of particular events or even of particular arguments.
The position we might adopt against Flew is this.
You are too used to dealing with theists who adopt a position of unassailable certainty in their beliefs.
For them it may be right to say that no conceivable circumstance in their lives would change the nature of their convictions.
But is that necessarily the only theistic position?
Could not the theist argue that faith in God is a form of trust like that which, in Mitchell ‘s parable, is placed in the stranger by the partisan?
If it is of this form, then by definition there will be facts and events that will count against it.
Indeed it could be argued that if there were nothing to count against it then it would no longer be faith!
Flew might say: But would anything count finally against it?
Would anything actually convert belief in God into disbelief?
Again, I see no reason why the theist should not reply that in principle, yes, there might be events that would ‘de-convert’ the believer.
There is, after all, such a thing in religious tradition as loss of faith, which may be prompted by experience of personal tragedy or by reading a particularly convincing argument against theism.
Just as the partisan might eventually lose his faith in the stranger, so the theist might lose his or her faith in God.
The sense in which I use the word ‘faith’ here is different from both Wesley and Locke.
For Wesley faith is a spiritual sense somehow implanted in the self by God that is ineradicable once received.
It provides a certainty that God exists which is on a par with the sort of certainty we claim from our sense-experience.
It is a direct intuition of God, in effect a hotline that bypasses the ambiguous world of the senses that might indeed provide only partial or uncertain evidence of the Deity.
For Locke, faith is a form of intellectual assent to propositions, some of which are the conclusion of reasoned argument and some of which are the product of acceptance of revelation (as assessed by reason).
Once again, faith is understood as offering certainty, in this case what might be called ‘intellectual certainty’, the consequence of accepting that a particular line of argument is overwhelmingly convincing.
Locke's enthusiasm is alive and well in the modern day too, despite the buffeting religious belief has had in the West over the last two hundred years.
Take, for instance, the following discussion first broadcast in 1948 by BBC radio, between the atheist Bertrand Russell and the Jesuit theologian F.C.
Copleston.
Their debate on the existence of God opened as follows:
COPLESTON: As we are going to discuss the existence of God, it might perhaps be as well to come to some provisional agreement as to what we understand by the term ‘God’.
I presume that we mean a supreme personal being — distinct from the world and creator of the world.
Would you agree — provisionally at least— to accept this statement as the meaning of the term ‘God’?
RUSSELL: Yes, I accept this definition.
COPLESTON: Well, my position is the affirmative position that such a being actually exists, and that His existence can be proved philosophically.
Perhaps you would tell me if your position is that of agnosticism or of atheism.
I mean, would you say that the non-existence of God can be proved?
RUSSELL: No, I should not say that.
My position is agnostic.
Copleston believed that the theist must be able to prove the existence of God.
Russell rejected theism on the grounds that the existence of God can neither be proven nor disproven.
But was Russell's position any less compatible with faith in God than Copleston's?
Let us concede (what in fact should not be conceded) that a proof that God existed would make the theist certain of God's existence.
Is it not possible to find an understanding of faith that is compatible with uncertainty rather than certainty of the existence of a Deity?
In ordinary language, the word ‘faith’ is used in a quite different sense from that used by either Wesley or Locke and Copleston.
If I say: ‘I have faith in you to post this letter’, such a statement is compatible only with an intellectual uncertainty that you will do so.
If I actually follow you down the street in order to be sure that you don't throw it away or forget to post it, for instance, then I at one and the same time become certain that you've posted it and display a lack of faith that you will do so.
Faith here means a commitment to believe in the face of evidence that is accepted as ambiguous, like the commitment of the partisan  in the face of the ambiguous behaviour of the stranger in Mitchell's parable.
It is noticeable that the Russell-Copleston debate became embroiled in a discussion of necessary propositions, a discussion made necessary by Copleston's desire to show Russell that the world is such that it must be the case that it has a Creator.
But does theism have to make such a case?
Isn't it making the mistake of claiming too much?
Isn't it unnecessarily raising the stakes here?
Do we really have to be sure that God exists in order to believe in God?
Cannot we argue, indeed, on the basis of the usual meaning of ‘faith’ that involves trust in the face of intellectual un certainty, that Russell's uncertainty as to whether or not God exists, the agnostic position, is the one the theist in fact should hold?
Suppose there existed a God who wished us to be unsure whether or not He existed.
Could we not, for instance, suggest that this God felt human beings would only be able to show the sort of moral commitment that He considered desirable if they were uncertain that He existed?
He would prefer us to be in the position of the person who learns to trust that a friend has posted a letter, and who does not go out to be certain that the letter has found its destination, a search that in fact would portray not faith, but a lack of faith.
God might, in creating the world, have put the sort of distance between Himself and ourselves that involves our having to live in an environment within which, until the day that we die, there is evidence both for and against His existence.
If we nevertheless believe that He exists, we are only showing the sort of commitment that the partisan shows.
We are not claiming to be able to prove His existence.
We are not claiming either that He has somehow implanted in us a sixth sense that gives us certainty He exists whilst our other five senses provide no such assurance.
The position I have attempted to outline in this first chapter is that of the ‘meaning’ theist, but it is also that of the ‘meaning’atheist.
I am arguing that a common ground exists between theists and atheists, where each exchanges different interpretations of reality and understands each other 's views.
They may reach different conclusions, but they do not pre-empt the discussion by claiming either that one side is talking nonsense or that the other side is talking from a position of impossible disadvantage through lack of faith.
Of course this common ground automatically implies  a battle.
It means that there will be a lack of certainty on both sides.
The theist will encounter doubts about the correctness of his or her belief, while the atheist will encounter similar doubts about disbelief Both theists and atheists have often seen a position such as this as too volatile to be credible.
Neither side feels that its principles may be maintained if it is tempted by the other.
But need this be so?
In the next chapter I examine further the idea that believers in God may be less than certain of God's existence.
A number of important examples from the history of religious thought help us to probe further the nature of religious belief Can it bear the interpretation which I have tried to place upon it?
notes
Ayer, Alfred Born in 1910, he did more than anyone else to familiarise the Anglo-Saxon world with the twentieth-century school of thought known as ‘logical positivism’, particularly through the best-seller,Language, Truth and Logic .
Most of Ayer's life has been spent teaching philosophy at London and Oxford.
Few philosophers have been able to match his clarity and lucidity (although Antony Flew, an equally committed atheist and twentieth-century philosopher, must come close).
Barth, Karl (1886–1968) A Swiss theologian of immense reputation (known in some circles as a Protestant Aquinas!),
Karl Barth was fundamentally a traditionalist thinker.
The school of thought associated with him —‘neo-orthodoxy’— is essentially an attempt to re-present the ‘orthodoxy’ of the Protestant Reformation in twentieth-century terms.
Locke, John (1632–1704) An English philosopher who in the context of his time (and of his own life which involved a period of exile) was a clear defender of toleration and free enquiry.
His work,The Reasonableness of Christianity , is still a classic in the philosophy of religion.
Russell, Bertrand (1872–1970) One of the most famous modern philosophers, Bertrand Russell was also an active peace campaigner as a deeply committed supporter of CND.
His work,Principia Mathematica , jointly written with Alfred North Whitehead, is one of the most influential philosophical writings of the twentieth century, but he also wrote clear and accessible introductory works.
His short book,The Problems of Philosophy , is still an excellent introduction to the subject.
Wesley, John (1703–1791) Regarded (despite his own desire to remain within the Anglican Church) as the founder of Methodism.
A man of both charisma and personal piety, John Wesley is a legendary figure for his tireless travels around the country on horseback, preaching at every opportunity (often in the open air, largely because he was banned from using pulpits).
More religious thinker than systematic theologian (more a Luther than a Calvin), Wesley's ideas cannot easily be defined, although his faith was clearly based upon personal experience rather than intellectual conviction.
further reading
A useful collection of extracts and texts, including a helpful introduction, is provided by John Hick in The Existence of God , published by the Macmillan Company in 1964 as part of their Problems of Philosophy Series.
The fascinating debate between Copleston and Russell can be found in this reader, together with short extracts from the history of philosophy concerning the traditional arguments for God's existence.
In 1971 Hick published a longer account of his own ideas in Arguments for the Existence of God .
The collection of essays entitled New Essays in Philosophical Theology , edited by Antony Flew and Alasdair McIntyre, is unmissable and full of ideas.
The section on ‘Theology and Falsification’ has been particularly influential.
Antony Flew's atheist position is clearly and pungently stated in his God and Philosophy .
belief in God
In the last chapter I introduced the ‘uncertainty principle’, the idea that belief in God was more compatible with a degree of uncertainty that God existed than with certainty of His existence.
In this chapter we examine this idea more closely.
How uncertain, for instance, can the believer be?
Must the existence of God be probable, or can theism seek to defend its position against the improbability of God's existence?
I set out a position which argues that there may be too much and also too little evidence for the existence of God to make religious belief a tenable option.
We begin with the argument that the evidence for a Deity might be so strong as to undermine faith.
I argue that implicit in the whole religious vocabulary of faith and belief is a condition of trust that is only compatible with intellectual uncertainty.
In the following section, on the other hand, I argue that this vocabulary can equally be undermined if the evidence for God's existence is too weak.
In such a situation, I suggest, faith becomes blind, belief becomes credulous and trust becomes misplaced.
Belief in God can be eroded from two opposite directions — from the effort to prove God's existence on the one hand, and from the denial of any evidence for God's existence on the other.
Let us examine each of these in turn.
wagers, ventures and chessboards
We start with a famous passage of the French religious thinker Blaise Pascal's Thoughts , in which the seventeenth-century writer compared belief in a God to a bet or wager.
‘According to reason’, Pascal suggested, ‘you cannot bet either way.’
But the choice of whether to believe in God is determined by at least one rational  consideration.
Even if the chance of success in a wager is very slight, the bet should be accepted if the reward of the wager is disproportionately high in relation to the amount staked.
In Pascal's argument, the possibility of God's existence may actually be very slight.
However, since the rewards of believing are so high (in fact infinite) in proportion to the amount staked (a finite life), the bet is worth having even when, in all likelihood, it will be lost.
But here there is an infinity of infinitely happy life to win, one chance of winning against a finite number of chances of losing, and what you stake is finite.
That removes all doubt as to choice: wherever the infinite is, and there is not an infinity of chances of loss against the chance of winning, there are no two ways about it, all must be given.
Whatever the level of probability that God exists, in Pascal's view, one should believe in God, one should wager.
One should always risk a finite certainty for an infinite uncertainty.
A bird in the hand is never worth an infinite number of birds in the bush.
There may be considerable scepticism about Pascal's case for always wagering on the outsider if the odds are high enough.
What is interesting, however, is the comparison between belief in God and the kind of risk venture undertaken when making a bet.
To Pascal religious belief was a commitment made in a context of obvious intellectual uncertainty.
If God's existence is ‘wagered upon’ in the way that the outcome of a race is wagered upon, then by definition that existence cannot be certainly known until after the race is run (presumably after death).
Indeed Pascal's commitment to the outsider would seem to entail that even if the possibility of God's existence were extremely small, the choice of belief should be made.
His position could be summed up as saying that so long as it has not been established beyond doubt that God does not exist, we should believe in God.
Another writer with a similar argument is the eighteenth-century cleric Bishop Butler.
In his Analogy , Butler concerned himself with the question of what sort of evidence one must possess in order to believe in God.
His central principle was that ‘probability is the guide to life’, and he applied this principle to those who find it difficult to accept Christianity.
His argument was that  they expect to be certain, and therefore interpret any doubt as evidence of unbelief:
They take for granted, that if Christianity were true, the light of it must have been more general, and the evidence of it more satisfactory…if any of these persons are, upon the whole, in doubt concerning the truth of Christianity; their behaviour seems owing to their taking for granted, through strange inattention, that such doubting is, in a manner, the same thing as being certain against it.
It is an old but still neglected adage that doubt is not the opposite of faith but of certainty.
Despite the familiar language from the confessional about ‘having doubts’, there is a tradition within Christianity that refuses to accept that there is any conflict between intellectual doubts (including doubts about the existence of God), and religious belief.
Furthermore, that tradition would claim that intellectual doubt was a necessary ingredient of faith, and not simply something faith could ‘learn to live with’.
Certainty that God existed, or the existence of a convincing ‘proof’ of the existence of God such as Anselm attempts in the Proslogion , would be incompatible with faith in God.
The only God that one can have faith in is a God whose existence cannot be demonstrated in the way that a mathematical equation can be demonstrated.
Precisely this point is made by one of the most subtle and underrated religious writers on the philosophy of religion in the nineteenth century, John Henry Newman.
Newman argued that as a commitment in the light of evidence that cannot be treated as proof, religious belief is like rather than unlike other forms of belief.
There is, however, something of a quantitative scale whereby the more important to us a particular belief may be, the more subtle and even ambiguous will be the evidence for it.
He made this clear in his University Sermons :
Next let it be considered, that the following law seems to hold in our attainment of knowledge, that according to its desirableness, whether in point of excellence, or range, or intricacy, so is the subtlety of the evidence on which it is received.
It is the beliefs of which we can be most certain, Newman argues, that play the least significant part in our lives.
We can possess a mathematical certainty that two and two make four, but this rarely matters to us.
On the other hand, we can never possess such a certainty that someone loves us.
There is always a possibility of deceit or self-deception.
But it is precisely the possibility of being wrong in believing that someone loves us that makes it appropriate to talk in this context of trust.
Where belief in God is concerned, Newman accepted that God's existence can be doubted, and that there is no possibility of the mathematical certainty which can be achieved in the case of equations.
But this he regarded as appropriate.
The risk of faith is a willingness to venture into what Newman elsewhere called a ‘certainty of commitment’ without a ‘certainty of understanding’:
We are so constituted, that if we insist on being as sure as is conceivable, in every step of our course, we must be content to creep along the ground, and can never soar.
If we are intended for great ends, we are called to great hazards; and, whereas we are given absolute certainty in nothing, we must in all things choose between doubt and inactivity, and the conviction that we are under the eye of One who, for whatever reason, exercises us with the less evidence when He might give us the greater.
If we seek to protect ourselves from doubt in matters of belief, the result will be ‘inactivity’.
The person who seeks to protect himself or herself from doubt in their belief, Newman argued, is like the person who, in order to be protected from the risk of illness, never ventures outside the home.
Faith is ‘a state in which we must assume something to prove anything, and we can gain nothing without venture’.
Newman's ‘venture’, like Pascal's wager, identified belief as a commitment undergone without the certainty of God's existence — indeed a commitment that makes sense only without that certainty.
Pascal, Butler and Newman pointed out in their different ways that religious belief can be endangered by too much evidence for the existence of God — evidence that amounts to proof.
But belief may also be threatened from the opposite direction — by too little evidence that there is a God.
It is this that we examine in the next section.
ventures are not leaps
There is a school of thought that claims that faith is an act of will made in defiance of the irrationality of believing that God exists.
It recalls a famous saying of the third-century Christian Tertullian:Credo quia absurdum est (I believe because it is absurd).
It is a position often linked to existentialist religious writers and particularly to the Danish thinker of the early nineteenth century, often regarded as the founding father of existentialism, Søren Kierkegaard.
This position claims that the existence of God not only cannot be proved but cannot make sense.
It would agree with Ayer that so far as reason is concerned, theism is nonsense.
But faith, it would say, is a deliberate defiance of what reason says, a leap into the dark that accepts that which it claims is ‘absurd’ or ‘paradoxical’.
The argument we have advanced, however, is different from this.
Whether we are talking about Pascal's wager or Newman's venture, we are always talking about a commitment made after weighing evidence.
Even the betting person makes a carefully calculated and rational decision about where to put his or her money.
The fact that we don't require the evidence of God's existence to be overwhelming does not mean that we require no evidence of God's existence at all.
The leap of faith may be blind, but the venture of faith is not.
In much existentialist writing the impression is given that, in order to test the believer and evoke real trust, God makes a world in which all the evidence points against Him.
An argument of Søren Kierkegaard's expressed this idea in the context of God's goodness, but the idea could equally well be applied to His existence.
Kierkegaard highlighted the part of the Old Testament where Abraham is told by God to kill his son Isaac.
He prepares to do so, and only when it is clear that he will obey the divine command does God at the last moment spare his son and tell him to kill a sheep instead.
Kierkegaard interpreted the parable to mean that we should trust God unconditionally.
Even when He appears evil, commanding actions universally regarded as bad such as killing a son, we should nevertheless call Him good.
In the same way, we should declare that we believe in the existence of God even when all the evidence is that such belief is absurd.
Such absurdity is there only to test our faith in the way that Abraham was tested with an ‘absurd’ moral demand.
It is doubtful whether Kierkegaard himself held this view, certainly by the time of his last and great work Concluding Unscientific Postscript , where he insisted that ‘faith must not rest content with unintelligibility’.
But some writers have held it, and have welcomed, in a way comparable to the spiritual elitism of the Wesleyan position, the claims that theism is absurd.
They see it as a further confirmation of their own moral righteousness in remaining committed to believing in a God who their reason tells them cannot exist.
This position I would resist.
I have certainly tried to argue that it makes sense to talk of God inviting trust by withholding the sort of evidence which might admit of certainty that He exists.
I am employing the kind of argument that has been used to resist demands that God prove Himself by miraculous interventions of some form — demands that in Christian tradition Christ himself refused to satisfy when he turned down the Pharisees' request for a ‘sign’ and asked that they have faith instead.
But at the same time, to argue that the trust becomes greater, and the faith more admirable, in proportion as the evidence for God becomes slighter, is not our position.
All our discussions of faith as trust, venture or wager have accepted that to subscribe to theism must represent a reasonable commitment on the part of the believer.
To revert to the trivial example of the letter posting: one would be willing to applaud the lack of certainty accepted by the person who resists the temptation to follow someone down the street and check whether a letter has been posted.
On the other hand, were every indication to be that there was no chance of the letter ever being posted — for example if the person was a known thief and there was no post-box within a hundred miles — then in this case giving him or her the letter would be regarded as stupid.
The point is this: trust is only applauded when it is not seen to be misplaced.
The fact that believing in God involves an acceptance of uncertainty does not allow us to accept any degree of uncertainty, or that trust will also be misplaced.
I am not, then, when I claim that the existence of God does not need to be proved, denying that we must show it to be reasonable to believe in God.
The ‘leap of faith’ argument will not do.
Faith ceases to be laudable when it is blind faith.
What I try to do in this  book is to show that faith is reasonable.
I want to argue that it is reasonable to believe in God.
In order to do so I do not feel that it is necessary to ‘prove’ the existence of God in the sense of demonstrating with mathematical certainty that He exists.
On the other hand, unless there is some evidence of the existence of God then positive arguments about the need to trust a Deity become negative arguments about credulous and uncritical behaviour.
‘meaning theism’, ‘no meaning theism’ and the pursuit of certainty
In the previous two sections I have attempted to outline ways in which the evidence for God's existence may either be too strong or too weak to make sense of religious belief My conclusions, however, connect up with the discussion of ‘meaning’ and ‘no meaning’forms of theism and atheism in the first chapter.
In the approach of the ‘no meaning’ theist, as I have outlined it above, we can now observe a pursuit of religious certainty that undermines faith.
The ‘no meaning’ theist, always seeks too much evidence of God's existence.
The ‘meaning’ theist, on the other hand, may sometimes claim to need too little — as in the case of the existentialist approach outlined in the last section.
But in the case of ‘meaning theism’ there is the possibility of recognising that the evidence of God's existence may be less than overwhelming without being negligible.
The ‘meaning’ theist is capable of recognising that he or she considers the problem in a mutual dialogue with the ‘meaning’atheist, that each is out to convince the other and that each may convert the other to his or her views.
That is precisely the sort of vulnerable intellectual position which the ‘meaning’ theist defends.
From his or her point of view this is part of a divinely willed vulnerability through which God elicits a response of commitment from the believer that intellectual uncertainty alone can give.
When the ‘meaning’ theist believes, he or she lives within and reacts to the same world as the unbeliever.
His or her belief, as we have defined it, does not rest upon privileged insight into a supernatural reality hidden from the unbeliever.
The ‘spiritual sense’ view of faith has given rise to a form of spiritual elitism in which the believer welcomes a position in which he or she has no common ground with the unbeliever, and thereby turns the sort of  dismissive ‘religious language is nonsense’approach of Ayer into a welcome acceptance of the divide between men and women of reason on the one hand, and those with faith on the other.
Belief in God, as I have tried to outline it, is a venture, a practical commitment, undergone in acceptance of the fact that the evidence for God's existence is never going to produce certainty.
It cannot yield what Newman calls ‘proofs such as absolutely to make doubt impossible’.
There is, where the question of God's existence is concerned, an unwillingness on the part of some unbelievers to concede the evidence for theism, and an unwillingness on the part of some believers to concede the limitations of that evidence.
Both positions feed off each other.
The believer wants to see too much evidence for God — like Copleston, he or she wants proof — and hence the unbeliever sees no evidence.
The unbeliever supposes that the believer must have proofs of the existence of God (as we point out below, there is some disagreement over whether some of the traditional ‘proofs’ of God's existence were intended as proofs at all).
And the believer agrees all too easily that he or she must indeed have this sort of proof if belief is to be possible.
The believer then claims either the sort of reasoned proof in which Locke had confidence, or some sort of self-authenticating ‘proof from experience’ such as Wesley argued for.
Neither side will concede the real ambiguity in the evidence, ambiguity which would make the believer uncomfortable in his or her faith, and the unbeliever open to doubt in his or her unwillingness to believe.
In contrast to these ideas about belief and unbelief, the position that I am advocating has few more eloquent supporters than Bishop Blougram in the poet Robert Browning's ‘Bishop Blougram's Apology’:
Now wait, my friend: well, I do not believe —
If you'll accept no faith that is not fixed,
Absolute and exclusive, as you say.
And now what are we?
Unbelievers both,
Calm and complete, determinately fixed
Today, tomorrow and for ever, pray?
You'll guarantee me that?
Not so, I think!
In no wise! all we've gained is, that belief,


As unbelief before, shakes us by fits,
Confounds us like its predecessor…
All we have gained then by our unbelief
Is a life of doubt diversified by faith,
For one of faith diversified by doubt:
We called the chess-board white,— we call it black.
Blougram does not suggest that there is no difference between belief and unbelief.
He suggests that each is more tempted by the other, and more alive to the nature of the other, than either likes to admit.
Both have some idea of how reality might come to be perceived as the other perceives it, and both perhaps at times experience in themselves, as an exception what the other experiences as a rule — a life of faith diversified by doubt, or one of doubt diversified by faith.
This seems to me to be a more accurate picture of the nature of religious belief than one which suggests that those who really believe, must confess to an unbridgeable gulf between themselves and ‘unbelief ‘.
There can be no exclusion zone around belief, whether it is put there by believers claiming special enlightenment or philosophers drawing the bounds to sense.
I would not, therefore, expect theism to have to rest its case on the sort of argument for God's existence that Anselm advanced in the eleventh century and which has come to be known as the ‘Ontological Argument’.
Anselm defined God as ‘that than which nothing greater can be conceived’.
He then asserted that it was greater to exist than not to exist.
Therefore, he concluded, God must exist, for otherwise there would be something greater than God (namely whatever he had defined God to be plus the additional ‘greater-making’ quality of existence).
Anselm appears to argue that merely understanding what is meant by the word God makes it clear that God exists.
Anselm's argument is discussed further later in this book.
I wish to make clear at this point that this kind of proof that God exists is not required in order to make the case for theism.
Were such a proof to be successfully produced, moreover — in other words if Anselm were shown to be right — then from our point of view such a success would undermine faith rather than establish it.
If what Pascal, Butler, Newman and Browning say is true, then there will always be a degree of uncertainty about whether God exists that reflects an absence of proof.
At the same time, however, there must be evidence sufficient to make belief in God an act of commitment representing risk but not foolish defiance of reality.
There must be more evidence than some existentialists desire for their ‘splendid’ leap of faith, but there may be less than Copleston required for his certain assurance of God's existence.
A final linguistic observation can make my position clear.
There is a common tendency to distinguish between ‘belief in’ and ‘belief that’.
Belief in, we are told, implies an act of will, a decision to trust — as in ‘I believe in you’.
Belief that, on the other hand, is understood t be an acceptance of fact, and observation of what is the case — as in ‘I believe that it is raining’.
But it is clear that in the case of God both ingredients are required — an act of trust and factual observation.
We do at times use ‘belief in’ language to mean something similar to ‘belief that’— as in ‘I believe in ghosts’, which surely includes the idea, ‘I believe that there is some evidence ghosts exist’.
My view is that the religious believer who makes a credal statement such as‘I believe in God’ is affirming something similar to the believer in ghosts.
He or she is certainly making a commitment to trust God.
But at the same time a claim is being made concerning factual evidence about God's existence.
I would expect someone who claimed to believe in ghosts to give some evidence for their existence, and it is reasonable to expect the theist to give evidence for God's existence.
But I do not consider it reasonable to expect the theist to prove the existence of God, something that would effectively remove the element of trust which I have also highlighted.
The task of the theist, as I see it in this book, is to define what he or she means by the word ‘God’, and to give some evidence for believing that this Deity exists.
Beyond that, however, it is not necessary for the theist to prove God's existence.
In Language, Truth and Logic , Ayer makes the following point about his religious position:
It is important not to confuse this view of religious assertions with the view that is adopted by atheists or agnostics.
For it is characteristic of an agnostic to hold that the existence of a god is a possibility in which there is no good reason either to believe or disbelieve; and it is characteristic of an atheist to hold that it is at least probable that no god exists.
We have seen already that Ayer identifies his position of ‘no meaning atheism’ as clearly distinct from both these positions.
What I have tried to set out in the last few pages is an understanding of ‘meaning theism’ which embraces a rather larger area than Ayer allows for.
Pascal, for instance, held that it is ‘at least probable that no god exists’, and yet he chose to believe (in his terms of belief as a wager).
Butler, Newman and Blougram might be considered agnostics according to Ayer's definition, or they might be considered theists.
It would depend upon what Ayer meant by ‘a good reason to believe or disbelieve’.
The truth is that within the spectrum covered by ‘meaning theism’ and ‘meaning atheism’there is no firm boundary marking the point where theism ends and agnosticism begins, or where agnosticism ends and atheism begins.
Decisions are made on the basis of evidence, but they may be reversed.
There is an obvious mixture of pointers both for and against the existence of a Deity.
Conflicting interpretations compete for plausibility, and neither side can prove to the other its irrefutable correctness.
We are in a state of perplexity.
It may represent humanity coming to terms with a godless world.
Or it may represent the God-given confusion which represents the opportunity for maturity outside the safe confines of the Garden of Eden.
It is certainly tempting to say both to ‘no meaning’ atheists and to ‘no meaning’theists that such perplexity represents the real life situation of most human beings as they choose to believe or not to believe in the existence of God.
philosophy and theology on common round
In the course of this chapter I have taken an historical perspective upon the nature of religious belief, looking in particular at writers from the seventeenth to nineteenth centuries.
But where is Christianity now in relation to questions of belief and the meaning of theism?
How does this particular religious tradition shape up at the end of the twentieth century, particularly in the context of those challenges that it has faced over the last hundred and fifty years from movements in secular thought like Darwinism, Marxism and Positivism?
The example of Barth which we examined in the first chapter is one form of reaction.
The intellectual challenge to Christianity in Western Europe and America over the last two hundred years  has all too often tempted it to retreat into a ghetto ring-fenced by claims about the unassailable insights granted to those with faith.
Yet Christianity is a religion that has always been open to rational criticism when its critics have been granted the freedom to make their challenge known.
In the ancient Roman Empire, before Christianity acquired sufficient political power through the conversion of Constantine to enforce acceptance of its doctrines as a religious and political duty, there were many pagan critics who doubted, attacked and mocked its claims.
Those doubts and attacks have been allowed to return in the modern era following the dissolution of theocratic ideas that have supposed a particular religious belief to be an essential ingredient of sound political organisation.
But Christianity had so forgotten an earlier period when it was open to discussion and even mockery of its views that it reacted to the modern onslaught with what often amounted to fear and paranoia.
Despite the political reasons for their intellectual difficulties, many Christians persist in blaming only ‘new ideas’ rather than new political freedoms for increasing secularisation.
They therefore adopt a deeply hostile stance towards intellectual developments of the last two hundred years such as Darwinism and Biblical Criticism, when they would have done better to engage with them and even turn them to their advantage.
The ghetto mentality adopted by many Christians gives justice to the harsh comment made by Rubem Alves in a recent book,Protestantism and Repression : ‘Doubt is the terror that has to be forgotten’.
This may seem only to be valid comment upon a fundamentalist ‘wing’ of Christianity.
But it goes further than that.
Deeply woven into a number of academic approaches to the Christian religion is the psychological terror of doubt.
Take the case of Biblical Criticism.
By any account this has offered a golden opportunity to understand the origins of Christianity more fully, to appreciate the social, economic, religious and political circumstances within which a Galilean Jew might impact so strongly upon world history.
But the opportunities have only been adopted half-heartedly.
Many Christians started to worry that Christian faith was being made to rest upon the merely provisional conclusions of historians.
Theologians pointed to what was dubbed the ‘ugly broad  ditch’ of A D. Lessing, namely that ‘accidental truths’of history cannot be the basis of ‘necessary truths of reason’.
The beliefs of Christians could not, it was said, rest upon historical judgments, because these beliefs as ‘truths of reason’ would then depend upon the truths of history, which were only ‘accidental’(in other words, they might not be the case).
A conclusion is only as strong as its premises.
If the premises might not be true, then the conclusion also might not be true.
The presumption is that the beliefs of Christians must be ‘necessary truths’(beliefs whose falsehood is inconceivable).
For this reason a number of theologians, right up to the modem day, have been profoundly uninterested in the historical debate over Christian origins.
They have decided that the ‘Jesus of history’ is too elusive a being to provide a sure foundation for the ‘Christ of faith’.
They have turned towards an inner contact with Christ based upon faith which has sought to bypass the historical research that sought to determine, with an accuracy previous centuries could never manage, the nature of Jesus of Nazareth.
As Martin Kähler put it a century ago in his tellingly-named book The So-Called Historical Jesus and the Christ of Faith : ‘Christian faith and a history of Jesus repel each other like oil and water’.
Less than fifty years ago the German theologian Rudolf Bultmann, still the staple diet of theology undergraduates, declared in an essay entitled ‘The Crisis of Belief’:
In the Christian message…there is absolutely no question of man's being given an historical account of a section of the past, which he might put to the test, or critically confirm or reject.
The result has been that a century which has seen so much development in terms of resources and method in historical research, has also seen a recurrent historical scepticism in theology.
Many theologians have embraced a scepticism about the historicity of events or sayings in the life of Jesus which ancient historians have regarded as excessive when measured against their own assessments of other, secular figures in the past.
The theologians' determination to rest their faith on something more secure than history has made them more than willing, in many circumstances, to accept that the historical evidence of Jesus' life is as patchy as the most sceptical secular historian  says it is.
Their position is summed up by the Anglican theologian John Knox in his Humanity and Divinity of Christ .
Since even the best attested fact of the history of the past can possess no more than a very high degree of probability and since, by definition, Christian and indeed all religious faith must from the believer's point of view be absolutely certain and secure, can faith ever be said to depend upon an historical fact, no matter how well established?
Faith must know its object in a way we cannot know an historical fact.
On this basis, theology effectively refuses any common ground with history.
Insisting that religious faith must be absolutely certain and secure, it decides that history can never provide such security and thereby loses interest in history altogether.
Instead, it asserts that religious belief must have a way of ‘knowing its object’ that is entirely separate from the process of historical reconstruction.
It retreats into the ghetto and dismisses the work of the historian as irrelevant to its needs.
Precisely the same has happened all too often in the relationship between the theologian and the philosopher.
Philosophy has effectively challenged what the theologian often persists in seeing as the ‘proofs’ of God's existence which he or she must hang on to in order to have an absolutely secure and certain faith.
Philosophers must therefore be excluded in the way that historians have been excluded.
Faith must ‘know its object’ in a way that philosophical reason cannot.
The mistaken view is that only ‘no meaning theism’ can secure the future of Christianity.
Theology must somehow be playing on a different pitch, with revelation determining the rules and faith the outcome.
The question that needs to be asked is: Can recent developments in philosophical criticism be seen to support religious belief in the way that recent developments in historical criticism can be seen to do?
Should the theologian attempt to make use of philosophy in the way that those who have not reacted against Biblical Criticism over the last hundred and fifty years have learned to make use of history?
Two trends in philosophy suggest that this might be so.
The first trend is the movement within the philosophy of religion away from the Cartesian view that if God existed some proof of His existence must be capable of being set out, in the way that Descartes himself attempted to set it out.
There is a greater  recognition among philosophers that belief in God's existence does not need to be justified in these terms, and that theologians themselves do not seek to provide such justification.
Arguments for the existence of God are no longer required to conform to Euclidean standards of proof — any more than are modern scientific hypotheses.
The second trend is the movement in thought associated with the development of Wittgenstein's thought between the early period of his Tractatus and the later period of his Philosophical Investigations .
That development entailed a recognition that the concentration upon language by the school of logical positivism, within which Ayer's dismissal of religious belief emerged, might not so much show up the meaninglessness of theology as elicit its own particular logic Wittgenstein's thought appears to show a progression from concentrating upon language in order to exclude certain forms of thought — as in Ayer's exclusion of metaphysics — towards concentrating upon language in order to make sense of those different forms in a way that was sensitive to their particular nature.
The idea of ‘Meaning as use’ associated with the later Wittgenstein was never meant to imply that if enough people used a certain expression it must be true.
But it did mean that in order to understand a particular way of thinking — for instance that of the theist — it was necessary to pay careful attention to the way in which theists actually spoke.
It meant that philosophy was listening to what theologians were saying — even though it reserved the right to reject the theologian's arguments.
Such sensitivity deserved a similarly receptive response from theology.
It suggested that theology should no more retreat to a ‘no meaning’ theist position in the face of philosophy than in the face of history.
‘meaning theism’ and the Christian personality
This chapter has argued not only for the compatibility of faith with intellectual uncertainty, but even for the necessity of such uncertainty for faith.
This puts theology in a much stronger position to accept the challenge posed by historians and philosophers.
It should encourage a willingness to engage on common ground, where ‘meaning’ theist and ‘meaning’atheist conduct an argument  in which each understands the other and indeed may convert the other.
The spectrum of conviction concerning God's existence may run through several degrees of probability.
Of course, those who, like Bishop Blougram, find it possible to share and even sympathise with the intellectual misgivings of the unbeliever, do not easily waver in their understanding.
For belief in God, they would argue, is a very practical matter which is not given up lightly, particularly if it brings out the best in the believer: ‘Belief or unbelief /Bears upon life, determines its whole course…
’ This does not mean they have to argue that their belief will never be given up.
An experience of tragedy might convince them that God is not good An argument about theism might convince them that God does not exist.
Such uncertainty they accept as the God-given climate within which they learn about life.
At the same time, they are constantly weighing evidence.
If they seek to ‘prove’ the existence of God, it is in the original sense of ‘test’or ‘try’rather than in the modern sense of ‘demonstrate in such a way as to convey certainty’.
They know that faith must be reasonable.
But they also know that it need not achieve the sort of certainty that leads theologians to drive wedges between faith and reason, or faith and history, in a desperate attempt to achieve a level of conviction that is impossible in what they see as a hostile rather than a mature scientific environment.
The desire for certainty they would interpret as a possessive attempt to deny the divinely-intended distance between God and creation.
It produces the archetypal image of the Christian, afraid of life, always trying to climb back into the Garden of Eden, by creating a world of fantasy if necessary to inhabit at the expense of living in the real world.
Whether it is the timidly smiling cleric having tea, the piously confident student talking about the way in which Jesus warms up his or her heart, or the aggressively confident know-all trying to recall the country to ‘civilisation’, it is a similar picture of inability to come to terms with the way in which most people in Western societies live.
Having read about the way in which Adam and Eve were beguiled out of the garden, Christians settle for being innocent as doves and leave others to be wise as serpents.
The rest of this book will not produce more than a flawed account of some of the arguments that have been advanced both  concerning the physical and moral nature of God (because even if a God existed, there is still the question of whether we should worship Him or rebel against Him).
But then anyone who picked up a book entitled Does God Exist?hoping to come away with the answer is liable to be disappointed.
This debate will continue to be the context in life of every person, including those committed to belief in God.
It may be that there is no God — every theist should be able to say that.
But at the same time, if there is a God, it is perfectly plausible to argue that He would desire the discussion of His existence to proceed in the argumentative, confused and doubting way in which it currently does.
Some will weigh the evidence one way and some will weigh it another, but no one, having made a decision to believe in God, will be able to say that their assessment cannot change as the argument proceeds.
If God's existence is only a probability, that invites an element of commitment in believing which is excluded by certainty.
That commitment can waver or disappear if the arguments of the philosopher or the historian appear to destroy its rational basis.
What I have tried to show is that exposure to these arguments may represent the will of a God who often desires more of a risk and venture in the faith of His creatures than they are willing to undertake.
notes
Butler, Joseph (1692–1752) An early example of a controversial Bishop of Durham (!),
Joseph Butler's ideas were seen in particular as a challenge to Wesley's (not unlike the way in which the present Bishop of Durham is seen as a challenge to contemporary evangelical ways of thinking).
His thought is best conveyed through some of his published sermons, although his most important work, containing the idea of probability as the guide to life, is The Analogy of Religion .
Descartes, René (1596–1650) A philosopher of such significance as to give rise to a school of thought in his name, Cartesianism.
His arguments for the existence of God developed the ‘Ontological  Argument’ of Anselm into the form which Kant criticised in the eighteenth century.
Descartes above all other philosophers popularised the idea that God's existence could be ‘proved’ in the sense of demonstrated with a mathematical certainty.
Kierkegaard, Søren (1813–1855) A Danish philosopher often regarded as the founding father of the modern school of thought ‘existentialism’, although the influence of this wide-ranging and original thinker can also be found in the neo-orthodox theology of Karl Barth.
Kierkegaard's relatively short life was largely confined to Copenhagen, where after many years as a student he wrote a series of unsystematic works on philosophy, theology and aesthetics.
Newman, John Henry (1801–1890) A foremost leader of the Oxford Movement within Anglicanism, Newman later converted to Roman Catholicism and was finally made a Cardinal before his death.
Many of his writings concentrated upon themes in the history of doctrine, but he also wrote significant works on the philosophy of religion, including the early University Sermons and the later Essay in Aid of a Grammar of Assent .
Pascal, Blaise (1623–1662) A French theologian and mathematician, Pascal is most famous for his unfinished Pensées (Thoughts ), in which, by means of brilliant, pungent remarks, he attempts a vindication of Christianity through a series of perceptive observations whose psychological insight and aphoristic style anticipate the approach of the brilliant atheist Nietzsche in the nineteenth century.
The idea that Christianity can only do justice to its beliefs by means of apparent contradictions (the notion of ‘paradox’) owes more to Pascal than to any other religious thinker.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig (1890–1981) One of the most brilliant of twentieth century philosophers, Wittgenstein was destined to be one of the most quoted and misquoted by theologians.
He is seen as a philosopher who passed through logical positivism (which he largely created with his early work Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus ) to a position more sympathetic towards religious language as outlined in his later Philosophical Investigations .
In fact Wittgenstein's famous dictum concerning the meaning of a word lying in its use was never designed to mean that if enough people said something there must be something in it!
Nevertheless, it is  fair to say that he was far more conscious of the reductionist tendencies in logical positivism than were others who passed through this particular school of thought.
further reading
A.J. Ayer's Language, Truth and Logic is still a pertinent and readable work, more than half a century after its original publication.
Later editions have a useful introduction written in 1946 by Ayer himself, in which he revises some of the points made ten years earlier in what he calls ‘a young man's book’.
As a part-review of Ayer's arguments, an accessible account can be found in Frederick Ferré's Language, Logic and God .
Another useful primer would be M.J. Charlesworth's Philosophy of Religion: The Historic Approaches .
On the specific idea of metaphysics, W.H. Walsh's book of that title provides a rather more hopeful view of the subject than does Ayer.
For analysing the way in which theological terms like ‘faith’, ‘grace’ and ‘revelation’are used in order to undergird the ‘meaning’theist position, and for a more general discussion of the issues, there is a useful collection edited by Basil Mitchell called Faith and Logic .
does what exist?
defining the problem
The previous two chapters have tried to argue that theists do not have to induce in others, or claim for themselves, the certainty that God exists.
Uncertainty about whether God exists can be interpreted as a condition of, rather than the negation of, faith in God.
However, there is a different form of uncertainty that cannot possibly help the theist's case, and that is uncertainty about what is meant by talking about God.
Whatever the uncertainty about whether God exists, the theist has a duty to be precise about what he or she means by ‘God’.
Sometimes the search for a definition is straightforward.
People arguing about whether black swans exist, for instance, do not need to spend much time agreeing first what a black swan is.
But in many, if not most, cases of ‘existence arguments’, things are not so simple.
Yet without a common definition of what is supposed to exist, people can argue at or around but never with one another.
To illustrate, I will take what might be thought to be an example posing relatively few problems — the case of the Loch Ness monster.
when is a monster not a monster?
Some people argue that everyone who claims to have seen or to have photographed this animal has been either drunk, deceived by a log or interested in promoting the Scottish tourist industry.
On the other hand, many people are quite prepared to concede that  some animal or group of animals has been seen in the loch.
The issue is whether this animal can be identified as the ‘monster’.
There is (to date) only one photograph of the creature.
This serpentine-shaped animal has been studied carefully by experts, and the general consensus is that the picture reveals a row of playful otters.
For this reason, arguments for the existence of the monster based upon visual evidence have met with a good deal of scepticism.
Another approach has been to consider how a monster or family of monsters, if they did indeed exist in the loch, might be able to survive in a freshwater environment.
Could they obtain enough food to sustain themselves?
Those who believe that they could point out that Loch Ness is very deep, and moreover that it may be connected by a series of subterranean passages with the sea.
This would allow for the fulfilment of a monster's dietary needs.
The subterranean passage view offers a plausible account of how the monsters could feed, but unfortunately in doing so it destroys another theory about ‘Nessie’, which is that the animal is a relic of the dinosaur age, possibly a plesiosaur.
The plesiosaur argument claims that the subterranean passages became blocked off over thousands of years, leaving a remnant of the past trapped in the loch, defying the process of evolution.
In which case, it is impossible to see how the plesiosaurs could obtain sufficient quantities of food to survive.
The most credible explanation offered by those who support the existence of the monster is one assuming that the passages to the open sea have remained open.
It argues that the animal is a whale or a basking shark which has lost its way or even come inland to die.
This could explain the very rare sightings (a family of plesiosaurs, for instance, would surely be seen more often).
A log; otters; a basking shark, a whale; a plesiosaur — these are the various theories.
But which of them, if any, would prove that the monster existed?
Certainly not the log or the otters.
Perhaps the plesiosaur.
What about the basking shark or the whale?
It would certainly be remarkable to think of an inland loch containing something so large.
On the other hand, even this Scottish Moby Dick would not be the ‘extinct’ species rediscovered, which the plesiosaur theory suggests.
It would not be in the serpentine shape in which local tradition and the folklore of sea monsters  tend to cast the creature, nor would it be the individual guardian of the loch, the watery Cerberus, which some like to think of Nessie as being.
It is therefore possible to imagine two opposite reactions if it were to be shown conclusively that the creature was a whale.
One reaction would be: ‘There is a monster after all.
It's been proven.’
The other reaction would be: ‘The monster theory has finally been debunked.
It's only a whale.’
And the issue would turn into one of defining when a monster was not a monster.
The argument about whether the monster existed could not be settled without preliminary discussion about what in general a monster was.
If this is true in the case of Nessie, it is doubly true in the case of God.
The argument about whether God exists cannot be settled without prior agreement as to who or what God is.
And that is not at all easy.
People say things about God that make the task of understanding what they mean very difficult — for instance when they describe God as indefinable.
For this reason the history of discussion between theists and atheists about the existence of God has been characterised by a great deal of mutual misunderstanding.
For example, there is a famous story about a conversation between the Emperor Napoleon and the astronomer Laplace.
Laplace was looking through his telescope, and Napoleon asked him if he could recognise the Deity through it.
‘I have no need of that hypothesis,’ the astronomer replied.
This story is commonly understood as an atheistic jibe against religion.
However, most theists now would agree with Laplace.
They would readily accept that an omnipresent divine being cannot be viewed through a telescope, however powerful, just as heaven is not a place which can be spied upon as though it were a distant planet.
God is no divine monster whose existence can be sounded out by the aerial equivalent of the sophisticated underwater sonar equipment used to test for the presence of Nessie.
You don't have to believe in God in order to practise astronomy or to understand how the movement of the planets is regulated, as might have been thought to be the case before Isaac Newton's time.
The Laplace argument, many theists would conclude, simply disproves the existence of a God that theists don't believe in anyway.
Countless arguments about the existence of God proceed — or fail to proceed — in this way.
Theists grow impatient with what they see as the reductionist behaviour of atheists, whom they accuse of disproving something the theists never claimed to believe in.
The atheists, on the other hand, grow impatient with the way in which the God of the theists appears to be a master of disguises.
If the atheist uncovers ‘His’ identity, then lo and behold the theists start saying that it isn't God after all.
‘He’ is somewhere else.
It seems that the atheist can never disprove the existence of a God that theists admit to believing in.
But one conclusion from that observation is that the theists themselves have no idea what they believe in.
I shall begin, then, by trying to set out what it is that theists believe in and atheists don't.
I shall try to answer the question: ‘What is God?’ before I set about trying to answer the question of whether or not this God exists.
many religions, many gods?
Given that Britain (like many other countries) is now recognisably a multi-faith society, it should be clear that we cannot conduct this enquiry from within the terms of Christianity alone.
Excluding the interesting view of God offered by the various sects, there are apparently different forms of theism promoted by Jews, Christians, Moslems, Sikhs, Hindus and perhaps Buddhists in Britain alone.
This reminds us that when talking in terms of‘theists’ and ‘atheists’we often forget that there are various kinds of theism.
It is all too easy to think in terms of‘theist versus atheist’, when in fact the argument is one of ‘theist versus theist’.
The story of the martyrdom of Polycarp, the Christian Bishop of Smyrna in Asia Minor during the early second century A.D., illustrates this well.
Polycarp is taken into the arena for the sort of gruesome death which some feel kept Christianity alive in its early period, and which certainly kept the Hollywood epic alive in the modern period.
The Proconsul offers him a last-minute reprieve, however, if he will repent and swear by the genius of Caesar.
The Proconsul commands him: ‘Say: Away with the atheists’.
To this Roman official, it is the Christians who are the atheists.
For they deny the existence of the pagan gods, of whom the  Emperor was one (so that they were guilty of treason as well as irreverence by refusing to acknowledge them).
The Proconsul is not interested in the fact that Polycarp believes in the existence of another god.
He is concerned only that the bishop denies the existence of those gods who were regarded as being essential protectors of the Roman Empire.
Such a denial makes him an atheist like other Christians.
In response, however, Polycarp turns to the crowd in the amphitheatre and shouts out the words which the Proconsul has invited him to repeal as if they applied to the audience in the arena.
‘Away with the atheists’, he cries out, not as if the words applied to Christians but as if they applied to pagans.
Needless to say, the response guaranteed his death.
But it illustrated that Christians and pagans had similar views of each other.
Pagans were as much atheists to Christians as Christians were atheists to pagans.
Polycarp was no more interested in the pagan gods than the Proconsul was interested in the Christian God.
Each side condemned the other as ‘atheist’, whilst firmly claiming to believe in a god or gods.
Fortunately, there is a more tolerant attitude towards other religions in most parts of the world today.
Increased possibilities of travel together with the effects of immigration have also made possible a wider knowledge of the world's religious traditions.
But the reality of many different forms of theism makes the answer to the question ‘Does God exist?’ more complicated.
Which god or gods are we talking about?
Do the different religions believe in the same god in different ways, or do they believe in different gods?
Do some of them believe in gods that exist and others believe in gods that don't exist?
Is our answer to the question ‘Does God exist?’ going to be: ‘It depends which god’?
Some religious traditions, it needs to be remembered, do not believe in any god.
This is sometimes said of Buddhism, but it would be more accurate to say that the question of God's existence is a debate within Buddhism itself, and that the different forms of Buddhism are partially the product of different answers to the question of God's existence.
Most religious traditions, however, do claim to be theistic — to believe in a god or gods.
But do they believe in the same god or do they believe in different gods?
One popular religious writer who thinks that they believe in the same god is John Hick.
His interpretation of the different forms of theism is well captured by the title of a book he wrote, called God has Many Names .
If this was so, then ‘Yahweh’, ‘God the Father’ and ‘Allah’would all refer to the same God, in the way that ‘The President’, ‘George Bush’and ‘Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces’all refer to the same person.
Hick once compared the different religious traditions to different planets in a solar system like our own, all of which orbit the same sun.
They therefore represent a variety of approaches to the same god.
In another analogy, he compared the religions to different paths towards the peak of a mountain, or different perspectives upon the same building.
All these images make the claim that there is one God who is understood in a variety of ways by the world's different religious traditions.
Understandably, this presumption has come in for a great deal of criticism.
I have already mentioned the fact that some religious traditions would deny (or at least dispute) the fact that they are theistic at all.
There is also the question, which we shall look at more closely later in the chapter, of whether they all believe in only one god, that is to say: Are they all monotheistic?
If not, Hick's position would presumably have to be that the many gods of one tradition were equivalent to the one god of another tradition.
Moreover, there is a feeling that Hick's perspective is in danger of appearing patronising.
Is it really any better to be saying to another religious tradition what John Hick presumably says, namely: ‘Your God is really my God’, than to be saying with Polycarp and the Proconsul: ‘Your God doesn't exist’?
The existence of many faiths, and the belief in many different gods, makes the task of finding a definition of ‘God’ doubly difficult.
It is as if the loch has filled up with many different monsters, each in turn requiring consideration of its claims to be Nessie.
Whilst I cannot within the scope of a short book consider what each religion in turn has to say about God, I can at least take note of the religious pluralism of our time.
I shall certainly go beyond the Judaeo-Christian tradition in examining the claims of theism.
However, whilst I remain suspicious of Hick's cosy position, it may be possible to accept that there is something  approaching a common theistic structure among a number of the world's religious traditions.
breaking down the stereotype
We shall only consider a small number of the world's religions.
They are sometimes referred to as the ‘major’ religious traditions, but this would be as misleading as referring to the other religions as ‘primitive’.
We have chosen the traditions which most Western students of religion learn about — Judaism, Christianity, Islam, Hinduism and Buddhism.
We limit our comments to these only because some sort of limitation is inevitable, and not because these are somehow the ‘important’ ones.
Books on these five traditions commonly divide them into two major categories.
In the first category are those often described as ‘Western’, although strictly speaking they are Near Eastern religions.
They are Judaism, Christianity and Islam.
They follow a common scriptural tradition, Christians seeing what they call the Old Testament fulfilled in the New Testament, and Islam seeing both fulfilled in the Qur'an.
They all therefore talk about characters like Moses and Abraham, and Islam talks about characters in the Christian gospels like Jesus and Mary.
These three religions are associated with a common form of theism.
They share a belief in one God, who created and sustains the world.
They agree that this god is ‘transcendent’, that is to say separate from the universe which He brought into being.
They address God in personal terms, using imagery drawn from human and animal life.
In the Old Testament or Hebrew Bible, which is an important part of the sacred literature of all three religions, God is likened for instance to a judge, a king, a midwife and a mother eagle.
In the New Testament, God is likened to a father, a shepherd and the owner of a vineyard (among other images, including some found in the Old Testament).
In the Qur'an, which is the most sacred text of Moslems, God is more often described in terms of generalised epithets that we normally associate with human life — for instance, Hearer, Keeper, Guide and Pardoner.
A number of these have been collected together by Moslems to constitute the ninety-nine ‘most beautiful names’ of God.
Because these three associated religions appear to have in common the belief in one transcendent personal creator, it is often assumed that they all believe in the same God.
Their descriptions seem sufficiently close to one another to be taken as descriptions of the same divine being.
The second category of religions is associated with the East.
In origin they are Indian traditions, Hinduism and (what is to some extent its off-shoot) Buddhism.
These traditions are not readily associated with the same God as those of Near Eastern origin.
Some forms of Buddhism appear to deny belief in the existence of any god, whilst Hinduism is often associated with belief in several gods (polytheism).
Moreover these gods are said to be more part of the world's spiritual furniture than transcendent of it — perhaps more like the saints in Catholic tradition.
It is also said that Hinduism believes in an impersonal rather than a personal Deity.
In the case of the Near Eastern traditions I talked of images which compared God to a guide or shepherd or mother eagle or father, all of them personal (or at least animate) metaphors.
Characteristic of Hinduism, we are often told, is the sort of analogy which suggests that God permeates the world in the way that salt permeates water when mixed with it (this comparison appears in The Upanishads , a series of early Hindu sacred texts).
Such an analogy suggests that the ultimate reality is an impersonal entity rather than a personal being.
This, then, is often said to be another difference between the Near Eastern and the Indian traditions.
Because of maintaining an apparently different brand of theism, Hinduism is often viewed by those whose main contact is with the Near Eastern religions either as atheist or as believing in a different god or gods.
In terms of the analogies we have used so far, the Indian traditions are said to orbit around a different sun, or to be climbing a different mountain — or to identify with a family of monsters in the loch quite different from the one followed by the Near Eastern religions.
It may be useful at this point simply to list the three main differences between the Near Eastern and the Indian religious traditions as they are often presented.
Because of the pressure of space, I cannot enter into the arguments about whether Buddhism  is a theistic religion, and how far it has moved away from its Hindu parent religion.
I shall therefore concentrate upon Hinduism.
Near Eastern Indian (Hinduism)Monotheist (one god) Polytheist (many gods) God separate from world God(s) in the world Personal God Impersonal God
A closer examination of the traditions, however, throws a question mark against these easy distinctions between the religious traditions of the Near East and India.
I shall therefore look more closely at their teachings, partly because of the ecumenical value of an awareness of their doctrine, but mainly because we can thereby focus much more clearly upon what religions mean by ‘God’.
I shall consider each of these apparent differences between the Near Eastern and Indian religious traditions in turn, beginning from the issue of polytheism and monotheism.
one God or many?
The following quotations are taken from the Hebrew Bible (what Christians call the ‘Old Testament’), the New Testament, the Qur'an and the Bhagavad Gita (a Hindu sacred text):
Invoke no other god with Allah.
(‘The Story’, ‘sura’ or chapter 28 of the Qur'an)
I am the Lord your God, who led you out of the Land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.
You shall have no other gods before me.
(Exodus 20:30)
Jesus answered, ‘The first [commandment]is, ‘Hear, O Israel: the Lord our God, the Lord is One; and you shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your mind, and with all your strength.’'
(Mark 12:30)
If any worshipper do reverence with faith to any God whatever, I make his faith firm, And in that faith he reverences his God and gains his desires, For it is I who bestow them.
(Bhagavad Gita 7:21–24)
The first three quotations, from the Near Eastern religious traditions of Islam, Judaism, and Christianity, demand belief in only one god.
But Christianity is the only religion that makes it clear that only one god exists.
Therefore Judaism and Islam could be said to be in one sense polytheistic and in one sense monotheistic.
They are polytheistic in that they seem to believe that many gods exist, but monotheistic in that they command obedience to only one of these many gods.
The quotation from the Bhagavad Gita , on the other hand, appears not only to recognise the existence of many gods but also to support the worship of many gods.
It might, therefore, be said that if this is a fair representation of Hinduism, the major religion of the Far East, then Hinduism is polytheistic in two ways — both in saying that many gods exist and in saying that many gods may be followed.
It may seem as though Christianity is the most monotheistic religion.
Not only does it command the following of only one god, but it also makes it clear that only one god exists.
However, closer examination of the Christian religion puts a question mark against this.
Christianity, unlike Judaism and Islam, talks about God as a ‘Trinity’.
God is Father, Son and Spirit, who together form ‘one substance’ according to the Christian creeds.
Many Jews and Moslems have accused Christians of being in reality polytheists, arguing that the Christian Trinity in reality represents a belief in three gods rather than one.
Indeed, in some ways the Christian idea that the three parts of the Trinity form together one underlying substance is closer to the Hindu understanding of one reality behind the many gods.
The Christian idea of God as Trinity could be regarded as a bridge between the traditions of the Near East and the Far East.
I will not attempt here to develop further the complicated arguments about God as Trinity.
My aim is only to point out that the situation is more complex than a simple division between ‘Western monotheism’ and ‘Eastern polytheism’.
For instance, take the case of Judaism and Islam.
Certainly they talk of other gods, but the nature of these gods is so different from that of the god whom Jews and Moslems are to follow that we might be tempted to deny that these others are gods at all.
We are at once in the realm of ‘when is a monster not a monster?’
Just what does something have to be for it to be called a god?
For instance, take the following quotations from the Qur'an about Allah.
Praise be to Allah, the Creator of heaven and and earth!
There is nothing in heaven or earth beyond the power of Allah.
(Both from ‘The Creator’, sura 35)
These ‘god-like’ qualities cannot really belong to more than one being.
If nothing in heaven or earth is ‘beyond the power of Allah’— if Allah, in other words, is omnipotent — then this quality can only be attributed to Him and to no-one else.
There cannot be another omnipotent god, in the way that there cannot be two monarchs or two presidents or two tallest men.
Allah is also unique in being the Creator.
Just as everything is under His power, so everything derives from Him.
As Creator He began it all; as all-powerful He sustains it all; as judge of the world He will complete it all and bring it to its consummation.
These characteristics can only be true of one Deity.
We might compare what Moslems and Jews say about gods to what a very different tradition from the Mediterranean world says.
The classical legends set down by ancient Greek poets like Homer referred to a number of gods, under their leader Zeus, supposedly located on Mount Olympus, who made occasional forays onto the human scene in various human or animal disguises.
These stories describe a form of religion commonly described as paganism, and represent what can clearly be understood as a type of polytheism.
The many gods are all of roughly equal power.
None is in complete control of the world.
None could be held up as creator, sustainer or judge of the world.
They are more powerful actors on the stage than the human ones, but they neither built the set nor determine the play.
Many people would refer to them more as superhuman than as divine characters.
They are not so much gods as supermen and superwomen — more basking shark than Cerberus, to return to our Loch Ness analogy.
Although Judaism and Islam, like paganism, recognise in at least some of their sacred literature the existence of many gods, the gods in these religions are not all of equal power.
One, the one they choose to worship, is so much more powerful than all the others that He belongs to what is in effect a different category of being.
Indeed, it could well be argued that He alone truly fits the  description ‘God’.
The rest are more like the pagan gods — supermen and super women.
Perhaps for this reason Judaism and Islam, particularly when they refer to the creative power of the god whom they follow, suggest that their deity is in fact the only god who exists and not simply the only god who is to be worshipped:
Men, bear in mind Allah's goodness towards you.
Is there any other Creator who provides for you from heaven and earth?
There is no God but Him.
How then can you turn away from Him.
(sura 35)
For thus says the Lord,
who created the heavens
(He is God!)
who formed the earth and made it
(He established it;
He did not create a chaos,
He formed it lo be inhabited!):
‘I am the Lord and there is no other’.
(Isaiah 45:18)
Judaism and Islam could be called polytheistic religions in the sense that they do contain traditions that represent Jews and Moslems as called upon to choose one of several gods and follow Him to the exclusion of others.
The God of Judaism, for instance, reminds Israel in the book of Exodus when He gives Moses the Ten Commandments that He is a jealous God.
Presumably, then, there is something for Him to be jealous of!
However, when we look closely at what is said about these various gods, we find that the god chosen by (or who chooses) Israel is quite unlike all the others.
He is not one among equals.
The question that must ultimately be asked about Israel's God is: ‘Is there a God besides Me?’
(Isaiah 44:8).
There are passages of the Bible which are compatible with polytheism.
Take this quotation from Exodus 15:
Who is like thee, O Lord, among the gods?
Who is like thee, majestic in holiness, terrible in glorious deeds, doing wonders?
The Exodus narrative, identifying the God of Israel as the worker of wonders such as those which led  Pharoah to release the Israelites from Egypt, could easily be thought of as referring  to one god among many.
The text asks, ‘Who is like thee?’, but what distinguishes this god — glorious deeds and wonders — is quite compatible with the existence of other gods performing glorious deeds and wonders of their own.
Israel's God would be unique only in the sense that each of the gods on Mount Olympus is unique, with a particular history of actions and involvement in the human world.
By the time that the Book of Isaiah was written however, things were being said about Israel's God that could not be said of any other, and this led increasingly to the claim that the God of Israel is the only one that exists.
There can only be one Creator, one God who made the earth and maintains it under divine control.
The other gods are mere pretenders to divinity.
Not only is no other god like Israel's God: no other god exists (Isaiah 45:9).
In the course of its history Judaism developed its concept of God.
The initial idea of God as the one who led the people ‘out of the house of bondage’, who freed the Israelite slaves from Egyptian control, develops into an idea of God as one who made the heavens and the earth.
The notion of God as liberator was compatible with the existence of other gods.
The notion of God as Creator was not.
Whether this is seen as a straightforward historical progression from polytheism to monotheism, or whether it is seen more as bringing out ideas implicit in the Jewish religion from the beginning, there is a clear case for identifying Judaism as a monotheistic religion despite its limited recognition of other gods.
The existence of other gods who turn out to be mere ‘pretenders’ to divinity raises the question of what makes a god a God.
Why are these other gods ultimately denied the status of true Deity?
Why is only Israel's God allowed in the end to be a ‘real’ god?
The answer seems to lie with the power of God.
There can only be one supreme being responsible for managing the world.
Only one God can have brought the world into being, supervise it in the present and bring it to its end.
This appears to be a fundamental belief of Judaism and Islam.
Christianity, however, does seem to envisage a degree of divine power-sharing among the persons of the Trinity.
Since the Eastern traditions think very much in terms of a single divine power being shared out among many gods, the Christian doctrine of the Trinity could be viewed as a link between  this view and the more familiar view of the ‘Western monotheistic ‘traditions.
Let us turn to the major Eastern tradition, Hinduism.
The quotation on page 53 from the Bhagavad Gita appears to support the idea not only that many gods exist but that many gods can be followed and worshipped.
Does this not constitute a radically different form of theism from that practised by the Near Eastern religions?
However, although frequently described as polytheistic, it would be more accurate to describe Hinduism as a religion which has become monotheistic by another route to that taken by the Near Eastern religions.
Where the latter have rejected other gods in favour of the one they wish to follow, the former has attempted to assimilate the many gods in which it believes into a single Deity who stands behind them as their ground.
In other words, for Hinduism the road to monotheism has been by way of syncretism (blending together) rather than rejection.
The passage from the Bhagavad Gita reflects the outcome of the process of syncretism, namely the idea of some further absolute being behind the gods that are reverenced.
If any worshipper do reverence with faith to any God whatever, I make his faith firm.
And in that faith he reverences his God and gains his desires, For it is I who bestow them.
(Bhagavad Gita 7:21–2)
The question is: Who is the ‘I’ who makes firm the faith of those who reverence any god?
Who bestows upon the worshippers the ‘gain' of their ‘desires’?
Is it not the case that there is one absolute being whose power is shared among the gods, much as in Christian tradition one divine power is shared out among Father, Son and Holy Spirit?
Another analogy drawn from comparison with the Christian tradition would be as follows.
Is it any more accurate to call Hinduism polytheistic because of its talk of many gods than to call Roman Catholicism polytheistic on account of its talk of many saints?
Just as the Catholic saints, who may well be associated with particular areas or objects like Hindu gods, all manifest the same divine power, they can be reconciled with monotheism.
Precisely the same can be said of the many divine beings reverenced from within Hindu tradition.
Such is the fluid nature of the Hindu syncretism that the unifying power behind the gods cannot be given a single name.
The speaker in the quotation above is Krishna, but Krishna is himself described by other Hindu writings as a manifestation of the God Vishnu.
What can be said, however, is that this sense of an ultimate monotheism according to which the gods are recognised to be manifestations of a single absolute reality is deeply woven into the religious tradition of Hindus.
Whether it is said of Krishna or Vishnu or Siva, the same structure of religious thought recurs.
This must lead us to consider whether the differences in theistic belief between Near Eastern traditions like Judaism, Christianity, and Islam on the one hand, and Indian traditions like Hinduism on the other hand, have been exaggerated because of language.
In Hinduism the manifestations of the highest reality are described as ‘gods’ rather than as ‘angels’or ‘powers’.
This is unusual in the Near Eastern religions, although Christians sometimes talk of Jesus as ‘God’(as in the words of Thomas after the Resurrection, ‘My Lord and my God’— John 20:28), and in the doctrine of the Trinity it is made clear that the Father, the Son and the Spirit are all ‘God’(as stated in the Athanasian Creed).
However, it is all too easy for those brought up in the Near Eastern traditions, when they hear Hindus talking of many gods, to suppose that they are talking of what they consider to be the supreme reality.
But this is not the case.
There is a reality ‘behind’ these gods, and any account of the divine nature as Hindus conceive it to be must take this into account.
In the case of Judaism and Islam, we are led to question whether the ‘other gods,’ which Jews and Moslems are commanded to shun in favour of following Yahweh or Allah, are really gods at all.
In the case of Hinduism, we are led to ask whether all the gods are really ‘God’, if by ‘God’ we intend to refer not to spiritual forces at work in the world but the absolute being who lies behind the gods themselves.
We must not be misled by language.
We may find works on Hinduism talking of a ‘High God’ and ‘lesser gods’, of ‘demigods’and ‘local divinities’.
Whatever words are used, the tradition appears to be fundamentally monotheistic.
The many gods do not share equal amounts of power.
One stands behind the others as their overall ruler.
In the Indian as in the Near Eastern traditions, the theistic structure is one which suggests the existence  of a single supreme being, under whom many other divine forces may operate, but always at a lesser level to the one ‘God’ under whose control they ultimately stand.
I would conclude, then, that for all these traditions there is only one monster in the loch.
Some Near Eastern religions demand allegiance to one of many monsters, but on closer examination it turns out that the other creatures in the loch are only large fish.
There can be only one all-powerful creator and sustainer of the world.
So far as Hinduism, the major Far Eastern religion, is concerned, there may be reference to many gods, but there is also a clear understanding that they are only large fish too, behind which lies a single, unifying absolute being not unlike the one substance in three persons of the Christian Trinity.
It is this being, the power behind the throne who acts as the unifying force of all the ‘lesser’ deities, who would more appropriately be described as the God of Hinduism.
in or out of the world?
The second supposed difference between the Near Eastern and the Indian religious traditions was that the former believe that God is separate from the world, whilst the latter make God or the gods a part of the world's spiritual furniture.
In this area of discussion too there may be a closer theistic structure between the two religious groupings than we are often led to believe.
Take, for instance, the Near Eastern religions of Judaism, Christianity and Islam.
These could be said to put their emphasis upon the ‘transcendence’(separateness or otherness) of God.
Indeed their sacred works contain passages that state bluntly that God is completely beyond our understanding and completely unlike anything which we know on earth.
Nevertheless, each of these traditions at the same time lays emphasis upon the ‘immanence’(presence) of God in the world.
The case of Islam provides an interesting example, because Islam is commonly regarded as the most strictly monotheistic of the Near Eastern religions.
That is to say, it believes in one God and distances that God completely from the world as utterly transcendent.
It attacks Christianity for its doctrine of the Incarnation, which is seen to suggest that God could be a human being.
Worshipping  Jesus as ‘Lord’ is taken to imply identifying Jesus as God.
Even the way in which Jews called their religious teachers ‘rabbis’ is suspected of applying some form of divinity to them.
Islam, it is said, is the religion most concerned to prevent any identification of the divine with what is earthly and human.
Mohammed is seen as someone who swept away the pagan polytheism of Mecca in favour of the idea that there is one God who is totally separate from the world.
An examination of the Qur'an, however, reveals that despite the traditional association of Islam with emphasis upon the transcendence of God, it also highlights the divine immanence or presence.
In sura 50, we find a famous passage which reads:
We created man.
We know the promptings of his soul, and we are closer to him than the vein in his neck.
God may be totally other to humanity, but at the same time (as in the quotation from sura 50) God is said to be closer to a human being than is his or her jugular vein.
In sura 24, the Qur'an declares that ‘Allah is the light of the heavens and the earth’.
Light is often used as a metaphor for God because it can convey both the presence and the unapproachability of the divine being.
It can convey unapproachability, because a dazzling light turns away those who seek to gaze at it directly.
On the other hand, it conveys God's presence because light shines down upon the world and illuminates everything within it.
In another sura (57), God is described as ‘the visible [or manifest]and unseen’.
Islam would never, of course, suggest that God was in any way a visible object.
But it does make clear a belief that the divine being reveals or manifests its nature in the world.
The God who is hidden to sight and beyond human understanding is also the God made manifest in our earthly environment.
This double emphasis upon the transcendence and the immanence of God can be recognised from the other Near Eastern religions.
In a well-known Christian discourse, chapter 17 of The Acts of the Apostles, St Paul makes a speech to the Athenians in which he refers to an altar inscribed with the words, ‘To an unknown God’.
He goes on to say: ‘What therefore you worship as unknown, this I proclaim to you’(Acts 17:23).
About this God Paul says two things: on the one hand, ‘He’ is ‘the God who made  the world and everything in it’, who ‘does not live in shrines made by man’(17:24); on the other hand, ‘He’is not far from each one of us, for ‘in Him we live and move and have our being’(17:27–8).
The first quotation affirms the transcendence of God, who is not part of the world's furniture, like an idol in a shrine.
The second quotation affirms the presence of God, in whom we live and move and have our being — emphasis upon the closeness of God akin to the Islamic passage about God being nearer to us than our neck-veins.
From Jewish tradition we have a clear statement of God's inescapable presence:
If I ascend to heaven, thou are there!
If I make my bed in Sheol, thou art there!
If I take the wings of the morning and
dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea,
even there thy hand shall lead me,
and thy right hand shall hold me.
(Psalm 139: 8–10)
When we recognise that for the three Near Eastern traditions there is a clear emphasis upon God's presence as well as His transcendence, their approach is seen to be closer than might be imagined to that of the Indian religious traditions.
A reading of some of the sacred texts of Hinduism and even non-theistic Buddhism arguably reveals a vision of reality permeated by a single transcendent being as clearly as do the texts and commentaries of the Near Eastern religions.
In The Upanishads (Hindu sacred texts) God is described in the following terms:
He encircles all things, radiant and bodyless, unharmed, and untouched by evil.
All-seeing, all-wise, all-present, self-existent, He has made all things well for ever and ever.
In the Bhagavad Gita , Krishna speaks in the following terms of the divine being:
I am the dice-play of the gamester,
I am the glory of the glorious,
I am the victory, I am courage,
I am the goodness of the virtuous…
…and I am the seed of all that is born…


There is nothing that can exist without me.
There is no end to my holy powers…
And whatever is mighty or fortunate or strong
springs from a portion of my glory.
It is, of course, impossible to do justice to the thought of a religious tradition with one or two quotations.
But they are enough, perhaps, to convey the fact that Hinduism is not a pantheistic alternative to the Near Eastern or Western forms of theism.
There is a sense of God's transcendence in Hinduism just as there is a sense of God's immanence in Judaism, Christianity and Islam.
All these traditions attempt to represent the way in which God both permeates and undergirds the universe on the one hand, whilst transcending it on the other.
Such a concept clearly requires further exploration, which I attempt in the next chapter.
Nevertheless, it can be claimed that such exploration will be discussing a theistic structure found in the Eastern as well as the Western traditions.
He, She or It — a personal God?
I have already mentioned that the sacred literature of the Near Eastern traditions contains many images of God as a person—judge, king, father, guide, keeper, shepherd and so on.
Recent feminist commentaries have pointed out that these images of God are not all of a male person.
Female imagery of God is used particularly in connection with creation, which is compared to a woman giving birth.
God's constant watch over the created world is compared to that of a female bird caring for its young, or a woman suckling her child (these images come from the Hebrew Bible or Old Testament).
There is also imagery of God as a woman which is nothing to do with specific female roles such as giving birth.
In the New Testament Jesus uses two images to convey God's extravagant concern for the world: one is the shepherd who risks the rest of the flock in order to go searching for the lost sheep; the other is the woman who turns a house upside down looking for lost coins.
God the Shepherd seems to have become well-established within Christianity, but God the Housekeeper less so.
Nevertheless, they are given equal prominence in the New Testament, and should be given equal weight as images of God.
However, it is also clear that there are impersonal images of God in these traditions.
In a famous passage from the Psalms, personal and impersonal images run side by side:
I love thee, O Lord, my strength.
The Lord is my rock, and my fortress,
and my deliverer,
my God, my rock, in whom I take refuge,
my shield, and the horn of my salvation,
my stronghold…
(Psalm 18: 1–2).
I have already referred to the passage of the Qur'an where God is described as ‘the light of the heaven and the earth’.
To suppose that the divine being is always represented by the Near Eastern religions in terms of personal (or at least animate) imagery would be a mistake.
A similar mistake would be the supposition that Indian religious traditions always represent God in terms of impersonal imagery.
I have mentioned one example of such imagery already — the comparison between God's relation to the world and salt dissolving in water.
Such imagery is comparable to the idea of light diffused throughout the world.
Moreover, it is combined with a great deal of personal imagery in many Indian religious traditions.
One example comes from the Sivananasiddhiyar the most important sacred text of a form of Hinduism common among the Tamils of Southern India, Saivism:
Whatever god you accept, he [Siva]is that god.
Other gods die and are born, and suffer and sin.
They cannot reward, But he will see and reward your worship.
We see here the familiar Hindu approach of assimilating many gods into one underlying Deity rather than rejecting some gods in favour of others.
What we also see is a description of this underlying God which can only make sense in personal terms.
Impersonal entities cannot overlook and reward worshippers.
The truth is that in both Near Eastern and Indian religious traditions there is a combination of personal and impersonal imagery in describing God, just as there is a combination of emphasis upon both the transcendence and the immanence of the divine being.
a common theistic structure
This chapter leaves crucial questions unasked, such as: What sense does it make to talk of a God who is both ‘in’ and ‘out’of the world?
How can God be both personal and impersonal?
I shall attempt to look at these issues in the next chapter.
What I have tried to do here is to suggest, without wanting to be closely associated with Hick's pseudo-ecumenical approach, that among many of the world's religions there may be a common understanding of the divine nature.
Behind the differences — which are often more of language and emphasis than of substance — there may be a common view that God is One, present in the world and yet transcending it, personal lord or saviour or protector and yet impersonal reality.
But is this a common definition among several religions or a common confusion?
Is this view of the divine nature not totally meaningless?
I shall try to unravel some meaning in my next chapter.
notes
The Bhagavad Gita Regarded as one of the finest religious poems in the world, the Bhagavad Gita forms one of the most important sacred texts of Hinduism.
Along with the sermon on the Mount, it was the favourite reading of Mahatma Gandhi and indeed both (in very different ways) encourage selfless devotion to others and the principle that the end does not justify the means.
The Qur'an (or Koran) The Islamic scriptures, divided into one hundred and fourteen ‘suras’ or chapters.
The first edition was produced some twenty years after the death of Mohammed — a much smaller gap than that between the death of Jesus and the emergence of the New Testament!
It is held by Moslems to contain all the essentials of their belief, and to be a collection of passages of direct revelation uttered by Mohammed (although not all written down during his lifetime).
When the verses of the Qur'an are  quoted a Moslem begins: ‘God has said’.
Mohammed's role is seen as entirely passive, passing on what God has told him.
By comparison, Jews and Christians have a much stronger sense of human involvement in the writing of the Bible.
further reading
One of the most controversial religious works of the 1960s, John Robinson's Honest to God , is a well-written and clear introduction (from a Christian perspective) to the problem of defining what God is, and the difficulty of bringing together theological description, popular imagery and the language of worship.
John Hick's God and the Universe of Faith introduces the ‘ecumenical’ idea of many faiths believing in the same God.
The problems with this assessment are briefly and clearly discussed in Brian Hebblethwaite's The Problems of Theology , chapter 2: ‘Theology and Comparative Religion’.
A good introduction to the multi-faith context within which theism should be discussed is Jean Holm's The Study of Religions .
An excellent short defence of female imagery for God is provided by The Motherhood of God , a report commissioned by the Church of Scotland and published by the St Andrew's Press.
the nature of God
introduction
Traditional approaches to the problem of defining God's nature have often concentrated upon running through a list of divine attributes and classifying them in various forms.
For instance, a common approach is to identify three ways of defining God, known as the ways of ‘eminence’, ‘analogy’ and ‘negation’.
The different characteristics of the Deity are then shown to reflect one or other of these ways.
For instance, the definition of God as ‘infinite’ is said to be an example of the way of negation.
By calling God infinite, we are denying Him a characteristic of objects in the world.
Adjectives like ‘infinite’, ‘unchanging’ or ‘impassible’could be taken as simple denials that what characterises reality as we know it characterises God.
It is clear enough that nothing can be defined simply in negative terms.
Other divine attributes, however, appear to state positive things about God.
The so-called ‘moral’ attributes are often cited in this context — ideas that God is wise, good, just, loving and so on.
We discuss the idea of goodness in the next chapter, but what we can note here is that these characteristics have traditionally been regarded as examples of the way of eminence — of God possessing perfectly what we possess imperfectly.
Thus it is claimed that God is perfectly just, where we are imperfectly so — indeed it is sometimes said that God is ‘justice’ or ‘justice itself’.
However, it is not only the ‘moral’ as opposed to‘natural’qualities that are treated in this way.
Take, for instance, the attribute ‘omnipresence’.
Is this an example of the way of negation or the way of eminence?
In a sense it is an example of the former.
It denies that God has particular location.
But at the same time it  is surely doing more than assert what God is not.
It is talking about an omnipresence of God.
It could equally be phrased in a way that fits in more with the way of eminence.
In other words, it could be taken as saying that God's presence is universal and complete, ours is partial and incomplete.
And what of the attribute ‘eternal’?
Does this mean that God is ‘not in time’— an example of the way of negation — or does it, as some have said, mean that all times are somehow ‘present’ to God, in which case it might be claimed that God possesses a kind of temporal omnipresence?
Then take the case of the way of analogy.
This has often been criticised because we are told that in drawing an analogy we normally know ‘both sides’ that we are comparing (eg ‘doesn't he look like a horse?’, where we can look at both and judge), whereas in this case we can only look at one side, the object that we are comparing with God.
We cannot enter into this philosophical debate here, but what we should note — and what will be obvious to anyone soaked in the traditions of religion — is that all the world's religious faiths use endless analogies for God with promiscuous abandon.
We have encountered them throughout the book.
Mother, eagle, rock, father, keeper, guide, stronghold, nurse, housekeeper — the cynic might say: you name it, God's been compared to it!
What results from this is that we might be led to think that the problem with defining God is that there is a whole range of ideas about the divine being that tend to produce no very clear overall picture.
We have a jigsaw puzzle with the pieces jumbled up.
For this reason I will not concentrate upon analysing or categorising lists of attributes.
My approach is to make general observations about the structure of theism.
I will concentrate upon two of the more difficult threads in the pattern I attempted to draw out in the last chapter, and will try to develop them further in a more philosophically coherent way.
This chapter is, therefore, devoted to a discussion of God as transcendent yet immanent on the one hand, and as personal yet impersonal on the other.
transcendent and immanent?
What sort of a deity can be both separate from, and present within, the world?
Is it a pure contradiction to affirm both these things at  the same time?
When the Qur'an talks of God as ‘visible and unseen’, or when the famous Christian theologian Dietrich Bonhoeffer defines God as ‘the beyond in our midst’, are they saying anything meaningful?
We can begin to answer this question by listing three principles concerning the divine which have emerged from the analysis in the previous chapter:
1.
God is not an object or part of the world.
God is not an idol in a shrine, nor the name of a spiritual force located in particular things like trees or stones.
Nor is any holy person God, whether it be Moses or Jesus or Mohammed.
None of the traditions asserts that.
Even Christianity, which calls Jesus ‘divine’, makes clear that he prays to, depends upon, and is resurrected by a Deity whom he introduces to his disciples as God the Father.
2.
God is not equivalent to the world.
This point must be made in order to distinguish these religious traditions from a ‘pantheist’ position, which identifies God with nature.
‘God’ is not the name for everything that exists considered as a unity.
3.
God is not an object outside the world, something you look ‘beyond’ in order to see.
This is perhaps the most important point to make.
After all, many popular images of God treat the Deity in this way.
Take, for instance, the common idea of God as an old man on a cloud.
Or take the many references to God as a being who looks down upon the world from some sort of celestial vantage point.
This is, of course, precisely the divinity with which Napoleon teased Laplace.
He challenged him to see God through his telescope.
But this idea of God as an object up above the world (or up above the universe) is firmly ruled out by all that these religions have to say about the divine nature.
The God believed in by Jews, Hindus and Christians, is not like the pagan God, Atlas, who was supposed to be underneath the world propping it up on his shoulders.
The third principle tells us that when we call God ‘transcendent’ we are not saying that God is ‘above’, ‘outside’or ‘beyond’the universe.
Such language inevitably contradicts itself.
It implies that there is a physical boundary to the universe, and that God exists ‘outside’ it much as the President of France exists.
‘outside’ Britain.
By saying that God ‘transcends’ the universe we are saying that none of the limitations that apply to finite life — such as being in a particular place — applies to God.
When Paul denies that God is an idol in a shrine, he effectively denies that God is anywhere else too.
As transcendent, God cannot be located, since location applies to what exists in the universe we know.
A transcendent monster is not a monster who has escaped the loch and sits on a hill outside it.
It is all too easy for this principle to be forgotten.
Believers then follow the practice of the person who stubs his foot on a stone and looks upwards with the cry, ‘Oh God!’ as if hoping for some sympathetic supernatural spectator to be looking down on what is happening.
We have to remember that Napoleon and the literal believers in old men on clouds have got it wrong.
God is not ‘up there’— not on a cloud, not in an upstairs heaven and not waiting to be glimpsed through the end of Laplace's powerful telescope.
To think that God can be some further reality beyond the reality we know is simply to have failed to define the reality we know widely enough.
It is to have failed to give the transcendence of God its proper cash value, to have weakened it so that it means something like ‘outside the solar system’ or ‘above the galaxy’.
The ghost of Laplace is hard to exorcise.
But once we do so, once we see that by calling God ‘transcendent’ we are not banishing Him to some distant celestial isle from which to look down on us, then it becomes easier and not harder to understand His presence.
How does this understanding of God's transcendence clarify what it means to talk of the divine immanence or presence?
It should be clear that a God who was simply ‘outside’ the world in the way that the President of France was ‘outside’Britain could hardly at the same time be present in it.
If ‘transcendent’ meant ‘spatially removed’from us, and ‘immanent’meant ‘spatially present’among us, then it would be an obvious contradiction to say that God was both transcendent and immanent.
But if ‘transcendence’ means not that God is physically distant from the world, but that none of the characteristics of finite human life, like location, duration and change, applies to Him, then it is at least not an obvious contradiction to call Him both ‘transcendent’and ‘immanent’.
It is important to be clear that the Deity does not lose its transcendence by being immanent.
God is always both transcendent and immanent.
Even Christianity, which is in danger of saying  that when God ‘became’ man in Jesus He gave up all the attributes of divinity, like omnipresence, draws back from saying so, admitting that God ‘put on’or ‘added’humanity to His unchanging divinity during the Incarnation.
Such a view presents Christians with particular problems in their idea of God (though also with benefits, examined more closely in chapter 6), but it demonstrates that they are consistent with the other traditions in what they say.
When God is present, He does not cease to be transcendent.
What, then, does such ‘immanence’ mean?
Just as the third principle, which rejected the idea that God is an object ‘outside’ the universe, clarified what we mean by ‘transcendence’, so the first principle clarifies what we mean by ‘immanence’.
God is not to be identified with what we have called a part of the world's furniture: God is no more an object inside the world than an object outside it.
We therefore have to know: what sort of presence could there be of a God to whom there applied none of the limitations that applied to finite human existence?
This question has been answered by describing the nature of God in a number of ways.
I shall examine two in this section — the comparison of God to light, and the understanding of God as existence:(a)Light .
The analogy to light has been a favourite religious image when talking of God.
In a number of ways it has proved an attractive metaphor.
First, light is seen as something that permeates reality in its entirety.
It is not limited to a particular place.
Similarly, the argument goes, God's presence is an omnipresence: he is everywhere.
Second, when the question turns to how God is everywhere, the analogy to light is seen as useful.
Imagine walking out one day and thinking about the light.
You would not say that it was a part of anything around you—it does not attach itself to things or become a particular quality that they have.
Light is not visible as an object in a particular place: rather, it operates as the invisible catalyst through which everything around takes form and shape.
If we were to refer to the light, we would not associate it with an individual object.
We would say: ‘It is light’, but would not refer to any particular thing by the ‘It’.
We might say that we were going out ‘into the light’, but here again the light would be the general  environment within which we did everything else.
It would not be itself a thing.
Going into the light is not like going into the street.
The presence of God, like the presence of light, is seen as universal and enabling.
As the quotation from the poets cited by St Paul has it: ‘In Him we live and move and have our being.’
It is also seen as similarly elusive, something in terms of which everything else has objectivity but which cannot itself be determined as an object.
(b)Existence .
Whilst religious traditions may prefer the theme of light as more poetic, their theologians find more prosaic ways to represent the divine presence.
One which has been thoroughly explored is that of ‘being’.
Philosophers of religion have considered what it means to say that something ‘is’.
They have thought of existence, in the way that others have thought of light, as something that permeates all things without becoming a part of them.
They have been particularly interested in a fact that I touched upon earlier when discussing the ‘Ontological Argument’, namely that existence is not a quality or attribute of something in the way that being round, or hard, or long-haired is an attribute.
They have therefore wondered what it means to say that something ‘exists’, when existence does not appear to attach any particular characteristic to it.
Some of them have concluded that existence constitutes that universal and elusive divine presence which can never be pinned down as a particular constituent of reality.
God, they have said, is ‘being’ or ‘being itself’(by which they mean that all else has to be ‘something’, whereas God as pure being simply ‘is’).
To say that God is present in the world, they would argue, is to say that the world has existence.
This debate re-opens some of the issues that were touched upon in the first chapter concerning the nature of metaphysics and the argument that Ayer acts in a reductionist way by proscribing, in effect, certain interpretations of reality.
According to Ayer, by mistaking existence as an attribute religious thinkers like Anselm had constructed an entirely bogus ‘proof’ of God's existence.
Metaphysics was seen by Ayer as a product of linguistic confusion.
It would become redundant as soon as the meaning of certain words was made clear.
But it may be, as this discussion suggests, that whilst the confusion Ayer points to is a real one, the meaning of the word ‘existence’ is genuinely complex.
It is certainly the case that the idea that existence is not a predicate, a quality of things such as blueness or hardness, was clearly recognised in classical philosophy long before it was taken up by Kant in the eighteenth century and further refined by Bertrand Russell in the twentieth.
Some philosophers of religion, particularly those in the Christian Thomist school (the school that follows the thought of Thomas Aquinas), would see in the idea of existence a key to representing the omnipresence of a transcendent God.
They would say that by existing things reflect the presence in them of that which transcends them.
And they would find this fact indicated by peculiarities in the use of the word ‘being’ or ‘existence’which the logical positivist critique doesn't begin to take account of.
Obviously more questions are raised here than can possibly be answered in a short book.
All I can try to do is to outline what theists have been saying when they talk of God, and to try to offset some popular misconceptions of what they mean.
Although I have so far been concentrating on Thomist interpretations of existence, there have been equally profound examinations in Buddhist and Moslem tradition, and in the modern day by existentialist writers, some of whom are religious and some of whom are not.
The references I have made to light and existence only touch the surface of a very complicated debate.
But by mentioning them I have perhaps been able to show that when theists talk of God as ‘both far and near’, or as ‘visible and unseen’, they are not guilty of a simple contradiction in terms.
To conclude this section, I would like to suggest that there is a common presumption among theists who explore, in their different ways, the nature of God as light or as existence.
The presumption is that there is some inherent incompleteness or dependence about reality as we know it.
This is arguably the fundamental point made by a famous set of attempted proofs of God's existence associated with the medieval theologian, Aquinas.
These use arguments that have become familiar in the philosophy of religion.
For instance, it is claimed that the world shows evidence of design or purpose: therefore, it is concluded that there must be a divine designer.
Another common argument is to point out that everything in the world must have a cause, but that at the end of the line there must be an uncaused or ‘first’ cause.
As proofs of God's existence these arguments fail to convince many people.
For example, would our designer or first cause, even if one existed,have to be God?
Would there have to be one designer, or could not the world have been designed by several working together?
On the other hand, there is a strong case to be made that Aquinas is not setting out to provide proofs of God's existence.
He is trying to describe the way in which the world as finite is not self-sufficient.
Take, for instance, the argument about a first cause.
As a suggestion that change in the world occurs rather in the way that certain competitions present dominoes falling into kaleidoscopic patterns, requiring some initial push in order to begin the process, this ‘proof’ is hardly convincing.
But some commentators have insisted that this sort of analogy misunderstands what Aquinas is saying.
He is not making a temporal point about something that must have happened ‘in the beginning’ —the first push.
To represent the dependence of the world upon God it is a classic error to suggest that it is like a car that requires an initial shove down the street and thereafter runs of its own accord.
The error is well-ingrained, however: in chapter 5 we look at another famous image of the world's relation to God coined by William Paley, that of a watch to a watchmaker.
Yet again, the idea is that once created the watch is self-sufficient and requires no further help from its divine craftsperson.
All these analogies present a picture of God setting the process up (creating), and then effectively sitting back and letting it continue of its own accord.
The form of dependence of the world upon God suggested by Aquinas, however, is arguably a continuous rather than an initial dependence.
Once created, the world does not become self-sufficient.
Indeed some theologians argue that ‘creation’ refers not to what happened ‘in the beginning’but to a constant dependence of the world upon God.
As Augustine pointed out, creation did not happen literally ‘in the beginning’ for it did not happen ‘in’time: rather, time was itself a part of creation.
The world is eternally dependent.
A famous early Christian image compared the universe to a tune which at any moment the creator might choose to end with silence.
Such an image, unlike Paley's comparison to a watch, makes clear the theist claim that the created universe can never be understood as self-supporting.
An analogy which would better express Aquinas' view compares the universe to a number of objects, say a pile of books on  a table.
Each book in the pile depends upon the one underneath it to hold it up.
The whole pile depends upon the table.
The table depends upon the floor for support.
And so on.
This is the sort of image that, some commentators argue, Aquinas is trying to convey.
The dependence of the world upon God is not initial but constant; built into the structures of reality is an inherent dependence which requires us to posit something else — the designer or the first cause.
Theists who explore notions like existence in order to express the presence of a transcendent God presume this inherent incompleteness in reality.
They believe that reality ‘points beyond itself’ in the sort of way that the pile of books points beyond itself, in that we know something must be holding it up or it would fall.
If we had no possibility of observing directly what was holding it up, we could still argue that something must be there.
Reality, theists would argue, has this character.
It could not be what it is without that upon which it depends.
However, we have no power directly to observe that upon which it depends.
Such a power would mean a capacity to see God directly which they are careful to rule out.
It would be like the attempt to look directly at the sun that dazzles and finally blinds rather than enlightens.
Theists describe a constant dependence of the world not upon something outside it — if we define the universe broadly enough nothing can be outside it — but upon something that transcends it.
They attempt to point out ways in which the world bears its self-insufficiency in its fundamental constitution, as being what it is, as existing.
The argument of the theist concerning God as both transcendent and immanent can be summarised in the following question and answer form:
1.
How is God known?
God is known through our knowledge of the world.
God is not an object outside the world.
2.
How is God known through our knowledge of the world?
God is known neither as a part of the world nor as identical with the world, but as that which transcends the world.
3.
How is God known as that which transcends the world?
God is that upon which the world depends.
But it is not possible to look beyond the world in order to see what it depends upon directly.
That would be like looking underneath the world to see Atlas'  shoulders holding it up.
What the theist claims is that by observing the world as it is, not by attempting to look outside it, one can see that it bears within itself a fundamental self-insufficiency.
If we observe a pile of books hanging in the air, we might say: ‘They must be resting on something.
’ Theists argue that this is what they are drawn to say about the whole of reality.
But whereas one can at least look underneath the books for evidence of something underneath them, one can never look ‘outside’ reality.
It has to be possible to see within reality the presence of that which transcends it — what the Christian theologian Dietrich Bonhoeffer called ‘the beyond in our midst’.
This is what philosophers of religion have attempted to explore in their complex analyses of existence.
He, She or It — a personal God?
The second part of the theistic pattern sketched in the last chapter which we need to put under the microscope is that which described God both as personal and as impersonal.
As with transcendence and immanence, this may at first sight appear to represent a flat contradiction in terms.
How can we make some sense of it?
To begin with, we must draw a distinction between God as personal and God as a person.
Clearly none of the religious traditions we have examined asserts the latter.
A useful example here would be Christianity.
This religion concentrates upon a particular person, Jesus of Nazareth, but in its definition of God it describes the divine being as a Trinity — that is to say three persons.
Moreover, it is frequently pointed out that the early Christian definitions of faith did not mean by the Greek and Latin words that we commonly translate as ‘person’ exactly what we would mean by ‘person’today.
There is no room here for a highly technical debate about language, but what is clear is that Christianity cannot possibly associate any view of God with what we would normally conceive a person to be.
Nor can we think of the Christian God as three persons in the way that we normally consider them to be, or we would surely have to conclude that it was a religion committed to polytheism.
Christians recognise this, of course, and therefore they emphasise that their three divine persons form a unity as ‘one substance’.
I will not enter here into the complex Christian debate over the nature of the Trinity.
What  we can clearly recognise, however, is that it is a religion committed to a view that God is personal in a different manner from that in which individual human beings are personal.
Given that this is so, what sense can we make of the way in which God, as opposed to John or Jane Smith, is personal?
What sense can be made of divine as opposed to human ‘personality’?
Once we try to lift the imagination away from the idea of God as a person (another unfortunate implication of the old man on a cloud motif) into another form of personality, we encounter a number of interesting arguments.
Clearly a great deal of what religious traditions have to say about the Deity presupposes a personal God.
We think of a being who shows various emotions towards creation — love, wrath, anger, sorrow, mercy and so on— and who is associated with particular activities that we think of as actions taken by persons, such as judgement.
But how can we combine these personal activities with the idea of God as salt or (as in the last section) light or existence, analogies which we apparently need when trying to make sense, for instance, of God's omnipresence?
Let us begin by considering why we want to think of God in personal terms at all.
One reason advanced by some is that we tend to value the personal above other things.
We treat persons with a respect denied to animals and objects.
In the terms of the old philosophical dilemma, most of us would save the endangered baby from the house before we'd save the Mona Lisa — even if the baby were far more likely to grow up an art thief than another Michelangelo or Da Vinci!
Calling God ‘personal’ is partly the product of a desire to associate with Him what we most value in ourselves and our environment.
But what is it, exactly, that we value in the personal?
Why are people more attractive to us than sunsets, even though at times we'd rather escape the people for nature?
In part, it seems that the reason lies in an idea of a ‘scale of being’.
There is a form of progress — not moral, but at least in complexity — from the inanimate to the animate, from plant to animal, from animal to human.
Many philosophers have spoken of this progress, identifying key stages in it, for instance the achievement of consciousness by animals or self-consciousness by humans.
The human  appears as the culmination and highest point of this process on earth.
What characterises ascending stages of the scale of being is the combination of unity with ever increasing degrees of complexity.
The individual plant has growth without movement.
Animals possess growth, movement and a consciousness of what is not themselves.
Humans possess not only this, but also a consciousness of themselves in relation to the world around them.
Some philosophers of religion have seen God as a higher stage of this process.
The doctrine of the Trinity perfectly describes, they feel, the highest unity containing the highest inner complexity, represented by the idea of ‘three persons in one substance’.
That God is personal by being tri-personal, they would say, means that in God the activity which at the human level must be divided between separate individual selves can be contained at the divine level within one being.
At the top of the scale of being, then, is the most complex unity of all: God.
Others might argue that this idea of the personal as a form of unity admitting the most internal complexity is beside the point.
They would highlight certain characteristics of human beings, such as emotions or the capacity to make moral choices, as characteristics that they wish to value above all others.
They naturally, therefore, think of God as possessing what they value most in themselves.
For the Christian, it is natural that God should become a person at the Incarnation rather than a dog or a stone, not necessarily because persons are somehow more technically advanced on a scale of being, but because they display the qualities that are most to be valued.
Both of the above approaches to the personal have value.
It is a matter of common sense that part of what we respect in persons is a technical appreciation of the sheer range of possibilities associated with them.
Their ability to communicate, to think, to show emotion and make judgements, whether or not they are of a different quality to the rest of creation, makes them more interesting.
At the same time, there is also a sense that qualities like conscience and love are significant for more than technical reasons.
It is as if by being able to make moral judgements people recognise, not simply an additional technical possibility, but something to which they wish to give ultimate significance.
For some philosophers of religion, it is this attitude towards morality, inbuilt as they see it into human beings, that makes theism necessary.
God alone can guarantee that the moral desires of humanity are satisfied — for instance, by providing a life after death in which happiness can be proportioned to virtue, as it patently is not in this life.
Such a view reminds us — as we shall see in greater detail in the next chapter—that there is an odd paradox where the ‘moral’ qualities of God are concerned.
On the one hand there are those who are convinced that God cannot be good given the amount of injustice in the world.
On the other hand are those convinced that the only explanation of such injustice must be the existence of God (for otherwise there would be no way of satisfying the human desire to see justice prevail).
Having looked at some of the reasons why God is thought of in personal terms, it is as well to remind ourselves of some of the dangers of doing so.
One obvious problem is that such imagery may lead us to undervalue the significance of the impersonal, particularly if we treat it somehow as the valueless first rung on the ladder of being.
Many people in the Western or Near Eastern traditions might indeed wonder whether there isn't a link between their neglect of the physical environment (something becoming increasingly obvious in the ‘green’ 1990s), and a tendency to relate to God simply as a ‘person out there’, unconnected to anything as ‘denigrating’as matter.
In what ways, then, have philosophers of religion attempted to combine personal and impersonal imagery in order to represent the divine nature?
One particular attempt needs to be examined carefully.
God's world, God's body?
One approach to the problem has been to think of the world as God's body.
God is present throughout reality in the sense in which a person can be said to be present throughout his or her body.
An attraction of this view is that the notion of the ‘I’ or ‘self’appears to bear the character of transcendence and immanence, discussed at length in the previous section.
The ‘I’ at one and the same time transcends the body (so that for instance we talk of our bodies as something separate from ourselves and say that we  ‘have’them rather than‘are’them) and is immanent or present in the body.
Moreover, the ‘I’ or self is not present in a particular part of the body.
This too, some have argued, makes it an apt image for God's presence in the world.
However, this analogy possesses two serious flaws.
On the one hand, it is clear that we depend for survival upon our bodies, whereas we may not want to say that God depends upon the world for survival.
In Christian tradition this has been very clearly stated.
To revert to the early Christian analogy between the physical universe and a tune, the singer can survive without a song.
More generally, creation has always been understood as an act of God's grace, something He could perfectly well have chosen not to do, rather than some kind of necessary mechanism through which He ensured His own existence.
The relation between the world and God is not one of reciprocal dependence: the world exists only as an act of divine favour.
God does not even ‘need’ the world in the sense imagined by those who suppose He must be lonely without it.
Christians argue that the whole point about a tri-personal God is that the benefits of society, as well as those of individuality, are contained within the being of God.
He does not need the world for company!
In the second place, the analogy fails to make any distinction between the way bodies behave and the way inanimate objects behave.
It insists upon lumping the whole of reality together as a single ‘thing’ or ‘system’like a body, rather than recognising that it is more a collection of different things, a network of interrelated but separate systems, animate and inanimate, that cannot be welded together into one ‘thing’.
The differences between objects and persons cannot be recognised properly if they are conceived of as different ‘bits’ of God's body.
Thus our argument against this way of conceiving God is twofold.
First, it revokes the fundamental belief in a dependence of the world upon God that is not reciprocated by an equal and opposite dependence of God upon the world.
Second, it actually overrides the differences between animate and inanimate, and thereby between the personal and impersonal, by perpetuating the myth of the universe as one big ‘thing’, usually thought of in personal terms — as in the idea of ‘mother earth’.
Once again, it may be the impersonal that is being undervalued by an approach  that is effectively denying inanimate objects their autonomy by trying to present them virtually as the organs of God's body.
The image of a body simply cannot do justice, we are saying, to the reality of — and our complex emotional reaction to — overpowering physical realities like the sea or the night-sky (however much we may be told that the stars are a twinkle in God's eye!).
What we have to do is to think of a personal God without thinking of a ‘body’ of God.
This is one clear way in which we can recognise the clear distinction between the form of human personality and the form of divine personality.
An image of God as a person like ourselves — for instance an old man on a cloud, or for that matter a young man from Nazareth — can, therefore, be deeply misleading.
Personality is mediated at the human level through individual bodies.
At the divine level, however, personality is expressed differently.
Whereas human personality is present in bodies, divine personality is present in what is inanimate also.
In conveying divine personality, therefore, impersonal images such as light are appropriate as well as personal images such as judge and father.
The impersonal imagery is essential if we are not to think of God as a person like ourselves.
It prevents us falling back upon the familiar ideas of a ‘father in heaven’ who is thought of in much the same way as Santa Claus or an uncle in Australia.
Without a means of preserving the difference between divine and human personality, we are liable to end up with an idea of God as a favourite uncle!
Such an idea could easily be associated with domesticating and trivialising the Deity.
divine agency
Linked to the idea of a personal God is the notion of God as an historical agent.
Some religious traditions emphasise that certain events in the world can be considered to be God's actions, and have claimed that what we know of God is derived from our interpretation of these events.
What we know of other people is learned in a similar manner.
Other people, for all that we may claim to understand them, still have an irreducibly transcendent ‘core’— expressed in the fact that we can never enter their minds and think as they do.
People reveal themselves in their actions, but they can never be reduced to them.
In a similar way, the argument goes, God reveals Himself in particular events (that may themselves be the actions of His agents, like Jesus of Nazareth or Mohammed) but can never be reduced to them.
We may see here a way of expressing the double motif of God's transcendence and immanence discussed above.
It may be — despite the fact that there are many incarnations or revelations of God in the Indian religious traditions too — that there is a difference here between some religious traditions of the Near East and those of the Indian sub-continent.
Whilst both sets of traditions talk in personal terms of God, it seems that the Near Eastern religions, perhaps because of a stronger sense of historical progress, have developed further the idea of God as an historical agent — someone who has revealed His hand by associating with particular events and claiming them as His own.
Whilst not retracting anything that has been said about the inappropriateness of either a corporeal God or a God who is a person, it has to be said that interpreting certain historical events as the actions of God is the primary way in which a number of religions understand the divine nature.
For Judaism, God is the liberator who brought the Hebrew slaves out of Egypt and subsequently acted to protect and chastise them throughout their chequered history.
For Christians, God's activity becomes associated not only with particular events but with a particular set of human actions, those that characterise what we know of the life of Jesus of Nazareth.
In the next chapter we will discuss the ‘moral’ qualities of God under the title: ‘Is God Good?’
It must be admitted that a great deal of what Judaeo-Christianity has to say about the ‘goodness’ of God is based upon claims about the way in which He involves himself in the historical process.
Moreover, much of the moral imperative of Judaeo-Christianity, to love one's enemies, to support the poor and so on, is based upon the idea that God got His own divine hands dirty by becoming associated with actions that promoted such principles.
Indeed Christianity might even say that in Jesus of Nazareth those actions were God's.
The idea that God is good might owe a great deal in those traditions to a view that God has done good things in the world Himself — that God Himself is in some way an actor on the world stage.
But does the crucial significance of this understanding of divine agency require that we think of God as a person?
Is it possible to make sense of revelation in any other way?
Is it possible to associate God with particular events without such a presumption?
Certainly such a relation of God with the world prevents us thinking of the physical universe in its entirety as God's ‘body’.
But are we left with a view of God as one of the actors on the world stage in the manner of the pagan gods, a benign Zeus who ‘comes down’ from Olympus to perform what is morally uplifting on earth?
Can we understand divine agency without reducing God to a person like ourselves?
This is the question that the Near Eastern religions in particular have to address, and that they often fail to answer.
They have to find a way of expressing their confidence that God reveals Himself through His activity in the world, without making Him into a person like ourselves.
a definition of God
What sort of monster, if any, have we identified?
Can we conclude that despite our reservations about Hick's presupposition that all religions believe in the same God, there is a case for seeing a common theistic structure among many of the world's religious traditions (or at least those that have any idea of God at all)?
In terms of a common form of theism, we have suggested that those world religions we have examined are all fundamentally monotheistic — they believe in one God.
We have also suggested that they all conceive of God as both transcendent and immanent — transcendent in the sense that what fundamentally limits reality does not apply to Him, immanent in that this lack of limitation is what makes possible a universal presence.
We have also suggested that this God is personal, but that the form of the divine personality is not that of human personality.
God is not present in the way that we are present, in bodily form.
God's presence extends throughout what is impersonal as well as what is personal.
We have tried to avoid in this chapter the sort of generalised waffle about God in which many theologians indulge.
Take, for instance, this grotesque definition of God by Professor Keith Ward in his Holding Fast to God :
…
God is infinitely potential: his is a dynamic power, from which an infinite set of new and different values can always arise.
He is not just wholly complete and static, frozen into an eternal completeness.
He is dynamic and creative, always moving on to new realisations of his infinite activity.
God is the infinite potentiality for good.
This is as far as you can get from Cupitt's picture of a reactionary, static super-tyrant [in his Taking Leave of God ]always making sure the universe remains the same and conforms to the old unchanging laws.
Ward and Cupitt, two Christians angry with each other 's definitions, swap epithets about static super-tyrants and dynamic powers, frozen gods and gods on the move, those that are reactionary and those that have infinite potentiality.
But do we achieve any understanding of what their two different Gods are like from this conflict?
The difficulty with defining God is that the theist is perfectly entitled to claim that ‘God’ refers to something that cannot be known in the way that other things are known.
At the same time, the atheist is perfectly entitled to claim that whether or not there is some special difficulty involved in defining ‘God’, anyone who uses the word must be clear about what he or she is saying.
To say that God is incomprehensible invites the perfectly reasonable response from the philosopher of religion, Frederick Ferré (Language, Logic and God ):
One's only logically appropriate stand when confronted with incomprehensibility is a demand for clarification; belief, even with the best of good will, must wait upon the provision of a content to believe.
A very famous ‘proof’ of God's existence, the so-called ‘Ontological Argument’associated with St Anselm, defines God as ‘that than which nothing greater can be thought to exist’.
Anselm's definition is seen as part of a clever philosophical con trick whereby he argues that it is greater for something to exist than not to exist, and thereby that the definition of God (as the greatest thing conceivable) demands that He exist!
Few people find Anselm a serious contender for proving the existence of God, although there have been many philosophers who have rightly observed, as we have tried to do, that the logic of existence requires careful consideration.
But what is less often  pointed out is that Anselm in The Proslogion also defines God as ‘greater than can be thought to exist’.
In other words, where God is concerned we are attempting to think of that than which nothing greater can be thought, which is also beyond thought.
In thinking of God, we are trying to think beyond the limits of thought.
It is arguable that here Anselm is not thinking of God in terms very different from those of Kant, the severest critic of his ‘Ontological Argument’(at least in the form in which it was mediated to him by Descartes).
Given that the theist believes that defining God involves thinking beyond the limits of thought, can he or she also fulfil the demand that a clear explanation be given of what is meant by the word ‘God’?
Cannot the sort of difficulty which the theist experiences in terms of describing God, for instance, as personal and impersonal, be justified by pointing out that attempting to think beyond the limits of thought is bound to entail stretching ordinary language beyond what it would normally bear?
The theist thereby comes to justify as a paradox what the atheist is wont to dismiss as a confusion.
In this chapter I have deliberately not concentrated upon analysing lists of attributes.
I have tried to make general observations about the structure of theism.
Can these observations form the basis of a definition?
For the atheist, they cannot.
The problem may not be so much that when we talk of God we say nothing, as that we say too much — we say things that seem to combine irreconcilable images that can never be focussed upon one ‘being’.
Can the theist respond that he or she does have a coherent understanding of God?
Can, for instance, the emphasis upon God as ‘underlying reality’, and upon God active in history as a personal agent, be regarded as compatible elements in an understanding of God common to many world religions?
In this chapter I have done more to highlight some of the problems in reaching a definition of God than to offer a solution of my own.
The position I have tried to adopt is that whilst the atheist must demand clarity, the theist can argue that the nature of his or her task necessitates a use of language that is bound to be criticised as unusual, although it cannot be allowed to be contradictory.
Whilst some theists like to bask in their own linguistic confusions, the more dangerous temptation is to pretend that some  simple formula like ‘love’ or ‘supreme being’— or even ‘infinite potential’— can somehow solve all theological problems.
notes
Anselm, St (1033–1109) Born the son of a Lombard landowner, Anselm eventually became Archbishop of Canterbury in England.
He had a very high reputation as a spiritual guide (he was for a time Abbot of Bec in Normandy) and teacher.
His time at Canterbury led to constant tensions with the Crown and periods of exile in Rome.
Apart from The Proslogion in which he propounded his ‘Ontological Argument’, Anselm wrote an important work entitled,Why did God become Man ?
(Cur Deus Homo ), regarded as a classic in Christian writings about the ‘atonement’(the means by which, after the Fall, God is once more reconciled to humanity).
Aquinas, St Thomas (1225–1274) A medieval theologian whose thought (Thomism) has been more profoundly influential upon Christian (particularly Roman Catholic) thinking than any other.
Aquinas sought systematically to bring the worlds of philosophy and theology together.
In particular he thought that the fundamental principles of Aristotle's philosophy could provide a setting in which to express the revealed truths of Christian faith.
Kant, Immanuel (1724–1804) Although one of the most difficult of all philosophers to read, Kant is one of the most important for theologians to examine.
His most significant work,The Critique of Pure Reason , sets out the limits to thought insofar as they can ever be set from the perspective of people who are subject to those limits themselves.
His Religion Within the Limits of Reason Alone expounds what he saw as the ethical basis of religion.
His life was one of unambitious regularity.
He lived and died in Königsberg, never venturing beyond the province, and had the reputation of being the contented bachelor from whose afternoon walk it was possible to set one's watch.
Though his thought may have been in some respects dry and narrow as a result, he set the agenda for modern philosophy and theology.
Some would see his agnosticism, his awareness of the limits to thought, as the only true basis for religious faith.
Paley, William (1743–1805) Though highly skilled as a lecturer in mathematics and ethics, Paley is best-known for his Evidences of Christianity , published in 1794, and for his Natural Theology published in 1802.
His confidence that God's existence could be demonstrated from the natural world made him a favourite target for those who felt it could only be on the basis of God's special revelation of Himself that faith could be justified.
further reading
Professor Sallie McFague's Models of God examines a number of ideas of the divine nature, including God as mother, lover and friend.
She explores the idea of the world as God's body, an idea which received earlier treatment by Grace Jantzen in her God's World, God ‘s Body .
Neither Jantzen nor McFague really gets to grips with the philosophical issues involved.
A theologian who does (though from a more conservative perspective) is E.L.
Mascall.
In his He Who Is: A Study in Traditional Theism (intended as a response to Martin Buber's I and Thou ) and in his work Existence and Analogy, Mascall sets out the main arguments of the Thomist.
His careful exploration of existence, the self and God in these books is uncritical of Aquinas, but shows a sophisticated awareness of he problems involved in defining God, and an awareness of the dangers involved in ‘using models’.
In this book I have tried to move beyond the Judaeo-Christian tradition in the discussion.
My claim has been that there are parallels to be observed between the theism of the Western religious traditions and that of the main Eastern religious tradition.
The further reading in this area is enormous.
The spectrum of religious beliefs is best approached initially through compendia: for instance the Concise Encyclopaedia of Living Faiths , edited by R.C. Zaehner, or the more recent Handbook of Living Religions , edited by John R. Hinnells (which has bibliographies for each religious tradition).
It is vitally important to know something of the individual richness and variety of each religious tradition before becoming subject to the generalisations of those engaged in comparative religion.