

FOUR
Pepito had advised Trent to return to Belpan and wait for affairs to break into the open.
Trent knew that Pepito was right, but he was an activist and found waiting both frustrating and unnerving.
While sailing back from Cancun to San Paul Key he had put down on paper what he knew in the hope that a pattern would appear.
To simplify his thoughts he had listed them under two headings: first there was that which directly affected Belpan.
Fact One: Someone was building a scenario, its purpose being to discredit Belpan's Government and its President.
Fact Two: Colonel Smith expected gun-runners.
Add the two together and the answer Trent found most obvious was a coup d'état.
In terms of force required, a coup would be easy enough to carry out.
Belpan had little crime, no enemies, nothing worth stealing, and no territorial ambitions.
As a result, the police force was rudimentary and inexperienced while the Belpan Defence Force was primarily a supplier of honour guards for the rare visitor of sufficient importance to warrant ceremony.
But a coup took more than force.
There had to be some political acceptance both inside the country and, more importantly, outside, because since the end of the Cold War  military take-overs were met increasingly by an immediate freeze of foreign aid.
Belpan depended on foreign aid for its survival.
And there had to be a reason for a coup.
As far as Trent could see, there was no reason at all.
Belpan's tax base was less than that of a medium-sized European market town, which made running the country a financial nightmare.
Because of the reef, there was no port; this precluded a military base.
Anyway, with the Cold War over, the superpowers were closing bases.
The cost of developing Belpan as a tax haven would be prohibitive and the competition in the Caribbean was already established.
For the same reasons Trent was unable to visualise Belpan as a future gambling Mecca.
But, in ruling out a coup, Trent had to presume that the arms had a further destination and weren't connected to the drug scenario.
And why the drug scenario?
The money involved, the ruthlessness, and the organisation, were all far too great to be explained by the political opposition to the President wanting to discredit the Government prior to the coming election.
Next Trent had listed those facts appertaining to his own role.
He had been sent to Belpan by Colonel Smith as bait for gun-runners.
Belpan was outside the EC's sphere of influence so the Colonel was doing someone a favour.
The Colonel had built his career on doing favours for the CIA — but Trent's contact was with Caspar from the DEA.
This made sense to Trent.
The end of the Cold War produced fresh priorities in the Intelligence community.
Drugs and terrorism now came top of the list.
In doing the DEA a favour, the Colonel was continuing his habit of laying down lines of influence.
The Colonel had summoned him to Cancun for the meeting at the Rena Victoria Hotel.
Don Roberto had supplied the Colonel's bodyguard.
The Colonel's bodyguard had led Trent and Pepito to Don Roberto.
Don Roberto had been killed with a similar knife to the one Trent carried.
Three men had mounted an incompetent attack on Trent at Bacalar.
The only reason Trent could imagine for the attack was to link him to Don Roberto's murder — this presumed that the three men were Don Roberto's hirelings.
But who had persuaded or paid Don Roberto to supply the men, and what reason had he given him?
Don Roberto was a highly successful and influential freelance in the Intelligence and Security business.
Whoever had killed Don Roberto had known him or had a first-rate introduction because there were no signs of violence other than the knife wound and Don Roberto had given his staff time off.
Why had Don Roberto been killed?
Presumably to keep his mouth shut.
But about what?
Why had he been set up as Don Roberto's murderer?
Trent knew that he was insufficiently important to be the target so there had to be linkage.
The only linkage he could see was with Colonel Smith.
Don Roberto had worked with the Colonel and had acted as cut-out between him and the CIA on the operations which Trent had undertaken on the Americans' behalf.
Was someone trying to discredit Smith through Trent?
And, if so, what had pushed them to such ruthless lengths?
Which brought Trent to the American who had called himself Steve in Cancun and Robert in Frankfurt.
Trent would have liked to know whether their meeting in Frankfurt had been deliberate on the American's part.
And, most of all, Trent would like to have known why the photograph he had taken from Don Roberto's house had been there in the first place.
And why that particular picture?
In all the years that Don Roberto had acted as his  Control when on loan to the CIA, the elderly Englishman had never mentioned Trent's mother.
Trent had come out of hospital after the ambush in Ireland with nothing left of his old life.
Now the photograph was pinned to the saloon bulkhead on Golden Girl .
With nothing to do but wait, Trent had agreed to act as sail-master on one of Belpan's sand lighters in the regular Sunday race meeting.
Forty-foot open sloops, gaff-rigged and shallow draught, the lighters were built to load river sand on the mainland for construction projects out on the keys.
Trent was crewing for Baccy, a six-foot-four Seventh Day Adventist black Customs officer who captained Belpan's lone patrol boat when he wasn't racing sailboats.
Seventh Day Adventists were the favoured race skippers — they didn't drink, which was more than could be said for the lighter crews.
The lighters employed moveable ballast made up of two-hundred-pound sacks of wet sand and crewing was hard work, particularly in a tacking race.
Each time the lighter went about on to a new tack the ballast had to be shifted to the windward side of the boat.
For fuel the crews ran on rum and fresh orange juice.
Two Creole girls squeezed oranges in the bows while Baccy shouted at his crew as if they were galley slaves rather than a bunch of half-drunk amateurs trying to have Sunday fun.
But Baccy never used a curse word, nor did he ever take the briar pipe out of his mouth despite having abandoned the tobacco habit on joining the church at the age of eighteen.
Maria Magdalena was Baccy's craft.
Old Man Eddy was helming Caribbean Queen .
The course was from Jimmy's dock on Key San Paul, round Key Canaka and back, with the local brewer's fifty-foot motor yacht acting as Committee boat.
There were no rules to lighter racing and the need for a Committee boat was restricted to the brewer's generosity in distributing cases of beer and crates of white rum.
The crews supplied their own oranges.
Maria Magdalena and Caribbean Queen cleared Key Canaka thirty metres apart with no more than a bowsprit between them.
The finishing line was on a dead run and Baccy had his crew throw the ballast overboard.
Then the crew got down to serious drinking.
Trent spied the President and his granddaughter on the end of the dock below the President's beach house.
Island gossip said the President was keeping clear of electioneering from fear that the rumours spread about his involvement with the Colombian cocaine trade would harm his party's performance at the polls.
With three hundred metres to the finish line, Baccy's Maria Magdalena was losing by a length to Caribbean Queen .
Baccy might be a stalwart Christian but he hated to lose a sailboat race.
He ordered those of his crew still in a fit state to swim to take to the sea.
Trent dived overboard along with half a dozen crew and Maria Magdalena surged ahead.
Trent strolled up the path to Jimmy's Bar.
Jimmy had been watching the race from his deckchair.
He beckoned Trent over: ‘Trent Boy, strangers askin' for you.’
He jabbed a thumb over his shoulder at the interior.
Trent walked round through the lean-to kitchen and stood in the doorway, from where he could see into the restaurant.
There were four of them: one thin, one fat and two nondescript.
They were Latinos and in their mid-thirties to early forties.
They wore the standard uniform of the well-to-do American out of office hours: Lacrosse sports shirts, tan cotton Oxfords, leather loafers.
Their jewellery would have looked heavy on a Gringo: chunky wedding rings and Omega wristwatches in two tones of gold.
And they wore silk socks that would have been frowned upon at the more establishment country clubs in the Hamptons.
Cashmere sports jackets hung on the back of their chairs, insurance against an encounter with air-conditioning.
Good quality hold-alls were stacked beside the table.
Businessmen, Trent thought, in the professions.
Probably checking Belpan's investment potential.
They would have alligator-hide wallets for their credit cards and carry photographs of their children.
They had ordered halves of the local draught beer which they weren't in a hurry to finish.
Quiet voices and Cuban cigars.
Americans from the US and the same background would have been emphasising their masculinity by drinking large rums and making too much noise.
The thin one appeared to be the senior partner.
Tall, he suffered the sunken chest of a consumptive, and had a hooked nose and eyes that, though hidden behind dark lids, were too big for his face — it was the starving poet look that enslaved self-sacrificial women.
He had caught cold, or more likely, suffered from an allergy, Trent thought as he remarked the inflamed eyelids that shuttered the eyes and a nose drip that the thin man dipped into a linen handkerchief every half-a-minute — dip, dip, like a skinny waterbird feeding along the tideline.
The fat man was stocky and broad-faced, but the fat was a thin disguise cloaking the layered muscles of a retired athlete now restricted by his job to twice-weekly sessions at the health club.
Calm and quiet, Trent picked him as the technical adviser along for the trip but without direct responsibility for the outcome.
The nondescripts were observers straight out of the nine-to-five banking bureaucracy: groomed to perfection, marvellously polite, and for sale to the highest bidder guaranteed to keep his mouth shut.
Or her mouth shut, Trent corrected himself.
Pleasurable prejudice, he thought, and smiled contentedly as he entered the bar.
He nodded to Jimmy's son before strolling over to the men's table.
He introduced himself with a slight bow to the tall man.
‘Trent, Señores.
You asked for me.’
The man unshuttered his eyes for a moment.
They were dark eyes, but without warmth and used to obedience, as  was the voice, low-pitched through years without need of recourse to argument.
‘We wish to make an inspection of the reef, Señor.’
Trent waited, but the tall man had had his say.
The fat man was there to arrange the details.
He introduced himself: ‘Gomez.
Pedro Gomez.’
English, it would have been John Smith.
‘You have a catamaran.
You can approach close to the beaches and also cross the reef where necessary.’
Personal experience or acquired knowledge, Trent wondered.
A slight callus marked Gomez's right index finger.
Trent imagined him holding a golf club but the callus didn't fit.
He said, ‘To be safe I require two feet of water under the hulls.’
‘You are for hire?’
Gomez asked.
The thin man's lids rose for a fraction of a second to show a look of quiet amusement which Trent answered with a slight shrug: ‘Señor, whether a man is for hire depends on the circumstances.’
‘Of which the amount is an important part,’ Gomez suggested smoothly.
‘And the difficulties,’ Trent said.
He found himself studying the thin man's hands.
Long-fingered and skeletal, they remained totally at rest on the rough wood of the table top.
as if waiting for a command to bring them to life, Trent thought.
He had known an Irishman with similar hands; hands that had seemed to perform as separate entities from the man himself; acting on his behalf yet leaving his conscience free of responsibility for their actions.
The Irishman had used a gun but a fountain pen could be equally dangerous.
‘As a foreigner, Señor,’ Trent said, ‘the law forbids me to work.
Given that I wish to stay in these waters I must be careful neither to give offence nor to provoke jealousy.’
‘We wish to sleep on board and we wish to remain close to the reef.
What other boat could take us?’ the fat man  asked.
His Spanish was harsh and a little guttural.
Trent couldn't place the accent.
‘In comfort?
None,’ Trent said.
‘Give me an hour.’
Fetching a bottle of rum and paper cups from the bar and a carrier bag of fresh oranges from the kitchen, Trent strolled over to the lobster Co-operative.
He found half a dozen fishermen seated under the palm trees at the foot of the Co-operative quay.
Squatting down, Trent poured rum and squeezed orange juice into the cups.
He had grown familiar with the fishermen of Ireland's west coast.
There they would have been complaining about the weather, the European Commission's new fishing controls and the imminence of bankruptcy.
These men were discussing Florida investment property and the stupidity of the Co-operative repatriating their full US earnings to Belpan.
A large part of their earnings went back again to the USA for investment; as a result they had to pay Belpan National Bank's transfer charges twice.
Listening to the conversation, Trent watched three frigate birds sailing the on-shore breeze beyond the quay.
They were waiting for a lobster boat's arrival in expectation of being thrown a free dinner — less work than fishing on their own account; which about summed up life on the Keys, Trent thought.
Sun, sleep, good booze, lackadaisical conversation, and a minimum of effort.
The thump and fumes of the freezer plant's heavy diesel generator were the only unwelcome intrusion.
Though not unwelcome to the fishermen, he reminded himself.
He didn't want to think about the Latinos.
But they were waiting and, into a pause, he mentioned that he'd met them over at Jimmy's.
The fishermen already knew of the four foreigners.
News travelled faster than light on the small Key.
The oldest of the fishermen, grey of head and wearing his false teeth on a string round his neck, spat in the sand and said, ‘Trent, boy, you take them men, you make damn sure them pay cash money.’
Mad money to be hidden from Colonel Smith, Trent thought as the other fishermen nodded their approval of sound advice.
‘An' you watch fo' dat Gilda woman, boy,’ the old man warned, referring to the hurricane now hitting the southern end of the Caribbean.
He looked up suspiciously at the northern sky, clear and tranquil.
‘Dem radio men is always too damn late.
Dat Gilda coming, de birds tell you.
No messin', boy.
You get up dem creeks an' lash up fast.’
There was a murmur of agreement from the other men.
One of them told Trent to fetch a gas can over to the Co-operative quay to be filled at the Co-op's gas pump.
Gas at the Co-op was tax-free.
Trent thanked him and poured another round of rum.
These men were wealthy and the rum was politeness rather than a bribe, particularly the effort of squeezing fresh orange juice.
And he had his permission for the charter…
Back at Jimmy's, he nodded to Gomez from the covered terrace.
The man came out.
Trent turned with him and they walked in silence down through the palm trees to the beach and Golden Girl .
The silence was deliberate on Trent's part and Gomez seemed content to wait.
For Trent it was a sizing-up process.
Like a dog checking another dog's scent.
Small dogs yapped, big dogs kept their own counsel.
By the time they reached the catamaran Trent would have wagered the charter fee on one guess at the man's profession.
He waded out to the craft and held her bows while Gomez shed shoes and socks and rolled up his Oxfords.
He grasped the forestay in both hands as high up as he could reach and drew himself out of the water and on to the forward hull beam as smoothly as a dolphin breaking for air.
Trent had left an old man guarding the boat.
Black Pete was asleep under the cockpit awning.
Trent gave him a nod of thanks and a dollar, then stood aside to allow Gomez into the saloon:’ Mi casa es su casa, Señor .’
My home is  your home…
The fat man's brief smile called Trent a liar, though without malice and Trent grinned.
‘At a price, of course, and on a temporary basis.’
Gomez laughed softly.
‘I may inspect the accommodation?’
‘With pleasure.’
The fat man took his time.
Trent had expected as much.
Waiting in the cockpit, he watched a couple of tanned young Americans race each other in from the reef on sailboards.
Gomez reappeared and pointed to the navigation electronics above the chart table on the port side of the main companionway into the saloon.
‘Much equipment, Señor.’
‘Toys,’ Trent said.
‘Christopher Columbus discovered America with a sextant and a chunk of lead tied to the end of a line.’
‘America is a large target.’
Trent said, ‘True,’ and waited.
And with your toys, Capitano Trent, how small a target can you hit?’
‘Night or day, give or take a hundred feet, right on the spot.’
‘Good toys.’
‘Expensive,’ Trent said.
Again that quick smile.
‘So let us talk money, Capitano.’
Trent tapped the barometer.
The needle remained steady at 29.9, one thousand and fourteen millibars.
‘US dollars.
One thousand a day, cash in advance,’ he said.
‘No receipt.
Food and drink on me as long as you eat fish.’
Trent had been correct as to the alligator-skin wallet but there weren't any credit cards.
Gomez slid three one-thousand dollar bills from the wallet.
The bills were fresh from the mint.
Trent said, ‘Gracias, Señor ,’ and folded the bills into his back pocket.
‘De nada .
We come on board tomorrow.
Two o'clock.’
Gomez held out his hand.
He had a good handshake, Trent thought, as they shook on the deal.
He would have been happier if the Latin American had made at least a pretence at attempting to beat him down on the charter price.
‘One rider to the deal,’ he said.
‘There's a hurricane down south.
The weathermen say we're safe but if it even thinks of heading north, we run for shelter.’
Trent lay on the surface watching a barracuda.
Despite the cotton T-shirt, he could feel the sun hot on his back.
He held his spear gun out in front of him with the safety off and used his flippers to keep facing the fish.
It was fair-sized, four feet long and weighing twenty-five to thirty pounds.
Gunmetal-grey flank, big unblinking eye and the dark slash of a mouth, the fish looked what it was — a killing machine, more dangerous, in Trent's experience, than a shark.
Sharks stayed outside the reef, while Trent knew Arab net fishermen in the Persian Gulf whose calf muscles had been ripped out by barracudas while they were standing on the coral with the water below their knees.
Trent had already warned his charter party back to the catamaran, keeping himself between them and the big fish.
He thought that if he shot the barracuda behind the head, it would leap clear of the water with its jaws snapping.
The open jaws of a big barracuda were enough to keep most people out of the water and his party hadn't shown themselves that keen over the past three days.
He thought that they would be happier under the cockpit awning than they had been in the water.
The icebox was packed with beer and he'd prepared a lobster salad that he'd left on ice.
If his plan worked, he would have an hour or two to himself dawdling along the reef, which was a better way of spending the afternoon than acting as nanny to four Latinos.
Though, as charterers went, they weren't bad.
He hadn't had to tell them to take their shoes off before boarding at the Co-op quay and in three days of cruising they had washed the  sand off their feet after each shore trip.
They had listened carefully to his instructions on how to use the marine toilets — unblocking them was Trent's least favourite job.
And, most importantly, none of them had ever sailed before, let alone on a big cat.
Nor had they cared to learn and Trent hadn't tried teaching them.
The barracuda swam two complete circles with Trent watching.
Part of the time it just hung there in the water, not even the tip of a fin moving.
But it was edging closer to Trent, always a little closer.
He doubted if the fish would attack, though, with barracudas, you could never be sure.
A big one was the sea's equivalent of the savanna lion or jungle tiger.
They were fearless because they were without enemies.
Hunter or hunted?
If the fish did attack and he missed with his spear, Trent knew that his chances of getting out of the water in one piece were nil.
An eight-band spear gun took too long to load for the fisherman to have more than one shot.
And if the fish went for his belly, he knew that he would be dead.
Knowing that the barracuda would dart forward the moment he fired, Trent aimed halfway down the jaw.
The jerk of the rubber punched up Trent's arm and into the right side of his chest.
For a moment he couldn't see through the train of bubbles left by the spear, which hit the fish dead centre and an inch behind the jaw hinge.
It leapt high, jaws snapping, body arced so that Trent thought that he would hear its spine snap.
The force of its leap dragged Trent breast high out of the water.
The sun flashed on the chromed speartip and on the fish.
Four leaps and it was dead.
Jimmy's wife prided herself on her barracuda curry, which would make a change from lobster.
Trent swam back to the catamaran dragging the fish behind him.
He passed the gun up to Louis, the tallest of the Latinos, the one he thought of as their leader.
Louis pulled the fish on board.
Trent suggested the Latinos came back into the water but they weren't keen.
‘Then enjoy yourselves,’ he told them.
‘You don't mind, I'll fish for our supper?’
He spent a further two hours in the water.
Most of that time he dived for red snapper along the edge of a break in the reef.
A lot of big fish were heading out through the gap.
Between dives Trent considered his charter party.
They had spent three days on the reef and had photographed every habitable key from every angle, one of the bank bureaucrats taking notes on a lawyer's pad.
They had never drunk more than a couple of beers each, never raised their voices, and always complimented Trent on the fish he grilled each evening.
That lunchtime they had told him their research was complete, but they had a day spare and were enjoying themselves.
Gomez had produced another of his crisp thousand-dollar bills.
Trent had told him to keep it; whether they had been on board or not, he would have spent the afternoon on the reef — having them along was a pleasure.
That's what he'd told them, and now they were waiting.
He had a feeling that they'd been waiting right from the start of the trip.
A thirty-pound tuna swam past, heading for the open sea.
Trent let it go.
Red and silver flashed thirty feet down.
He drifted beyond a coral head jutting out from the gap's wall and took six deep breaths to hyperventilate his lungs before piking.
Then he shot his legs up into the sky and slid down without a splash.
At fifty feet he levelled out, slipped the safety off the spear gun, and swam slowly round the coral outcrop.
The shoal of snapper were above him.
He picked the largest, his spear taking it through the gut.
Two kicks of his big flippers were sufficient to send him drifting back up towards the surface that quivered in the harsh sunlight like a sheet of liquid mercury.
He unscrewed the speartip, slipped the fish off the shaft and fed it into his catch net.
Two snapper per man made a good dinner.
Towing the net, he swam slowly back to Golden Girl .
The sea was an almost oily calm.
As always, Trent was impressed by the beauty of the big cat.
It was a very different beauty from that of a 1930's Alden ketch or a clipper-bowed Herreshof schooner so admired by the traditionalists.
Those yachts, with their flowing sheer, were the swans,Golden Girl was the barracuda, Trent thought as he recalled the big fish hardly stirring as it circled him.
The same threat was present; even at anchor, the same promise of instant acceleration to a speed that the monohull sailor could only fantasise about.
Reaching the transom, he tied the catch net to the portside rudder.
Pedro Gomez held out a hand for the spear gun.
Trent passed it up along with his weightbelt, slipped off his flippers and mask, dropped them over the taffrail and pulled himself into the cockpit.
Having rinsed and stowed the fishing gear in the after locker, he reached into the icebox for a cold beer.
The two bureaucrats lay drowsing on the port and starboard cockpit seats.
Louis lolled at ease in one of the two deckchairs.
Gomez sat on a bucket with his back to the companionway.
A pistol had appeared in his hand, a 9mm Beretta 10-shot automatic.
The pistol wasn't pointed at Trent.
There was no need for pointing.
As Trent had known it would, the callus on Gomez's index finger exactly fitted the trigger and upper edge of the trigger-guard.
Hours of daily practice on the firing range had formed the callus.
Gomez's slight smile was that of a man who believed that politeness demanded he act a little embarrassed at doing his job.
Trent was neither surprised nor, to his own amazement, frightened.
But there was plenty of time for fear.
‘Want a beer?’ he asked.
‘Not at this instant,’ Gomez answered — one professional to another — no personal animosity.
Trent seated himself on the taffrail.
Raising his beer can to Louis, he said, ‘Salud ,’ before drinking.
‘With your knowledge of sailing, Señor Louis, have me shot and you'll float around out here the rest of your lives.’
It was a point Louis must have considered.
He touched the ever present linen handkerchief to his nose.
‘We wish you to do us a service.’
‘Then point dollars,’ Trent said.
‘The more you point, the better I react.’
Louis snuffled amusement into his handkerchief.
‘The gun is merely to assure you of our seriousness.’
‘Consider me assured,’ Trent said.
He watched a distant flock of gulls wing their way towards the mainland.
And the big fish were heading for deep water.
Tongue out, as if licking the beer from his lips, Trent felt for the wind.
Not even a breath…
‘We wish to rendezvous with a ship,’ Louis said.
‘I've known that since the first day Gomez came on board and checked the Loran navigation worked.
Are you leaving or are we making a pick-up?’
Louis sniffed.
‘Pick-up.
Twenty men.’
One and a half tons.
‘Much baggage?’
‘Seven hundred kilos.’
Trent said, ‘Wind picks up, we'll need to tow half of it in the Zodiac.’
The fourteen-foot inflatable dinghy would carry the weight and tow easily enough.
Louis carefully folded his handkerchief into a square and laid it on the deck beside his chair.
His hands returned to lie parallel with each other on his knees.
He examined them from beneath pink-rimmed lids — as if checking that they were his, Trent thought.
His eyelids rose for a moment.
Trent sensed that he was being inspected in the same way that Louis had examined his hands; as an abstract entity; a tool, at most; briefly useful, but, once used, to be discarded without further thought.
It was a death sentence, Trent knew with absolute certainty, passed on him by a man  who was both intelligent and psychopathic.
Shades of Ireland, he thought: Colonel Smith and his power games that kept his minions in ignorance of the danger they were being manipulated into facing.
Take a few months off.
Relax.
Get yourself a suntan.
Establish a new identity.
As a corpse…
Trent's thoughts went back to the photograph he had found on Don Roberto's piano.
The young fair-haired Lancer officer lolling at his mother's feet, the look on the officer's neatly moustached face that of complacent ownership.
And Trent too had been his possession.
Not in day-to-day practice, perhaps, but by Trent's accepting his relationship to the Colonel as an inevitable part of his life.
It had been his only relationship, a habit of natural loyalty founded in his childhood, further cemented by the dependence of the field officer on his Control, and never questioned in its foundations…perhaps because, in accepting the Colonel as his father-figure, he had been able to protect himself from the manner of his real father's death.
Damn them both, Trent thought, the British Colonel and the Latin American killer.
And the killer was waiting for Trent's explanation.
‘Catamarans are built for speed,’ Trent said.
Not for carrying weight.
When hit by a squall, a conventional yacht heeled, thus spilling the wind from its sails.
With a catamaran it was instant acceleration that dampened the force of the wind.
‘Weigh her down and the first squall rips the mast out of her,’ he warned.
‘Tow the Zodiac and we sit Gomez on the taffrail with a machete.
A squall hits, he cuts.’
Gomez grinned at the thought.
‘But we lose the cargo,’ Louis suggested coldly.
Trent shook his head.
He had a thousand metres of nylon fishing-line on the marlin rod lashed to the port stay, three hundred kilos breaking-strain.
‘We come up into the wind and collect the Zodiac.’
‘So easy, Capitano?’
Trent raised his beer can.
‘Easy, and you wouldn't have to pay so much.’
FIVE
The wind came in tiny puffs that hardly stirred the sea's surface.
Despite the lack of wind, over the past hour a swell had built beyond the reef — a strange, almost oily swell that rose in long humps only to collapse back on itself as if exhausted by the effort.
The heat was intense and the humidity so heavy that the setting sun seemed crushed into the mountains like a piece of squashed orange modelling clay.
The big fish had been making for deep water all afternoon and Trent hadn't seen a bird for the past hour.
Seated portside of the cockpit, he pounded garlic, fresh ginger, black peppercorns, salt, and olive oil into a paste.
He had already stowed the cockpit awning and set up the barbecue.
One of the bureaucrats had cleaned the fish — Trent's fishing-knife had been confiscated by Pedro Gomez.
Now the bureaucrats and Louis were below while Gomez, lazily watchful, sat on the saloon cabin top.
There was no hurry.
The rendezvous was six miles out beyond the reef at 0100 hours.
Say twenty minutes to transfer the men and cargo; two hours to the mainland and a further half-hour to reach the upriver disembarkation point.
Although which river had been kept secret from Trent, he was certain that it would be the north fork of the Belpan  where a bend would hide them from the road bridge.
They would unload the cargo.
Then Gomez would shoot him in the head.
Gomez would neither dislike nor enjoy doing so.
It was his job — like going to the office.
Trent held eight of the fresh thousand-dollar bills folded in the back pocket of his jeans; the original three for the charter augmented by a further five in payment for his agreeing to the rendezvous.
Thoughts of the bills returning to Gomez's alligator-skin billfold were unpleasant, but less unpleasant than the thought of being shot in the head.
Trent had wanted out for so long — out of the secrecy and isolation.
These last few months of building a new identity had enabled him to relax for the first time in years.
Now he was back at the sharp end.
Fear was useful as an adrenaline pump but dangerous if allowed to affect the ability to think clearly.
So far Trent had managed to keep it under control but he could taste its sourness in the back of his throat and feel it in his stomach and up the back of his thighs — familiar tremblings imperceptible to an observer.
He wanted to check the barometer.
To do so he would need Gomez's permission, and in asking he might arouse the Latino's suspicions.
Anyway he knew what was coming.
The when was important — the hurricane was a more accessible ally than either Caspar at the US Embassy or Steve back in Washington with his promise of the heavy brigade.
Spooning the garlic and ginger paste into the snapper and over their skin, he dropped the first three fish on to the grill and called down to the other Latinos to bring plates and cutlery from the galley.
Eating dinner, Trent watched Louis run his knife down a fish's backbone, parting the flesh with the concentration and obsessively meticulous neatness of a surgeon.
Louis was a man to whom error was unforgivable, in himself as much as in his associates or employees.
Essential to Trent's possibilities of survival was that Louis should believe him ignorant  of the death sentence already passed.
Unsuspecting, Trent would be watched, certainly, but there might be a chance moment in which the Latinos relaxed or shifted their concentration.
Reaching for a beer from the icebox, Trent flipped the cap and asked casually, ‘Why didn't you fly them in?’
He already knew the answer.
The Latinos were used to flying their drug cargoes and knew that there was always the risk of someone, if only by accident, being on or near the airstrip.
Smuggling drugs was a quick in-and-out operation.
Land, refuel, and take off before anyone could get there.
Now these men were involved in a long-term operation and total secrecy was essential to its outcome.
Louis looked at him, his red-rimmed eyelids lifting for a moment.
The handkerchief appeared, the nose was dabbed.
Then the tiniest flutter of thin fingers unfurling.
‘We like the sea, Señor Capitano.’
But had no experience of it, Trent thought.
This was their one mistake, this entering on unfamiliar territory — his territory.
And because it was his territory, Trent retained hope, despite his fear of Louis; as he had retained hope back in Ireland under the inspection of the leader of the terrorist unit that he had infiltrated.
The terrorist had hands identical to those of Louis and he had been a psychopath.
The wind puffs were stronger now, though no more frequent.
Not squalls yet, but armed with sufficient force to drift Golden Girl to the length of her anchor warp, and there was a change to the sound of the swell on the reef, a growing harshness.
Trent said, ‘I'll need to get the sails ready.’
Neither stars nor cloud shadows marked the darkness stretching overhead and on down to meet the equal gloom of the ocean.
The wind was irregular.
The seas, long and oily-smooth, lifted Golden Girl without breaking on the light hulls, and left the barest traces of phosphorescence in  the twin wakes.
Every ten minutes or so a larger swell came at them out of the darkness.
These larger swells spilled the wind from the running genoa for a moment so that the big, light foresail snapped full again, the stays humming under the suddenly renewed tension.
Trent could sense the approach of these larger swells.
He didn't know how — perhaps a different feel to the tiller or in the way the bows felt at the sea.
It was a faculty common to all good sailors, the essential extra that enabled them to meet the seas whatever the conditions so that their craft ran straight rather than in the long zig-zags of the helmsman imprisoned by the compass and only reacting to the swing of its needle.
Trent hardly looked at the compass.
It was there as confirmation of the course he sailed rather than as an ever-present guide, as were the slowly changing figures on the Loran's small screen on the bulkhead beside the companionway.
He had no need to check the chart.
Before raising the anchor, he had punched the rendezvous into the Loran's computer; now the radio navigation system gave Golden Girl 's position in relation to the rendezvous to within a hundred metres.
It was easy sailing but unpleasant, the threat always there in the darkness and in the thick feel of the night air.
This despite the meteorological report and the barometer steady at 29.9.
Pedro Gomez had sensed Trent's unease prior to their sailing.
‘You can feel it?’
‘What?’
Trent had asked, still hopeful of subterfuge.
‘The hurricane,’ the Latino had stated flatly.
‘You haven't wanted to look at the barometer in the last four
Trent had shrugged and the gunman had grinned at him, teeth flashing in the light from the saloon companionway: ‘I like you, Trent.
Not that it makes any difference.’
‘Not that it makes any difference,’ Trent had agreed.
Half an hour prior to Trent's calculated sailing time, Louis had come on deck.
‘Señor Capitano, you have a light rope?’
‘How light?’
‘Light enough for you to wear.’
The eyelids lifted.
Cold eyes.
‘How sad it would be for us to lose you to the sea, Señor Capitano.’
So now Trent wore a fifty-foot leash of rope round his neck.
Gomez had done the tying.
His slight smile and a shrug had told Trent that this, too, wasn't personal, just part of the job…
With the leashing Trent had lost his last hope of escape.
The fear was with him, still hidden, but unavoidable.
Three hours to live.
Three hours in which to think of all that he had missed.
Love.
Always love.
The fantasy of living with a woman in a state of openness and trust.
To have no secrets, no abnormal fears, no hidden agenda.
To be like other people: gardening at the weekend, scent of freshly-mown grass, children playing on the lawn; wife in a cotton dress, long-legged, her smile sharing with him their private memories, future secured.
Even the possibility of this birthright had been stolen from him, though not by these Latinos.
Colonel Smith had been the thief, with Trent's habit of loyalty as the accomplice; the Latinos were merely the instruments, Trent thought as he looked across at the thick shape of Pedro Gomez seated on the windward side of the cockpit.
Through the three days of their charter, Gomez was the only one of the four Latinos with whom Trent had formed the slightest relationship.
He even found himself liking the gunman in an abstract way, despite Gomez's future role as his executioner.
His liking for the man made him uncomfortably aware of the similarity in their jobs.
Both of them were professionals, the only difference being that Trent was on the side of the law.
A heavy swell came at them out of the thick darkness.
Trent met it with a slight movement of the tiller bar, and  the big catamaran lifted smoothly.
The sea slithered along the hulls with the sound of tearing paper as the yacht heeled to the slope of the wave, wind spilling for a moment, slap of canvas.
A quick glance at the Loran indicator.
One mile to the rendezvous.
Two hours and fifty minutes to live.
‘You are married, Gomez?’
‘Si, Señor .’
The gunman laughed contentedly.
‘Three boys, three girls.
One boy will be a lawyer, one will be an accountant, one will be a policeman…’
So much for female emancipation, Trent thought.
‘You've got everything covered.’
Again Gomez laughed softly.
‘The doctor remains to be born.’
‘And obedient millionaires as husbands for your daughters.’
‘But naturally…’
‘Remember,’ Trent warned, ‘God is on our side.
Unfortunately he believes that we improve with punishment.’
The fat man grinned, pistol held loosely in his lap.
‘A depressing philosophy, Señor Capitano.’
‘Don't doubt it,’ Trent said.
Two hours and forty five minutes to live…
The throaty rumble of twin diesel motors muttered at them out of the darkness.
For a moment Trent allowed himself to believe in rescue.
But there were no lights on the vessel.
Up in the bows, one of the bureaucrats flashed a torch twice, waited five seconds and repeated the signal.
A blue light above a green flashed in answer.
‘Take the helm,’ Trent told Gomez.
‘Hold her steady while I drop the genoa.’
Careful not to hook his leash, Trent made his way forward.
Waving the bureaucrat clear, he dropped the big foresail, furling and stowing it into its sailbag.
The vessel was in sight now.
White-hulled, she was a sleek ninety-foot Baglietto motor yacht.
Two million dollars of Italy's finest craftsmanship.
A thousand horsepower in each engine, she'd make thirty knots in calm water, Campari with soda sipped in the shade of the aluminium awning on the afterdeck.
Nothing but the best for the murderous pigs of the cocaine trade, Trent thought, anger and fear sour in his throat.
Drug barons, the newspapers called them, giving the pigs a glamour in which to revel.
But the yacht would be a pounding hell if caught out in a rough sea.
The skipper would be anxious to get the transfer over quickly, Trent knew as he made his way aft to the cockpit.
Once unladen, the Baglietto had the power and speed to out-race the coming storm.
Easing Golden Girl up under mainsail, Trent watched the motor yacht roll gently in the swell.
He was faced by a problem in seamanship.
Though it wasn't a difficult test, it was sufficient to distract him temporarily from the fear.
There were men on the afterdeck now.
Two of them wore white uniform.
The others were merely dark shapes.
Louis had come up from the saloon.
He stood leaning against the bulkhead, hands resting on the cabin top.
A calculating machine, Trent thought.
Louis,El Jefe , the Chief…
Trent's loathing for the man was suddenly unbearable.
Unable to look at him, he turned to Gomez: ‘I don't want the ship rolling on us.
They'll have a stern ladder.
We'll come stern-on and get a line on board.
Load from the ladder.’
The gunman, nodding his understanding, called orders to the two bureaucrats now both in the bows.
Trent pinched Golden Girl a few degrees into the wind as the motor yacht rose to a swell which ran down her side in a flowing cascade of phosphorescence.
Her stern rose with the sea, then dipped as the swell passed.
Now it was Golden Girl 's turn to be lifted.
Her bows rose level with the Baglietto's afterdeck.
‘Throw,’ Trent yelled.
He saw one of the sailors catch the heaving line.
Thrusting the helm hard over, he shot clear of the motor yacht's wind-shadow.
A flick of the  main sheet freed it from the cam cleat.
‘Head down,’ he warned Gomez as the boom swung.
Then he was on to the cabin top and releasing the main halyard.
The sail came down on the run.
Trent gathered it and wrapped it with ties to the boom before going forward to raise the storm jib.
Broadside to the wind,Golden Girl was already drifting clear of the heavier motor yacht.
‘Haul her in,’ Trent ordered the bureaucrats.
‘Slowly,’ he warned and backed the tiny storm jib, making the sheet fast so that the breeze would hold them clear of the Baglietto's stern.
There was a part of his mind filled almost to sickness with self-mockery, a bitter mockery grown out of the fear that was back with him now, mockery for the excellence of his seamanship.
Two hours and thirty minutes of life left, why care what happened to Golden Girl?
But he did care.
And he cared that the sailors on the Baglietto should respect his ability.
The first specks of light rain fell on Trent's face as he looked up to see the motor yacht's captain studying him from over the brilliantly-varnished taffrail.
Gold braid glowed on his peaked hat and epaulettes.
The man was sixty years old, Trent judged, and no different to look at than any other skipper to the supra-wealthy — a tried and tested retainer on sixty thousand dollars a year, pension fund and the finest medical insurance.
But this captain's bosses were different and that made the captain different.
Pigs had piglets, Trent thought and called up, ‘What do you make of the weather?’
‘Barometer is steady,’ was the reply.
‘Nothing on the radio.’
And may you remain confident and get yourself drowned, Trent thought.
A sailor stood beside the captain, behind them a dozen men in jungle fatigues and black berets.
Jungle boots were looped round their necks and they carried weapons.
Kalashnikovs Trent presumed.
It was always Kalashnikovs.
‘We'll take six of the men first as handlers, then the cargo, he called.
‘Let's get things moving.’
The men came down the stern ladder.
Short, stocky mestizos , there was no pretence or possibility of disguise with these men as there was with his charter party.
Killers, all of them, vicious hoodlums from the slums of Medellin, the cocaine trade's terrorists, bombers of bus stations, murderers of anyone who criticised their masters' rights to rule as self-appointed kings of Colombia.
And Trent had been correct as to the Kalashnikovs — one more failure for British exports.
Violence was a daily part of their lives, and the men paid Trent's leash as little attention as they would have spared for the commonplace of a bleeding corpse sprawled in the gutter back home.
Leaving two of the men in the bows to receive the cargo, he positioned two more along the windward side deck.
Then helped by the last two, he unlashed and lifted the inflatable dinghy overboard from the cabin top, making it fast fore and aft.
Back in the bows, he called up, ‘Lower away,’ and watched a metal ammunition box swing down.
‘Keep it off the deck,’ he ordered.
From behind him, Louis said, ‘There are three sizes of boxes, Señor Capitano.
Six of the small ones in the saloon and two each of the long boxes.’
Trent hadn't heard Louis come forrard.
The sound of the Latino's voice, cold and quiet, brought back the fear that he had forgotten for a moment.
Turning to face Louis, he said, ‘I warned you.
The cargo goes in the Zodiac or we'll be carrying too much weight.’
Louis, without any expression, said, ‘Put three men in the Zodiac.’
His own fear clammying his T-shirt, Trent imagined the long terror the men would suffer, men with no experience  of the sea set adrift in the pitch dark and drizzle with the swell building and the rising thunder of surf breaking on the reef ahead.
But with Louis discussion was alien territory and deadly dangerous: ‘They're your men.
I'll give them a torch.’
Louis unhooded his eyes.
A venomous snake's eyes.
His voice was soft as the hiss of a snake.
‘They have no need of a torch, Señor Capitano.’
In case, panicked, they should wave the beam.
‘As you say,’ Trent said and turned back to organise the loading.
Ammunition for the Kalashnikovs and Beretta automatics, grenades, half a dozen hand-held rocket launchers and their missiles.
Next came the men's leader, Mario.
He was short, slim, and light on his feet.
His eyes were small and wide-set, bright like a ferret's.
A knife scar showed pale on his left cheek.
He spoke with a slight lisp and greeted Louis with respect but without subservience.
As with his men, Belpan Defence Force shoulder flashes were sewn to his fatigues.
The others followed, all of the same murderous breed, twenty killers to be let loose on the tiny defenceless country which Trent had learnt to love for its simplicity and innocence as much as for the variety of its natural beauty.
Three men to the Zodiac, two forward in each forecabin, four in the twin stern cabins, five in the saloon.
He looked up to see the last of them swing a booted foot over the Baglietto's taffrail.
‘Hold it right there,’ Trent yelled.
The man peered down in mock confusion.
‘Someone talking to me?’
‘I'm talking to you.
Get those boots off.’
The man giggled, high-pitched.
‘Hey man, there a talking Gringo dog on a leash.
You believe that?’ he asked of his compatriots in film-world Hispanic-American, deliberately mocking.
He swung his other leg over.
Sitting up on the rail, he spat down at Trent, then tilted his head back and  yapped like a Pekinese.
‘Watch your backside, Gringo, back home we eat dog for dinner.’
He jumped, boots striking the deck.
As he landed, he skewered his heels deliberately into the pale teak.
Two black streaks, shiny under the light rain falling steadily now, marked the wood.
The man giggled.
He was smaller than the others.
Broad, high cheekbones and a mahogany skin underlined his Indian blood.
He spat at Trent again and again giggled, black eyes crazed; ‘Good dog, Gringo, you wanna wag your tail for Miguelito?’
Trent's self-control had been exhausted in holding down his fear.
Blind rage took him.
He hit hard.
The man ducked, weaving to his left so that Trent's fist caught him high on the right cheek.
He fell backwards, already rolling as he struck the trampoline between the hulls.
Trent came after him, right foot driving at his crotch but hitting his thigh as he rolled again.
The man was up like a cat, crouching, legs apart, the pale lights of the motor yacht shimmering on the knife in his hand, spittle foaming at the corners of his mouth, mad eyes.
Hands grabbed Trent from behind, pinning his arms to his sides.
The man grinned, all teeth, and charged at Trent fast, the knife driving at his belly.
Then came Louis' voice, cold as dry ice, utterly controlled, utterly vicious: ‘Drop it.’
The man stopped in mid-strike as if a steel door had been slammed in his face.
His fingers opened, the knife bounced on the trampoline webbing and fell through into the sea.
But his eyes remained on Trent, insane with hate.
He spat frothy phlegm.
‘I keel you, Gringo.’
It was a promise as sure as a Lloyd's Insurance policy.
‘Wait, Gringo.
Wait.
I keel you.
I, Miguelito…’
Trent shook himself free of the hands that held him and turned his back on the man.
The rage remained in him.
His hands shook with it.
No fear left now.
‘Get that pig's boots off,’ he told Louis.
‘Get his boots off and get him below or I'll sail the lot of you straight into the reef.’
Louis dabbed his nose into his handkerchief.
He must have a suitcase of handkerchiefs, Trent thought as he met the Latino's cold eyes studying him over the crisp white linen barricade.
‘With the rope round your neck, you would die slowly, Señor Capitano.’
And while there was life there was hope.
Except that Trent no longer had any hope.
Two hours and twenty minutes to live…
Casting off the Zodiac, he led the laden inflatable aft, making the bow line fast to Golden Girl 's stern anchor cleat.
The three men assigned to the inflatable waited in the cockpit.
They watched him with unconcealed anxiety, wet already with the light rain.
Soon they would be sea-wet and sea-sick.
Trent considered showing one of them how to keep the bows of the Zodiac to the wind in case he had to cast them off but Louis was beside him.
‘To delay us would be dangerous, Señor Capitano.’
Trent dug lifejackets out of the portside cockpit locker.
While the men put them on, he led the fishing-line down from his marlin rod lashed to the after port stay.
He made the line fast to the Zodiac's bow cleat and set the drag brake on the reel at two hundred kilos.
‘Keep still, don't panic, and you'll be all right,’ Trent told the three men as he handed them into the boat.
With Louis watching, they nodded in dumb misery.
‘We get hit by a squall, things will get busy,’ he warned Louis and the hit squad's leader, Mario.
‘The fewer men on deck, the better.
They'll be in the way.’
He had already planned the voyage in his head.
‘Gomez I can use, he's learned a little— and one man at the mast.’
To Mario, he said, ‘One of your men who is quick on his feet and who understands ropes.’
While Louis ducked into the saloon, Trent made his way forward.
He selected the number two jib, clipping the spring shackles to the forestay.
Even in the light breeze a bigger  sail would have made towing the Zodiac dangerously uncontrollable.
One of the soldiers had come up on to the cabin top.
‘You know ropes?’
Trent asked.
The man shrugged.
‘Soy vaquero, Señor .’
A cowboy…
‘Then watch,’ Trent ordered.
Dropping the storm jib, he raised the number two.
‘Cast off,’ he called up to the Baglietto's crewman.
Quickly coiling the bow line, he raised the main, then back to the cockpit.
Sheets in, he bore away from the motor yacht.
The crewman waved, seaman to seaman, and Trent raised a hand in farewell.
Two hours to live…
The jerk of the Zodiac's tow rope would have slewed Golden Girl broadside to the wind but Trent was ready with the jib sheet, hauling in hard to balance wind with tow.
Once the Zodiac was in motion he was able to ease out the sheet.
The big cat ran smoothly though sluggishly.
‘Hold her steady,’ he told Gomez and made his way on to the cabin top.
He showed the vaquero the main and jib halyards.
‘I yell, you drop the sails,’ Trent told him.
‘Get the sails down fast and gathered on to the deck.’
Though clearly unhappy at the responsibility, the vaquero nodded his understanding.
The drag of the loaded inflatable had slowed the catamaran so that they were making a bare five knots.
The swell had built steadily over the past half-hour.
Ahead of them, Trent could hear the surf smashing on the reef, heavy now and threatening.
The rain fell steadily.
The wind remained light but the gusts were stronger and more frequent.
Ten minutes to the gap in the reef, three-quarters of an hour to the mainland, twenty minutes upriver to the disembarkation point…
There was a tension in the air, as if they were sailing within a millimetre-thin glass bowl that was about to shatter.
At the moment of its shattering hell would implode on them from all directions.
Gomez felt it.
He sat hunched by the stern cleat, knife ready to cut the Zodiac free.
He had smoked one cigarette after the other, holding them cupped in his palm to protect them from the rain.
Every half-minute or so, he peered over at the Loran navigation indicator — as if looking at it would make the numbers showing their position change more rapidly — then glanced up at the sky as if there was something to be divined in the matted darkness that could warn him of approaching doom.
‘It is coming?’ he asked for the fifth time since they had broken away from the Baglietto.
‘Not yet,’ Trent said.
‘Maybe a couple of hours.
Maybe longer.
First there'll be squalls.’
And then one hit them, racing out of the darkness.
The sound of it was buried by the thunder of the surf ahead and the white spume line was on them without warning.
As the wind struck the sails, Trent yelled, ‘Cut,’ and saw Gomez's knife flash as the big cat leaped forward, sails taut as an overheated drumskin, stays screaming with the power of it.
Then Gomez was on his feet; whether from fear or to do something, Trent didn't know.
The leap of the big catamaran unbalanced the gunman.
He stumbled, arms flung wide.
The fishing-line caught round his legs.
The weight of the Zodiac plucked him out of the cockpit like a pip out of a ripe olive and he screamed with the terror of drowning as he struck the water.
‘Drop the sails!’
Trent yelled at the vaquero by the mast and slammed the helm hard over to bring Golden Girl into the wind.
He jerked both sheets loose from their cam cleats and hit the sea in a flat dive.
Ten strokes and he had Gomez by the back of the shirt.
He had forgotten the leash.
He thought the jerk would tear his head from his shoulders.
He managed to get one hand on the leash, pulling with all  his strength, his other locked in Gomez's shirt.
The sea flooded his mouth and eyes, blinding and choking him, and the gunman's flailing arms threatened to knock him unconscious.
‘Stop panicking!’ he yelled.
A swell lifted him and he saw men in the cockpit.
The rope round his neck went slack.
Gasping air into his lungs, he dived down, groping for the fishing-line looped and re-looped round Gomez's legs.
He caught the line the Zodiac side of the gunman, wrapped it round his right wrist and kicked hard for the surface.
Water filled his mouth as he fought for air.
Salt seared his lungs and then the panicked Gomez flung his arms round Trent's neck, choking him and threatening to drag him back down.
Trent had no option.
He brought his knee up hard into Gomez's stomach, driving the wind out of him.
As the gunman jack-knifed, Trent hit him on the point of the jaw.
‘Sorry,’ he said, although Gomez was barely conscious.
Letting Gomez loose, Trent heaved a loop of his neck rope in and tied it to the fishing-line, leaving enough slack so that the strain was off Gomez's legs.
He grabbed him, flipping him over on to his back so that the gunman's mouth and nostrils were clear of the sea.
Then, ducking his head under, he tried to free Gomez's legs but the line was in and out of them like a cat's cradle.
Trent surfaced and yelled at the men in the cockpit to swim a lifejacket out to him.
None of them seemed anxious to comply and Trent doubted his strength would last long enough to haul Gomez against the weight of the Zodiac.
The roar of the surf was closer.
For a moment Trent thought of letting the whole damn lot of them go up on the reef.
He could cut himself free on the coral.
But he knew that it was a fantasy.
The power of the swells breaking now would rip him to pieces in seconds.
Better to live in hope — and better to be shot cleanly through the head than be smashed by the surf and stripped of his flesh by the knife-sharp coral.
He shouted at the men in the cockpit to make fast the rope that led to his neck.
Floating Gomez up on to his shoulders, he held him there with his left hand while pulling steadily with his right.
One-handed, and with both Gomez's weight and the weight of the laden Zodiac to drag, his progress was desperately slow.
The reef was now less than a quarter of a mile away.
As each swell lifted him, he could see the wall of foam ever closer.
A score more swells would do it…
Trent imagined Golden Girl picked up by the surf and flung tumbling and splintering into fragments.
Bodies tossed, men screaming.
The strain on his right arm was almost unbearable.
He no longer had the strength to yell instructions to the men on the catamaran.
And he had swallowed so much sea water he wanted to vomit.
A part of himself longed to surrender, but he was close now, and hands reached for him.
A swell swept him forward, and one of the uniformed terrorists caught his wrist.
He gasped at the men to grab Gomez.
Then he was into the cockpit.
The vaquero was still by the mast.
‘Get the sails up,’ Trent managed — no time to get his breath back with the reef now a bare two hundred yards on their beam.
‘The big one first.’
The wind caught the sail.
Trent sheeted it in and, as the sail drew, put the helm over to circle back towards the Zodiac.
‘Someone pull in on the fishing-line,’ he ordered.
‘Not hard or you'll break it.
All I need is to see the direction.
As the slack came in, he got one of the uniformed men to cut the line away from Gomez's legs and retie it to the line on the rod.
‘Keep reeling in,’ he told the man.
‘The rest of you get back below.’
Only then did he see the thin figure of Louis leaning against the saloon bulkhead.
Trent had forgotten the Latino.
The dark shapes of Mario's men ducked one by one  into the saloon leaving only the man on the rod, the mastman, and Gomez.
Louis put a hand up to the boom to steady himself and crossed the cockpit to where Gomez lay on the cockpit sole like a beached grouper.
Sea water leaked from his mouth, his breath gasped in jerky spasms.
Louis looked down at him.
‘We will be late, Señor Capitano.’
‘We're alive,’ Trent said.
Louis kicked Gomez in the belly and the gunman vomited.
‘Time is important, Señor Capitano.’
Trent could no longer contain his loathing for the Latino.
‘And you're a psychopath,’ he said.
‘Someone should have shut you in a hospital for the criminally insane and thrown away the key.’
The ever-waiting white handkerchief appeared.
Louis sniffed into it, dabbing the end of his nose as precisely as a dentist drying a cavity.
He tucked the handkerchief back into his sleeve.
‘When you have a rope round your neck, Señor Capitano, it is a mistake to insult the holder of the rope,’ he counselled without apparent emotion.
‘Miguelito,’ he called down into the saloon: ‘Please sit with the Señor Capitano…’
With the wind drifting the laden Zodiac, Trent doubted his ability to pick the tow up before the men were on the reef.
He could imagine them, lifejackets on, faces strained with a terror compounded by their helplessness.
All their concentration would be on the great white wall of crashing surf ahead.
It was too dark to see the line, and Trent called to the man on the rod to keep it pointing at the Zodiac.
He had set the brake on the reel at two hundred kilos, leaving a hundred as insurance against the line parting.
Two hundred kilos of drag was enough to slow the drift of the Zodiac but nowhere near sufficient to haul the boat in to the catamaran.
The line screamed out as Trent beat to windward off the reef.
‘I'm going about,’ he called to the vaquero .
‘Watch the small sail.
If it catches, free it.’
‘Si, Señor ,’ came back the answer.
The man on the rod would be unable to reel in fast enough as they ran down on the Zodiac.
‘Drop the rod and pull in by hand,’ Trent told him.
‘Fast but not hard or you'll snap the line.
Get up in the bows.
Shout the direction.’
Ahead of them the reef roared like a lion waiting to be fed.
Four hundred yards, three hundred, two hundred, one hundred…
Trent knew that the Zodiac was gone, the Zodiac and the three men.
Then the rod-man screamed, arm pointing straight ahead at the surf.
Trent shouted with all his force that he was going about.
Thrusting the helm right over, he held the catamaran's bows directly into the wind and, looking aft, saw the madly waving arms of the terrified men outlined against the wall of white spray.
The Zodiac was within fifty yards of annihilation.
Thirty yards separated them from the catamaran.
Trent held the jib backed, sailing the cat stern on.
A man was beside him, heaving rope ready.
He had no time to see who the man was.
Ten yards now.
The rope dropped across the boat.
He saw one of the men begin to haul on it.
‘Make it fast,’ he yelled but the man was too scared to understand.
‘Tie it,’ Trent yelled again but without time to watch if the man obeyed his instructions.
He let the jib sheet loose and heaved in on the main.
The big cat started to swing on to the other tack but a swell caught her bow, slamming her back.
Fifty yards to the reef.
The thunder of it drowned his voice as he yelled at the rodman up in the bows to hold the jib clear of the stays.
The main filled and the big cat accelerated.
Twenty yards from the reef…
He hadn't the speed yet to be sure Golden Girl would come about.
Ten yards…
Now! he thought and slammed the helm over.
The cat shuddered as her bows bit into the swell.
Up she came, the swell lifting her and lifting her, sails flapping crazily.
Hold it, Trent warned himself.
One second, two seconds, three…
Then Golden Girl was through the wind.
Hard in on the sheets.
The sails filled.
He didn't bother with the Zodiac.
There was nothing he could do — it was saved or not.
He felt the tug of the tow rope.
Only then did he dare look back over his shoulder.
For a moment all he could see was the great wall of surf, dark at its roots like a dyed blonde.
Then he recognised the darker mass of the dinghy against the white foam.
The tow held steady, but the weight of it was forcing him further and further off the wind.
Another minute and he would be broadside to the swell.
‘Watch yourselves,’ he yelled, doubting if the men could hear.
‘Going about.’
Over went the helm.
Again the swell held the bows for an agonising moment.
Trent saw a dark figure grab the jib foot, forcing the sail hard back into the breeze.
The catamaran shook its bows against the swell, then she was through the wind and on to the other tack with the sails drawing sweetly.
But they had lost ten yards in the manoeuvre, and the Zodiac was almost back into the surf.
Trent glanced at the Loran.
The gap in the reef lay two hundred yards ahead on the port bow.
He needed more canvas, but he couldn't leave the helm.
He glanced down at Gomez, still sprawled on the cockpit sole.
No help there.
Beside him appeared the maniacal little knife-man, Miguelito, giggling like an over-excited schoolgirl at a birthday party.
Trent saw him stuff white powder into his nose.
The man snorted like a ploughhorse getting its breath after turning a long furrow.
The powder left a white rim below his nostrils.
‘Hey, little dog,’ he giggled, looking at Trent out of crazed eyes.
‘That baby beetch of a sail don' do you no good.’
What did he know about it?
Trent thought, the rage  beating adrenaline into his bloodstream as if forced by a foot-pump.
Miguelito knuckled the white rims into his nostrils, a mass of white teeth gleaming.
The high-pitched giggle drilled into Trent's brain as the crazy words came in the mestizo's B-film American: ‘Hey, leetle dog, you wan' help from Miguelito, jus' say the word.’
as if a homicidal maniac on cocaine could be of any help…
‘Man, Miguelito know every dam' theeng.
Better believe it!’
The mestizo was on his feet, jigging a little dance in the cockpit.
‘Where the sail, man?
Tell Miguelito, he do good.’
Suddenly the backing of the jib connected in Trent's mind.
However unbelievable, it had to have been the little mestizo .
‘Portside sail-locker.
Black bag with a white figure one painted on it.’
A swell lurched the catamaran a further metre towards the reef.
‘I'm going about,’ he told Miguelito but the little man had danced his way forward.
The next swell lifted Golden Girl , and using the down slope for extra speed, Trent swung the helm over, holding the jib sheet tight till the bow came through the wind.
The boom slammed over.
He sheeted both sails hard in and glanced back to see the Zodiac lift high on the edge of a breaking swell.
The tow rope sprang taut, plucking the dinghy clear as the swell broke, thundering forward on to the waiting coral.
Up in the bows the yellow mass of the number one genoa broke out of its bag.
Miguelito scurried down the side deck, leading the port genoa sheet aft to the sheet winch.
‘Hey, Miguelito do good, huh,’ he giggled, with a little prance of his feet before scurrying forrard for the starboard sheet, and yapped dog-like as he jumped back into the cockpit, sheet ready.
‘We haul the son a' beetch up that mast now, leetle dog.
You ready?’
‘Ready,’ Trent said and watched the mestizo vault one-handed  on to the cabin top for a quick word with the vaquero at the mast.
The yellow genoa sped up the forestay, Trent switching sheets as the jib came down.
The catamaran surged forward under the added power of the big sail.
The Zodiac swung behind it.
The gap in the reef showed as a dark stretch less than two hundred yards away on their port quarter.
At any moment another squall might strike.
Trent wiped the rain from his eyes as he tried to calculate speed and distance against the drift of the Zodiac.
He required a minimum of fifty yards for safety.
‘Going about,’ he shouted and watched in amazement the crazed proficiency of the little cocaine addict leaping back into the cockpit to winch the genoa sheet in.
‘Hey, leetle dog, you cut distance fine,’ the mestizo giggled, thumbnailing white powder into his nose.
‘You scare them like hell.’
‘Better scared than dead,’ Trent said.
‘Where did you learn to handle a boat?’
‘Miguelito sail with one gringo widow-lady, two months.
Then she put Miguelito in jail.
Bad time.’
He giggled.
‘Now El Jefe make Miguelito a present.
Yeah, leetle dog, you the present.’
He drew an imaginary knife across his throat.
‘One dead gringo…’
SIX
Trent had been correct in guessing their destination to be on the north fork of the Belpan River.
Once into the shelter of the mangrove-bound estuary, he had taken the men off the Zodiac, ordering them below after stacking the dinghy's cargo along Golden Girl 's side decks.
With the wind dead on their stern, he had changed the genoa for a much bigger and lighter cut.
Main boomed out to port, genoa to starboard, they ghosted up the smooth waters of the river like a giant white butterfly as the first grey touch of dawn lightened the sky.
Along the banks the dark green tangle of mangrove had given way to tall jungle.
The pale trunks of giant ramon trees rose out of the layered undergrowth of fan palms and creepers.
Cotton trees shaded the bank.
Cohune palms with nut pods that resembled huge wasp-nests stood sentry.
Frangipani grew wild and rampant up a grey cliff of limestone above the south bank.
The white star-flowers of wild coffee spattered the banks and the feathery ballerina skirts of kapok shimmered with raindrops.
Parrots should have been swooping, tree to tree, in search of breakfast; toucan, egret, cormorants, heron, trogons.
But nothing moved, no sound disturbed the silence: no kingfisher flash of bright blue low over the water, no dawn  fire-siren of cicadas.
All was heavy with foreboding, and the rain fell steadily.
Requiem for a monk, Trent thought as he watched the cocaine-addicted mestizo squatting on the cabin top.
For the past half-hour the little man had been giggling to himself as he stropped a Buck knife razor-sharp on the inside of his belt.
Trent had no doubt that Miguelito would kill him and enjoy doing so — revenge for whatever had happened to him in a US jail and for the gringo widow-woman having put him there.
Gomez had recovered and sat beside Trent in the cockpit, solemn-faced.
Hardly a word had passed between them but now the gunman looked up and said quietly, ‘There is nothing that I can do.’
Trent didn't bother to answer.
There wasn't an answer.
They were professionals, they knew the rules of the game.
But there remained an essential difference between them: their choice of masters.
Whatever the pressures, Gomez had been free to make his choice.
Good or evil…
These were considered old-fashioned terms in a morally rudderless society, Trent thought with more sadness than bitterness.
But they remained essential to him, perhaps because his life had so often been at stake.
He would have liked to have known what Louis planned, if only to know in whose cause Colonel Smith had sacrificed his life and how much information Smith had kept hidden.
Most of all Trent would have liked to know the power structure and the brains behind Louis.
Whatever it was that these men planned, Trent remained certain that it was too sophisticated to have been plotted by the murderers of Colombia's drug trade.
Murderers…
It was important to Trent that he held to that word; as it had been important to him never to use the term ‘Loyalist’ when speaking of or reporting on the Protestant terrorists  in Northern Ireland.
Accuracy of language was crucial when your life was at risk and each use of ‘Loyalist’, when applied to the Protestant equivalents of the IRA, had been to Trent, a Catholic himself by birth, an insult to the Catholic community of whom the vast majority were as opposed to the evils of terrorism as they were to the injustices of long-practised prejudice on which Irish terrorism bred.
Terrorism was an effect rather than a cause.
Trent had learnt this lesson well in his fight against it.
That this was true offered no excuse to the sick, evil, vicious minds that used it as a tool.
In his years of infiltrating terrorist groups Trent had been forced to listen to every form of philosophical self-justification.
Every word of it had been a lie and to this truth Trent remained as totally committed now, close to his own death, as he had been when plotting the downfall of the groups he had penetrated.
There had been moments during the past night when his fear had become almost uncontrollable.
Now, with the dawn breaking and his death so close, he found himself strangely sanguine — almost as if he were an abstract entity observing, from another place, the last chapter of his life.
Louis came up from the saloon.
The devil, Trent thought, and found himself smiling as he realised that continual fear had acted as a drug, lifting him free of reality in the same way that marathon runners broke through the pain barrier into an almost hallucinatory state of calm.
Louis examined Trent with less emotion than he would have given a sandwich.
He dabbed his nose into one more spotlessly fresh handkerchief, folding it carefully back into his shirt-sleeve.
‘When we round the next bend, bring your boat to the left bank, Señor Capitano.’
‘Pray God someone shoots you,’ Trent said.
Louis ignored him but Miguelito giggled happily, ‘Hey, you one brave leetle dog, Gringo.’
They rounded the bend to see a landing-stage of rough piling and a mud track that led to the main highway and  the bridge.
Two Belpan Defence Force Land-Rovers and an army truck waited by the dock.
The drivers had turned the vehicles back towards the highway to be ready to move the moment the men, weapons and ammunition were loaded.
It was this detail of organisation that made Trent fear for the Belpan Republic.
There was nothing he could do, no way of getting a message to Caspar at the US Embassy.
Easing the helm over, he slid Golden Girl into the bank.
The vaquero dropped the sails while Miguelito threw a line to one of the waiting drivers.
‘I could do with a cup of coffee,’ Trent said to Gomez.
But Louis was on deck and Gomez shrugged his apologies: ‘I must get the trucks loaded.
Also I must ask you —‘
‘Be my guest,’ Trent said and handed him the eight thousand dollars from his back pocket.
He watched Gomez organise the transfer of the cargo.
Gomez had earned his status through the calm weight of his personality as much as by his physical strength and the inevitable accuracy of his firepower.
In the eyes of Louis, his near-drowning had been an act of self-emasculation, a loss of face tumbling him down the social scale to a level little higher than a peon's.
Peons made sacrificial meat and the men smelt this on Gomez so that his command of them was tentative.
Such were the risks of the gunman's trade.
They were not risks that Mario cared to take.
The hit-squad's leader had kept below rather than find himself in confrontation with Louis or be seen by his men to be subservient to or afraid of the Latino leader.
Miguelito, on the other hand, had gained face the closer the men came to action — perhaps because he so obviously enjoyed killing, Trent thought as he watched Miguelito thumbnail more cocaine into his nostrils.
Killing was about to be these men's business.
Of that Trent was certain.
The mestizo looked up to see Trent watching him.
‘You  wan' coffee?
Sure, why not?
Firs' we tie your han's, leetle dog.’..
With Gomez watching, he bound Trent s wrists in front of him so that he could hold the coffee mug.
Mario followed the last of his uniformed men into the truck.
The bureaucrats were in one Land-Rover; the other waited for Louis and Gomez.
Miguelito had returned to his seat on the cabin top.
Though watched by Louis, Gomez held out his hand to Trent in an unspoken plea for absolution.
‘Thank you for my life, Señor.’
‘Be my guest.’
Trent, as an outside observer, watched himself shake the gunman's hand within his own bound palms.
He felt himself on the edge of hysterical laughter and fought to gain control.
‘Nothing personal,’ he said.
Then, because fomenting distrust between the two men was all he could do, ‘You get a chance, shoot him,’ he advised with a nod at Louis: ‘You don't, he'll kill you.’
He saw Louis' eyes flatten and felt the twitch of a nerve in Gomez's hands.
He had condemned one of the men to death — which one was for the future.
Gomez dropped over the rail.
Trent watched him walk very upright to the lead Land-Rover.
Louis sniffed into a handkerchief.
His cold gaze rested on Trent for a moment.
‘You have been most proficient, Señor Capitano.’
He looked up at the mestizo .
‘Dispose of him.’
‘Sure, I take him in the jungle,Jefe .’
The little man giggled in pleasurable anticipation and drew his knife as if across Trent's throat.
‘I leave his body, big cat eat him.’
Louis indicated his approval with a slight wave of his handkerchief.
‘When you're finished, join the roadblock at the bridge.’
With the vehicles gone, Miguelito swung down from the cabin top.
‘You wan' a las' cup coffee, leetle dog?’
‘Thanks,’ Trent said, to delay his death, if only by a few minutes.
The mestizo dug his thumb into his cocaine pouch and cursed at finding only a few grains on the nail.
‘Hey, we better go in the saloon, leetle dog.
Too much rain out here an' Miguelito got to cut himself a leetle coke.’
He made fast the rope round Trent's neck to the handhold beside the companionway leading down to the head in the port hull.
Trent sat on the saloon deck, holding his coffee mug cupped in his hands.
Miguelito sat at the saloon table.
He had taken a couple of square inches of rock cocaine from wherever he had hidden his supply and was chopping it with his knife on to Trent's shaving mirror.
He didn't seem in any hurry: because Louis was no longer there, Trent presumed, and because his cocaine habit demanded a goodly supply ready cut; preparing more would be difficult once he was out in the rain.
‘Hey, this Belpan one crazy place,’ Miguelito remarked, head cocked to one side as he glanced over at Trent.
‘They got a governmen' like they theenk this one real country excep' all they got is couple hun'red thousan' people.’
He sliced a quarter-inch off the block and went back to chopping it into fine powder.
‘Yeah, leetle dog.
Crazy.
And they got elections now so the politician' all over the damn place.
No bodyguards.
Nothing.
Man, they real crazy.
We goin' pick them like they ripe avocados.’
Looking up from the mirror, he winked at Trent, saliva dribbling.
‘Yeah, leetle dog — plop, plop, plop,’ he giggled, and aped dropping ripe avocados into a basket.
‘We goin' take these politician', leetle dog, an' we goin' put them in one beeg hole so they don' come back.
Then Señor Louis goin' run this leetle country like it his hacienda .
We goin' have planes landin' like flies goin' land on your body after Miguelito keel you.
Yeah,’ he said with satisfaction as he chopped another quarter-inch off the block.
‘We  get good and finish, ev'ry damn coke plane goin' fly via Belpan.
That one beeg mountain coke, leetle dog.’
‘That's a big operation for one man,’ Trent said.
Miguelito lifted his eyebrows in amazement at Trent's stupidity: ‘Hey, you think Louis the big Jefe ?
You one crazy gringo.
Louis, he what you say?
Groun' Operation; yeah, that the words.’
The mestizo pronounced them again and with care, proud of his command of the language.
‘Yeah, Groun' Operation…’
Thumbing cocaine into his nose, he giggled.
‘Louis one crazy tough man, but he nothin'.
We got bosses from all over, leetle dog.
We got bosses from Colombia.
We got Louis' Nicaraguanos.
We even got one gringo boss no one ever see.
He the brain, leetle dog.
One smart mother.’
So Trent had been correct.
But the information was useless to him.
He pictured Belpan's President as he had last seen him, barefoot and casting for bonefish from the end of the dock out at San Paul Key.
With no one to guard him, unless you counted his granddaughter…
The other ministers, spread through their constituencies, would be as easy.
But there was a piece missing from the scenario…
Trent put down his empty coffee mug.
‘You really believe that the US and the UN are going to allow you to get away with this?’
‘Belpan?’
Miguelito giggled happily.
‘You crazy, who you thin' geev a sheet?
We the Belpan army, man, we got the uniforms, right?’
But it wasn't that easy, not any more.
The end of the Cold War made the difference.
The days of distant alliances based on a promise to support either Capitalism or Communism were over.
The brain behind this operation had to know this.
‘You wan' a try a line o' coke, leetle dog?’ the mestizo offered with that cock of his head and a crazy grin.
‘One hundre' per cent.’
Trent ignored the offer.
‘Man, you don' know what good for you.’
He scraped the cut cocaine into his pouch and stood up.
He wore a pistol stuck in his belt and held his knife in his right hand.
‘We goin' take a leetle walk now, leetle dog.
You goin' give no trouble to Miguelito.
Then Miguelito cut your throat good so you don' feel nothin'.’
He ordered Trent back from the handhold on the companionway so that he was safely out of range while untying the rope.
Trent had a last look round the saloon.
‘Yeah, leetle dog, nice boat,’ Miguelito giggled.
‘Adios…’
He followed Trent over the rail on to the dock, prodding him with the tip of his knife: ‘We go jus' leetle way in the jungle, leetle dog.’
No path existed so that Trent had to force his way into a wall of vegetation.
A knife-point poked into his back every few seconds, so he knew that the mestizo was close behind him.
A clearing opened ahead, separated from Trent by a fan of palm fronds.
As he parted them, he heard the familiar snuffling as Miguelito fed cocaine into his nose.
Trent spun as he dropped, right leg kicking back.
His foot hit home, sinking deep into the little man's belly.
Miguelito buckled and Trent, as he hit the ground, kicked up hard with his left foot, catching him under the chin.
The mestizo fell to his knees, but he still held the knife.
Dropping Trent's neck rope, he scrabbled for the pistol in his belt.
Rolling and scrambling to his feet, Trent charged blindly across the clearing and into the undergrowth, holding up his bound hands to protect his eyes.
Sharp leaves and thorns cut and tore at his arms and ripped his cheeks.
Vines caught at his feet and at the rope round his neck.
He tripped and fell into thick bush.
Desperate with fear, he forced himself forward, crawling on knees and elbows under the low canopy.
He could hear Miguelito cursing.
Sweat blinded him.
Ahead of him a rivulet trickled towards the river.
He kicked his feet free of a vine and rolled into the water, the drag of the rope almost strangling him.
Heading downstream, he saw a pool in front of him, more liquid mud than water.
He plunged into it, and the mud closed over his head as he struggled for a footing.
The feel of it plugging his nostrils added to his panic.
Panic was the enemy.
He commanded himself to think.
His feet found bottom and he surfaced, hands up to smear the mud clear of his eyes.
Then he saw the snake.
It was three feet long, a greeny-brown ribbon with a yellow diamond on the throat.
Fer-de-lance.
Deadly…
Close behind him, the mestizo called, ‘Hey, Gringo, you a bad leetle dog.
Miguelito real angry!’
Trent turned his body slowly so that he could get his hands on the rope.
The snake raised its head, hissing in fear or anger, tongue darting.
‘Hey, Gringo, I can see you,’ Miguelito sang as if teasing a child in a game of hide and seek.
The snake hissed.
The mestizo giggled.
‘Miguelito goin' get you soon now, leetle dog.’
A mosquito landed on Trent's nose and bit him.
The mud on his lips tasted of rotting vegetation and the stench of it was thick in his nostrils.
He inched the rope in.
The snake struck, fangs deep in the rope.
Then it was gone, tail vanishing under the bushes through which he had crawled.
He heard the mestizo curse in fear as he saw the snake.
‘Hey, Gringo, maybe I leave you here so you die slowly.’
More crashing of feet through bush, then the snuffling of cocaine — sniff, sniff.
Then, as if talking to himself, ‘Yeah, Gringo, that what I do.
You die real slow in the jungle.
Son of a beetch.
Miguelito tell El Jefe you real dead meat.’
Trent suspected a trap.
He heard Miguelito pushing his way through the bush to his left.
Back to Golden Girl ?
Or would he join the men at the roadblock on the bridge?
The quantity of cocaine the man forced up his nose must affect  his judgment…but in what way?
Trent wondered.
Would he risk lying to Louis?
Trent had followed the rivulet down to the Belpan River, crawling the entire distance, squirming silently through the mud and rotting vegetation.
Belly flat in the water, he inched his bound hands forward and drew his face clear of the undergrowth so that he could look upriver while remaining camouflaged by the overhang of a wild coffee bush.
The rain had been falling now for more than four hours.
The river had risen by almost two feet and the current, which had been almost imperceptible on their approach to the dock, was beginning to form foam-lipped eddies along the near bank.
Trent had hoped to be able to observe Golden Girl but the rivulet had led him downstream and the yacht lay upriver beyond the bend.
Had Trent been Miguelito he would have lain in wait in the jungle by the catamaran.
With the highway under observation, the yacht offered Trent his only hope of escape and, with access to the radio, he would be able to warn Caspar and the Belpanese and call in Steve's heavy brigade.
But the mestizo was a gangster and his prime loyalty would be to himself.
Safer to lie rather than confess his failure?
Neck rope coiled round his waist, Trent slithered into the river like a crocodile.
Below the bend the water remained sufficiently shallow close to the bank for Trent to keep his footing.
As he forced his way against the current, the water deepened.
He tried to pull himself forward, branch to branch, but with his hands bound, he lost ground each time he grabbed for a fresh hold.
He had either to swim to the far bank or return to the undergrowth.
He pictured the topography.
The current had cut into a hillside on the upriver side of the bend so that he would be faced with a steep climb of some fifty feet.
To be silent on the upriver descent as he  approached the bridge would be impossible.
If he swam the river, he would have to make his way upstream well beyond the yacht and within sight of the bridge or be swept back down by the current.
But Louis had posted the roadblock to stop anyone with authority returning to Belpan City.
His men would be watching the road rather than the river, plucking politicians into their net — as Miguelito had boasted — easily as plucking ripe  advocados .
Trent pushed off from the bank, swimming with his bound hands in an adaptation of sidestroke that was clumsy and inefficient.
Once out of the shelter of the bank he found the wind had strengthened.
That, too, would make his escape more difficult.
On the other hand, once clear of the river mouth, he could sail a clear reach for Key Canaka.
He had to save the President from capture by Louis' men.
Like a jigsaw, piece by piece, the picture was becoming clear.
The President was the key.
Leader of his country even before its independence, the President was alone in being known outside Belpan.
Captured, he would be forced into giving credence to the coup.
If he remained at liberty, he could authorise the calling in of outside help — hence, as insurance, the coup leader's attempt to destroy the President s reputation by connecting him to the cocaine trade.
From the outside of the bend, he saw Golden Girl .
She lay as he had left her, moored fore and aft to the dock.
But now, with the rise in river level, the dock was almost awash and the bow line bar-taut.
Face lapped by the water, Trent pushed his way upstream.
The wind and the rain beating down on the river camouflaged his progress; he could see the bridge now and he waited, watching.
Louis' men had set their roadblock the far side of the bridge from Trent's observation point — upended ammunition boxes topped by poles cut from the jungle edge and a square white signboard on which Trent could see red letters made indecipherable by the angle of the board to  his line of vision.
The men wore rubber ponchos and had exchanged their black berets for jungle hats pulled well down against the rain so that he was unable to discern whether Miguelito was amongst their number.
He scooped mud on to his forehead and cheeks and kept close in under the dripping leaf canopy cloaking the bank.
Shallows forced him to his knees, his progress desperately slow.
The driver of a Toyota LandCruiser changed gear and drove slowly across the bridge to halt at the roadblock.
Two of the men turned their backs to the wind and driving rain as they checked the driver's papers.
Seven in the morning.
Sunday morning…
Only three roads led into Belpan City and Louis would have erected roadblocks on them all.
Had they chosen a weekday for the coup, there would have been heavy traffic at this hour and news of the roadblocks would have spread quickly throughout the country, perhaps warning one of the ministers before he could be captured…one more example of exemplary planning.
Now upstream from Golden Girl , Trent looked back.
Nothing moved on the bank nor on the catamaran.
But if Miguelito was waiting, he would be well hidden.
Trent counted the seconds as he watched a dead branch clear the bridge and float down towards the craft.
Say four minutes to recross the river, two hundred yards of drift.
For safety he would have to strike out for the far bank from a point less than fifty yards below the bridge and the current was gaining strength.
One of the men at the roadblock, bored, dropped a stick into the water and watched it float under the span.
A second man joined him.
They found fresh sticks.
Though he couldn't hear them, Trent knew that they were setting up a race.
Sure enough, they dropped their sticks at the same moment and ran across to the downriver side of the bridge to watch for the winner.
A third man joined them as they sought new sticks.
Trent  waited until they made for the upriver side, then charged forward uncaring.
He froze as they dropped their sticks and ran back.
He could see their faces, and Miguelito wasn't one of them.
So it went on, Trent gaining ten yards each time and knowing that, while they continued racing, he had no chance of recrossing the river unseen.
Freeze and rush, freeze and rush.
Half an hour, one hour…
Trent reached the point which he had marked but now the current was that much stronger and he needed to be at the bridge.
No sign of Miguelito…
A Land-Rover Discovery followed an American Ford pick-up across the bridge.
Trent took his chance, running in a low crouch for the protection of the span.
Ten yards to go and he heard the driver of the Discovery accelerate away from the roadblock.
Up on the bridge someone shouted.
Trent dived belly flat into the protection of a bush sprouting from beside the concrete piling.
Rolling on to his back, he lay still as a corpse with only his face breaking the surface.
He heard two men arguing, but with water lapping in his ears he couldn't make out the words.
The men's footfalls were muted — jungle boots on concrete.
The voices came to a halt directly above him.
More argument.
Then he heard the breaking of branches and a curse as one of the men leaped from the parapet on to the top of the bank, thirty feet above him.
Trent held his breath, face under the muddy surface of the river.
He gritted his teeth against the demand of his lungs to burst.
Ten seconds, twenty, thirty…
Air escaped into his mouth.
He could feel his cheeks bulging like hot balloons.
He surfaced his nostrils, leaking the air out.
Feet slithered in the mud halfway down the bank.
A stone rolled free and splashed into the water no more than a yard from Trent's feet.
Silence.
Then, hardly above a whisper, ‘Hey, you there, leetle  dog?’
A further slide of feet scrabbling for a foothold accompanied by a muffled giggle: ‘Miguelito theenk he see you.’
That the mestizo kept his voice down was proof to Trent that the little man, lying, had reported him dead.
And Miguelito couldn't see him from the bank.
Not yet.
To see under the bridge, the mestizo would have to come right down into the water.
Loosened by the rain, a chunk of the bank broke under the little man's weight, and the caked earth tumbled into the river.
To Trent the splash was loud as a bomb.
The mestizo lost his footing, and Trent heard him slide, swearing.
Water fountained over the bush under which he lay hidden as Miguelito hit the surface.
Trent knew he was finished; there was no way the mestizo could miss him now.
All the little man had to do was stand up and take one pace forward, parting the branches.
He heard the man up on the bridge laughing.
Miguelito shouted up a string of gutter-Spanish abuse.
Then he said, ‘Sheet,’ softly, and Trent, forced to watch from between the leaves, saw him shake the water out of his pistol.
He opened his jungle jacket and dried the magazine on the front of his sweatshirt.
‘What are you doing down there?
Fishing?’ the man on the bridge called down.
Miguelito yelled up that the man should do something unmentionable to himself.
He slapped the magazine into his pistol-butt and took a step forward, his jungle boots stirring the mud inches from Trent's feet.
Pistol in hand, he parted the leaves.
Klaxons sounded from up the road.
The little man looked up.
More klaxons beating a tattoo.
‘Hey, man, what the sheet goin' on?’
‘Looks like a procession,’ the man on the bridge yelled down.
‘Posters of some cabrón with a big moustache.
Must be a politico…’
Miguelito swore and released the branches.
‘Man, nothing here.
I'm comin' up.’
‘Yeah, hurry.
And don't drown yourself.’
Klaxons beeped in rhythmic unison and a man's voice chanted over a megaphone the initials of the President's Party and the name of Belpan's Minister of Tourism and Transport: ‘VOTE PP.
VOTE GEORGE VICENTE BROWN.’
‘George Vicente Brown goin' be one dead son of a beetch,’ Miguelito swore as he struggled up the bank.
Trent was shaking.
He tried to breathe slowly, calming himself as he waited.
The electioneering procession was on the bridge, everyone shouting, klaxons blaring, and the PP chant repeated like a scratched disc.
There had to be fifty trucks and cars.
Trent slid out from under the bush and took a deep breath.
Hands out like a battering ram, he kicked underwater for the far bank, feeling the grab of the current.
Twice he surfaced, filled his lungs, dived.
Then he could see the catamaran.
He looked back for a moment at the Minister's procession stalled at the roadblock.
There was nothing he could do to save George Vicente Brown.
Diving again, he kicked hard.
By the time he surfaced, the current had swept him clear.
The release from fear was almost unbearable.
He wanted to roll on to his back and float, no further effort.
He goaded himself by picturing the ageing President, grey-haired and frail.
He had to reach Key Canaka before Louis' men got there.
The rain beat down and the wind was picking up.
SEVEN
The river current swept Trent down between Golden Girl 's twin hulls.
Grabbing at the Zodiac's tow line, he held himself against the river for a moment, getting his breath back.
Then he hauled himself up over the Zodiac's port tube and rolled on to the floor slats.
He had forgotten the rope wrapped round his waist.
Falling on it nearly winded him.
He longed for rest but knew that he had to keep moving, and hauling on the line, he got his hands on to the taffrail and vaulted into the cockpit.
He went directly to the radio above the navigation table.
Someone had ripped out the cables — more proof of attention to detail.
Dropping down into the galley for a carving knife, he cut the rope loose from his neck.
Freeing his hands was more difficult.
He wedged the knife upright in the cutlery drawer while jamming it shut with one knee.
The knife slipped twice, cutting into his wrists, but he managed.
Blood dripping, he raced back on deck and leaped ashore.
The dock was already a foot under water.
He untied the stern line, kneeling to lead it back round a pile to the cockpit.
Then he let go the bow line, jumped on board, and ran aft to the cockpit.
With the stern held, the current swept Golden Girl 's bows clear of the dock.
Trent waited until the catamaran was pointing downriver, then he let go the  stern line, pulling it in and coiling it down.
He kept to the inside of the bends where the current was fastest and more powerful than the onshore wind.
Sails would have been a hindrance.
Where the river straightened, he took his chance to check the barometer.
Pressure had dropped to 29.5, one thousand millibars.
Briefly he considered making for Belpan City and Caspar at the US Embassy but there was no certainty of the DEA Agent being there, and Louis would have men covering the city docks in case any of the Government returned from electioneering out on the Keys — that much was certain.
As for reaching a telephone, given the meticulous organisation behind the coup, Trent was sure that the telephone exchange would be in Louis' hands and out of order, particularly for foreign calls, which put calling Steve in Washington out of the question.
Trent didn't consider Colonel Smith.
It had to be Key Canaka.
Whoever held the President held the hole card…
He heaved the Zodiac on board as the current swept Golden Girl round the final bend before the open sea.
As he raised his binoculars to scan the coast, the wind struck him in the face.
Already it had whipped the shallow water inside the reef into short seas, white-capped and capable of stopping the big cat in its tracks if he had tried sailing for the far point and Belpan City.
Six miles on a reach to Key Canaka — and he was single-handed.
Whatever the urgency, setting more than the number three jib and the mainsail would have been stupid.
He raised the main, lashing the tiller bar, and ran forward to set the jib.
The power in the sails lifted the yacht so that she left two long trails of dark blue in the spray.
For a moment Trent gave way to the thrill of speed and power.
But he had things to do.
With bungees holding the tiller arm, he heaved the heavy BMW inboard on the davits and manhandled it across the cockpit and into the saloon, lashing it to the mast support.
Next he unscrewed a foot-square drainage plate in the saloon deck.
Hurling the cushions aside, he lifted the settee locker lid clear.
Pressing hard on the top inch of the panel at the back of the locker, he pushed sideways.
The panel dropped.
Behind it, held by padded spring clips, lay two 12-gauge single barrel Greener pump-action shotguns in their waterproof covers, eight cartridges to the magazine.
Cartridge boxes were stacked in two layers.
A cartridge belt and two bandoleers lay on top.
Both belt and bandoleers were ready-laden with red Ely cartridges loaded with buckshot; one in the belly would blow a man apart.
Trent slung a bandoleer over his shoulder and grabbed both guns and two boxes of cartridges.
Back in the cockpit, he checked the course, then fed cartridges into the magazine of one gun.
He pumped a shot into the breech and laid the gun on the portside cockpit settee, covering it with his shirt weighted down against the wind with the coiled stern line.
Looking aft, he spotted a grey smudge a mile out from Belpan City.
Through his binoculars he made out Belpan's one patrol boat with a great vee of spray at its bows.
Baccy!
Clearing the gap in the reef, the patrol boat drove into a wave and leapt half out of the water like a giant grey killer whale.
Trent almost laughed with relief as he imagined the six-foot-four Customs officer at the wheel, empty pipe jammed between his teeth.
Baccy was one man neither hurricane nor Louis would be able to stop.
He loaded the second Greener.
Less than two miles to Key Canaka — get the President safe on board the patrol boat and contact the US Embassy by radio.
He glanced over at the windspeed indicator.
Force four and strengthening and Golden Girl was flying.
Fourteen knots over the ground.
Single-handed, and sailing faster than thirty millions of fully-crewed Twelve Metre competing for the America's Cup.
But then he wasn't carrying tons of lead on a keel that had to be dragged through the water.
Nor did he need  to check the chart.
Golden Girl drew twenty-two inches.
He'd sailed these waters for six months and knew every reef and coral head shallow enough to be a threat.
With an eye on the speed indicator, he eased the main out an extra couple of inches and did the same for the jib.
Fifteen knots.
After the terror of the past twenty-four hours he was safe for the moment and in sight of victory.
To hell with Louis and his Nicaraguans.
To hell with Mario and his Colombians.
To hell with the gringo brain behind the attempted take-over.
And to hell with Colonel Smith.
Head back, rain beating in his face, Trent laughed almost maniacally with the joy of freedom.
He knew the feeling of old — operating outside the rules and hidden from the surveillance of his superiors.
He sailed past the President's beach house before coming over on to the other track.
He didn't bother with the dock or with a stern anchor but, dropping the sails, ran Golden Girl up on the sand.
When he was ready, the wind would take him off the beach.
He wore one bandoleer slung over his shoulder and carried a Greener.
Jumping ashore with the bow line, he wrapped a clove hitch round the trunk of a palm.
He avoided the path to the President's house, running in a low crouch, weaving between the trees, shotgun at the ready.
There was no one on the terrace and the door was open.
He scooped up a stone and leaping the steps to the terrace three at a time, he hurled it through the door and dived after it, hitting the living-room floor flat and rolling twice.
A woman screamed over to his right.
The President's granddaughter.
Her hands covered her mouth as if trying to hold the screams in.
No one else.
Greener covering the two doors leading to the rear of the house, he asked, ‘You're alone?’
She nodded.
He checked anyway — two bedrooms, bathroom, kitchen — all empty.
She hadn't moved.
Her dark eyes watched him, wide with fear so that the whites showed like two new moons.
She wore her hair squeezed up into a ballooning Afro by the same red  bandana that she had worn down on the dock the first time Trent had seen her.
Black sleeveless T-shirt, black shorts, no shoes.
He thought of telling her that he was a friend but friends didn't dive in through the front door; they didn't have blood on their wrists nor cuts all over their faces; they didn't have a rope burn round their necks and they wore shirts, at least until they were properly introduced.
Most of all they didn't carry guns and wear bandoleers.
She needed an explanation.
‘Trent,’ he said.
‘EC Anti-Terrorist Unit.’
He added, ‘British,’ because EC clearly didn't mean anything to her.
‘On secondment.
Some people have mounted a coup d'état.
Where's your grandfather?’
She wasn't going to tell him.
He didn't blame her and he hadn't time to argue.
‘You've no reason to trust me, but I'm probably the only person capable of saving the President.
It's what I'm trained for.’
She hated what he was trained for.
It was there in her eyes.
CIA, MI6,Deuxième Bureau — these were the anti-heroes of every university student's political mythology.
Particularly so when the student had read Politics and Economics at the LSE, came from the Third World, and had a dark skin.
Student prejudice kept the KGB off the list, which made Trent mad or made him laugh, depending on the day of the week.
‘Tell me one thing,’ he said.
‘Is he here on the key or is he safe?’
She hesitated and he said, ‘Please…’
‘He's safe.’
‘Thank God.’
One last effort and he could rest.
Wiping the back of his hand across his face, Trent showered sweat and rain on the varnished floorboards.
‘The patrol boat's coming in the other side of the key.
They've got a radio.
Baccy, the bosun, knows me; we race lighters together,’ he explained.
‘I have a contact at the US Embassy.’
Mentioning the Embassy was a mistake.
The US was demonology — the United Fruit Company, the assassination of Allende in Chile, the Contras…
He read the litany in her eyes.
‘Stay here,’ he said, ‘I'll be back.’
He ran across the key, bandoleer slapping his chest, gun held at the port, and reached the beach in time to see Baccy ease the patrol boat in through a gap in the reef.
To save time, Trent propped the gun against a palm, draping the bandoleer over the barrel, and ran out along the millionaire's dock.
He hit the sea in a shallow dive, swimming out against the wind.
Fifty yards out he stopped and trod water while getting his breath and watched the patrol boat drop anchor while still two hundred yards out.
Normally Baccy would have come in closer but the wind was onshore and the storm couldn't be more than an hour away.
Half a dozen sailors were on the side deck.
Trent waved and yelled, ‘Baccy…’
A wave slapped him in the mouth.
He coughed and shook salt out of his eyes.
The sailors had run aft to the tender hanging in the stern davits.
Despite the protection of the reef, there was sufficient sea running to make the patrol boat roll through sixty degrees.
Lowering the tender took care and patience if they wanted to keep it in one piece.
The man giving orders was short and fat.
None of the men was black, none of them stood six-foot-four in bare feet, and none of them wore a pipe in his mouth.
Trent rolled over and swam for the beach.
The sailors were dropping off the stern ladder into the tender as he reached the dock, and with the tender pitching in the steep lop, they were having a hard time.
Trent sprinted up the dock and spotted the President's granddaughter.
She was standing in the shade beside his shotgun.
He needed the gun.
He waved her back.
Instead, she stepped out of the shade to meet him.
He heard the fluttering of bullets before  the fast slap-slap-slap of an automatic rifle.
He hadn't played rugby football since leaving school but he tackled the girl as if he were a wing-threequarter playing for Ireland at Lansdowne Road.
She kicked out at him as he covered her body with his but he held her tight and rolled with her into the protection of the trees.
‘Keep on your belly,’ he ordered as he grabbed the Greener.
He didn't bother to look back to see whether the shots were coming from the patrol boat or from the tender.
Both were equally unsteady platforms for a marksman but that didn't preclude one of them getting killed by a chance shot.
‘I told you to stay at the house.’
Then he realised that she hadn't recognised the slap of the rifle.
Getting shot at wasn't included in the Politics and Economics degree at the LSE.
More's the pity, he thought, given how many of the Third World's leaders came from that educational background.
‘They're shooting at us, for Christ's sake!
At least, they're shooting at me.’
Her next question would be ‘Why?’ so he gave the reason without waiting: ‘If they have you, they have your grandfather.
Because he loves you,’ he added before she could ask.
‘I've got to get you off the Key.’
He read in her face that she wouldn't leave under her own steam.
Eyebrows knitted in support of her determination, she said: ‘He told me to wait here.
Belpan isn't a colony.
You've got no right to order me around.’
‘I don't happen to want to get killed.’
He hadn't been able to keep the irritation out of his voice.
She bridled.
‘That's your fault.’
‘Lord God, forgive me.’
Grabbing her by the arm, he yanked her to her feet.
‘I can drag you or I can carry you — except that it would probably kill me.’
She recognised that he meant what he said.
‘Don't push.’
‘Then run,’ he told her as he heard the tender's motor start.
* 
Trent pushed Golden Girl off the beach, swinging the bows round before dragging himself on board.
The wind was already driving them clear of the shore as he raised the sails.
The barometer had fallen a further ten points to 28.5.
‘We're going to get hit by a hurricane,’ he told the girl as he dropped into the cockpit and took the helm.
He grabbed lifejackets out of the port locker, tossing her one.
‘Wear this.
Something happens, don't bother swimming.
Just relax.
The wind will drive you onshore.
Get into the trees and make for high ground.
He rigged a lifeline fore and aft and clipped the safety line on the girl's lifejacket to it.
He hadn't yet made up his mind where to head for but he needed shelter.
He would have liked to have made a run for Mexico but he had work to do, and there wasn't a chance of their surviving that long a race against the hurricane.
Belpan City was out, as was the Belpan River.
Next north from the Belpan came the Makaa.
Visualising the chart, he calculated the distance to the Makaa river mouth at about twelve miles.
He changed course five degrees and looked aft to check for squalls.
Whoever was skippering the patrol boat hadn't waited to pick up the tender.
She rounded the key under full power, the spray bursting so high from her bows that Trent, through his binoculars, could barely make out the bridge.
Thirty knots, Trent guessed.
Ten minutes and Golden Girl would be in range of her bow cannon.
He had to think — but he was close to physical, mental and emotional exhaustion.
‘They'll shoot, won't they,’ she said.
He had been calculating the girl as a mathematical entry in the equation.
The quiet flatness of her voice was mirrored by the fatalism he saw in her eyes.
Rain streaked her cheeks so that he was unable to tell whether she was weeping.
‘They won't harm you,’ he said.
‘They want you alive.’
She had already thought ahead.
‘They'll ram us.’
‘Probably.
Or they may fire a warning shot.’
She nodded acceptance of her own thoughts: ‘You'll hand me over…’
He thought it was an accusation but she met his eyes for a second: ‘They'll kill you,’ she said.
‘You never know.’
‘You do,’ she said in that same quiet flat voice.
‘That's what you said.
It's what you're trained for.’
Instead of answering, he adjusted the jib.
‘Who are they?’
, Cocaine trade.
They want to use Belpan as a staging post.’
He saw that she couldn't believe him.
He could have slipped the bungees over the tiller arm.
Instead he told her to take the helm.
Having something to do was better than sitting doing nothing other than wait for the first shell.
He pointed to a slight gap in the mountains thirty miles inland.
‘That's your heading.’
She protested.
‘I never have…’
‘Slow and easy,’ he told her.
‘Concentrate and don't overreact.’
He ducked into the saloon.
The barometer had dropped like a plumb weight.
He ran parallel rules over the chart and tapped latitude and longitude into the Loran.
He watched the girl for a minute before calling to her to bring their heading a little to port.
‘Hold her there.’
Making his way forward, he dragged sailbags out until he found the huge, feather-light balloon spinnaker.
Because of the vast size of it and the difficulty of controlling it when sailing single-handed, the spinnaker wasn't a sail he used much and it was right at the bottom at the aft end of the sail-locker.
His plan was certainly crazy and almost definitely doomed to failure but it was his only option.
Re-stowing the rest of the sails gave him time to get the details straight in his head.
Shaking the spinnaker out of its bag, he curled it on to the trampoline while checking the cotton lashings that held it rolled.
He hanked the head of the spinnaker to the spare  forehalyard so that the sail would set outside the jib.
Next he led the spinnaker sheets aft to the cockpit and made them fast to the stern cleats with plenty of slack.
The girl was too involved with the helm to watch him.
He said, ‘You're a natural,’ and she almost smiled at the compliment.
Encouraged, he went on, ‘The President introduced you as his granddaughter but he didn't give you a name.’
‘Mariana,’ she said.
‘Nice.’
He thought it about the stupidest remark he'd ever made — and so did she by the look on her face.
He looked aft.
The sea, rather than dipping to the horizon, curled up like the lip of a dish.
For a moment Trent thought that there was something wrong with his eyes.
Then he realised that for the first time he was looking into the front of a hurricane.
The patrol boat had gained a mile on them.
Two sailors were on the foredeck manning the cannon.
With the vessel bucking through the short waves like an unbroken horse, Trent hoped that they wouldn't fire a warning shot.
Unless the men were experienced, it could go anywhere.
He checked his bearings on the Loran.
He wanted to take another look at the chart but he hadn't time.
He said to Mariana, ‘I'll take her for a few minutes.
Keep your hands on the helm so you keep the feel of her.’
Trent shifted course a couple of degrees to pod without adjusting the sails and Golden Girl lost a knot in speed.
He held her there for two minutes, then paid off a further two degrees, again without adjusting the sails.
A spit of white sand showed in the far distance.
The roar of the patrol boat's huge petrol engines thrummed in his ears and he glanced back over his shoulder.
Golden Girl 's lead was down to a quarter of a mile.
He checked his bearings again and pointed to the sand-spit.
‘That's your course, Mariana.
I'm going to try something.
It probably won't work but it might.
If it does, we'll almost certainly lose the mast, but we won't sink.’
Mariana didn't look up so the smile Trent gave her was a waste of time and he couldn't think of anything else to say, or nothing that would make any difference.
So he said, ‘Right, I'll leave you to it,’ and vaulted on to the cabin top.
The sea was such a mess that it took him a few moments to be sure of the reef.
The last time he'd dived off it, the coral heads had been awash.
Now, with the tide driven high by the approaching storm, it was hardly visible.
But it was there all right, dead ahead — a bar, knife-sharp and deadly.
If they hit it, it would rip the bottom out of Golden Girl in less than a second.
Trent grabbed the spinnaker halyard.
He looked back.
Their lead over the patrol boat was down to two hundred yards.
He could see the separate strands of spray thrown aside by the bows and make out the shadow of the helmsman in the wheelhouse.
The reef was less than fifty yards.
Caught between the rock and the hard stuff…
He glanced down at Mariana, throwing her a fresh smile that was meant to be encouraging but she was looking straight ahead, eyes fixed on the sand-spit.
She was gripping the tiller arm so tightly that the blood had been driven out of her knuckles.
Trent thought of calling at her to relax but he knew that it would be as pointless as trying another smile.
He checked the reef.
Thirty yards and he could see the shark's teeth of coral waiting to devour them.
‘Hold her steady,’ he yelled to Mariana and heaved the spinnaker flying to the masthead.
The vast red sail burst free of its lashings, the wind filling it so that it bowed forward in a great scarlet curve on which was painted in brilliant gold the portrait of the Golden Girl herself, bubble-curled, lips pouting — Marilyn Monroe.
‘Do it for me,’ Trent prayed to the film star.
He could feel it happening, the lift of the sail, loose-set, acting as a vast kite.
The hulls were almost clear of the water, mast  bowing like an archer's longbow.
Then they were over the coral, clear of it.
‘Fly,’ he yelled at the Golden Girl and let the spinnaker halyard go.
As the sail whipped free of the masthead, he leaped back into the cockpit to loose the spinnaker sheets.
Entwined snakes of gold and scarlet streamed through each other as the sail, rolling and writhing, fled away on the wind.
Trent looked back straight into the bows of the patrol boat.
For a second he could see every detail of the men's faces at the bow cannon.
Then came the terrifying crash as the coral tore the ship's bottom out.
He saw the gun shield cut the sailors almost in half, their torn bodies somersaulting high against the great mauve bar of the approaching hurricane.
For a second the boat seemed to be frozen as if in a frame of news film.
Then the ship tore herself away from the reef, back broken, thirty feet of bow section diving free.
The dark hole of the ship's innards gaped for a moment.
Then came the thunder of the fuel tanks exploding.
Brilliant against the storm bank, flames streaked with ruby leaped to devour the sky as the heat of the explosion blasted the catamaran.
Trent swept Mariana to the cockpit sole, sheltering her with his body as jagged fragments rained on them.
A shard of steel plate knifed through Golden Girl 's mainsail, cutting the portside shrouds as if they were string.
The mast quivered and bowed as Trent dived for the main and jib sheets, whipping them clear of the cam cleats.
Leaping on to the cabin top, he dropped the sails.
Without bothering to bag it, he stuffed the jib down into the sail-locker and lashed the main to the boom.
Only then did he look back at Mariana.
He wasn't surprised at the horror he read in her eyes.
But he had expected it to be directed by concern for the dead rather than against him as the perpetrator of their demise.
‘You murdered them,’ she said.
Her judgment was  absolute, no hope in plea-bargaining.
And Trent couldn't be bothered.
He watched the first squall race towards them, the rain compressed into a curtain above the white line of wave caps.
About twenty minutes and the hurricane would have them in its grasp.
The Makaa River was two miles now on a dead run.
Looping a line over the crosstrees, he set the storm jib, sheeting it out to port in hope of putting the greater strain on the starboard stays.
A fresh squall came at them.
The wind spun the sea into feathers of spume, the rain solid as it struck Mariana in the face.
She flinched with the force of it.
She hadn't moved from the cockpit sole, but crouched there looking aft as if mesmerised by the towering storm front.
‘When it hits,’ Trent said, ‘we're going to lose the mast.
You'll be safer below.’
Mariana didn't answer.
‘Please…’ he said, and again she didn't answer.
They could see now that the front was concave.
The summit of it curled forward like a giant wave at the point of breaking.
As with a wave, the crest of the front was shredded into wisps — dragon tongues that licked out, desperate to taste their prey before devouring it.
Lightning played across the front almost continually, and thunder rolled over the catamaran.
Trent knew that Mariana was waiting for the hurricane to fall on them.
That when it did, she believed that they would be obliterated totally, like midges slapped into nothingness by a giant.
Tiny midges.
Infinitesimal…
The terror bound her chest so that her breath came in the short, dry, painful gasps of a dying asthmatic.
Trent knew that he should do something.
He had read in Victorian novels of mothers smacking their hysterical daughters across the face.
He had kneed Gomez in the stomach to break the gunman out of the panic of drowning.
But that had been in the immediacy of action and as much  to save himself as to save Gomez.
He thought that he should touch her, offer her comfort.
But he was trained in action rather than in comfort.
He told himself that it wasn't difficult — to lay a hand gently on her shoulder and draw her into the protection of his own body.
He would do it when the next squall hit.
The thick rumbling roar of thunder enveloped them.
Lightning lit Mariana's face.
Then the squall was on them.
The force of it lifted Golden Girl 's stern and for a moment Trent feared that she would bury her bows in the sea and pitch-pole.
He shifted the helm so that the storm jib lifted the bows, the catamaran lunging forward on to the wave top, surfing the squall front.
Then the squall fled ahead of them, leaving the craft shuddering in its wake.
Trent hadn't touched the girl.
The rain was so heavy now that he was unable to see the expression on her face.
The vast curling crest of the hurricane reared over them, and its face stretched from horizon to horizon.
Lightning flowed over it continually, and the thunder was incessant.
He had to shout to make himself heard: ‘Mariana, look…’
But he was trying to stop her looking, or wanted to stop her looking.
The image of the Victorian mother slapping her daughter haunted him.
Incensed by his own inadequacy, he heard himself yell at her in desperation, ‘Mariana, have you read Jane Austen…?’
EIGHT
Have you read Jane Austen?
The insanity or inanity of Trent's shouted enquiry snapped Mariana out of her trance.
Thunder shook the catamaran as she looked up at him, rain almost blinding her.
He pointed at the deck between his legs and she scrabbled over on her haunches to sit there partially protected.
The sea had become a green-black pool spread with foam less than a hundred feet in circumference in which Trent steered by instinct.
He could no longer read their position on the Loran let alone see the coast and the mouth of the Makaa River which remained his goal.
Even the lightning was filtered into changes in density of darkness by the weight of rain cascading out of the cloud-front.
The wind had steadied, not the calm before the storm, but the bunching of a tiger's muscles as it gathered itself to pounce.
Trent believed that they were less than two miles from the river mouth.
In final preparation for the storm, he closed the cockpit drains.
The wind hit.
It came screeching out of the darkness, and not even the thunder could drown the scream of its menace.
Trent let go jib sheet and halyard; the heavy canvas flashed free, disappearing into the rain curtain as if lighter than tissue paper.
The seas smashed into his back, wind and water clubbed him off the seat  on to the cockpit sole.
He wrapped his legs round Mariana, an arm across her chest, his other hand on the tiller arm.
In seconds the cockpit was full to the coamings.
Waves crashed over their heads and burst through the open saloon door.
The weight of the water forced Golden Girl down, as Trent had planned, so that she was little more than awash.
There was no possibility now that she could capsize: built with positive buoyancy, she was incapable of sinking.
Waves smashed over Trent and Mariana almost continuously.
Thunder rolled over and round them from every direction so that Trent had the sense of being in the interior of an enormous drum on which giants beat from all sides.
Lightning spiked and zig-zagged.
The wind screamed incessantly.
The lashings holding the Zodiac snapped, and the inflatable spun away like a Frisbee.
The top section of the mast snapped at the crosstrees as if it were less substantial than a toothpick.
A moment later the main section sheared at the mastfoot.
The spar crashed down across the cabin top in a tangle of twisted stays and halyards.
Unable to break them free, waves thrashed the jagged tubes of aluminium over the foredeck.
At any moment they might come sweeping back into the cockpit, impaling Trent or Mariana.
‘We have to get into the saloon,’ Trent shouted in Mariana's ear.
He couldn't tell if she had heard.
Gripping her in his arms, he rolled over on top of her and thrust with his feet against the stern locker, shooting them forward across the cockpit.
Waves washed over them, driving Mariana out of his arms as he grabbed for the side of the saloon companionway.
She pitched forward into the flooded darkness of the interior, and Trent heaved himself after her.
Gathering her back into his arms, he unclipped the safety line on her lifejacket and lifted her on to the saloon settee where she was protected from the surging water by his BMW.
Both hulls were flooded, the water driving backwards and  forwards across the saloon deck as the waves lifted first one hull, then the other.
The continual slamming of the seas under the bridge-deck beat at them, fountaining up through the manhole Trent had unscrewed in the saloon deck.
The sea churned the banalities of his life into flotsam: sheets, shirts, sandals, books, charts, salt cellar…
Waves burst over the cockpit into the saloon only to pour out through the manhole each time the bridge-deck broke free for a moment.
The wind screeched like a herd of pigs at slaughter.
The mast and stays thrashed the cabin top.
Thunder exploded, roll after roll after roll, so that there seemed to be no gap between but only an incessant bombardment.
The hurricane would drive Golden Girl where it willed.
There was nothing that Trent could do on deck.
‘We'll be all right,’ he shouted at Mariana: ‘I promise…’
They had been perhaps a mile and a half off the river mouth when the hurricane hit.
The sea would be rising fast, flooding inland over the mangrove swamps, drowning the coast under ten or twenty or thirty feet of water.
Trent had listened to stories of the 1961 hurricane.
Perhaps because of the coral reefs, as now, there had been no tidal wave but the force of the wind had driven the sea inland, thirty feet deep in Belpan City.
Rafts of logs, waiting for shipment, had been ripped free of their bindings, smashing through concrete buildings as if they were built of playing cards.
The electrical supply would be cut, all telephone lines would be down, airstrips closed.
Soon the road bridges would be torn from the banks by the flood waters spewed raging down from the mountains by the incessant rain.
The perpetrators of the coup would be imprisoned by the storm for the next twenty-four hours.
Trent had thought, on the way out to the rendezvous with the Baglietto, that the hurricane would be his surest ally.
Now he was being proved correct.
True, most if not all of the Government ministers  were probably taken.
But if he survived the storm, there was a chance that he could reach the President ahead of Louis, men.
The wind was still as vicious but the thunder had passed them by and the voice of the seas changed, waves breaking over the catamaran with less force.
Trent heard the scratching of branches against the bridge-deck as the wind drove Golden Girl inland on the flood tide.
Shifting his grip from handhold to handhold, he reached the companionway to the cockpit.
With the rain cutting  visibiity to less than a hundred feet, it was as if they were trapped inside a glass tumbler the sides of which held at bay the blackness of the storm.
The sea foamed beneath a heaving mat of torn mangrove branches, leaves, reeds, turtle grass and seaweed.
Trent half swam and half wriggled across the cockpit to unblock the drainpipes.
Golden Girl 's stern rose as the water drained, the wind pivoting the catamaran round and driving her stern first.
With the companionway protected from the wind, only the waves that broke over the cabin top burst into the saloon.
Regaining the companionway, he dragged the doors closed, bolting them.
Then he dropped down into the port hull.
The bilge pump was on the bulkhead.
He pumped steadily for five minutes, crossed to the starboard hull, pumped for a further ten minutes, then back to the port hull for a final five.
With the water less than a foot deep in each hull, he squeezed his way round the motor cycle to join Mariana on the settee.
From the galley he had brought matches wrapped in cellophane and packed in a screw-top coffee jar.
He lit the gimballed oil lamp on the cabinside and, in the soft yellow light, saw that Mariana looked more stunned now than frightened.
‘I told you we'd make it,’ he said, lips close to her ear.
‘We've been washed way inland.
The baddies won't move till the storm's over.’
Mariana didn't respond but he hadn't expected her to.
Dropping down to the galley, he struck a match to the gimballed stove, put a can of tomato soup, pierced but unopened, into the pressure cooker along with an inch of water, and fastened the lid tight.
He gave the soup five minutes to warm, managed to open the can without cutting himself, and split the contents between two pint mugs.
‘Haute cuisine, good for you,’ he told Mariana, forcing one mug into her hands.
She didn't want to take it.
She didn't want to move or speak — most of all, she didn't want to think.
Trent recognised the symptoms.
Fear did that to people.
Shut the world out…
If he could break her out of it, she'd be all right.
And he had to — he needed information.
‘You'll have a wonderful story to tell your children.
On a small boat in a hurricane and a lunatic asks if you read Jane Austen.’
No reply and not even a hint of a smile.
‘The first time your children tell you they've heard the story, remember, I warned you,’ He drained his mug, dropping it over his shoulder into the water slushing around in the galley: ‘Nothing like a hurricane for washing dishes.’
He cupped his hands round hers, lifting the soup to her lips.
He tilted the mug.
She could drink or turn her head away.
Trent didn't mind which — he wanted a reaction, that was all.
She sipped as if on automatic pilot, which wasn't good but it was better than catatonia.
‘Damn,’ he said, as if something urgent required his attention.
‘Hold on, I'll be back.’
He took his hand away from hers.
She nearly dropped the mug but her brain took over at the last instant.
Trent dropped down into the galley and took his time searching out a tin of ginger biscuits.
Mariana had finished the soup.
She lowered the mug under her own volition and he took it from her.
‘Peek Frean,’ he told her, showing the biscuit tin.
‘What greater love can man have for woman?’
He forced a biscuit into her hand: ‘I know — I'm not funny.
People have been telling me that ever since I was a small boy.’
He smiled: ‘Be grateful.
You should hear me sing.’
She looked down at the biscuit, as if surprised by it.
Then she brought it to her mouth and nibbled.
She looked up at Trent, as if seeing him for the first time: ‘I'd have drowned if you'd left me on the Key.’
‘Nonsense.
The patrol boat would have taken you off.’
‘Would that have been better?’
So she was seeing the Colombians as the enemy.
‘The eye of the storm?
With hurricanes it's true.
When it reaches us, we'll have calm for half an hour.
That's our chance.’
Leaving her in peace so that she could think, he stripped the cover from the BMW.
He brushed a few drops of sea water off the top of the carburettor, dabbed the float chamber full and gave Mariana a shrug of apology before kicking the starter.
The engine fired on the fourth kick and he flashed her a victorious smile.
In the enclosed cabin the noise was unbearable.
He shut the engine off and opened the saloon doors to clear the fumes.
Nothing had changed outside except that there was more grass and fewer leaves mixed with the foam.
He closed the doors again and stood watching Mariana from the companionway.
He was in no hurry.
Anyway hurrying would have been unproductive.
As with waiting for a hedgehog to uncurl, prodding didn't help.
Mariana finished the biscuit.
Trent proffered the tin.
She took a minute to make up her mind to accept.
He took one himself.
He was determined not to lie to her.
Talking at all above the screech of the wind was difficult and he had to make his explanation short: ‘Mariana, the men running this coup set up roadblocks this morning to pick up any of the Government trying to get into Belpan City.
One of their men boasted to me that they intend killing the ministers.
I don't think they've got your grandfather.’
He wasn't trying to give her false hope but was simply telling her the truth.
Though not all the truth.
‘There's nothing certain and I don't have all the bits so I can't promise,’ he said.
‘But I'm certain as I can be that they can't win unless they have your grandfather.
If 1 can reach him, there's a chance I can save the ministers.’
He accepted, as he watched the anger rekindle her eyes, that she felt he was blackmailing her.
‘It's your choice,’ he said, deliberately increasing the pressure.
‘I can't make it for you.’
Swinging down into the port hull, he searched his cabin for dry clothes.
His jumpers, unused through the past three months of the hot season, were folded round humidity-absorbent packs and bagged in strong plastic.
So were his long trousers, his formal shirts, and what he thought of as his work-clothes: camouflage trousers and combat jackets.
He selected a blue cotton shirt and a pair of light wool slacks for Mariana.
He took up a sleeping-bag, unzipping it so that she had something dry to sit on.
The towels were awash.
He dropped back down to his cabin while she changed.
He gave her ten minutes.
The dry clothes had given her strength.
He sensed that she was judging him.
Accepting her inspection, he waited, one hand on the mast support to steady himself.
The catamaran heaved beneath his feet, the wind screeched, the stays and mast thrashed the deck.
‘You won't hurt him?’ she said.
It wasn't a question Trent had expected.
But it was the correct question, courageous, and he admired her for it.
He gave himself time before answering.
She had to know that he had considered and that he was committed by his reply.
He looked away, as if studying his own thoughts.
Then he deliberately looked back to meet her eyes so that she would know that he had made a decision With a slight lift of his shoulders, he accepted his decision.
‘No Mariana I won't hurt him.’
He knew what he was asking of her — that she should place her grandfather in his hands.
And he was certain that the President had told her not to tell anyone where he had gone.
Mariana's struggle was now internalised, for there was nothing to be read in her face.
She looked away as Trent had done.
A wave caught the mast, lifting it high and then slamming it down on the cabin roof.
She used the noise as camouflage for what she felt to be her betrayal of her grandfather's trust: ‘He's up at Pine Ridge.’
Trent swung himself over to the settee so that she wouldn't have to shout.
‘Where on Pine Ridge?’
‘He has a cabin,’ she said, ‘up by an abandoned quarry.
It's where he goes when he has to write a speech…’
She looked away so that Trent wouldn't see her misery: ‘He told me not to tell anyone.’
‘I know,’ Trent said.
He unfurled the map of Belpan from the waterproof pouch on the motor cycle.
‘Can you show me where the cabin is?’
The catamaran was riding light, the wind driving it further and further inland across the coastal strip.
As Trent studied the map, he recalled the topography each side of the Makaa River.
Behind the mangroves lay low scrub, lagoons, and then narrow flats planted with sugar cane.
The tide would carry them inland at least two miles and possibly three before they were beached on the first low ridge that had been the coastline a million years before the birth of Christ.
Beyond that first ridge came rolling scrubland, the soil impoverished over the centuries by annual burning and the single crop agronomy of the Maya, the land now abandoned.
Next came the mountains, their lower slopes cloaked in rain forest which had once covered the coastal plain but was now restricted to tongues licking down the banks of the Belpan and Makaa Rivers.
The highest of the mountain ridges separated the headwaters of the Belpan and Makaa.
On the high flanks of the ridge the thick canopy of the rain forest gave way to slender pines where clear streams plunged from pool to pool over granite boulders.
From the early days of the Spanish invasion, the ridge had been logged commercially but now the major part of the pine forest had been declared a nature reserve.
Trent pictured the ridge.
An American had built a mountain lodge more than five hundred feet below the edge of the reserve where he offered horseback riding along the mountain trails and old logging roads — but that was in the tourist season which wouldn't officially open for a further month.
The President's cabin lay three miles into the reserve, four miles to the north and a good eight hundred feet above the lodge, and divided from it by a small tributary of the Makaa so Trent could expect no help there even if the owner was in residence.
Turning off from the north-south highway some twelve miles north of the Makaa, the track leading to the cabin had been made first by loggers and then improved by a quarrying company some forty years ago.
For the first miles it led through thick rain forest before climbing along the flank of a long narrowing valley up into the pine-clad highlands.
One of the many branches of the Makaa followed the valley but there were no bridges to cross and where the track crossed side-streams, the fords were wide and bottomed with concrete.
Eleven o'clock of a hurricane morning, Trent thought wryly.
He'd had no sleep and had been nearly drowned, almost had his throat cut, been shot at and then nearly rammed by a patrol boat.
It was going to be a long day.
He said to Mariana, ‘I need to try and get us a little further north.’
He gathered six double sheets from the drenched berths, folded them in half and left them by the companionway.
First  checking his lifeline, he crawled out on his belly to the after locker for the coil of rope Gomez had noosed round his neck.
The wind threatened to pluck him like a ripe orange off a tree.
When he turned back into it, waves smashed into his face but the tangled stays had caught round the bow pulpits, holding the thrashing mast sections at bay.
Back in the saloon Trent cut the rope into four lengths and made one fast to each corner of the folded bedsheets.
He rolled and tied them so that the wind wouldn't tear them out of his hands while he tried to position them.
Then he dragged them out into the cockpit, making one corner fast to the main sheet winch on the cabin roof and one to the starboard jib winch.
Every move was hampered by the beating of the elements.
The wind screeched in his ears, making consecutive thought almost impossible so that not only did he have to struggle in desperate conflict with the conditions but had also to fight to hold to his concentration.
Every move had to be calculated in advance.
One error and he would have been torn loose and hurled overboard to be smothered by the driving spray.
Flat on his stomach, he slid across the cockpit to lead the other two lines over the taffrail and back through the portside stern anchor cleat to the portside winch.
He winched in hard and let go the lashings round the rolled bedsheets.
Their slope and angle up to the cabin top was sufficient to drive the catamaran north.
Trent didn't expect the twelve thicknesses of cotton sheet to last but each minute that they held would gain precious distance.
He tumbled back into the saloon.
Sprawled on his back on the deck, he lay exhausted under a waterfall of waves breaking over the cabin top.
He hadn't the strength to close the doors.
He couldn't move.
He didn't care.
All that mattered to him for the moment was the feel of the bedsheets angling Golden Girl northward.
Half past eleven of a hurricane morning.
Trent expected  the hurricane to last between eight and ten hours.
They were close to the eye of the storm.
The last of the bedsheets, ripped into ribbons, had been torn away but he believed that they were well north of the Makaa.
Mariana had managed to close the doors.
Now she watched as he prepared the tools of his trade.
He adjusted the slings on the Greeners' canvas cases so that he could wear one slung across his chest and the other across his back.
The yellow silk square that Steve had given him was in his back pocket; eight boxes of buckshot in each saddlebag; binoculars in his combat jacket; two rolls of inch-wide parcel tape; fifty feet of light line; steel hammer and hall a dozen steel spikes; spare combat jacket and two pairs of jungle trousers; for night work, black cotton roll-neck, black tracksuit bottoms and black cotton gloves; slacks and a light jumper for Mariana.
She watched as he adjusted the string of red coral beads through the shammy pouch that held his throwing-knife.
He fastened the beads round his neck, arranging the knife so that it rested hidden between his shoulder blades.
He belted a ten-inch hunting-knife to his right calf.
A metre and a half of copper wire with wooden handgrips at each end went in his pocket plus a box of bullets for his Walther in case he should be able to reclaim it from the masthead.
He had become an Untouchable, Trent thought with sudden bitterness as he glanced up to catch a look, almost of horror, on Mariana's face.
He was aware of how professional he must appear to her in his preparations for what she saw as killing and which he had been trained to see as protection of the innocent.
Even if she could be brought to view his actions in his own light, he would remain for her the instrument of death.
‘You'll be safe on Golden Girl ,’ he said.
‘Once the wind drops, try and get across the border.’
‘In case you fail?’
‘I'm not invincible, despite the hardware.’
Reaching over her head, he plucked the photograph of his mother from the bulkhead.
Mariana watched him slip the picture inside the folded map for protection.
‘I'm coming with you,’ she said.
It was a statement of fact rather than the opening shot in an argument and Trent accepted it as such.
Already he had learnt to recognise the small frown line that drew Mariana's brows together as a signal of immovable stubbornness — or absolute commitment.
Which of the two was in the eye of the beholder.
‘I'm not useless, you know, and you can't do everything on your own.’
Switching from the maternal to the sulky child, she added, ‘Anyway you'll need me to back up whatever you tell Gran'pa.’
Trent might have laughed had he not been thrown against the motor cycle as the hurricane drove Golden Girl aground.
The catamaran's stern slammed on rock and they heard, above the scream of the wind, the rudders shatter.
Trent leaped to the portside bilge pump, desperate to clear the remaining water from the hull before its weight broke the vessel apart.
‘And don't dare tell me it's going to be too tough for a woman,’ Mariana shouted, as she glared down at him from the saloon.
She disappeared from view.
A minute later he heard the rhythmic thump of the starboard bilge pump uniting with his own pumping.
The sudden stilling of the wind brought with it a silence so total when compared to the continual cacophony of the past hours that the shock of it, for a moment, held Mariana and Trent immobile.
He thrust the doors open.
Unlashing the motor cycle, he manhandled it across the saloon and into the cockpit.
Only then did he look out across the land.
Golden Girl had cleared the rocks on which she had first grounded, the wind slithering the lightened catamaran broadside across the  sparse grasses sprouting from the leached sandy soil behind the ancient coastline.
The rain fell as heavily as ever but was no longer compressed by the wind into a solid curtain.
A vast circle of storm clouds hugged the ground and rose towering into the air, so they seemed becalmed on the inside edge of a massive mauve funnel through the swirling walls of which Trent could make out, to the south, a thin line of greater darkness that he knew must be the rain forest bordering the Makaa River.
They had been driven far further north than he had expected.
To the west lay the highway.
He dropped the gangplank over the stern and wheeled the motor cycle down.
He found his Walther safe in the masthead.
Tucking it into one of the saddlebags, he looked up to see Mariana with one Greener slung over her shoulders.
She held the second shotgun out to him and he slung it across his chest.
For a moment he hesitated, nervous of breaking the strange stillness of the deserted landscape.
It was as if they had landed on an alien planet, his fear that of awakening the denizens, giant and menacing.
He sensed the same nervousness in Mariana.
He smiled at her and, in offering her reassurance, broke the spell that held them.
The engine roared into life as he kicked the starter.
He swung a leg over, and Mariana settled herself behind him.
Already they were close to the middle of the cloud funnel.
Ten minutes, fifteen at the most, and the wind would be on them, tearing them from the saddle.
Ten, fifteen minutes to gain the shelter of the forest — though even there they would be in danger of being pulped into nothingness by trees ripped from the rain-softened earth.
NINE
The front of the hurricane tore at the lower flanks of the mountains, rending great trees from the rain forest and tossing them aside as if they were little more than sticks.
But in the centre of the storm calm prevailed, fifteen miles in radius, a haven in which Trent and Mariana charged towards the north-south highway.
They were in a desperate race with the towering, whirling walls of mauve-black cloud.
They were safe as long as they remained within the central eye of the storm.
On its edge lay chaos and destruction.
Though the big R100 BMW has been designed as much for cross-country work as for the road, the wheels bucked and skidded in the grey waterlogged soil as Trent fought the handlebars, weaving between scrub bush and clumps of hagara grass.
Once already he had lost control, the wheels sliding away from under him as he slewed clear of a steep-sided washway.
They had lost precious seconds; now they had none left to spare.
Slit-eyed against the blinding rain, he hurled his weight forward as he powered up a ridge, the rear wheel tearing at shale and mud.
From the top he could see the highway, a quarter of a mile ahead.
It lay across their path, a black snake of tarmac, rain-soaked and unprotected.
Her cheek pressed flat between his shoulders, Mariana  clung to Trent as if it was only her strength that saved them from disintegration.
To encourage her, Trent yelled that the road was in sight.
With the ribbon of blacktop offering a new perspective, he realised that the vortex within which they fled was turning away from the mountains.
They had been fleeing from the pursuing cloud front, but now they were charging to meet its attack.
But, in changing direction, the hurricane had given them ten minutes of further respite.
Trent slewed the motorbike over as they hit the highway.
Throttle wide, he bowed into the slipstream.
Mariana crouched low on the pillion.
Spray spun high from the tyres.
The speedometer quivered at one hundred and forty kilometres per hour.
Clouds towered on every side, and the attacking front was less than a mile to their left.
Trent sought to recall the terrain ahead.
He remembered a swamp draining into a lagoon some distance to the right of the highway — the road must have been raised for him to have seen that distance.
Given the swamp, there had to be a stream or streams feeding it, which would run through a culvert under the highway.
He knew that he should slow and seek shelter.
He began counting to himself as he had always done, even as a child, when under stress.
Thirty seconds and he would turn off the road.
He sensed the growing tension in Mariana and felt her turn her head so that she could no longer see the wall of cloud less than half a mile to their left.
Dark whips flicked at them.
The motor cycle shuddered as a squall spat a tongue of rain across the highway.
Trent fought to hold the BMW upright.
He could see the embankment.
He cut power, toe snapping up through the gears.
A quick shift of weight, and he angled the bike over the gravel edge, sliding broadside as he struggled for traction.
A fresh squall tore the rainwater off the road surface, cascading it down so that they were riding in the inside of a waterfall as Trent powered onward in the lee of the embankment.
In the far distance he saw the shadowed mouth of a large culvert  angling towards them.
The squalls were screeching now over their heads, rain curtains hurtling after each other seaward across the low swampland.
Too late Trent flung the motor cycle into a skid as a steeply-banked riverbed opened before them through the driving rain.
Mariana tumbled free as the BMW slid over the edge, dragging Trent with it.
Left-booted, he forced the bike upright as he hit the water, which was less than a foot deep.
He opened the throttle, blasting the motor cycle broadside into the culvert.
Kicking down the side-rest as he jumped clear, he spun round in time to see Mariana slide down the bank.
He was about to take her arm and help her into the culvert but she neither needed nor wanted his help.
That much was clear as she struck his hand away.
Wading under the highway, Trent found that the riverbed continued the angle of the culvert.
It was vertically banked and some thirty metres wide.
Water flowed in the centre, shallow and sluggish.
Studying the map back at the motor cycle, he saw that it had once carried what was now that branch of the Makaa River which flowed down the valley below the track up to the President's cabin.
A landfall had probably blocked off the river centuries back, forcing it into a fresh path.
Now the water ran strongly only when the river overflowed its new bed.
With its loss of flow, the river's old mouth had silted up, thus forming the lagoon and swamp.
Here, where it cut the highway, the steep bank of the river would give them protection from the full force of the hurricane.
Trent was unable to read from the map for what distance the banks remained steep but if a fall had blocked off the riverbed then the banks had to be steep right up to where the new river cut away from it.
He checked his watch: twelve noon…
Angled away from the path of the hurricane, the concrete tube had become a giant organ pipe across the mouth of which the hurricane moaned and howled as if driven into enraged dementia by their evasion of its savagery.
Rainwater, driven off the highway, fell in a solid wall that cut them off from any view of the outside world.
Trent looked up from the map to find Mariana watching him.
The anger he saw in her eyes was camouflage for the fear she felt.
She had been through enough already.
She felt safe in the protection of the culvert.
But the culvert was a death-trap.
Trent felt her retreat further inside herself as he shouted through the organ howl, ‘There's a chance we can make our way upriver.’
He didn't want to force her but he had no alternative.
Lips close to her ear, he said, ‘I'm sorry, but I have to try it.’
He stood on the starter and kicked up the side-rest.
Without looking at Mariana, he swung the BMW round to face the mountains.
The seconds ticked by.
Finally he felt her weight settle on the pillion seat.
She didn't touch him, no grip round his waist or leaning of her body into his.
He looked back at her and their eyes met.
She was about to look away when he grabbed her shoulder.
Anger was her only protection and, deliberately feeding it, Trent shouted, ‘Don't play games, Mariana.
Stay here or co-operate.’
Rage drove life into her eyes.
‘I hate you,’ she shouted.
For a moment, he thought that she would hit him.
He let out the clutch.
Then both her arms were round his waist as if she wanted to crush his ribs.
As he opened the throttle, the roar of the BMW's engine bit into the moan and howl of the wind across the culvert's mouth.
Trent lay flat over the handlebars and bulled the motor cycle clear of the tunnel.
He rode with his legs spread wide, boots skimming the riverbed.
The rain struck him across the face like a whiplash as he fought to keep the bike upright and driving for the protection of the leeward bank.
In seconds his boots were filled with water.
He couldn't see.
The wind screamed, the hurricane hailed stones and branches.
For a moment he thought that he had lost control, and the bank loomed at him.
The sudden slackening of the wind shot the BMW forward as if he had released the  brakes.
He kicked the bike round on his right boot, riding only inches from the bank, the top only four feet above his head.
Eyes squinted almost shut, he could see less than ten yards upriver.
The bike bucked left as he hit a boulder and the front wheel struck the bank before he could straighten up.
Next second they were sprawling in the mud and water, motor cycle on top of them.
They had gained less than a hundred yards.
Trent lifted the bike.
Mariana beat on his shoulders, screaming at him to go back.
To do so was to court death and to surrender, not only to the hurricane, but to surrender a nation, however small, into the hands of killers.
Trent knew that Louis' men, if they were able, would strike soon after first light.
He had to reach the President's cabin with at least an hour of daylight in which to plan his defence and with time to get through to Caspar on the President's radio.
Thirty feet of high tide dammed the Makaa River.
For the past six hours the downpour had been continuous and torrential.
The branch of the Makaa had risen fifteen feet and, with no escape, overflowed into its old bed up which Trent and Mariana rode.
As the flow increased, the water nibbled away the downstream face of the hundred yards of landfall that had originally forced the river westward into the Makaa.
Minute by minute the flow gained in speed and power, and what had been a trickle became a stream and then a shallow river.
Great chunks of earth fell from the face of the landfall; boulders, the restraining earth gouged away, shuddered and rocked and tumbled free.
Over a hundred thousand tons of water pressed on the landfall and each foot eaten away from its face sapped its ability to withstand the massive weight.
The density of the landfall was critical to calculating at what moment the dam would capitulate.
When it did, a solid wall of water, twenty feet deep, would sweep down the old bed, crushing everything  in its way, hitting the highway with the force of an express train.
In less than a second it would tear a gap in the highway the width of the riverbed.
as if enraged at its defeat by the mountains, the hurricane once more turned inland.
As it howled on to a new course, the river bank no longer protected Trent and Mariana from the worst of its savagery.
To the contrary, there was a period in which the riverbed served as a channel for the full ferocity of the storm.
Trent had calculated the distance between the culvert and the junction of the old and new rivers as less than four miles.
Half an hour had passed since they had left the shelter of the culvert.
He had little idea as to how far they had come and had lost count of how many times they had fallen.
He lay sprawled against the foot of the bank with the full weight of the BMW across his legs and pinned between the wind and the growing force of the water like a fly between the pages of a book.
The squall that had flung Trent against the bank had hit them at over one hundred and fifty miles an hour.
It had plucked Mariana from the pillion seat, skittering her against the current like a flat stone skipped across a pond.
During the occasional moments in which the driven rain lost its solidity, Trent could see Mariana's arms locked round a fallen treetrunk some twenty yards upstream.
He imagined her terror.
As he was held between the conflicting pressures of wind and water, so he was caught between the desire to reach Mariana and offer her comfort and the need to husband his remaining strength — but he knew that the husbanding of his strength was paramount if they were to survive.
He could feel the swing of the hurricane.
Soon the far bank would offer shelter.
But what had been no more than a slowly moving stream less than a couple of metres wide now flowed fast and dark with mud across the full thirty metres of the riverbed.
In a momentary gap in the rain curtain, he saw that the tree behind which Mariana lay was  almost awash.
Trent closed his eyes, feeling at the wind, sniffing at it, listening to it.
Gathering his strength, he  pried his left leg free of the BMW and dragged the bike upright against the bank.
Straddling it, he kicked the starter.
No response.
He kicked twice more.
Dear God, he prayed, and leaned his shoulder against the bank while he got his breath.
For a moment he thought that he had felt something, an infinitesimal trembling of the earth.
He kicked for the fourth time.
The engine caught.
He rested against the bank, waiting, and this time he was sure that he felt something.
A squall beat him into the bank.
It passed and he looked upriver to where Mariana lay hidden upstream of the fallen treetrunk.
He could see her plainly and the scream of the wind was softer.
The swing of the hurricane was bringing them back into the eye of the storm.
Gunning the engine, Trent slammed into first gear and eased the motor cycle diagonally upriver.
The water was two feet deep at the treetrunk.
He shouted at Mariana, grabbing at her arms and dragging her upright.
‘Move!’ he yelled.
‘Quick…!’
He swung the bike downriver as her weight hit the pillion.
Throttle open and keeping to the centre of the stream where there were no obstructions, he powered the BMW in second gear straight back the way they had come.
Desperately he looked for a way up the river bank.
Twice he had to kick hard against the force of a squall but the wind was dropping fast, the howl gone out of it.
And then he heard it — the thick, heavy thud of a big fieldgun far in the distance.
But there were no fieldguns…
He saw ahead and to their left a wedge of earth fallen from the bank.
He rode at it, braked, yanked Mariana off the pillion and yelled at her to climb.
‘Run!’ he shouted.
‘Run for your life!’
He kicked the motor cycle round and gunned it across the river, then swung back to face the spit and the vee-shaped cut in the almost vertical bank.
Mariana was halfway  up.
She looked back.
He slammed a fist up at her as if the force of his gesture could throw her the last five feet, and screamed at her although he knew that she couldn't hear.
Her head was still a foot from the top.
He looked upriver.
It was coming.
A vast roaring wall of death and destruction.
He let go the clutch, lifted the front wheel and drove at the far bank, sand-spit dead ahead.
Spray, driven by the wall of water, struck his face.
He felt the wind of it and the cold.
He hit the spit and threw his weight forward, bulling the BMW up the steep slope and into the vee.
Mariana was halfway over the bank.
Desperation gave him strength.
He grabbed her collar, dragging her clear and across the mud like a life-size rag doll.
The roar of the water deafened them.
They heard, like thunder, the explosion of its power as it struck the distant road, and saw the highway break and rise in two sections like two sides of a lifting bridge.
Then there was nothing but the river running wide and strong and dark and it was as if the highway had never existed.
For a moment Trent and Mariana were held immobile, stunned by the incredible power from which they had so narrowly escaped.
Trent broke the spell.
Safe in the central eye of the storm, they had ten or fifteen minutes in which to reach the comparative safety of the track leading up through the rain forest to the President's cabin.
Shrilling overhead, the hurricane clawed at the leaf canopy of the rain forest, tearing great holes in it.
The track had become a shallow river: the clay had been eaten away from the broken rock and pebble surface, and the front wheel of the motor cycle kicked continuously against the handlebars.
Trent rode in first gear, headlight tunnelling into the forest gloom through which the rain bucketed.
Onward and upward the track wound, clinging to the side of the ridge like a pale slippery centipede.
Nature had drawn a demarcation line far more precise  than any national frontier drawn by man and Trent and Mariana burst free of the rain forest and into the pine-clad uplands at nineteen hundred feet.
They had almost outrun the hurricane — or the hurricane had dawdled, keen to exact its full revenge on the mountain flanks that had initially defeated it.
Back on the storm-front, lightning flashed and thunder exploded in long runs that seemed to envelop the length of the mountain chain as if spread by a giant paint-roller.
The pines grew spaced as in a plantation.
There was no shrub and palm cover bound by creepers as there had been in the rain forest so that the track was little protected from the squalls that struck up the mountainside, screeching like banshees, as they bowed the slender treetrunks almost to the ground.
The timber opened as they breasted a ridge and Trent glimpsed a steeply-sloping meadow up ahead and a patch of white.
The track dipped, weaving into a wooded hollow.
They came to a fork.
Mariana pointed Trent to the left.
Another five minutes and they were at the edge of the meadow.
Trent braked and swung the BMW back into the shelter of the pine trees.
Kicking down the foot-rest, he dismounted and stretched a little of the stiffness out of his shoulders.
He unslung the gun case from across his chest, unzipping it as he gave Mariana a grin.
‘We made it,’ he said and took the second gun from Mariana's shoulders without really looking at her.
He checked the actions and pumped a cartridge back into the breach of each gun before slipping upward through the trees.
The meadow was three hundred yards across and a little more in length.
The cabin stood in the centre.
It was one of those houses children draw: a door in the middle, matching windows each side, sloping roof and a chimney sticking up.
The roof was thatched with wano palm; white walls, varnished wood — simple, as befitted the reputation of the President.
He felt Mariana's touch on his shoulder.
‘What's wrong? she asked.
‘Probably nothing, but it's like crossing a road, he told her.
‘Look first and you don't get killed.’
He took his binoculars from his breast pocket.
Four yemery trees shaded the cabin and a dozen or so pines were scattered across the upper slope.
Trent guessed that the meadow had been cleared originally because its soil was richer than the sandy loam common to the ridge.
Certainly the trees were massive in comparison with the feathery pines of the forest.
The mountainside, climbing steeply from the head of the meadow, was concave so that it formed a natural amphitheatre cupping a quarry face.
Trent couldn't see whether the track ran on to the quarry or stopped at the cabin.
No vehicle was in sight and the cabin windows were uncurtained and unshuttered.
No smoke came from the chimney.
Little Red Riding Hood came into Trent's thoughts as he studied the scene.
Thunder rolled as he turned to ask Mariana where the President kept his Land-Rover.
A squall screamed through the trees and blasted a curtain of rain up the meadow.
Rather than shout, Trent aped driving and raised his eyebrows in enquiry.
Mariana mimed a lean-to round the back.
Putting an arm round her shoulder, he crouched down and used a stick to draw the meadow in the dirt.
He marked in the cabin, the quarry, and the track up as far as the cabin and back down through the dip to the fork.
Pointing to the right fork, he passed her the stick.
Mariana hatched the drop to the river to their right and dragged a furrow through it round the side of the meadow and on up the mountain with a branch cutting off at right angles to run along the top of the quarry.
Trent pointed to the quarry road.
He scrubbed out the map with his boot before remounting the motor cycle.
Mariana swung up behind him.
The right fork ran through pine forest well below the level of the meadow before climbing  to meet the quarry track, which ran in a slight curve following the concave face of the mountain.
The pines on the lower edge fragmented his view of the meadow so that his first clear sight of the cabin's rear came as they reached the quarry top.
A steep path cut down from the quarry edge to the meadow.
Again Trent braked in the shadows of the trees and studied the cabin through his binoculars.
A County-model Land-Rover had been backed up against a stack of firewood in the shelter of a thatched carport.
A sheet of plastic covered the woodpile.
A small shield bearing the Presidential arms was stencilled on the vehicle's front door and Trent could see the silver pennant staff on the bonnet.
A back door led out to the carport and there were two windows, just as there were in the front.
A big storage chest stood to the left of the door.
The carport and Land-Rover obstructed Trent's view of the windows.
The quarry was wider than it was deep, perhaps sixty yards across and dropping eighty feet sheer into a small lake, the water dyed red by the mud washed down by the rain.
A few rocks showed in the water close in to the quarry face and there was a crescent of sand the meadow side of the water with two giant pines shading the right corner.
With the sun out, it would be a wonderful place for a picnic.
Two hundred yards of open grassland stretched between the treeline and the cabin, no cover.
Shooting him as he made his approach would be easier than pumping lead into a target.
He beckoned Mariana to draw the inside of the cabin.
Large living-room in the front with two doors.
One led to the kitchen, the other to the President's bedroom with a bathroom off it.
A door connected kitchen with bathroom, with the rear door leading from the kitchen to the carport.
Trent walked back and studied the footpath before remounting the motor cycle.
He signalled Mariana to follow on foot and left one of the shotguns with her.
First gear, footbrake and handbrake, he slithered down the shale and slippery boulder track that twisted between the pine trees.
Twice he nearly lost control and rested, steadying his nerve.
He knew fatigue as a temptress capable of leading the unwary into shortcuts that were fatal.
From the meadow edge, he could see the rear windows of the cabin.
Nothing moved.
He laid the shotgun across his lap.
A heavy squall drove up the meadow, bowing the trees before howling away up the mountain face.
Lightning struck out of the towering cloudbank.
He released the clutch as the thunder broke upon him: the power of its sound smashed him into the saddle as he zig-zagged fast across the smooth grass towards the cabin.
He braked and grabbed up the shotgun as he laid the bike over, sliding into the shelter of the woodpile.
He crawled on toes and elbows round the Land-Rover.
One door, two windows…
He had done it so often, yet it got worse rather than easier: pain in the gut, sticky sourness in the back of the throat, thighs trembling with tension but the hands steady.
He closed his eyes and waited for the pupils to widen.
Up into a crouch, charge.
He leapt and took out the window to the President's bedroom with his left shoulder.
He hit the floor, rolling, and lay flat, shotgun ready.
The President sat at a plain wooden desk to the right of the door through to the front room.
He wore Marks and Spencer boxer shorts, a pair of rubber flip-flops, and thirty-six hours of silver bristle on his cheeks.
He seemed to take for ever to look down at Trent.
Neither surprise nor fear showed in his eyes.
He wasn't even focusing.
The tumbler in his right hand was almost empty.
So was the bottle of Famous Grouse on the desk blotter.
Clothes lay on the floor and the bed hadn't been made.
Trent rolled to the living-room door and opened it.
Empty.
He checked the bathroom and kitchen and only then stood up to look through the windows to be certain that no one had made a run for the trees.
He felt no  embarrassment.
Precautions had kept him alive.
He walked round the cabin, checking the ground for tracks.
Then he waved for Mariana.
He would have preferred holding her back but that couldn't be done without her getting frightened that something bad had happened.
Back in the President's bedroom, he said, ‘Good afternoon, sir,’ which struck him as a little formal in the circumstances.
The President didn't bother to look up.
Instead he reached for the whisky bottle.
Trent removed it.
‘I've brought Mariana with me,’ he said.
‘She'll be here in a few minutes.’
Giving the President time to gather himself, Trent straightened the sheets and bedspread.
He picked the clothes up off the floor and put them away in the wardrobe, and found the President a clean pair of slacks and a shirt before sweeping up the broken glass.
The President sat studying his tumbler.
He didn't seem upset that it was empty and Trent had the feeling that, given the chance, the President would have poured himself another whisky and drunk it for something to do rather than from desire for alcohol.
Trent had never heard of the President being a drinker, secret or otherwise, and it was the sort of habit that couldn't stay hidden in a country of Belpan's size.
‘I'm sorry, sir,’ he said, ‘but you have to shower.
You can't let your granddaughter see you like this.’
Receiving no response, he went through to the bathroom and turned the cold tap on full.
He went back for the President, lifting him from behind by both elbows and walking him into the shower with his boxer shorts and his sandals on.
The President walked well enough, no struggle.
Trent held him under the cold water, hoping he would make some effort to support himself.
Trent was out of luck.
‘I'm going to let you go, sir, so you'll have to stand up or you'll fall down.’
He thought that was about the stupidest  statement he'd ever made.
He had no way of knowing what the President thought.
He placed the President's hands against the wall, let go, and thanked God when he remained on his feet.
Trent checked that there was a towel and said, ‘I'll make coffee, sir.
I'm sorry, but for your granddaughter's sake, you really do have to straighten up.’
Trent saw Mariana up on the forest edge when he went to fetch wood from the carport.
He considered meeting her halfway and warning her but decided that getting coffee into her grandfather had priority.
The stove lit easily.
He filled the kettle and set it on the hob, then went through to the front room, closed the shutters, and tried radioing on the frequency Caspar had given him for the US Embassy in Belpan City.
He didn't expect to receive through the static created by the storm but he broadcast a warning and his position in the hope that the Embassy had equipment that would pick him up.
Back in the kitchen he found a stove-enamel jug.
Twelve tablespoons of coffee and a single mug of boiling water struck him as right for the emergency.
He poured an inch of condensed milk into the mug plus four spoons of sugar and stirred the coffee before straining it.
He carried the kill-or-cure mixture through to the President.
He had hoped to find him attempting to dress but he was still propped up under the shower, hands against the wall.
‘Excuse me, sir, I've brought your coffee.’
The President slowly turned his head.
The alcohol had sapped the strength out of his jaw muscles so that the skin fell in folds and made him look like a tortoise.
He seemed to Trent to have withdrawn so far into himself that there was nothing left in his eyes.
That was how he looked, but Trent hoped that part of the dead-eye effect came from the President not wearing his spectacles.
He said, ‘Coffee, sir,’ and offered the mug, though holding it just out of the President's reach.
‘You can come out of the shower, sir.’
The President managed to focus on the free hand Trent  proffered.
Pushing himself off the wall, he grabbed at it, missed, and nearly fell.
Trent caught him by the forearm.
He swayed as he stepped clear of the shower tray.
His knees almost buckled but he fought himself upright and managed to get Trent into focus.
Suddenly there was fear in his eyes.
‘Who are you?’
Trent, sir.
European Economic Community, Anti-Terrorist Unit.
I'm sort of on leave.
I'm afraid there's been some sort of coup mounted.
I'm trying to help.’
‘Who?’
‘You, sir.
Your Government.’
Trent closed the President's fingers round the mug.
‘Mariana's coming down the meadow.
I'll hold her off as long as I can.
Tell her you're not well.
I think the coffee would help, sir.
And perhaps being sick…’
TEN
A light show of billion-ampere strobes blazed across the thick black screen of cloud now burying the mountainside.
Dwarfed by the storm and bent almost double, Mariana staggered into the wind and rain.
She almost crumpled as the full rage of thunder exploded over the meadow and was still fifty yards short of the cabin when the squall hit.
It plucked her from her feet and spun her round, tumbling her back uphill as if playing a game of roll-a-ball.
Trent was already running.
His feet seemed hardly to touch the ground as the wind drove him up the slope.
He saw Mariana scrabble at the grass, desperate for purchase.
Then he was with her, crouching to shelter her with his body.
He shouted in her ear that they should crawl but the wind flicked the words from his lips.
The only means of communication was sign language.
Holding Mariana close to the ground, he turned her into the wind — fifteen minutes to crawl fifty yards…
Trent held Mariana tight round the shoulders, blocking her view of her grandfather who knelt at the lavatory bowl as if in prayer.
Safe in the kitchen, he shouted at Mariana that her grandfather was resting.
The cabin walls shook and the roof trusses bowed as the wind fought to rip the roof free.
He looked into the living-room.
Despite the shutters, both front windows had imploded, glass powdering the floor.
They heard, through the thunder, one of the great yemery trees shatter.
First pouring boiling water over the used coffee grounds, Trent led Mariana through to the living-room, seating her on the sofa.
‘Don't move,’ he ordered.
‘There's glass everywhere.
Fall and you'll cut yourself to ribbons.’
He lit the hurricane lamps set in brass wall-brackets and found a pressure lamp for the dining table.
Back in the kitchen he poured coffee, adding sweetened condensed milk for instant energy.
Mariana looked up as he returned to the living-room.
Wet as a water rat, she sat hugging her knees.
The shape of her body hidden, she looked in her mid-teens, defenceless.
Her hair had been flattened by the storm so that it made Trent think of a squashed  astrakan hat.
Bruised shadows of fatigue showed beneath her eyes — eyes in which Trent read gratitude and the beginnings of dependency.
He wanted neither.
She was part of an equation, nothing more, along for the trip because that was the way of it.
‘I'll fetch a broom.’
Hurrying through the kitchen, he found the President keeled over on the bathroom floor.
He knelt to check the old man's pulse only to discover that the President was uncaring rather than unconscious.
Wiping the old man's mouth on a facecloth, Trent helped him to his feet.
‘You'll be better off lying down, sir,’ he said, and supported him through to the bedroom.
He hesitated before slipping the President's boxer shorts down but it was part of the job.
He toppled him forward on to the bed and covered him with a sheet.
Mariana made a move to help as Trent returned to the living-room with broom and pan.
Trent waved her back.
He wasn't planning to fight indoors but it might happen and sweeping the floor clear of glass was the same as cleaning his guns — not a task to be left to someone else.
Anyway, Mariana needed rest.
Finished, he tried the radio again.
Static crackled and flared through the roar of the storm outside.
Trent repeated his broadcast to Caspar and gave Mariana a shrug.
He switched the radio off.
Fetching the saddlebags from the motor cycle he spread the contents on the table.
He knew that Mariana was watching as he stripped the shotguns, oiling them before reloading the magazines.
He did the same for the Walther.
The worst of the thunder had passed and there was a softer tone to the storm's rage.
Trent crossed to a window, peering out through the heart-shaped decoration cut in the shutter.
The terrain was clear in his mind.
Ten minutes and he'd try preparing the potential battlefield.
He saw Mariana shiver as he went back to the table and slipped the Walther into his belt.
She was studying her hands.
‘You should change into dry clothes,’ he said.
‘I'm going to have to go out for a while.’
She looked up at him.
For a moment he refused to meet her eyes but she said his name.
‘Trent…’
Then, ‘Is that all you think you can do?
Kill people?’
Her choice of phrase had been deliberate.
The meaning struck him like smoke touching off a fire alarm.
‘What do you want me to do?’
‘Hold me.
Please…’
Then she said, ‘Damn,’ and her face crumpled.
‘Go away, damn you…’
Soon after first light, either Caspar's or Louis' men would come for the President.
Whoever came, Trent was determined that they should come on foot and across open ground.
And he wanted time to ready himself, that most of all.
Slicing pieces of the plastic sheeting covering the woodpile as extra waterproofing, he had taped his shotguns into the packages that he now carried slung over one shoulder.
He had found chainsaw and fuel in the carport storage chest.
He had been tempted to use the President's Land-Rover but the tracks would have shown.
Now he was on  the edge of the pine forest at the bottom of the meadow.
He had covered the ground in short dashes between the squalls.
With less than an hour of daylight remaining, he carried a flashlight — not that it would be of much help with the rain cascading down as if the Maya Rain God had corralled every raincloud in Central America and pulled the plugs out.
Laying the shotguns well out of danger, he started the chainsaw.
The wind, blasting up the valley, decided the direction the trees would fall.
One by one, he cut deep wedges out of the trunks each side of the track, watching as the wind snapped them over.
He went on cutting until the fallen pines formed a thick overlapping vee across the track on the edge of the meadow.
Carrying on down the ridge, he felled half a dozen pines across the track at the bottom of the dip.
He chose small trees because he wanted them cleared.
Then he took the right fork of the track, following it for a hundred yards, and blocked it so that clearing the barricade in a hurry would require a bulldozer.
He cut up through the forest to where he'd left the shotguns and followed the treeline round to the left until he hit a shallow ravine almost opposite the cabin.
The rain wash-off into the ravine had flushed the goodness out of the soil, so that instead of grass, there was a strip of thin scrub and stunted trees.
Trent found a boulder on the edge of the ravine which he prised loose so that a light push would send it crashing down the ridge and he hid one of the shotguns at the foot of a solitary pine.
Crossing the head of the ravine, he headed on up the meadow keeping within the treeline for protection and using the flashlight.
He hit the lake at the foot of the quarry.
Twice a squall bowled him into the water as he followed the shore round.
The chainsaw weighed a ton.
He hid the second shotgun under a fallen branch at the foot of one of the pines shading the beach.
Resting his back against the  tree, he switched off the flashlight and waited for his irises to expand before starting down the meadow.
He had set a pressure lamp on the Land-Rover's hood before leaving the cabin but he couldn't see it through the rain.
He was heading straight into the wind and the force of it buffeted him from side to side until his sense of direction became totally confused.
He thought of sitting down to wait for a break in the storm but that could have been all night so he struggled on downhill, angling a little to the left, until he met the treeline at the bottom of the meadow.
Turning right, he hit the track leading to the cabin and followed it back up.
He walked round to the carport and put the chainsaw back in the chest.
The lamp had lost most of its pressure.
He gave it a few pumps and collected an armful of logs for the stove before going in through the back door.
Checking his watch, he found that he'd been out of the cabin for a little over three hours.
He dropped the logs off in the kitchen, adding a couple to the stove, and put the kettle on.
He looked in on the President.
The old man wasn't in his bedroom.
Trent returned to the stove and stood there, warming himself, as he tried to gather his energy.
He needed to banish Mariana from his thoughts.
She wasn't important…not in the scheme of things, whatever that meant.
In reminding himself that his responsibilities were for the President, he recalled the way that Mariana had looked at the old man that first day when he had met them out on the dock, the President casting for bonefish.
He had seen pride and admiration in her eyes, and love — and that protectiveness of the young for the old that came with love.
He thought that she must be feeling a great deal of pain, and that there was nothing he could do about it, and that, if his suspicions were correct, her pain would get a great deal worse…
Above everything, he wanted to get into dry clothes and sleep, but his clothes were in the living-room — as were Mariana and her grandfather.
He put three mugs on a tray and poured coffee so that he would have something to do when he went into the living-room.
It was a lot like hitting a room where there might be terrorists waiting in ambush, he thought as he opened the door.
The President sat at the table.
He had put on a fresh pair of boxer shorts or the old pair had dried.
And he had found a tumbler and another bottle of Famous Grouse from which he'd taken, at most, two tots.
He had the look of an old man waiting outside the doctor's office in a paupers' hospital; sent for, rather than there by choice; content to wait; apathetic as to what the doctor would tell him, because good news no longer existed and bad news was no longer bad, but merely an essential ingredient of his condition.
It was all a flashback to his own childhood and to his father, Trent thought as he looked across at Mariana.
She was on the sofa, sitting as he'd left her, arms wrapped round her knees.
She had changed into the spare slacks and jersey he'd brought from Golden Girl .
He had been correct about the pain.
What he hadn't considered, or had tried not to consider, was the extent to which he cared.
Mariana said, with a lot of anger in her voice, ‘Where have you been?’
The President looked up and Trent was certain that he knew who he was.
Careful, with the old man listening, he said, ‘Outside…walking around.’
He handed Mariana a mug and took the tray over to the table.
He said, ‘Good evening, Mister President,’ and, too exhausted to bother with niceties, took him by the elbow.
‘You should be in bed, sir.
Come along…’
In the bathroom, he asked, ‘Do you want to brush your teeth, sir?’
The President regarded him for a moment and Trent thought that the old man might rally.
But all he said was, ‘They're not mine.’
‘Then perhaps you should put them in a tumbler,’ Trent  suggested.
‘You'll feel better in the morning…or less dreadful.’
The President managed a slight smile that brought a moment of life to his eyes: ‘You're most considerate, Mister…?’
His esses were a little lax.
‘Trent,’ Trent said.
‘I do my best.’
‘No doubt it goes with the territory.’
As should courage in a President, Trent thought.
He supported the old man over to his bed and fetched a glass of salted water from the kitchen for his teeth.
The President had got himself into bed and covered himself with the sheet.
He looked up as Trent came into the room.
‘They'll come in the morning…’
‘Police or villains, yes, sir,’ Trent said.
‘Perhaps both.
If that happens, it may get messy.’
He put the tumbler on the bedside table: ‘I've put salt in the water, sir.’
‘You are a kind man, Mister Trent.’
The President made as if to reach for Trent's hand but the effort was too great, or perhaps the shame.
‘You will protect Mariana?’
Trent had expected the demand and understood it.
He wasn't prepared to lie.
‘My first duty is with you, sir, but I'll do my best.’
‘I'm quite sure that your best will be most effective, Mister Trent,’ the President said quietly.
Trent felt the knowledge drawn from him as their eyes met.
‘Yes, indeed,’ the President said.
‘Good night, Mister Trent.’
‘Good night, sir.’
Trent searched the kitchen.
The staples were there and canned vegetables but there were no cans of meat.
The President was a keen fisherman and Trent guessed that he hunted — despite the Pine Ridge being a Nature Reserve.
Presidential privilege…
Chopping onion into a pot, he set it to soften in a little oil and went out to check the Land-Rover.
A double-barrelled  twelve-gauge stood upright in a gun rack between the two front seats.
He found a hacksaw in the storage chest.
Back in the kitchen, he stirred rice into the onion, added water and a stock cube and emptied two cans of black-eyed beans into a frying pan, with a half spoonful of chilli, black pepper and garlic purée.
He would have preferred fresh garlic but there wasn't any.
In the few minutes that he had been preparing dinner, the water  drippng from his clothes had formed a pool round his feet.
He was avoiding Mariana and knew it.
And he knew that he couldn't continue avoiding her — or not without catching pneumonia, he thought, and smiled at his own joke.
She hadn't moved from the sofa and didn't look up when he pushed open the door.
He smiled as if nothing unusual had happened and said, ‘Dinner in five minutes.
I'll change into dry clothes.’
He crossed to the table for his spare trousers and combat jacket.
From behind him Mariana said, ‘He's drunk.’
‘The bottle's nearly full.’
Trent held it up as evidence.
‘Don't lie to me.’
‘I'm not.’
‘You're avoiding the truth, which is the same thing.
You do a lot of avoiding.
Look at me, damn you.
You do, don't you?’
She seemed pleased that he didn't have an answer.
‘Anyway he doesn't drink.’
‘I hadn't heard that he did,’ Trent said.
‘What did you do to him?’
‘Nothing.’
His answer failed to satisfy Mariana: ‘You said you wouldn't hurt him.’
‘Promised,’ Trent corrected quietly.
‘I don't break promises.’
‘Ever?’
‘Mariana, if you have to ask, there's no point in my answering.’
Taking his clothes, Trent checked the President.
The old man was asleep and snoring.
Satisfied that he was safe, Trent changed in the bathroom.
He draped his wet clothes over a chair in front of the stove and ladled rice and beans on to two plates.
Mariana had moved to the table where he had left the map.
She had found the photograph.
Looking up at Trent, she searched his face for a resemblance.
‘She's very beautiful.
She's your mother, isn't she?’
‘Yes.’
Again she studied the photograph: ‘And your father?’
There was doubt in her voice.
‘The man I work for,’ Trent said.
‘He and my father were in the army together, friends.
It's an old picture,’ he added in an incompetent explanation of something she hadn't asked.
She said, ‘Oh, I see,’ as if it hadn't been obvious to her that the photograph was old.
She looked away and Trent thought for a moment that she would leave it alone, but then she looked back and asked quickly, to get it out, ‘Did your mother leave him for your father?’
Putting their dinner on the table, Trent reached for the photograph and studied it for the umpteenth time since finding it on Don Roberto's piano — his mother, and the Colonel as a young man.
He accepted that the Colonel's look of complacent ownership had prompted Mariana's question, and that his mother, her face unseen by her escort, who lounged at her feet on the grass, projected a sense of distance and of slight embarrassment at the relationship implied by the taking of the picture.
Mistaking Trent's silence for rejection, Mariana said, ‘I'm sorry.
I was wrong to pry.’
‘It's all right.’
In part he was relieved that the photograph had prompted Mariana to pose the question in confirmation of his own suspicions.
‘I don't know the answer,’ he said.
‘My parents died when I was twelve.
I found the photograph  last week in someone's house.
Framed,’ he added because the framing was important.
The contrasting feelings displayed made the picture disturbing; not something to keep for nearly forty years, let alone frame in silver for display in the drawing-room.
He could see in Mariana's eyes that her thoughts mirrored his own.
There were no variations of fading between the main body of the photograph and the edges, as there would have been had it been in the frame for years.
‘Odd,’ he said.
And deliberate, he felt sure.
A message?
A warning?
But of what, and why?
His relationship with Don Roberto had been strictly business and even that had been in abeyance since Trent's posting to Ireland.
‘She was very beautiful, your mother,’ Mariana repeated into the silence: ‘How did she die?’
‘A car crash…’
His mother had driven their secondhand Jaguar into a concrete wall six weeks after his father's death.
Fifteen years later Trent had visited the spot.
The road ran straight across the desert for twenty miles.
Then came the corner, the road bending round the walled compound of a Sheikh's racing stables.
The wall stood twenty yards back from the road.
Possibly his mother had fallen asleep at the wheel.
‘She was driving very fast,’ he said as he folded the map round the photograph and tucked it into the inner pocket of the waterproof saddlebag.
Close to one hundred miles an hour had been the accident investigator's opinion.
‘Eat while the food's hot,’ he prodded Mariana.
‘One day I'll cook properly for you on Golden Girl .’
In their discussion of the photograph, Trent had forgotten for a moment that Golden Girl lay miles inland.
‘If I can't get her back to the sea, I'll have to become a farmer,’ he said.
’ Golden Girl 's all I've got.’
‘Except for your job…’
Mariana, too, had spoken without thinking.
But it was said and the barrier was back between them, built of suspicions neither of them dared  bring to the surface…though Trent had intended asking her about her grandfather.
Now the moment had passed.
Taking his plate through to the kitchen, he washed it and filled the kettle.
Seated at the kitchen table, he began the long, tedious task of hacksawing all but eight inches off the barrels of the President's twelve-gauge.
It wasn't a job he enjoyed.
The gun had been handbuilt by Holland & Holland of London, perfectly balanced and beautifully engraved.
The gunsmith would have murdered him or had a heart attack.
Mariana came to the door.
For a moment she just looked, then she said in a strangled gasp, ‘That's Gran'pa's gun.’
‘I'm trying to protect him,’ Trent said.
‘Believe me, Mariana.
A sawn-off shotgun is the best weapon in an enclosed space…other than a grenade,’ he added for accuracy, and smiled.
‘With grenades you need to be outside the enclosed space.’
She said, ‘Oh, I see,’ and went through to the bathroom.
The partition door was thin and the door was a poor fit.
To give her privacy, Trent said to the door, ‘I'll try the radio.
Give me a shout when you're finished and we'll have coffee.’
He broadcast his message to the US Embassy, repeating it a dozen times.
He wasn't discouraged by the static.
Compared to the DEA's sophisticated equipment the President's radio was akin to a man running uphill with a message in a forked stick.
Mariana called him.
She was already pouring coffee.
He sat down at the kitchen table and picked up the hacksaw.
She put a mug in front of him: ‘Gran'pa was already drunk when you got here, wasn't he?’
‘Yes.’
He began sawing.
‘Don't,’ she said and he stopped.
‘Who are you meant to be protecting?’
‘The President.’
‘But you weren't, were you?
You were protecting me.’
‘I'm trying to do both.’
‘By lying to me?’
‘I've never lied to you, Mariana.’
‘You haven't told me the truth.’
‘I don't know the truth.’
He had bits and pieces of it, and suspicions in which he found difficulty believing, and wished not to believe, despite the growing evidence…but not the whole thing.
Not yet.
Though he sensed that he was getting close — his goal, the gringo brain behind the coup, of whom Miguelito had boasted.
He knew that he should discuss her grandfather with Mariana but remained frightened of hurting her, or of being the immediate instrument of her hurt.
‘It's complicated…’ he began.
Which was what adults told children, he thought:You're too young to understand .
And he'd lost her.
‘I don't need your damned protection,’ she said.
‘I can look after myself.
Leave me alone.
Do your bloody job.
Bloody, that's exactly what it is.’
She grabbed up her coffee and slammed the door behind her.
Trent understood her anger.
It was born of fear for her grandfather, he thought as he returned to his butchery of the President's shotgun.
Finished, he stripped down his Walther.
Thumbing the bullets out on to a sheet of old newspaper, he set to work with his knife.
He heard the President stumble in the bathroom.
Reloading the Walther, he waited for the lavatory to flush before going through to help the old man back to bed.
He tucked his Walther under the old man's pillow: ‘Just in case, sir…’
Then he tried the radio again.
Mariana was asleep on the sofa.
He covered her with a blanket and set the alarm clock to ring in an hour, wrapping it in a towel.
He slept, sitting at the table, the towel his pillow.
Waking, he again broadcast to Caspar.
Mariana slept restlessly, curled up like a child.
Watching her, Trent recalled sailing towards what he had expected to be his  death the previous morning on Golden Girl …his sense of deprivation, of having been robbed of his right to a normal life.
By the Colonel.
Opening the saddlebag, he took out the photograph.
ELEVEN
Although the main body of the hurricane had moved north, vicious squalls still tore at the mountainside, flaying the incessant downpour into giant whips of solid water that lashed across the meadow.
Trent lay on the roof under a rubber poncho he'd found in the kitchen.
He had been there for an hour and a half.
The wind and wet had sucked the warmth out of his blood and he shivered constantly.
He had wanted rain.
If the attack came, the attackers would be confident in their numbers.
Their desire to escape the rain might hurry their attack — not much but enough to give him a small advantage.
He had begun his watch half an hour before first light.
Now it was the law, sent by Caspar, who were coming.
Without binoculars Trent could decipher the POLICE signs on the two Land-Rovers' front doors as the sharp bends in the track forced the drivers broadside to the cabin.
They would be at the light barricade at the bottom of the dip in ten minutes.
Five minutes to clear the trees.
A further five minutes to the vee-shaped barricade where they would be forced to leave the vehicles, then five minutes walk up the meadow.
Sliding down the pitch of the roof, hidden from the track, Trent dropped to the ground.
Back in the kitchen, he blew  the embers up in the stove, added a couple of logs and put the kettle on.
Mariana hadn't moved from the couch.
She had slept restlessly but the slim shape under the blankets now lay still.
Trent guessed that she was awake.
‘The good guys have won.
Police,’ he said.
‘They'll be here in twenty minutes.
Kettle's on.’
Returning to the warmth of the kitchen stove, he stripped and pulled on the clothes he'd worn on the motor cycle.
They were damp but warm.
He slung the twin cartridge belts over his shoulders and tucked a roll of the heavy tape into each of his jacket pockets before making coffee.
He carried the pot and three mugs through to the front room.
She was sitting up now.
The anger remained in her, hoarded from the previous night when she had slammed the door on him.
Sleep had flattened one side of her Afro and a curl had broken free above her forehead.
He considered going to her and brushing the curl back, but he wasn't sure how she would react.
Probably bite his hand off, he decided and smiled instead.
‘You look like a unicorn,’ he said.
She pushed at the curl, then reached down for the shoulder-bag that lay at her feet and dug out an ebony hair pick.
‘You don't have to stare.’
He crossed to the window.
Through the heart-shaped cutout in the shutter, he saw the Land-Rovers disappear into the dip where he'd felled the small trees.
‘You said they were police,’ Mariana said.
She referred to his cartridge belts.
‘Think of them as a business suit,’ Trent said.
‘I'll wake your grandfather.’
Taking the third mug of coffee from the tray, he carried it through to the bedroom.
The old man looked a wreck.
His hands shook as he took the mug.
Trent surprised a disconcertingly familiar look in his eyes, a combination of guilt, anger and bitterness that he had learnt to recognise in his own father as the approach of one more milestone in his downward journey.
Secretary to the Jockey Club, Secretary to the Polo Club — the clubs ever smaller and in more distant outposts of equestrian society.
Trent had gained from that odyssey a mastery of languages and dialects supported by an education shared both with the children of the social élite and with the riff-raff of the stableyard.
Captain Hamilton Mahoney, despite his financial disasters, had been a loving, understanding, and exciting father.
But prone to lapses of memory after a binge…
Unsure of how much the President would remember of the previous day, Trent reintroduced himself.
‘Trent, sir.
Anti-Terrorist Unit.
British.’
As an employer, EC lacked punch.
The President fumbled at the bedtable for his glasses.
Trent found them on the floor and watched the old man thread the sprung arms over his ears.
‘The police are coming up the valley, Mr President,’ he warned, as a hint to him that he should tidy himself.
‘Looks as if you're safe now, but keep my pistol handy just in case.’
The old man seemed lost for a moment.
Then, remembering, he fumbled under the pillows for Trent's Walther.
He realised how odd he must look, sitting up in bed, silver bristling his cheeks, coffee mug in one hand, long-barrelled pistol in the other.
With a touch of irony, he said, ‘Thank you, Mister Trent.
I feel better already.’
Politicians were masters of the quick recovery, Trent thought as he went back to the front room.
‘He's fine,’ he told Mariana and crossed to the window, checking his watch.
He had expected the police to have reappeared.
Finally a single Land-Rover ground over the ridge and stopped at the barricade.
The second must have got stuck at the first trees — or the driver hadn't bothered to navigate the obstacle.
Trent watched the policemen drop down from the vehicle; four of them.
He couldn't see their faces.
Ponchos, like the one he'd used as protection on the roof, covered their khaki uniforms.
One of them waved a greeting at the cabin — the sergeant, Trent presumed.
Spreading out  a little, they came up the hill, rain and wind pushing them, sometimes staggering under the force of it.
They held their automatic rifles across their midriffs, four friends out for a day's sport.
‘They're here,’ Trent told Mariana and called back to the bedroom: ‘Mister President…’
Then he remembered another morning.
A morning with US Special Forces in South-East Asia.
Rangers jumping from a helicopter and spreading out in this same way, a little over-confident as many American soldiers tended to be, hyped up by TV and movie images to believe in their innate superiority.
Belpan's police force, if at all, were trained in the British police tradition.
Four down the hill — the others covering the cabin's rear from the mountain.
The delay had been to give the second team time to gain position.
He was a little surprised to find that he wasn't afraid.
But there wasn't much to fear once you could see the enemy.
From then on it was just a job of work to be done.
You succeeded or failed.
He looked back at Mariana.
Since waking, she had hardly moved.
Seeing her sitting there, clinging to her anger, Trent was reminded, suddenly, of a mother in a famine-relief camp cradling a dead child — frozen in grief.
If she released her grasp, she would have nothing left.
Despite any explanations he might offer her, he had to remain the enemy.
For the moment, the alternative was too painful to her.
‘I'm sorry, Mariana,’ he said.
‘I made a mistake.
The good guys are bad guys in disguise.’
He slid the table into the centre of the room, tipping it on to its side, and dragged over the couch with Mariana still on it, so that the furniture formed a fort.
He laid the sawn-off shotgun on the sofa beside her.
Her expression hadn't changed.
‘Keep down.
Don't move.
Don't look.
If they come in, shoot them…if you want to,’ he added.
The choice was hers.
Forcing open the door against the wind, he waved at the  advancing policeman and stepped clear of the cabin so that they would see he was unarmed.
Watching him, they were unable to see each other so could only guess at what warned him.
He ran, neither weaving nor ducking, unarmed and apparently panicked, across the face of the meadow towards the treeline, leaping a low bush, hearing shots.
There was little chance of his being hit, but he slipped deliberately, pitching forward, striking the ground with his shoulder and rolling fast for the ravine where he'd hidden the first gun.
Once, twice, three times, he rolled, hands scrabbling at the mud, crashing through light scrub for the safety of the trees and the ravine.
He lay there for a moment, getting his breath.
Then he was up and levering the round boulder free, not listening to it crash down the mountain, doubting if the attackers would hear or see — and, if they did, whether they would be persuaded that it was his own body tumbling — but it was one extra little chance that cost him only a few seconds.
Tearing the wrapping from the pump gun, he unzipped the case and headed uphill fast through the pines.
He had planned it carefully, rehearsing every move in his head.
The upper team would have been on the logging track above the natural amphitheatre when he broke for cover.
He thought that they would stay there, the track giving them visibility and line of fire.
They would have radios.
He crossed the track on his belly and went on up a further hundred yards before starting his circle.
He had to take out the man furthest from him first, the man least prepared.
The wind and rain were on his side, masking his movements.
It was an old game, familiar from his past, and he was expert in it.
His quarry crouched on a rock at the apex of a slight bend in the track from whence he could see in both directions.
He held his gun ready — one of the Kalashnikovs which Trent had smuggled ashore.
He wore a jungle hat, the brim streaming waterfalls on to his poncho.
Trent waited for a squall to hit, then moved fast, dropping to the ground and crawling the last few yards.
‘O1a, amigo mio ,’ he whispered, watching the man's shoulder-blades leap as if dragged together by a ten-ton truck.
‘No sound, no movement,’ he warned.
‘The shotgun in your back is loaded with deershot.
Even think of being stupid and I'll blow your spine through your navel.’
Against a rifle, the man might have risked diving for the trees.
But against a shotgun…
‘Let me see your face.
Slowly, and your hands where I can see them,’ Trent cautioned.
Trent was reassured by the absence of hate in the dark, watchful, Latin eyes that faced him.
The man was short, slim, mid-thirties.
Old enough to have already proved his courage and, like Trent, a professional.
‘You and I are peons,’ Trent advised, a slight smile of complicity supporting his argument.
‘Let the Big Ones die…if they have the belly for it.
You have a name?’
‘José,’ the man whispered, his lips hardly moving.
‘Good,’ Trent said.
‘You may look back down the mountain.
Up here, how many are you?’
‘Three.’
‘Positioned?’
José nodded down the track to his right.
‘The man closest to you — he also has a name?’
‘Juanito.’
‘And the third man?’
‘We call him the Eel…’
‘You will use your radio to summon Juanito,’ Trent commanded.
‘Tell him that you believe there is someone moving below.
And be careful in your conversation.
I would take no pleasure in killing you.’
With the rain beating at the trees and the wind whistling there was no chance of José using intonation as a warning.
Satisfied, Trent ordered him back into the pines.
He hit him hard on the neck with the side of his hand, catching  him as he fell.
Taping the man's mouth, hands, and ankles took less than a minute.
Then Trent was up and running — important that he halt Juanito well before José's position or the man would be warned by José's absence.
The track ran along the lip of the natural amphitheatre, no trees guarding it from the eighty-foot drop to the small lake, so Trent could look out from his ambush across the track to the meadow below.
The cabin was barely visible in the rain.
No shots had come from there.
Trent hadn't expected any, but took no pleasure in being proved correct.
Juanito belied the diminutive in his name.
Bigger and far heavier than José, broken-nosed, more thug than thinker, dangerous in that his actions would be unpremeditated.
Trent took him from the rear.
A hard sweep of his right hand, the edge smashing into the big man's neck, should have felled the Latin American, but hidden beneath his poncho he wore a studded leather collar.
The studs bit into Trent's hand.
Juanito shook his head clear as he rounded on Trent.
Trent had to stay in close or be shot down, but in close, the big man had the advantage of weight and strength.
Trent kicked at the man's right knee.
Juanito was ready for him, and the Kalashnikov crashed down at Trent's calf.
He grabbed at the barrel and fell with it so that the power of the big man was added to his own strength.
Trent twisted as he fell, the whole weight of his body tearing the rifle free of the man's hands.
With a roar of fury, Juanito was after him, boot swinging at Trent's head, the rifle loose on the ground between them.
Trent rolled again, the boot carving up the side of his skull, the big man thrown off balance again by his own weight.
Trent struck up between the man's legs, right hand stiff as a piece of iron.
Juanito screamed, falling, hands gouging for Trent's throat.
Trent bunched his knees up as a fulcrum and as the man hit them, grasped the big man's trousers at the waist, heaving for his life.
The man tumbled on forward  and over the edge of the track, a scattering of rocks heard through his scream and the splash as he hit the water eighty feet below.
Trent rolled to the other side of the track, grabbing for his pump gun.
‘Freeze, Gringo.’
The Eel, Trent thought — tall, thin, small black eyes bright with natural malice, rain drops shimmering on his dark, oily skin, the Kalashnikov in his hands steady as a rock.
‘Drop the gun.’
Trent dropped it.
‘Hands behind your head.’
Trent obeyed.
The Eel spat over the cliff.
‘A pig…we are well rid of him.
José?’
‘Alive,’ Trent said.
‘In the trees.’
‘Take me to him.
Walk carefully,’ the Eel warned.
A pine tree grew out of the face of the amphitheatre a little ahead of them and fifteen feet below the edge of the track.
Then a further sixty-five-foot drop to the water.
He would be killed even if he didn't hit a rock — though there had been a far greater profusion of rocks visible the previous evening.
Rain had fallen continuously, the mountain spilling waterfalls into the amphitheatre.
How deep was the water now, Trent wondered.
Beyond the pine, and a little lower on the cliff, a dozen or so bushes grew from a wide fissure.
Below the bushes lay a ledge and then a sheer rock face plunging forty feet to the clay-reddened lake.
Or be shot in the back of the head?
It wasn't much of a choice.
Trent's thoughts returned to the murdered pilot.
At least he retained his sight.
And he must keep his eyes open, seeing all the way down.
A shard of flint on the track marked the point.
Seven paces, Trent thought.
His mind had become detached from his body so that he was watching himself.
This also was familiar to him, the ability, at times  of danger, to issue commands to his body as if it were a separate entity.
Now! he thought and dived for the tree.
Swing, he screamed at himself as his arms crashed into the pine, not holding, but the weight of his body already carrying him on in the next arc of his trajectory.
Don't think,look , he screamed against the desire to shut his eyes against the terror of the fall.
His right hip struck the rockside above the bushes.
Then he was clinging to them, even as he felt them tear loose from the rock.
Then the ledge below, the rock edge ripping his hands, and his shoulders almost jerked out of their sockets as he fought his boots flat for a hundredth of a second against the cliff face.
Pushing hard back against the mountain, he spun backwards out from the rock, curling over in the air so slowly that he could watch, in slow motion, first the passing overhead of the dark clouds, then the mountains, the far side of the valley, the meadow, the cabin, and, at last, the lake red with mud.
He tucked himself into a tight ball, and, at the last moment, rolled on to his side from terror of the rocks beneath the surface.
The breath smashed out of him as he hit.
Clay soup filled his mouth, then came the punch of washed-down mud cushioning his body from the final hit of the rock beneath.
It smashed into his ribs, forcing his mouth open again, more soup choking into his lungs, his eyes gummed with it as he fought for the surface.
The cliff face protected him from the Eel above.
His right leg was numb, his right side ripped and bleeding.
He knew that some ribs were broken; it was a matter of how many.
The Eel, on the radio to his four companions, would be running down the path Trent had ridden the previous afternoon on his motor cycle.
Trent looked across the lake.
Even had he the strength, the swim would take him out from the protection of the cliff.
Desperately he hauled himself along the cliff face, right leg dragging over rocks, waterfalls bucketing their charge of stones and gravel on his head.
Fifty yards.
He kept on telling himself how short the  distance.
He counted each fresh handgrip as a half-pace.
He encouraged himself with promises that after ten paces he could rest, then demanded of himself that he manage another five and another five until he lost count of how far he'd come and how far he had to go.
Through the beating of the rain he thought that he could hear the Eel, feet scrabbling on the gravel path.
He imagined being shot in the water and it closing over his head, filling his mouth and lungs, the last moments of life choked out of him.
Dying with a whimper, he thought.
The little beach where Mariana had played as a child was to his left.
He felt the gravel shelve up under his feet and staggered free of the water.
Looking down the meadow to the cabin, he saw no sign yet of the other four but the Eel was very close.
Trent fumbled with his right hand behind his neck, then collapsed on the sand where he lay sprawled, his right arm thrown back above his head, clay-sodden hair shading his eyes.
The Eel came round the bushes, saw him and cried his triumph.
He walked strangely, swaying at the hips, thin and tall, vicious and deadly.
He held his Kalashnikov in both hands, but not aimed at Trent because there was no need.
The Gringo was finished.
To be certain, he kicked Trent twice on the sole of his right boot.
Then he spoke into his radio.
‘I have him.’
Now!
Trent thought and brought his right arm over fast and smoothly.
The Latino dropped his gun, his hands leaping halfway to his throat before his knees lost their strength.
He crumpled quite slowly, the surprise still frozen in his black eyes.
Crawling over, Trent pulled his small matt-black throwing-knife out of the man's throat, cleaning the blade before replacing it in the sheath between his shoulder-blades.
He thought of taking the man's rifle but knew it was too heavy for him and that he would be incapable of aiming it.
He crawled over to the fallen branch by the big pine, found his  second shotgun and unwrapped it.
The fall had torn one belt from his shoulder, and the cartridges in the other would be too swollen with water to fit the breach.
Eight shots, Trent thought, and dragging himself to his feet, he leaned against the big pine, waiting.
He wasn't sure if they would all come but thought that they would.
They came: a tight little group, guns in the crooks of their arms, chatting and laughing amongst themselves, like hunters strolling up to view the bag after a fine day in the field.
Trent waited till they were close.
He was too tired to care about the morality of it.
It was something to be done.
He stepped clear of the tree, firing from the hip.
The recoil tore at the ripped muscles in his right arm and shoulder.
He thought of holding one shell back but he couldn't be bothered.
He walked down the hill without looking at the dead men, slowly and with difficulty and pain.
In what seemed to him to be the far distance he could see Mariana and the President climbing up the meadow to meet him.
He didn't want to talk.
He wanted to sleep — preferably between clean white sheets in his own bed upstairs in his cottage on the Hamble.
Then he remembered that the cottage had been sold, the money placed in trust for his father's mother, the income paying the fees of the nursing home where she sat all day rocking herself in a wheelchair — Alzheimer's disease.
The sale of the cottage and the setting-up of the trust had been Colonel Smith's doing.
Trent had owned and lived in the cottage as Patrick Mahoney, and Patrick Mahoney was dead.
Tired of it all, he sat down on the thin, wet, short grass.
Mariana reached him first.
Trent let her take his gun.
‘Did they hurt you?’ he asked.
‘No.’
‘No…’
Then he added, ‘I didn't think they would,’ and looked up into the muzzle of his own pistol held steady in the President's hand.