

McDONALD'S FOOD: The Facts UPDATE
A Note to Our Valued Customers
In recent years people have become increasingly aware of the foods they consume — not just from restaurants, but from supermarkets as well.
Have you ever wondered what all those ingredients listed on packaged food are?
What is Ascorbic acid?
Riboflavin?
Niacin?
At McDonald's we believe you deserve straight answers to any questions you might have concerning our food products.
That is why we have taken the lead in the restaurant industry to voluntarily list and explain the ingredients in our food.
We would encourage all restaurants, cafeterias, delicatessens, food vending services and convenience stores to do the same.
Our food is of the highest quality; our ingredients prove it.
At McDonald's we believe food should do you good as well as taste good.
That is why we have based our menu on good nutritious foods.
McDonald's serves almost a million people every day and we believe the only route to continued success is to stay in touch with our customers.
So if you have any questions or comments after reading this booklet, please don't hesitate to contact the:
Our customers are important to us.
You are, after all, 100% of the reason we are in business.
Did you know?
No 1
TROPICAL RAINFORESTS — The Facts
It has been said that McDonald's is involved with the destruction of rainforests of Central and South America in order to raise cattle for hamburgers.
LET'S PUT THE RECORD STRAIGHT.
NOWHERE IN THE WORLD DOES McDONALD'S USE OF BEEF THREATEN OR REMOTELY INVOLVE THE TROPICAL RAINFORESTS.
In the UK McDonald's uses 100% EEC produced beef, in Canada they use 100% Canadian beef, in the United States they use 100% US beef.
McDonald's restaurants in Central and South America (Argentina, Brazil, Costa Rica, Guatemala, Mexico, Panama and Venezuela) only use suppliers who document that their beef has come from long established cattle ranches — not rainforest land.
It is known that rainforest destruction threatens the well-being of the environment.
McDONALD'S HAS NO PART OF IT.
The Company will continue to monitor and adapt policies and practices as necessary to protect the global environment on which we all depend.
McFACT CARD
Did you know?
No 2
CHLOROFLUOROCARBONS (CFCs)— The Facts
Because McDonald's has always been very conscious of all issues relating to the environment, early last year the decision was taken to cease using CFCs in packaging.
CFC's may be found in refrigerators, aerosol cans, air conditioners, foam furniture and packaging.
Other manufacturers have also banned CFCs from their products and it is expected that there will be a sizeable cut in the use of CFCs in the early nineties.
The news from the Antarctic, though not yet conclusive, is deepening international concern.
Ozone is perpetually created and destroyed by the sun's radiation from which it, infact , protects us.
This sensitive balance is believed to be upset by the release of CFC's through the atmosphere, into the stratosphere.
McDonald's UK packaging supplier was instructed to investigate and implement the best non-CFC alternative.
This change-over was completed in April 1988 and all McDonald's foam packaging produced in the UK is now CFC free and carries the CFC FREE message, reassuring customers of this change.
This change in the manufacturing process does not affect the quality of the packaging or McDonald's ability to serve customers with hot, fresh products.
OZONE FRIENDLY
McFACT CARD
Did you know?
No 3
100% PURE BEEF — The Facts
Food hygiene and quality have always been important to McDonald's.
There has been much debate recently regarding the quality of meat used in pre-cooked meals, convenience foods and in the fast service restaurant industry.
McDonald's attention to high standards in this area is not a debatable point.
ONLY prime cuts of lean forequarter and flank are used for their 100% pure beef hamburgers.
No additives; no fillers; no binders; no flavour enhancers.
Just 100% pure beef.
All McDonald's beef comes from EEC-approved European suppliers.
Every consignment of beef arriving at the meat plant is subject to a total of 36 separate quality control checks, carried out by a team of qualified technologists.
If a consignment should fail on any one check — it will be rejected by McDonald's.
In addition, a Ministry of Agriculture representative visits the plant weekly, to monitor its hygiene standards, as well as the quality of the beef.
McDonald's commitment to quality is paramount throughout the production and preparation of all its products, to ensure that customers receive only the highest quality food and beverage.
McFACT CARD
UPDATE
There is growing awareness that the type of food we eat is crucial to our health.
An official government report published in July 1991 has concluded that we need to make substantial changes to the typical British diet if we are to reduce some of the major health concerns such as heart disease.
McDonald's fully endorses the recommendations in the report.
We are constantly searching for ways to better the nutritional quality of our menu, whilst retaining the characteristic taste and flavour of our food.
We have recently replaced the lard in our buns with a smaller quantity of vegetable oil and we have also altered the composition of our sauces.
As a result of this, the amount of calories, fat and saturated fat is very much reduced.
The work does not stop here however, and we will continue to look for ways to improve the nutritional properties of our products.
ON FAST FOODS
‘These arguments (against fast foods) use lack of balance to dramatize a point that would be seen instantly to be ludicrous if presented reasonably.
No one in their right mind would live exclusively on sausages or hamburgers or meat pies (or sweets or crisps) but the arguments are presented as if they would.’
Comment BNF May 1987.
Professor David Conning, Director General, British Nutrition Foundation 
NUTRITION
Nutrition is a word everyone uses these days but what does it mean?
Nutrition is the process by which the body acquires all the foodstuffs it needs to keep it in good working order and converts them into energy, new body tissue and those substances necessary to keep all the body processes (metabolism) going.
HOW MUCH SHOULD WE EAT?
People vary tremendously in their individual requirements for dietary energy (kcalories/kJoules).
People of different ages and sex expend different amounts of energy and some people are more physically active than others.
Even people of the same age and sex can differ considerably in the energy they burn up to keep their bodies going.
It all boils down to a simple equation:
if Energy consumed equals Energy expended — body weight will stay the same.
if Energy consumed exceeds Energy expended — body weight will increase.
This will happen regardless of the type of food eaten.
It is the total amount of energy consumed that is important and there are no specifically ‘fattening’ foods.
However, our foods are made up of three major components which provide energy: carbohydrates, fats and proteins.
It is important to remember that these vary in the amount of energy they provide.
Carbohydrate = 3.75 kcalories (16 kJoules) per gram; fat = 9 kcalories (37 kJoules) per gram; protein = 4 kcalories (17 kJoules) per gram.
So, weight for weight, more energy is provided by foods which are rich in fats.
WHAT NUTRIENTS DO WE NEED?
Approximately 50 nutrients, as well as dietary fibre and water, are needed by the body.
Some of these, such as carbohydrate, fat and protein are needed in relatively large quantities and have been termed macronutrients.
The rest — the vitamins and minerals — are essential but only in very small amounts and are known as micronutrients.
Listed overleaf are the functions and sources of the macronutrients and some important micronutrients.
WHAT IS A HEALTHY DIET?
A healthy diet is one which contains all the essential nutrients in the right proportions.
In order to eat a healthy diet we need to think about two things:
VARIETY
No single food contains all the nutrients we need.
Different foods contain different nutrients.
We therefore need to eat a wide variety of foods so that we obtain all the essential nutrients.
BALANCE
In most western countries, serious nutrient deficiencies are fortunately rare.
Our problem is that we tend to eat too much of some nutrients and not enough of others.
This imbalance can lead to a number of diet-related diseases.
Guidelines on healthy eating therefore suggest that we are:
eat the right amount of energy (calories) to keep us at the right weight
eat less fat (particularly saturated fat)
eat more fibre
watch our intake of sodium (salt) and sugar.
SO WHAT SHOULD WE EAT?
The best way to achieve VARIETY and BALANCE is to select foods from the main groups shown below, together with smaller amounts of oils and fats.
Foods from all these groups need to be chosen on a daily basis but it helps to think of choosing from at least two of these, including the cereal or fruit and vegetable group, when selecting foods for each meal as well.
EXERCISE AND GOOD HEALTH
Regular physical activity or exercise is just as important as eating the right type of food.
On the whole, most of us lead very sedentary lives these days and are often put off by the thought of taking exercise.
This is partly because the word itself tends to conjure up the picture of performing some type of vigorous sport.
But there are ways of gradually increasing daily physical activity without necessarily turning to a specific form of sport.
For example:
Walk briskly whenever possible
Stand instead of sitting
Use the stairs instead of the lift
Walk to the station, shops or school instead of taking the car or being driven
Vigorous gardening or housework can be good forms of exercise too.
However, if you do want to try a specific activity, there are many more available now which are community-based, such as swimming, keep fit, aerobics, cycling, jogging, tennis and squash.
Remember though, if you are unaccustomed to vigorous exercise and are over 35, it is a good idea to consult your doctor if you want to try something as vigorous as squash for the first time.
Whatever the exercise, start gradually and increase the duration progressively in order to build up your endurance and fitness.
Children need exercise too and should be encouraged to participate in at least one sport.
Whilst not every child has the aptitude for sport, with such a large choice of activities in the country, there's bound to be something which each child can enjoy.
Regular exercise could help you — and your child — to feel better, look better and be more alert.
McDonald's Quality Ingredients
PURE BEEF — 100%
McDonald's meat patties are 100% pure beef, with no additives whatsoever.
All the meat, which is EC produced, is prepared and packaged at our own meat plants.
In addition to inspections carried out before the beef arrives at the plant, McDonald's undertakes 36 separate quality control checks on every batch.
McDonald's uses only the best cuts of prime forequarter and flank meat, which is probably leaner than the minced beef you will find in some butcher's shops.
And, because we griddle our meat, there is no extra fat added during cooking, just a little salt to season.
POTATOES
McDonald's world famous French Fries are produced only from the best quality potatoes — Russet Burbank and Pentland Dell — and our total annual requirement is UK grown.
No artificial colourings are used on our French Fries, however from time to time a light dextrose (sugar solution) spray may be used on the surface to enhance the colour.
The French Fries are seasoned with salt to taste, prior to serving.
FISH
The fish in McDonald's Filet-o-Fish is 100% pure cod with a pinch of salt to taste after cooking.
CHICKEN
McDonald's McChicken Sandwich is made from boned breast meat in a light batter coating and served with a pinch of salt to taste, lettuce and mayonnaise in a toasted bun.
McDonald's Chicken McNuggets are made from whole cuts of boned breast and thigh meat.
They are shaped in uniform sizes to ensure consistency in weight and value and served in a specially seasoned breading.
COOKING OIL
McChicken Sandwich, Chicken McNuggets, Filet-o-Fish and Fruit Pies are cooked in a pure vegetable oil.
McDonald's French Fries and Hash Browns are cooked in a mixture of beef and vegetable oil.
McDonald's uses this high quality blend because it provides the consistency and unique taste our customers have come to expect.
INGREDIENTS
McDonald's is proud of the ingredients used in all products, from the basic Hamburger to the Big Mac, from French Fries to Apple Pies.
If you have an allergy to certain foods or ingredients, or want more information about our products, please contact the:
From time to time we offer other fruit pies such as cherry, apricot, blueberry, etc.
The ingredients in these pies are of similar high quality but the fruit and seasonings have been changed.
The Facts about Additives
Additives have been used for hundreds of years, though they were not always known as ‘additives’.
For instance, people have long known that squeezing lemon juice on sliced fruits prevents them from turning brown, but until recently it was not known why lemon juice has this effect.
We now know that the ascorbic acid in the juice prevents discoloration .
Ascorbic acid is a useful additive and like salt and pepper, it is one of the many additives that is derived from a natural source.
So, what are the benefits of additives in foods we commonly consume?
For the Best Flavour and Appearance…
Spices, flavourings and other ingredients are sometimes added to enhance the taste and appearance of food.
For Freshness…
Whether it be for the supermarket shelf or McDonald's, suppliers may add ingredients to ensure that foods maintain their fresh taste and appearance.
For Consistent Quality…
McDonald's uses some common ingredients to enhance the natural texture of food.
WHAT ARE ‘E’ NUMBERS
The classification of additives by ‘E’ number is made under an EC directive.
Any additive given an ‘E’ number is generally regarded as safe to use.
A product's actual ingredients are subject to some variation depending on the local supplier, the region of the country and the season of the year.
Therefore, the ingredients listed in this book may not necessarily be exactly identical to the product served in particular restaurants.
However, any difference would be slight, since all products served in McDonald's — and provided by our suppliers — meet McDonald's strict specifications and high standards of quality.
Similarly, McDonald's constantly reviews the recipes of its menu items and makes improvements to these recipes in order to bring you the highest quality, best-tasting food.
The ingredient and nutrition listings in this booklet are effective as at June 1991.
McDonald's will publish updated versions periodically.
Ingredients for products McDonald's might have on trial are not included.
The following Trademarks are owned by McDonald's Restaurants Limited: McDonald's, Big Mac, Chicken McNuggets, Filet-o-Fish, McChicken Sandwich.
(All this information is correct at time of going to press).
(Date of print: October 1991)
‘I've always believed in the basics.
Our menu at McDonald's offers meat, eggs, fish, bread, dairy products and potatoes — the kind of good, nutritious food most people eat at home.
This is only a part of our commitment to deliver Quality, Service, Cleanliness and Value to our customers.
We've held these principles for more than thirty five years — as we do today.’
Ray A Kroc Founder, McDonald's Corporation 1902–1984