

A selection of articles giving a practical guide to their use compiled by Robert Barker
SECOND (REVISED) EDITION
THE HOMOEOPATHIC SUPPLY COMPANY NORFOLK ENGLAND
CONTENTS
Preface to 1st edition
Preface to 2nd edition
The LM Potencies — Dr. S.P. Dey 1
Dose, Dilution and the LM Potencies — John Tomlinson 5
Fifty Millesimal Cases — Dr. R.M. Schore, M.D. 17
The Practicalities of Prescribing — Robert Barker 21
PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION
The idea for printing this booklet came from an eagerness to share enthusiasm and experience of the 50 millesimal potencies.
I first turned to them out of  desparation in a case where I was making no progress and after some initial success my enthusiasm was further stimulated by talking to Richard Pitt a member of The Society of Homœopaths who kindly sent me a photocopy of the article by Dr. Robert Schore which is reprinted here.
It provides the clearest description that I have yet found on the use of 50 millesimals in practice and in addition conveys a sense of excitement which makes one eager to try out this ‘new’ form of prescribing.
It is for similar reasons that I have included the notes from a lecture by Dr. S.P. Dey — the feeling of certainty that LM potencies are an indispensable part of the homœopath's armoury comes from the authority of his many years in practice.
I am indebted to John Tomlinson of The Helios Homœopathic Pharmacy in Tunbridge Wells who has made a particular study of the Organon's instructions on preparation and administration of LM's and whose advice enabled the inclusion of the final section entitled Variable Factors.
Like many issues within Homœopathy there are a variety of ways of interpreting the instructions for LM's in the Organon.
In the best of the Hahnemannian tradition I hope we will all follow his investigative path.
I would be pleased to receive additional information or experience from readers for possible inclusion in future editions.
Robert Baker Fairview 4, Nelson Road Sheringham Norfolk NR26 8BU
PREFACE TO THE 2nd EDITION
It is 2 years since the first edition of this booklet was printed and during this time there has been an enormous increase in interest in the use of LM potencies.
John Tomlinson's article, Dose, Dilution and the LM Potencies which was first published in the Journal of the Society of Homœopaths (Vol. 10 No. 4 Dec. 1990) has been included and gives a detailed analysis of Hahnemann's thinking which led to his development of the LM system.
Robert Schore's article printed in the first edition has been edited leaving only his case examples to save duplication of the information which is now in a more expanded form in John Tomlinson's essay.
My own section on the practicalities of prescribing now includes case histories and explains the even more simplified approach which I now adopt.
I would be pleased to receive any observations from readers on their own experience.
THE LM POTENCIES — NOTES ON A LECTURE BY DR.
S.P. DEY
The following comprises notes from a transcription of a tape of a lecture by Dr. Dey, they are printed in the good faith that they give as true a representation as is possible of his words.
I am indebted to Linda Kulig who studied in India with Dr. Dey for her work in producing the text.
Throughout his life, Hahnemann's sole aim was to find out how the patient could be cured rapidly, without any  unneccesary aggravation.
So he formulated three conditions:
1).
The remedy should be the  simillium to the totality of a patient
2).
The potency should be appropriate.
3).
The remedy should be repeated at suitable intervals.
There were, however, no precise indications as to the number and frequency of repetitions; indeed, we find that he changed his mind again and again regarding the potency and repetition of the remedy.
At times he advised reverting to a lower potency if the higher potency aggravated; at other times he advised giving a few doses of a partially similar remedy if any aggravation should occur; he also suggested administering the remedy in liquid form, giving a few succussions before repeating (the plus system).
However, he was still not satisfied.
By the time ‘Chronic Diseases’ had been published, Hahnemann had decided that the remedy should be not only succussed but also diluted before repetition, and he formulated the fifty millesimal scale, in which we have both more succussion (one hundred times instead of ten times) and greater dilution (fifty thousand times instead of a hundred times as in the centesimal scale).
By this method, aggravations were minimised, and this, the last heritage of Hahnemann, is the fifty millesimal potency scale.
The principle behind the fifty millesimal scale is the raising of the remedy's dynamic strength whilst reducing the duration and intensity of its action by a high degree of dilution.
As a result the remedy can be repeated without causing the patient any aggravation; or if aggravation should occur it will be of short duration, easily controlled.
Before the introduction of fifty millesimals there were no certain means of regulating homœopathic aggravations.
THE ADVANTAGES OF USING FIFTY MILLESIMALS.
1).
Aggravations are minimised, or can be regulated.
This is very useful in skin diseases, difficult and serious chronic cases and various acute diseases in which  homœopathic aggravation can cause increased suffering, or even endanger the life of the patient.
2).
Deep acting medicines (Lycopodium, Calc Carb etc.) can be used several times daily and repeated for months at a time if necessary.
3).
The same constitutional medicine can be used for both palliative and curative purposes simultaneously, because deep acting remedies can be repeated frequently, without risk of aggravation, if correctly selected they may not only palliate but also cure the patient, even in apparently hopeless cases, because of the gentleness of the fifty millesimal scale.
4).
Long standing chronic disease can be cured more quickly using this scale (Some cases of bronchial asthma of very long standing have been cured in three to four months, and cancer cases within six to eight months).
5).
It can be ascertained within two to four days whether or not the remedy has been correctly selected (in acute cases within two to four hours) because the patient after a few doses should be relieved.
This can be contrasted with the centesimal scale where we may have to wait a fairly long time to ascertain the action of the remedy.
6).
In cases of mental illness, where there is a possibility of the patient having an aggravation with even a low potency of the centesimal scale, the fifty millesimal potency can effect the cure smoothly and without problems.
7).
In cases of long standing suppression this potency works marvellously; this is because where one or two doses of the centesimal potency may fail to revive the suppressed symptoms, the repeated application of potencies of this scale can, and cure is begun.
8).
In the primary stages of psora, syphilis and sycosis, where Hahnemann advised repeated administration of the remedy, this potency proves to be very effective.
9).
This potency is very good for palliated incurable cases without the least danger of aggravation.
INSTRUCTIONS FOR USING FIFTY MILLESIMALS
When you purchase a fifty millesimal potency you should receive a bottle of poppy seed sized granules.
To administer these, take one grain and dissolve it in distilled water with some alcohol added, the total amount to be determined approximately by the number of doses you wish to prescribe.
Exact quantities are not necessary.
For the first dose, the bottle should be succussed 8–12 times, and one tablespoonful of it should be diluted with half a glass of water.
Then one teaspoonful of this is given to the patient.
To administer the second dose, succuss the original bottle and repeat the process, so that the second dose is a little more succussed and diluted than the first.
In chronic cases the potency is usually administered every alternate day, or less frequent intervals if required.
Sometimes it happens that after a number of successive doses like this, the patient will have the beginnings of an aggravation: the medicine should be stopped for two to four days (or a few hours in acute disease) and in order to continue treatment you want to give the remedy now in a more diluted form: from the first cup (not the bottle) take one teaspoonful and dilute it in another cup, and one teaspoonful of this solution should be given to the patient.
If this also causes aggravation, the remedy can be further diluted in a third cup, and so on.
As yet you are using only variations of the first fifty millesimal potency with which you began, and this way you derive the maximum benefit from each potency in turn.
You only raise the potency when each one in turn has exhausted its usefulness.
When you are ready to go on to the next potency, the whole process is repeated with a single poppy seed granule of the desired strength.
In this way one goes up the scale gradually instead of in leaps as in the centesimal scale.
HOW FIFTY MILLESIMALS ARE MADE
The potencies are labelled as follows: 0/1, 0/2, 0/3, 0/4 etc.
The zero symbolises the round shape of the poppy seed granule, the reason being that potentisation in the fifty millesimal scale begins and ends in globule form.
Preparation is simple.
All remedies are prepared by trituration up to 3C potency in the centesimal scale, so the original material is diluted one part to a million.
Then it is dissolved in 100 drops of absolute alcohol and given one hundred succussions.
What was 3C is now further diluted 1:50,000.
Five hundred globules, one hundred of which should weigh one grain, should be moistened with one drop of this solution.
These moistened globules should be dried on blotting paper and then put in a sealed bottle, and labelled 0/1.
This is the first potency in the fifty millesimal scale.
To prepare the next potency, one globule of 0/1 is dissolved in a drop of distilled water, mixed with 100 drops of absolute alcohol, and a hundred succussions given; five hundred globules are moistened with one drop of this solution and this is 0/2.
Thus in each potency the remedy's strength becomes a hundred times five hundred, which is one fifty-thousandth of the previous potency: hence the term fifty millesimal potency.
PRESCRIBING WITH FIFTY MILLESIMALS
If while a patient is using repeated doses of a fifty millesimal potency, new symptoms appear, you would change the remedy to cover the new symptoms as you would using the centesimal scale.
If the symptoms of a latent miasmatic state appear, the remedy should be changed suitably and if a nosode is chosen then the centesimal scale will have to be used as except for Bacillunum these are not available in fifty millesimal form (the Helios Pharmacy now has most nosodes available as LM's).
As with centesimal, if we see that the patient's symptoms are relapsing frequently in spite of repetition, a deeper complementary remedy will be needed, because it's not the potency that is at fault but the choice of remedy.
In chronic cases if you change to a complementary remedy you generally start from 0/1 again and work up.
In fifty millesimals, when you are sure that the organic destruction has been checked, you can administer the same remedy in the centesimal scale: you can now use it without the slightest aggravation, the patient can be cured.
Before you complete your treatment, give a few doses of the centesimal to test if there is any remnant of the disease condition.
If there is still some latent state it will flare up after a dose in the centesimal potency.
You can give 200 followed by 1M and that will bring out everything else inside.
After 0/30, it is not wise to go down as far as 6C or 30C.
There are a few things to be wary of in using the fifty millesimals.
The dilution is performed by the patient often without supervision, and they may not understand or follow instructions.
Very clear directions must therefore be given, bearing in mind that with so many dilutions the patient may think the remedy is too strong, or misunderstand the process in some way.
It is particularly important when using this scale that your remedy is well selected.
If it covers the case only superficially there is the possibility of palliation and suppression without cure, the more so as it is repeated so frequently.
You must be satisfied that the patient is progressing towards cure according to homœopathic principles: some repetition of an ill chosen remedy may do no harm, because of the brief action of each dose, but persistent use of a superficial remedy may cause harm.
My experience of these potencies over many years has demonstrated their usefulness in the treatment of serious cases, and deep pathology is rarely wholly eradicated without the aid of fifty millesimal potencies.
Dr. Dey trained under Sir John Weir and Dr. Foubister at The Royal London Homœopathic Hospital.
Since then he has dedicated his life to his practice in Calcutta where he now only sees the most difficult cases, particularly those with organic pathology for which he finds the 50 millesimal potencies especially appropriate.
DOSE, DILUTION and the LM POTENCIES
by John Tomlinson
Hahnemann completed the fifth edition of the Organon in 1833 and the sixth edition by the end of 1841.
He wrote a letter dated 20th February, 1842, to Schwabe, his publisher in Dusseldorf saying that ‘I have now after 18 months of work finished the sixth edition of my Organon, the most nearly perfect of all .’
After stating his preference as to type and paper he asked Schwabe if he would publish it, but before the negotiations were completed Hahnemann died on 2nd July 1843.
His wife Melanie was pressed by Boenninghausen, Hering and other students of Hahnemann to publish the document after his death, but she would not release the manuscript either because of a desire to protect his name or because of her desire for money!
Although most writers favour Melanie's avarice as the cause of the delay, this is unlikely as the manuscript was not released, even though she was over 80 when she died, and her greed was thus left unsatisfied.
Hahnemann described her as his best ever student and her deep love for him surely withheld the manuscript to deny his critics the opportunity of judging the 6th edition even more eccentric than the 5th.
It was only released to the world, after translation, in 1921 when Richard Haehl procured the manuscript from Hahnemann's ancestors by which time there had been a great establishment of homœopathy by J.T. Kent and those who followed him.
It is ironic that Kent, such a devoted follower of his master, should have only had the fifth edition, and not the ‘most nearly perfect of all’ on which to base his teaching.
Had the 6th edition been available to him, the whole evolution of homœopathy would surely have been different.
KENT
Kent's contribution to the development of the high potencies established an extension to remedy preparation based on the guidelines given by Hahnemann in the 5th edition (published in 1833), namely the centesimal potency scale.
By 1921, 5 years after Kent's death, America and Europe were well established in decimal and centesimal remedy philosophy so the discovery, in the 6th edition, of a new method of potentising remedies, the LM potencies, did not, at the time, start a revolution towards their use.
In fact it was a further 33 years, in 1954, that Dr. Pierre Schmidt of Geneva published essays about his experiences using the LM scale.
Since then only a few have carried the flame in Europe and India, but recently the worldwide growth of homœopathy has started to look again at the LM potencies which Hahnemann describes, in a footnote to 270 as being ‘the most powerful and at the same time mildest in action i.e. as the most perfected .’
The evolution of the preparation and application of Hahnemann's remedies passed through several phases.
His early use of remedies (from 1784) were small crude doses, of the drug, in powder or tincture form given according to the homœopathic principle.
There were of, course, side effects especially with the poisonous remedies such as Arsenicum, and the desire to eliminate these toxic effects led him to develop, in 1815, the method of trituration and subsequent liquid dilution and succussion, we know as the centesimal potencies.
From 1815 he used potentised remedies for the toxic and insoluble inert materials such as Silica, Carbo Veg etc. and dosed directly with drops of the less poisonous mother tinctures such as Bryonia, Pulsatilla, Rhus Tox.
By 1834 he was using all his remedies in a potentised form, giving the appropriate potency and the minimum dose (i.e. quantity) of his medicines to patients by means of the smallest sugar granules available.
These so-called ‘pellet’ dosages are described in Chronic Diseases p151 as ‘the finest, of the size of poppy-seeds, of which about 200 (more or less) weigh a grain ’and just one of these tiny granules, given dry on the tongue, remained Hahnemann's standard solid dose right up to 1837.
It seems that the evolution of his remedy preparation was fuelled by the desire to create, not only, a highly dynamised remedy but also to give it in the smallest dose (quantity) possible to effect a curative response.
Hahnemann's writings clearly show that he differentiates between the level of potency and smallness of the dose i.e. the quantity given.
For example in the Organon 5th edition (1833) §276: ‘A medicine, even though it may be homœopathically suited to the case, does harm in every dose that is too large, the more harm the larger the dose, and by the magnitude of the dose it does more harm the greater its homœopathicity and the higher the potency selected .’
Organon 5th Edition (1833) §246 footnote:
Now, in cases where he was convinced of the correctness of his choice of the homœopathic medicine, in order to obtain more benefit for the patient than he was able to get hitherto from prescribing a single small dose, the idea often naturally struck him to increase the dose…and, for instance, in place of giving a single very minute globule moistened with the medicine in the highest dynamization, to administer six, seven or eight of them at once , and even a half or a whole drop.
But the result was almost always less favourable than it should have been; it was often actually unfavourable, often even very bad — an injury that, an injury that, in a patient so treated, it is difficult to repair.
SIZE OF DOSE
These days we tend to regard the size of a dose of a centesimal remedy as irrelevant.
One tablet or ten tablets taken as one dose still only gives one dose of the potency, does it not?
But there are unanswered questions.
For example, why do we not nowadays extensively see remedies causing ‘more harm the larger the dose’? after all the average dose from a tablet used today is approximately 50 times the dose of Hahnemann's small granule.
Also how far can a remedy be diluted before the remedy is inactive?
If we dissolve a tablet in a bath of water will a teaspoonful dose have the same effect as taking the tablet itself?
Why should olfaction of a remedy by more suitable to sensitives?
Is it because they take in a smaller quantity of vapour or tablet dust? and how far does the  vial have to be from the nose before the dose is inactive?
As we shall see management of cases using the LM scale is based on the quantity of medicine the patient takes.
It is as if Hahnemann takes it for granted that we all understand the importance of quantity, as well as potency, when administering a remedy, but this seems almost a revolutionary concept to us as we rarely consider this factor when using both low and high potency centesimal remedies.
SUCCUSSION
Another interesting concept which Hahnemann consistently refers to is the ability of an increased number of succussions to continually strengthen or intensify the potency without further dilution.
In the 5th edition we find the following footnote to 270: ‘In order to maintain a fixed and measured standard for developing the power of liquid medicines, multiplied experience and careful observation have led me to adopt two succussions for each phial, in preference to the greater number formerly employed (by which the medicines were too highly potentized).
There are, however, homœopathists who carry about with them on their visits to patients the homœopathic medicines in the fluid state, and who yet assert that they do not become more highly potentised in the course of time, but they thereby show their want of ability to observe correctly.
I dissolved a grain of soda in half an ounce of water mixed with alcohol in a phial, which was thereby filled two-thirds full, and shook this solution continuously for half an hour, and this fluid was in potency and energy equal to the thirtieth development of power .’
It is more likely that rather than an increase in potency level itself, the large number of succussions produce a lateral intensification or energising of the solution within the confines of the dilution factor — a concept upheld by the LM method.
If there was not a ‘ceiling’ to potency level then serial dilution would not be needed to make a remedy, one could simply shake any dilution for different lengths of time as in the example give above.
Also the lower potencies are very limited by the physical molecular presence of the remedy so it is impossible to make a 30c if there is material presence as potencies above 12c have no molecules of the original substance left.
POTENCY
The question remains, however, as to when a potency level is actually reached and how many succussions are needed to reach it and also whether different dilution factors need different amounts.
For example if one succussion will turn a 29c into a 30c then extra succussions will simply intensify on the 30c level.
If more shakes are needed then a gradual increase in potency occurs until a saturation point arrives and presumably only intensification takes place.
In the sixth edition §248 Hahnemann describes the daily succussion of the LM solutions as: ‘altering and slightly increasing the degree of potency ’ suggesting a gradual almost exponential curve of increasing potency which never actually reaches the next degree until a further dilution step in taken.
Hahnemann's thoughts are shown in the following extracts,Materia Medica Pura (1827) p46
‘…we must act with moderation in order to avoid increasing the powers of the medicines to an undue extent by such trituration.
A drop of Drosera in the 30th dilution succussed with 20 strokes of the arm at each dilution, given as a dose to a child suffering from whooping-cough, endangers life, whereas, if the dilution phials are succussed only twice a, globule the size of a poppy seed moistened with the last dilution cures it readily .’
Organon 6th Edition (1842) §270 footnote:
‘…with so small diluting medium as 100 to 1 of the medicine, if many succussions by means of a powerful machine are forced into it, medicines are then developed which, especially in the higher degrees of dynamization, act almost immediately, but with furious even dangerous, violence, especially in weakly patients, without having a lasting, mild reaction of the vital principle .’
On the subject of repetition of a centesimal dose of the same potency Hahnemann shows an important change of mind between the 2 editions.
In the 5th edition §246 footnote he advocates that ‘…a single dose of a well selected homœopathic medicine should always be allowed first to fully extend its action before a new medicine is given or the same one repeated .’
‘then continues in this long footnote to give details of certain chronic and serious acute conditions when it is actually necessary to repeat the dose several times to effect a cure, although he advises caution as ‘he has frequently experienced no advantage, but most frequently, decided disadvantage .’
Whereas in the 6th edition the re-written §246 dismisses the above as ‘all my experience permitted me to say at the time…and that his research of the previous five years had wholly solved the difficulties of repetition.
§247 clearly states his renewed position:
‘It is impractical to repeat the same unchanged dose of a remedy once, not to mention its frequent repetition (and at short intervals in order not to delay the cure).
The vital principle does not accept such unchanged doses without resistance, that is, without other symptoms of the medicine to manifest themselves then those similar to the disease to be cured, because the former dose has already accomplished the expected change in the vital principle and a second dynamically wholly similar, unchanged dose of the same medicine no longer finds, therefore, the same conditions of the vital force.
The patient may indeed be made sick in another way by receiving other such unchanged doses, even sicker than he was, for now only those symptoms of the given remedy remain active which were not homœopathic to the original disease, hence no step towards cure can follow, only a true aggravation of the condition of the patient.’
After many years of continued experimentation, Hahnemann published new  proceedures which solved some of the problems of dose and repetition.
They formed the basis of the LM method which was to follow after another five years painstaking work.
This first breakthrough comes in 1937 when the chapter in Chronic Diseases called ‘Concerning the technical part of Homœopathy’ describes the new plussing method for administering centesimal potencies.
He is lead to changes of the dosing of remedies because the ‘variety among patients as to their irritability, age, spiritual and bodily development necessitate a great variety in their treatment and administration to them of the doses of medicines ’.
Hahnemann felt that the ‘single dose and wait’ philosophy left too long a period of inaction and the speed of cure often too slow as the practitioner could do nothing but wait for the remedy to complete  its' curative curve.
Also, from his many comments about violent reactions to remedies, the sensitive  patients he saw, were producing undesirable aggravations which he constantly sought to escape from.
He firstly introduces the greater beneficial effects of administering remedies always in liquid form, the reason for this being that the medicine ‘comes in contact with a much larger surface of sensitive nerves responsive to the medicinal action ’(5th edition §286) and because of this the effect of the remedy increases.
One of the granules of high dynamization (he refers mostly to the 30c) is dissolved in 7–20 tablespoons of water with a little alcohol added.
The patient then takes, directly from the bottle, a tablespoon of the liquid (a teaspoon or coffee-spoonful for children) two, four or six hourly for acutes, daily or every other day for chronics.
The choice of how many tablespoons to make the solution with depends on how much of the granule is required in each tablespoon dose i.e. 1/7granule (7 tablespoons)—  (20 tablespoons), as well as for how many days the remedy is to be given.
The differing amount of solution to be made up gives flexibility for each  patients needs and infers that the remedy action is different (weaker) in its ‘intensity’ the more diluted the original granule becomes.
Additionally, before each dose is taken: ‘a slight change in the degree of dynamization is effected if the bottle, containing the solution of one or more pellets, is merely well shaken five or six times, every time before taking it .’
Thus each days' dosage remains homœopathic to the case as the slight increase in the health of the vital force is matched with the slight increase in potency caused by the five or six shakes of the bottle.
The regular stimulus of the remedy which is homœopathic both in pathogenesis and potency is the key to the speedier cure.
The same chapter in Chronic Diseases highlights this thus ‘In taking one and the same medicine repeatedly (which is indispensable to secure the cure of a serious chronic disease), if the dose is in every case varied and modified only a little in its degree of dynamization, then the vital force of the patient will calmly, and as it were willingly receive the same medicine even at brief intervals very many times in succession with the best results, every time increasing the well-being of the patient .’
Another method for dosing ‘careful ’ patients is also suggested in the same chapter whereby the pellet is dissolved in 200 (approx.8ml), 300 (12ml) or 400 drops (16ml) of a 50% brandy solution, depending on whether it is to be weaker or stronger, and one, two, three or several drops, according to the irritability of the patient, are dropped into a cup containing a tablespoon of water.
This well stirred is then taken all as one dose or only half is taken if ‘special care is necessary ’ The stock bottle is shaken as suggested in the method above.
So here we have  as example of reducing the dose further by using drops rather than tablespoons so as to not over stimulate the sensitive or ‘careful’ patient.
i.e. the smaller the quantity of the pellet received in the dose the less its undesirable effects.
There is an optimum dosage which suits each patient as the diluting weakens the potency so it doesn't overstimulate.
The optimum dose individual for each case is the smallest amount needed for a gentle but certain remedial effect.
These are also the principles on which the LM method is based.
Lastly Hahnemann paves the way for the final step, into his most perfect method, with a famous paragraph concerning the number of succussions given to the vial when preparing centesimal remedies.
The homœopathic Pharmacopoeias officially advocate  ten succussions as the number to use when preparing C potencies, but I believe they have missed a small point when interpreting Hahnemann'sreasons for change.
In Chronic Diseases we are told that when giving remedies in solid form i.e. solid form i.e. granules or powders dry on the tongue, Hahnemann found that remedies prepared with more than two shakes were too strong so stayed with two strokes for consistency; but during the last years since I have been giving every dose of medicine in a solution, divided over fifteen, twenty or thirty days and even more, no potentizing in an attenuating vial is found too strong, and again I use ten strokes .’
In other words as long as the dose is in liquid form, and can be regulated as to the optimum size and repetition, then no matter how many succussions are used to prepare the original remedy it will not be too much for the patient.
This also confirms the idea that the intense action of a highly succussed remedy is diminished by dilution.
THE LM POTENCIES
From 1837–1843, as far as in known, all Hahnemann's administration of remedies was done in liquid form using variations on the above themes.
The final development to create a more highly dynamised remedy was the change of the dilution factor from 1:100 to 1:50,000.
The 3c trituration powder (details of the preparation of this are in §270) is the starting point for the preparation of the LM scale because all remedies are soluble in water at this point; so any remedy can be utilised even the insoluble materials such as Carbo Veg, Aurum etc.
A grain in weight (0.06gm) of this powder is dissolved in 500 drops (30ml) of 20% alcohol making a 1:500 dilution of the 0.06gm of 3c, and one drop of this solution is then further diluted in 99 drops of 95% alcohol, filling two thirds of a glass vial, giving a (1 in 500 × 100 = 50,000) solution of the 3c powder.
This tube is then succussed 100 times against a firm but elastic object (the famous leather bound bible) to create the LM 1 medicating liquid.
Hahnemann's comments on this new method are found in the 6th Edition §270.
‘meticulous experiments have convinced me that this ratio (1:100) between the quantity of diluent and that of the medicine being dynamized is far too low to develop the medicinal substance properly and to a high degree with a large number of succussions unless force is used…
Whereas in this much higher ratio (1:50,000), between diluent and medicinal substance, a large number of succussions of the vial filled two-thirds with wine spirit can bring about a far greater development of power .’
The LM 1 liquid is then poured onto some poppy-seed granules of which a hundred weigh 1 grain (0.06gm).
Although this size is larger than those granules advocated in Chronic Diseases (200 to a grain) they are still so small that one drop of the alcoholic LM 1 liquid can completely wet at least 500 of them.
Thus just one granule absorbs at least a 500th of a drop.
When this granule is dissolved in a drop of water, and 99 drops of alcohol are added to it, the next LM2 solution contains a 1/500th x 100 = 1/50,000th of the previous LM 1 liquid.
The LM 2 liquid is then succussed 100 times also.
The process is continued in this way simply using the granule as the intermediary to transfer a 500th of a drop instead of the direct addition of the whole drop as is the case with the centesimal 1:100 ratio.
Hahnemann's practical simplicity is masterful as the small granules not only provide a tiny, manageable dose, for using with patients, but also the  smallest practical unit to effect such large dilution ratio.
One could theoretically dilute with one drop to 50,000 drops (100 drops of 95% alcohol = 3.6mls) but the bottle to be succussed 100 times would then contain 1.75 litres of alcohol.
Not an economic or practical size for the average human being to work with!
Although the nature of the 1:50,000 potency created is different from that created by a 1:100 ratio (‘…my new method produces medicines of the highest power and the mildest action…’ §270)it is interesting to note the theoretical relationship with the centesimal scale.
Each step of 1:50,000 is a rise of approximately 2.5C so that considering we started with a 3C a LM 1 is just over 5C, LM 6 = 17C, LM 12 = 31C, LM 30 = 73C (all approximate figures).
So the granules are wetted with the solution and left to dry after which they are bottled and labelled with the appropriate nomenclature e.g. LM 1, LM 2 or LM 0/1, LM 0/2 etc. the zero signifying the granule, the form in which the final medicine is stored.
Now we have this highly dynamized remedy our criteria for how to use them are different from those of the centesimal scale.
Obviously the indicated similar remedy is still chosen on the same principles as before but choice of potency, up to now our main variable factor for controlling the response to the remedy, is not such an issue when using the LM's.
Hahnemann's recommendation is to always start with the lowest degrees (§246).
Although not specifically mentioned, this suggests always starting with LM 1, but is often interpreted, by experienced users of LM's, as between LM 1 and LM 6.
The choice is based on the health/vitality level, degree of pathology, suppression, sensitivity etc. and provides a variable on which we can individualize.
With the dissolving in liquid, and subsequent shaking of the bottle before each dose, the potency is gradually raised, expanded, and intensified to continually stimulate the vital force at regular intervals.
The next potency level is given when the bottle of the previous potency is finished.
No leaps in potency are recommended (246) and if one starts with LM 1, for example, then LM 2 follows and so on .
Unless we dissolve a granule directly in 1.75 litres of water we will never actually reach the next LM level but simply continue towards the potency level determined by the dilution factor.
After we have chosen the appropriate remedy to give in LM form, the first choice, after the potency, is how much of the granule is the patient to take i.e. the dose, how often it is to be repeated and for how many days are they to be on that particular potency.
These are the areas where the difficulties of the LM's lie and, as Hahnemann tells us in §278, theorizing is not enough to tell us what the ideal degree of smallness of the dose is to effect a gentle cure, and that ‘Only pure experiment, the meticulous observation of the sensitivity of each patient, and sound experience can determine this in each individual case .’
Control of the dosage is very similar to the centesimal ‘plussing’ technique but using the LM granule, instead of a 30c, dissolved in liquid.
The directions for making up the solutions for patient use are defined quite clearly in the 6th edition 248 footnote.
He states that one rarely needs more than one granule although two or three can obviously be used if a stronger solution is required.
The granule is dissolved in forty, thirty, twenty, fifteen or eight tablespoons of water with the addition of a little alcohol to preserve it; 10% is a good guide for solutions designed to last up to two months.
The patient takes directly from the ‘stock bottle’one or, increasing progressively, more coffee or teaspoons of this as follows: in chronic diseases, daily or every other day; in acute diseases every six, four, three or two hours…
.’ Eight, ten, or twelve succussions are given to the bottle before each dose.
Again we have here a variable which we can use to regulate individual needs if required, twelve shakes giving a slightly sharper daily rise in potency than eight.
Also note the wording ‘one or increasing progressively more teaspoons ’ which, if appropriate to the case, can speed up cure by giving increased stimulus from the larger dose as well as taking the patient through the higher potencies more rapidly.
DOSAGE
To help us decide how much liquid to make up let us look at the appropriate dosages for each of Hahnemann's suggestions.
A tablespoon is considered a 20ml measure, a teaspoon 5ml, and a coffee-spoonful 2.5ml, so a granule dissolved in:— 40 tablespoons = 800ml =  granule/ml so a 5ml dose contains a  of a granule. (160 days supply) 30 tablespoons = 600ml =  of a granule per 5ml dose (120 days supply) 20 tablespoons = 400ml =  of a granule per 5ml dose (80 days supply) 15 tablespoons = 300ml =  of a granule per 5ml dose (60 days supply) 8 tablespoons = 160ml =  of a granule per 5ml dose (32 days supply) A coffee spoonful will represent a dosage twice as small as the above i.e. 40 tablespoons =  of a granule per 2.5ml dose.
As bottles above 300mls are not very practical for patients to use Hahnemann's practicality introduces the use of a drinking glass to further dilute the solution and obviate the need for a large amount of water.
The method is given in detail in 248.
One granule is dissolved in seven or eight tablespoons of water and after succussion a tablespoonful is put into a glass containing eight to ten tablespoons of water.
After vigorous stirring a teaspoon or coffee-spoonful dose is then taken from the glass.
The next dose is prepared in exactly the same way using a fresh glass of water.
This method represents the following dose, 8 tablespoons = (160ml) = ⅛ granule/tablespoon (20ml) diluted x 10 =  per 20ml so a 5ml dose =  granule which is the weakest dose Hahnemann recommends but takes the patient only 8–10 days to finish and be ready for the next potency up.
Dr Pierre Schmidt used one granule in 100mls of water and a coffee spoonful as a dose which represented  of a granule per 2.5ml dose (40 days supply).
Dr Robert Shore and Dr H Choudhury both dose with one granule in 110ml water putting one tablespoon in a glass of 110mls of water which represents  of a granule per 5ml dose (6 days supply).
Other commonly used methods, for preparing weaker solutions, include:
One granule in 150ml stock bottle and a 5ml spoonful in approx. 100mls water in the glass, so one 5ml =  granule per 5ml dose (30 days supply).
One granule in 10mls water then 10 drops in 100mls water in a glass =  granule per 5ml dose (20 days supply).
Very sensitive patients who quickly become over stimulated by or prove the remedy when given in the standard dose can reduce it, next time, by diluting a teaspoonful from the first glass in a second glass of water thus reducing the dose by a factor of about 20 for each glass used.
The variations mentioned above provide much flexibility with different combinations of dose and speeds of potency increase reaffirming the importance of ‘meticulous observation of the sensitivity of each patient .’
§278
Cases published show Hahnemann used most often the eight tablespoon stock bottle and glass method in 248 for dosing patients.
This provides a weak solution but takes the patient through to the next potency level in only 7–8 days.
It is important to remember that the Organon gives many possibilities to tailor dosing to the needs of the patient and experience will show us what is most appropriate.
The beauty of the versatile LM method is that we can also just choose one or two methods to gain that experience while still giving our patients the gentle but speedy improvement they desire.
CASE MANAGEMENT
Many practitioners come to use LM potencies when treating cases which need more care because of risks of aggravation e.g. patients who are very sensitive to remedies, those with very low vitality, cases with severe pathology, history of suppressive treatments etc.
But in theory all cases whether acute or chronic, showing pathology or not can be treated with LM's and there are many practitioners who use these remedies exclusively.
In practise, however, some patients may need the qualities of the centesimal remedies to awaken their self healing process.
The LM's give us yet another valuable string to our bow to be chosen appropriately.
Alternating periods of treatment with LM's and C's are also possible remembering that the lowest degrees of potency are to be used with each new LM even if the last remedy was a high centesimal of the same remedy e.g. Sulphur 10m is followed by the lowest LM (Sulphur LM 1)
Management of cases with LM potencies is quite simple as long as patient compliance is good and if a few simple guide-lines are followed.
After a suitable solution has been chosen the patient continues to dose appropriately i.e. daily, or every other day etc., while there is improvement to the case and the patient does not show any new symptoms §248.
Each dose stimulates a reaction to the vital force, which moves up a level in health only to be further stimulated by the following dose which matches the favourable change in the patient and remains completely homœopathic as regards symptoms and potency level.
The intensity of the potency, determined by the quantity of dose given, is also regulated to the optimum especially if the doses are increased progressively as is suggested e.g. an extra 5ml  spoonful each week.
However as no dose can ever be too small then any dosing level will have some effect.
If there is no improvement after a few days then it is either not the appropriate remedy or there are some environmental maintaining causes blocking the remedy action §252.
If new symptoms previously not seen before appear, then the remedy is not the best choice, because the symptoms are not being cured by the remedy, so dosing is stopped.
The new picture is then assessed and another remedy given starting at the lowest degrees of dynamization (LM 1) regardless of what potency level the previous remedy had reached.
Although LM potencies are the most highly dynamised remedies they are much milder than the centesimals in action.
However, aggravations still do occur and are useful guides to remedy reaction as they are with the C scale.
The LM aggravation comes towards the end of treatment and is a return of old symptoms stimulated by the remedy itself.
As the curative curve of a particular remedy comes to an end, the vital force has only the excess artificial disease stimulus of the remedy to respond to — susceptibility having been satisfied.
The remedy is stopped.
If the symptoms disappear in a few days no more medicine is needed, but if the symptoms persist dosing continues as before to complete the cure §281.
An aggravation of symptoms at the beginning of treatment, i.e. with low potencies, is a sign of over-stimulation (too much intensity) and indicates the dose was too high.
To alleviate this the amount taken from the stock bottle is reduced to a level which creates no discomfort and the remedy is continued using that dosage routine until an increase in dose is appropriate §282.
In practise the use of successive dilutions using the drinking glass is the most useful method to effect this or by simply reducing the dose given from the stock bottle e.g. a half-teaspoonful instead of a full one if the medicine is being dosed directly without the use of glasses.
Reduction of dose is similarly used for so-called sensitive cases who are immediately over stimulated or prove the remedy during the first days, or hours, of treatment.
If treatment is started with higher potencies e.g. LM 3 and above, then initial aggravations could also be due to a higher potency as with the centesimal potencies.
A SUMMARY OF HAHNEMANN'S DIRECTIONS
1.
The remedy must be homœopathic §246
2.
The remedy must be highly potentised i.e. prepared by the LM method §246
3.
The remedy must be dissolved in water before administration to the patient §246
4.
The remedy must be given in small doses at suitable intervals §246
5.
The potency must be changed before each dose i.e. raised by succussion 2§46.
The solution must be succussed 8, 10, 12 times before taking one, or (increasing progressively) more coffee or tea-spoons daily or every other day (for chronic cases) 2, 3, 4 or 6 hours for acutes. §248
6.
Potency must start with the lower degrees (LM 1–6?) and proceed to the higher levels §246
7.
Even long acting remedies can be repeated §248 
8.
Dosing is continued while there is steady improvement and the patient does not experience a symptom he has not had before.
§248
9.
If a new set of different symptoms are seen, then another more appropriate remedy must be looked for.
§248
10.
If an aggravation occurs i.e. an intensification of the original symptoms, at the end of treatment, then the doses must be reduced in quantity and repeated at longer intervals, or stopped altogether to see if the symptoms will continue to disappear by themselves.
In which case either no more medicine will be needed or continuation of the remedy if, after a certain period, symptoms continue.
§248
11.
No dose of a highly potentized remedy can be too small that it cannot be stronger than the natural disease, that it cannot at least partially overcome it and that it cannot start the process of cure.
§ 279.
12.
If one is sure that the remedy is correct! and there is no improvement then it is likely that a maintaining cause in the patient's way of life or environment is influencing his progress.
This must be removed to bring about a permanent cure.
§252
13.
Aggravations or ameliorations of the psychic conditions and general demeanour of the patient are a good indication as to the progress of the remedy.
14.
If the patient develops some significant new symptoms or symptoms of the remedy then this is an unfavourable response.
§256
15.
Do not make favourites of certain remedies as the smaller lesser used remedies which might be more helpful will be overlooked.
§257
16.
It is not necessary to give a patient more than one remedy at a time.
§273
17.
If the remedy is homœopathically accurate then it becomes increasingly beneficial as its dose approaches the ideal degree of smallness for gentle action.
§277
18.
It is only by experiment, experience and observation of the sensitivity of each patient that can determine the optimum size of dose to give.
§ 278
19.
Dosing continues, increasing it progressively, until the patient, while feeling generally better, begins to manifest one or more of the old, original symptoms.
§280
20.
Return of old symptoms is a good sign and the medicine is stopped as this is an indication that no more is needed as the symptoms are of the remedy.
To verify this the remedy is stopped for a week or two.
If the symptoms are of the remedy they will disappear in a few days and no more medicine may be needed.
If traces of the original complaint remain then dosing should be continued from where it was left off.
§281.
21.
A homœopathic aggravation i.e. an intensification of the original complaint, at the beginning of treatment, is a sure sign that the dose (i.e. the quantity of the dissolved granule) is too large and must be reduced.
§282
22.
If the smallest doses are given then even if the remedy is inappropriate the harm done is insignificant and the appropriate remedy quickly puts the case in order.
§283
23.
Very chronic problems can be speeded up by applying the same solution as that taken by mouth, externally to the back, thighs and lower legs.
CONCLUSION
This article has been an attempt to use Hahnemann's writings to understand the dynamics of potency and, in particular, the LM potencies.
It is interesting to note that their evolution was a long and gradual one and not such a revolutionary concept but simply an extension of where we are now i.e. in centesimal potency (5th edition) philosophy.
Their wide flexibility and safety leave silent many of the old arguments about repetition and potency choice, allowing us all a very free and individual approach to their use.
It is also a fact that although 6th edition philosophy is taught and revered, the practical methods given to apply this teaching have been, over the years, sadly neglected.
Thankfully the recent revival has generated a new enthusiasm for the use of LM potencies giving us a feeling that, at last, their time has come.
John Tomlinson LCH MRPharmS is the founder and director of the Helios Homœopathic Pharmacy in Tunbridge Wells where he also practises .
FIFTY MILLESIMAL CASES
Dr. Robert M. Schore, M.D.
The following cases were included in a much longer article entitled Fifty Millesimal Potencies — An Introduction which appeared in the November 1985 edition of The Hahnemannian Gleanings.
We hope we will be forgiven for editing out of Dr Schore's discussion of the background to LM's but inclusion would have meant duplication since John Tomlinson's Dose Dilution and the LM Potencies already covers the points he makes.
Dr Schore says the most impressive statements he has read, inspiring him to investigate further the LM potencies, are the following, by Dr. Pierre Schmidt ‘…but we must bear in mind that Hahnemann never says anything which has not been duly considered and thought out, and that all his words should be weighed with the utmost care.’
Remember, that Hahnemann did nothing lightly and bear in mind his imperative advice: ‘Imitate me, but imitate me well’
CASE REPORTS
I have only been using LM potencies actively for about nine  monthe.
However, I have used them enough to observe that the properly selected remedy works deeply, quickly, smoothly, and without initial aggravation.
I will select from a variety of cases in order to illustrate the ability of the fifty millesimal potencies to act  favorably on all levels — mental, emotional, and physical.
Case No. 1: 28 year-old male with a chief complaint of fits of anger for not apparent reason.
There was a definite history of grief preceding the onset of the chief complaint.
The patient was thin, desired salt, and has other symptoms allowing the selection of Nat.
Mur.
Nat.
Mur. 0/1 was given, a dose each morning.
The patient began to feel better within 24 hours and continued to feel better until the sixth day, when he developed an aggravation.
I thought this was quite early in the case for an aggravation, so I had him take a dose every other day after diluting the remedy in a second glass of water.
This dose also aggravated, so the remedy was stopped.
The aggravation subsided after 36 hours, leaving the patient feeling well for the past 5 months.
Case No. 2: 55 year-old obese female with hypertension and spells of dizziness and headache for many years.
Based on what I thought were proper symptoms, Puls. was given but with only temporary relief, and slight lowering of the blood pressure.
Later the patient recalled that her spells may have begun after a head injury in childhood.
The case was difficult for me, but other symptoms fitted Nat.
Sulph. so Nat Sulph was begun in the 0/1 potency every other day, and followed by Nat.
Sulph. 0/2, 0/3, 0/4, and currently 0/5.
There has been no aggravation, the blood pressure is normal, the spells are infrequent now, and she is losing weight with improved energy.
Nat. sulph. will be continued in gradually ascending potencies until there is aggravation, or the symptoms change to another remedy.
Case No. 3: A Lachesis patient, whose main complaint was fatigue, called for further treatment after his improvement stopped 4 months after a dose of Lachesis 1M which created a short initial aggravation.
He was given Lach. 0/1 with marked improvement after four doses, one dose daily.
Six weeks later he felt somewhat better but had an immediate flare-up of painful, bleeding  hemorrhoids on the left side, an old symptom.
This cleared on sac.lac. after five days.
In this case the patient should have called, and Lach. 0/2 should have been prescribed.
The response probably would have been smoother because the effect of the 0/1 potency had been completed six weeks earlier.
Case No. 4: 40 year-old female with chief complaints of a swelling above the eyelid and a marked sensitivity to drafts accompanied by weakness.
The swelling was classic for Kali Carb. and the case was started with the 200th potency.
She came to seem me before I began to use the LM potencies and there was some minor pathology in the kidney related to surgery for prolapsed kidney, so I was reluctant to use higher than 200.
She felt much better for about 6 weeks, but it was clear that she needed a higher potency in order to cure.
Kali Carb. 1M was given followed by strong and disruptive aggravation.
The dose was not premature because there was definite reversal of the case following  amelioratrion from the 200th.
She felt poorly for about one month but then seemed to recover and felt somewhat stable for the next 6 weeks.
At that time Kali Carb. 0/1 was begun and followed by ascending potencies on an every other day dosage.
With these LM potencies she is feeling stronger than ever without aggravation and is currently taking 0/7.
The swelling above the eyelid is slowly shrinking.
I suspect in this case that there may be pathological change in the kidney which is intolerant to the 1M dose, but responsive to the gently, deeper action of the fifty millesimals.
Case No. 5: 58 year-old woman fell, sustaining a left ankle sprain and bruising over the ankle and tibia.
Arnica 200 afforded temporary relief for two hours; a repeat dose helped temporarily.
Arnica 0/1 every four hours relieved the swelling and pain steadily over the next 36 hours.
Case No. 6: 2 year-old boy fell off a platform striking his head.
He became stuporous but a full neurological exam.
at the local hospital revealed nothing else.
After the first dose of Arnica 0/1 there was immediate recovery.
Case No. 7: 28 year-old woman sustained a left mid-forearm ulnar nerve injury after having the automobile door closed on her arm.
The pain travelled upward and the fingers were numb along the distribution of the ulnar nerve.
She was given  a dose of Hyper.
30 from her first-aid kit and sent to the neurologist.
He said the nerve may take several weeks to heal.
I saw her later in my office because the Hyper.
30 had no effect.
By then she had a terrible headache, but Hyper.0/6. one dose, relieved the headache instantly, the numbness was 50% improved after one minute and completely resolved after 30 minutes.
There was some return of pain and numbness after 24 hours, but repeating the dose relieved the problem.
I started this case with 0/6 because I did not have the 0/1 in stock.
Case No. 8: 40 year-old woman sustained crushing compound fracture of two fingers in an automobile accident.
It required surgical pinning, sutering and casting.
Hyper.0/1 every four hours relieved all pain and swelling and fever within 48 hours, even after  anesthesia and tetanus toxoid were given in the hospital.
Case No. 9: 76 year-old Sulphur patient with typical 11.00 hr. aggravation and bladder infections felt temporary relief for two months after Sulphur 200, Sulph 1M was given, but she sustained a long and somewhat debilitating aggravation lasting 6–8 weeks.
Her age and weakened state had no tolerance for a 1M, so I repeated Sulph. 30 when the problems returned shortly after the aggravation.
This also relieved temporarily.
Sulph. 0/1 taken every other day created gradual relief without aggravation.
This was followed with Sulph. 0/2 and she continues to improve.
Case No. 10: 37 year-old woman with painful, persistent right ovarian cyst about 4cm size.
One year prior to this she consulted me because of night sweats and oedema.
She was constitutionally a Kali Carb. patient and she was given the 10M but sustained a long aggravation followed by weakening of her condition.
I concluded that she must have some internal pathology based on the effect of the remedy, the family history of cancer in close relatives, and the past history of recurrent infections and long-term birth-control pill use.
A few months after the aggravation I started her on Kali carb. 0/1, progressing through 0/6. with steady amelioration, increasing energy and emotional well-being.
During the 0/6 she had an aggravation, but stopping the remedy afforded no relief, and she became weaker, with left-sided pharyngitis and fever resembling Lach.
Lach.0/1 cleared the problem after three hourly doses; there was no resultant setback of her overall condition.
A few weeks later she fell ill with the ovarian cyst, but the picture was now Lycopodium.
Lyc. 0/1 was prescribed every two hours.
After three doses, she slept deeply, waking intermittently during the night only to urinate.
By morning she had lost five pounds, there was no right pelvic pain or ovarian swelling, and she felt much better generally.
She has continued to improve generally on ascending every-other-day doses of Lyc. through 0/8.
Her overall energy and stamina has greatly improved.
Case No. 11: 21 year-old college student, constitutionally Nat.
Mur.
His main complaint was inability to concentrate and remember his school work.
I began his case with Nat.
Mur. 0/1 ascending to 0/7, which he is currently taking.
He is  improving generally and his memory and concentration became normal during the 0/2 dosage.
There has been no aggravation.
Case No. 12: 15 year-old girl with a chief complaint of warts on the hand.
She was quite withdrawn, angry and constitutionally fitted Nat.
Mur.
After the 0/3 bottle of Nat.mur. given every other day beginning with 0/1, the warts were gone and she was definitely more open and communicative.
SUMMARY
I have dome as a Hahnemann requested and have followed his instructions exactly.
My experience with fifty millesimal potencies over the past nine months, with approximately 400 patients, has proved to me that Hahnemann was correct.
The patterns of responses were exactly as he said they would be, provided that one begins treatment, whether acute or chronic, with the 0/1 potency.
The potencies work most often without aggravation but with the same curative effects as centesimal potencies.
They effect healing gently and rapidly on mental, emotional, and physical levels.
I hope that my further work and the work of others around the world will help to clarify the advantages of the fifty millesimal potencies over the centesimal potencies.
Hahnemann, early in his career, used low potencies, but later was aware of and used centesimal high potencies.
Why did he conclude that fifty millesimals were better?
I encourage other classical homœopaths to submit their work with the fifth millesimals for future publication and discussion in Homœotherapy.
My continuing work is convincing me that there are probably no inimical remedies when LM's are used, that Lycopodium can probably follow Sulphur, and that LM potencies can be repeated often and safely in weak patients and in patients with serious tissue pathology.
We hope we haven't inadvertently breached  any existing copyright and we trust that our attempts to ensure the wider distribution of this material will not cause loss to anyone concerned with the advancement of Homœopathy.
Unfortunately no biographical details concerning the author appeared with the original article, I understand from Francis Treuherz of The Society of Homœopaths that Dr. Schore edited a journal entitled Homœotherapy which began in 1982 and ran to 8 volumes.
Should he or any other person who knows him wish to supply some further biographical details the publishers will be pleased to incorporate these into future editions.
THE PRACTICALITIES OF PRESCRIBING LAWS
by Robert Barker
Why LM's
It is now 4 years since I gave my first remedy in an LM potency and it has become my preferred method of prescribing for a number of reasons 1) No decision has to be made on potency level i.e. whether 6, 30, 200, etc is indicated.
Some may argue that this is merely abdication of responsibility!— I prefer to consider that LM system is more sophisticated in removing any need for the practitioner to make such a judgement.
The issue of potency level has been a source of the bitterest argument between practitioners since Homœopathy began.
We have all heard of examples of the deepest psychological states being cured with a 6c potency and at the other extreme a 50M being needed for a sprained ankle.
It seems that potency level is as much to do with satisfying the need of the practitioner to feel that they are doing something as being a systematic deductive process!
My own need to feel that I am ‘doing’ something is happily satisfied by the continued repetition involved in LM's, safe in the knowledge that as soon as the vitality has had enough it will say so.
2) There is no risk of aggravation from the selection of too high a potency
The removal of the ‘problem’ of what to do about aggravations is wonderful and gives complete freedom to use the range of remedies whatever reputation they may have for over-reacting or whatever rules may have evolved about not repeating.
It has even been suggested that it is possible to use inimical remedies with impunity although I haven't actively set out to prove or disprove this.
(Inimical means that certain remedies have been found to be similar in their action that prescribing them in succession leads to aggravation e.g. Mercury and Silica shouldn't follow each other without interposing some other remedy) 2) The beauty of the LM system is encompassed in its ability to fulfill §.2 of The Organon:
The highest ideal of therapy is to restore health rapidly, gently, permanently; to remove and destroy the whole disease in the shortest, surest, least harmful way, according to easily comprehensible principles.
The gentle and yet rapid response that one achieves has to be experienced to be understood.
For example whatever the nature of the case be it acute or chronic I would expect to see some signs of improvement indicating a curative response within a very short while.
As with the centesimal system the time will depend on the acuteness of the symptoms, the chronicity of the complaint and the vitality of the patient but there has always been the question of when to repeat the remedy if the response is insufficient having regard to the severity of the symptoms.
Dr Campuzano of Mexico likens the action of a remedy to that of a wave breaking upon the beach.
A centesimal potency creates a wave of some size and when it reaches the shore there will be considerable disturbance while the turbulence subsides and the remains of the wave penetrates to its furthest point.
On the other hand an LM ‘wave’ is much smaller and by its nature causes much less turbulence but frequent repetition means that its wavelets still penetrate as far into the being of the patient.
It is as if there is an element of delayed action with centesimals and we have no means of knowing what the final extent of reaction will be without waiting.
I am sure I an as guilty as most homœopaths of not waiting enough but waiting is not as significant with LM's because the action of the remedy is more immediate.
If you stop an LM remedy too soon then the patient will experience relapse.
If the patient takes more medicine than they need then there will be over-reaction but I have had very few cases of over-reaction and always the state produced has calmed within a day.
Case 1
A tooth abscess had built up over 24 hrs and had left the patient without sleep for a night, it was very clearly Belladonna given the nature of the pain and the characteristic worse for lying.
A single spoonful of Belladonna LM1 took effect within 2 or 3 minutes and a few more doses during the day cleared the state.
This obviously isn't to say that the same response would not have been achieved with a centesimal potency, it merely demonstrates the applicability of LM's in an acute and the simplicity of repetition.
THE SIGNIFICANCE OF THE AMOUNT OF MEDICINE
In cases of long standing chronic disease I expect the patient to start feeling better within a day or two and certainly wouldn't continue with a remedy if there was no improvement after a week.
However you do have to remember that with the LM system the frequency of repetition and the quantity of medicine that the patient takes is significant.
Case 2
A 30 year old woman presented with asthma which she had on and off for 3 years.
She had originally had it in childhood but it had disappeared at 14 years.
She used Ventalin as and when she needed it.
She presented many Phosphorus symptoms including the peculiar of desiring cold milk which she  remembered craving during her childhood asthma.
Phosphorus LM1 was prescribed, one granule in a 100ml bottle of purified water, half a teaspoon to be taken daily increasing quantity and frequency as desired.
She rang in on the fifth day to say she was no better and didn't feel she was getting anywhere.
Fortunately this was a case where I had felt very confident of the remedy and close questioning revealed that her appetite had returned, her chest wasn't as tight and she did experience feeling better in herself immediately after taking the medicine.
This seemed clearly a case of the patient needing the medicine more frequently so I suggested she take it at least 4 times daily.
After three days she rang to say she was ‘better’.!
Now according to Hahnemann being better isn't a sign to stop the medicine, his argument is that the symptoms may be gone but the patient has not yet demonstrated that the predisposition has been removed.
One of the major difficulties for practitioners in understanding the LM method is this idea of the patient continuing to take the remedy even when they are feeling better.
It contrasts so vividly with the centesimal system where the remedy may well be given as a single dose and even when several doses are taken is usually stopped at the first sign of improvement.
The illustration that I use to explain the LM concept is that of a millpond representing the human condition.
When we are in a state of disease then the smooth calm surface is disrupted by ripples (or even waves!) spreading out from the site of disturbance.
The administration of the remedy is like dropping a pebble into the water's edge, the ripples/waves resulting will depending on their homœopathicity cancel out the energy disturbance of the disease.
It can be seen that continued administration of the remedy once the disease disturbance has been overcome will result in the presence of an energy pattern of the remedy itself i.e. a proving.
If continued taking of the medicine does not produce remedy symptoms then the patient must still have a disease/energy disturbance that matches the disease producing capacity of the remedy.
Having said all of this my experience with patients is that very few of them persist in taking their LM remedy until they begin to prove it and who can blame them!
Most of them on finding their symptoms gone see little point in either remembering their daily dose or for that matter paying out money for more medicine when they feel well.
Case 2 (above) contd.
The patient's requirement for frequent repetition of the Phosphorus led me to make up a 5ml dropper bottle as the stock bottle i.e. the LM granule dissolved in 5mls of water and alcohol instead of 100mls.
She would take a few drops directly into the mouth using the pipette whereas previously she had used a teaspoon direct from the 100ml bottle.
She progressed with no aggravation until Phos LM3 when the asthma symptoms began steadily relapsing with no aggravation until Phos LM3 when the asthma symptoms began steadily relapsing and stopping the remedy did not lead to amelioration.
The most obvious choice for a nosode was Tuberculinum given its relationship to Phosphorus and the continued desire for cold milk.
Improvement ensued under Tub LM1 (again taken from a 5ml dropper bottle) although the  patient commented that the wheeziness wasn't as clear as it had been on the first Phosphorus.
After finishing the Tub LM1 we returned to Phosphorus LM4 having left it at LM3 but the patient found her symptoms returning so Tuberculinum LM2 was used which almost completely relieved.
We were then able to return to Phosphorus which maintained progress.
It is interesting to note that all the prescriptions subsequent to Phos LM3 were made up in 5ml dropper bottles except Phos LM8 which was put in a 100ml bottle by mistake and didn't have the same effect.
LAYERED CASES
Obviously all cases are not single remedy prescriptions but the principles of changing medicines and the interspersing of nosodes is no different from centesimals.
A relatively complex case such as no. 3 following reveals the adaptability of LM's and demonstrates the speed of response which can be expected from remedies.
There will always be the question as to what would have happened if the last remedy had been the first prescription but in my experience that's the sort of question homœopaths ask rather than patients!
Case 3
This was a lady of 50 who came with chronic sinusitis, so severely blocked in fact that X-rays showed black over the frontal sinus.
Her father suffered similarly and had symptoms of  delerium with it.
She was menopausal and had begun hot flashes 18mths previously and took Dixarit.
She expressed being a sensitive person who needed company (she always had the radio on), she wasn't thirsty and she liked the heating on but had to have windows open.
Pulsatilla LM1 produced a response within 3 days when her mouth felt as if it was coated with glue and then she suddenly found she could smell again!
She was much better in herself and the sinus problem having effectively gone by Puls LM3 she was left with hot flushes and no further improvement.
A single dose of Puls 200 produced a night free of flushes but this didn't hold and repetition of the Puls 200 after 2 days had no effect nor did increasing to Puls 1M or returning to Puls LM4.
The patient complained of pain to a scar on her leg which she had cut 18 mths previously and which had taken 6 weeks to heal at the time.
Using this symptom with those of the flushes which were worse at night and aversion to anything around the neck the remedy Lachesis LM1 was prescribed with an immediate improvement generally and in symptoms.
She felt so good she stopped the remedy of her own accord but within 2 weeks began a period.
I advised going on to Lachesis LM2 and after 3 weeks she had a return of flushes.
These remained and the following sequence over a month all proved ineffective although she commented that she felt 20 years younger: Lachesis LM3, stopping the remedy, Lachesis 200, Syphilinum LM1 and returning to Lachesis LM3.
Another interview revealed that ever since childhood she had been very suspicious of strangers.
The experience of being molested once as a child and then a man jumping in her car at 21 yrs and her running away remained with her  so that she has persistent fear of being attacked and the sense of someone being behind her.
Thuja LM1 produced immediate improvement in hot flushes which returned at Thuja LM4 when the remedy was stopped and the flushes abated.
Case 4
A woman of 40 came with digestive disturbance which had been around for twenty years and which had been ameliorated but not cured by previous homœopathic treatment.
This case began before my use of LM's and I prescribed Lycopodium 6C three times daily which dealt with the symptoms within a few days.
Periodic relapse occurred over the next 4 months and I then gave Lyc LM1.
She appeared to experience a return of an old symptom in the form of fear of cancer — her father had died of a particularly virulent from of rectal cancer which had metastasised to the spinal cord and brain and she had periodically experienced intense fear that she would die similarly.
She went on to Lyc LM2 but proceeded to have an acute flu-like illness and ended up in hospital with dehydration.
Six weeks after the acute she came along with headaches, anxiety, depression and low-grade digestive symptoms.
As I was floundering around trying to see a picture she mentioned that she was dreading a forthcoming holiday because of travel-sickness — the anticipatory fear would lead to headaches and frequent urination.
I asked her whether high buildings bothered her and she said she would feel fear if she looked up at them.
I prescribed Argenticum Nitricum 6x in a 5ml dropper bottle as I didn't have it in LM.
Six weeks later she reported back that she had been very well on holiday with no travel-sickness or stomach problems but since returning home the digestive symptoms had gradually increased in intensity.
This could have been the return to the stresses and strains of normal life or because she was no longer taking Arg Nit so I put her on Arg Nit LM1.
After 2 weeks, she reported back there hadn't been any improvement but it turned out that she had bought herself some Arg Nit tablets as she didn't like the taste of the alcoholic water the LM was made up in!
I gave her another bottle of Arg Nit LM1 with less alcohol in it and she had an excellent response for 10 days, then the pains returned so she stopped the remedy and she was well for two weeks.
Now the pains were returning but 4 weeks after Arg Nit LM2 she was able to say that the digestive symptoms had been negligible.
After another 6 weeks she complained of a headache like she ‘used to have’ and Arg Nit LM3 was given.
No news for 6 months then she came along with an anal fissure, she'd not had any stomach problems and in fact had only taken the Arg Nit LM3 for 2 or 3 days till the headache went.
I returned to the Arg Nit LM3 to see if it would deal with this new symptom picture but there was no change in the anal discomfort with the Arg Nit LM3 or 4 and after 6 weeks she was again getting headaches and expressing fear of cancer.
I gave one dose of Syphilinum 200 and 4 weeks later she had fear of cancer, stomach discomfort and a peculiar symptom of food going up to the back of the nose on swallowing.
This strange rare and peculiar led to Nitric Acid which covered everything, I gave the 6c potency since again I didn't have the LM and after 4 weeks she reported improvement of the anal discomfort and a return of the old stomach symptoms.
I sent her Nit Ac LM1 and didn't hear anything for a year when she rang up with a headache — it turned out that the anal fissure had cleared quickly and she felt she had been  miraculously well given her sister had been murdered 12mths previously and she'd had 4 months leave of absence from work to deal with the aftermath which had involved her nephew joining the family.
I prescribed Nit Ac LM2 and as far as I know she remains well.
The case was instructive from a number of standpoints but particularly in the way it appears to demonstrate the ability of LM potencies to reach the parts which other potencies cannot reach!
There is little doubt in my mind that the case was Nitric Acid from the very beginning but nevertheless given the imperfectness of my prescriptions the gentle stimulation of the vitality by the 50 millesimal potencies uncovered the necessary clues in the end.
Their deeper action over and above that of repeated low potency centesimals seems plain and although I have no evidence I feel that high centesimals would probably have aggravated and made more difficult the roundabout route which we followed.
CHANGING FROM CENTESIMALS
If a patient is currently on centesimal potencies there is no difficulty in introducing the same or different remedies in the LM scale.
If they are still experiencing the benefits of the last centesimal medicine then as usual you would wait for some indication before repeating or changing remedies at which point the LM can be prescribed.
If the patient is on repeated low potency centesimals but not making the progress desired the use of the LM potency would be an ideal solution.
AGGRAVATIONS FROM LM'S
After aggravation with an LM potency, there should be amelioration within a few days (24 hours in my experience), if there is a subsequent return of symptoms requiring the same remedy resume treatment not with the same potency but the next higher one.
If there is no amelioration another remedy to fit the picture must be found.
In looking through my cases for examples of problems that I've experienced with 50 millesimals I am conscious that aggravations are not one!
Where the remedy has been too ‘strong’ for the patient's vitality this has always shown itself on the first few doses and it has merely been necessary to wait a day or two for the over-reaction to settle and then to begin again using greater dilution.
PARTIAL RESPONSE
The most awkward response is that of a partial similar, there are some improvements but there are still problem symptoms.
Is it a question of the amount and frequency of the prescription or is a new remedy needed?
Since amount and frequency of the medicine are easily experimented with then LM's are actually  easier to assess than centesimals.
The general rules on Hering's law of cure and looking for improvement in well-being still applies but it is necessary to take into account pathological tissues change.
It is possible to palliate without cure.
Case 5
This lady of 42 came along with the diagnosis of uterine fibroid which was leading to severe haemorrhaging at the time of her period.
She'd been on anti-depressants for the last 4 years since her husband walked out on her to live with another woman.
He'd returned after two years and she was happy with that.
She experienced changeable moods and panic attacks — she hadn't been on holiday for 20 years and couldn't even go out to dinner for fear of not being able to get away.
She was very tidy and had been as a child, she said ‘I'm  obssessive ’.
I decided to give her Arsenicum Album LM1 in a 100ml bottle and within 1 month she was feeling much better, her period had been the best she could remember and she'd even been out to a party.
However the next month she had severe blood loss with the period and the Arsenicum LM3 she was on didn't produce the same sense of wellbeing.
An old symptom of restless legs in bed had returned and this with the ailments from indignation over her husband's desertion led to Staphisagria LM1.
A cold came out after three days, she complained (for the first time ever!) to her husband about doing his books and she put the house up for sale.
Her period then came early and flooded and the symptoms were severe enough to  warrent a new prescription (the Staphisagria wasn't helping) which came out to Millefolium.
I hadn't any LM so gave Mill 6C which stopped the haemorrhaging but led to such severe abdominal pains the GP was called.
She didn't respond to allopathic painkillers, developed vomiting and diarrhoea and then had a good response to Arsenicum Album LM4 but having recovered from the acute was experiencing some return of anxiety symptoms.
My understanding of the case was that I'd not yet found a remedy to cover the fibroid as well as everything else so I chose Phosphorus LM1 from the rubric bleeding fibroids since it covered her fears and complemented the Arsenicum.
She reported a general response as good as on the Arsenicum, went on holiday and had to come home from it because her period was again heavy and all she could do was lie down!
It was now 15 weeks since beginning treatment and she now had discomfort walking and standing from the weight of the uterine tumour.
Some weeks previously we had discovered from Louise Hay's booklet, The Mental Causes for Physical Illness that fibroids represented the nursing of a hurt from a partner.
Comparing the rubrics ailments from suppressed anger with tumours, uterine, fibroids brought me to Aurum.
Burnett's favourite preparation for the treatment of uterine tumours was Aurum Muriaticum Natronatum so not having the  LMI gave her the 6C potency in a 10ml dropper and within 3 days she was relieved of the discomfort on walking and standing which it seems reasonable to assume is due to the fibroid shrinking.
This case although incomplete is nonetheless very instructive — it demonstrates a layered case, the ability of remedies to take away symptoms but not cure the patient and the fact that centesimals can be introduced when you haven't got the LM!
CHILDREN
Children don't have any particularly different rules — they just emphasise the need to be conscious of the way that LM's work.
As you would expect the high level of vitality in children means they respond quickly and they generally won't need as many doses of the remedy.
The nature of the child's condition is more likely to influence my decision on whether to use centesimals or 50 millesimals.
With adults I tend to assume there are going to be layers or stages in the case which a repeated LM will uncover.
If the child's symptoms are functional and the picture is clear probably decide a 30C is the simplest approach.
However where repetition is needed the LM will allow more control particularly in longstanding or deeper states.
ACUTES
In acutes I've quite often got the patient to repeat their chronic remedy more frequently.
This is particularly useful where a patient suffers ‘acute’ episodes during chronic treatment.
I sometimes find that this method does away with the need to find a new remedy for the acute picture — remember the patient should respond within hours in acute situations so you'll be able to determine whether the new symptoms are responding or whether you do need a different medicine.
In cases where an acute prescription is required I give the new remedy in LM1.
After the acute is over the picture of the chronic state should be more prominent.
‘HOW’ LM's
The question of the ‘how’ you actually administer the LM preparations is a matter for individual preference.
The previous articles included in this publication all explain the variations on the stock bottle size which are possible and discuss the taking of medicine directly as teaspoon doses from the stock bottle or the further dilution by use of glasses.
Whenever I've enthused to practitioners about the advantages of LM's they've always expressed confusion about the procedures involved and in particular the complications that they see in using teaspoons, tablespoons and glasses.
I began 4 years ago with 150ml stock bottles, went on to 100ml stock bottles and I now use 5ml dropper bottles!
Technically because 1 granule is only diluted in 5ml of water and alcohol the ‘strength’ of the remedy is much greater than Hahnemann expected patients to be able to withstand.
I personally have not had any problems with over-reaction using this method.
The  procedure is so much more simplified — the patient is instructed to take a drop (or even a squirt!) from the stock bottle usually on a daily basis (every few mins or hours in acutes) with instructions to succuss the bottle 8 to 10 times before each dose.
They're told that the amount of medicine they take us under their control and I usually suggest they experiment after two or three days with either increasing the amount of the dose e.g. two squirts instead of one or taking the remedy twice a day.
If they find the stimulus too strong they know they can reduce it.
I don't know why a 5ml stock bottle doesn't create too strong a medicine, perhaps my patients are too ‘healthy’(!),
I can't say that I've even found cases with definite pathology needing to dilute more.
What matters is that they find the system simple to use and it certainly simplifies the practitioner's lot.
CHECKLIST
1.
Obtain your LM's as poppy seed granules from pharmacy which you completely trust as having followed the procedure laid down in the Organon.
I personally use The Helios Pharmacy in Tunbridge Wells (tel. 0892 537254) since the pharmacist is John Tomlinson whose article Dose, Dilution and the LM Potencies demonstrates his understanding of the preparation procedures.
2.
Decide on the stock bottle size which you are going to use.
If you want to stock to 100 or 150ml size then ask your local chemist to order you a box of amber glass medicine bottles — they are used all the time in a dispensing chemist and a manufacturer's box of 50 is relatively cheap.
If you want to use dropper bottles they can be obtained singly from dispensing chemists or in quantities of 50 or more from The Homœopathic Supply co. (tel. 0263 824683)
3.
You will now need a supply of purified water and 95% alcohol, again obtainable from dispensing chemists.
The restrictions on purchasing ethanol without prescription have been removed (although not all pharmacists will realise this) but it is very expensive because of the Customs and Excise duty despite its medicinal purpose.
If you start using large quantities of alcohol it can be purchased in 10 litre amounts (min. order) from Hayman Ltd, Witham, Essex (tel. 0376 517 517) at about one third of the pharmacy price.
You can use vodka or brandy as a preservative but given these are usually less than 50% proof you would need at least 20ml in a 100ml stock bottle to give a 10% alcoholic solution.
4.
You now have the necessary items to make up the patient's stock bottle in the consulting room.
If you need to send the remedy through the post and are not using dropper type stock bottles I have personally found it safest to add the granule to 10mls of alcohol in say a 10ml screw cap vial.
Instruct your patient to purchase a 100ml or 150ml bottle of purified water and to add the contents of the small vial to it.
It can be a bit daunting dealing with a single grain and this is one way of  ensuring the patient doesn't have to worry whether the poppy seed really did drop into the bottle and similarly the practitioner can be reasonably confident of eliminating this danger in assessing any lack of reaction.
You can of course ask your Homœopathic pharmacist to dispatch the stock bottle direct to the patient and eliminate all those steps!
5.
Frequency of repetition will depend on whether the condition is acute or chronic and the vitality of the patient.
It can therefore vary from every few minutes to once a year but I usually begin with once a day.
I suggest the patient takes it on waking for the first two or three days and then experiments either with increasing the amount or by introducing an extra dose in the afternoon or evening.
Given that we are attempting to reach the point where the patient no longer benefits from the remedy then it is appropriate to use up the medicine as quickly as possible.
My experience is that patients have little problem in finding the pattern and dosage which suits them.
6.
No more than one LM granule needs to be used in preparing the stock bottle since Hahnemann says ‘one rarely needs more than a single globule of appropriately dynamised medicine’(para. 248a.).
I haven't tried adding additional globules so I've no idea what would happen.
7.
I've always started with LM1 since I can't see how it's possible to perceive whether a patient would benefit from beginning somewhere else.
I do occasionally move through the range two at a time e.g. 4,6,8 but as often as not that is because I've economised in not buying all the potencies!
An information sheet for patients is printed overleaf and a possible list of instructions to be given to patients using 100 or 150ml stock bottles is included.
The space in paragraph 6 is for frequency e.g. daily/every other day in chronic cases or 1/2/3/4 hourly etc. in acutes.
PATIENT INFORMATION
The LM form of homœopathic medication is unusual in that once you are improving on the remedy you actually continue to take it even when you are feeling well.
This often means that several bottles of medicine will be used in the process of cure.
It is very important that as you come to the end of one bottle you contact your Homœopath to arrange for the next one to be made up.
When your vitality no longer needs the stimulus of the medicine you should experience the return of an old symptom such as you had before starting the remedy — this should disappear when you stop the remedy.
If other old symptoms arise during treatment this demonstrates a positive response so please ask your Homœopath for advice.
The LM's are a particularly gentle form of treatment and any over-stimulus can be controlled by extra dilution of the medicine which your practitioner will be pleased to advise you about.
It cannot be expressed too strongly that the most beneficial results are obtained from pursuing the treatment until a return of symptoms occurs.
INSTRUCTIONS FOR TAKING LM POTENCIES
1.
Buy a 150ml brown glass bottle of purified water containing 15ml of ethanol from your local dispensing chemist.
If necessary a small soda-water bottle with cap will do — add 150ml of distilled or purified water together with a few drops of vodka or brandy.
2.
Add the LM remedy to your bottle — this is now your STOCK BOTTLE.
3.
Take one tablespoon from the stock bottle and add to 8–10 tablespoons of water in a cup or glass.
This is your remedy, take one teaspoonful and throw the rest away.
4.
Before preparing subsequent doses, succuss or shake the stock bottle by hitting it into the palm of your hand 8 to 12 times.
Then as before take one tablespoon from the stock bottle and add to 8–10 tablespoons of water in a clean cup or glass.
Administer one teaspoonful, this is your second dose — throw the rest away.
 6.
Repeat this process........ until the contents of the stock bottle are finished.
Report back before you finish the stock bottle.
CONCLUSION
I hope this publication has given a starting point and that you will be stimulated to try out this last great contribution from the founder of Homœopathy.
The following words of Hahnemann provide a fitting final comment on how to determine the appropriate dose:
Only pure experiment, the meticulous observation of the sensitivity of each patient, and sound experience can determine this in each individual case 
Organon §278 Robert Barker BSc LCH is a partner in the Homœopathic Supply Company.based in North Norfolk where he practises.