

PART TWO: LOCAL COLOUR
Milan: a short history 38
Layout of Milan 55
Structure of the book 57
Climate 58
Public holidays 59
View south-east over the city from the roof of the Duomo
Milan: A Short History
The first known inhabitants of Italy lived around a quarter of a million years ago, when the country was mostly inhabited by elephants and rhinoceroses.
Remains of these first Italians, people who arrived over the land bridge from Africa (as did the exotic animals) have been found not only in the south, but also on the Lombardy Plain, near Verona.
These oldest dwellers, hunters of the Paleolithic or Old Stone Age, left few remains of their presence.
Not until after the last Ice Age had remodelled the valleys north of the plain, overdeepening them, then damming them with morainic debris to form the great lakes of Maggiore, Como and Garda, did man evolve to the point where he left a permanent imprint on the landscape.
The late Neolithic or New Stone age, and Bronze Age peoples of northern Italy can certainly claim to have left their mark.
Visitors to the sites of lake dwellings on Lake Ledro — to the west of the northern tip of Lake Garda — and Lake Varese can still see the remains of the wooden stake piles on which the lake villages were set.
Ledro supplies water to a hydro-electric power station and when demand is high, and the water level correspondingly low, some 15,000 wooden stakes emerge from the waters.
Equally impressive are the finds exhibited in the museum on Lake Varese's Isolino Virginia.
Later, as bronze was replaced by iron, the Golasecca culture arose at the southern end of Lake Maggiore.
The culture is named after a village away from the lake, though the better finds have been at Sesto Calende, the town at the end of the lakebound autostrada that heads north from Milan.
As the Golasecca culture flourished, elsewhere in Europe the first of the truly great European cultures was rising to the east.
The Greeks were not slow in taking to the sea and exporting  Hellenic culture around the Mediterranean basin.
Southern Italy, and especially Sicily, had Hellenic cities from an early time.
To the north the Celts were arising in central Europe, chiefly expanding northward, but also crossing the Alps to replace the Golasecca culture around the lakes and founding the Gaulish city of Mediolanum, so called because of its position in the centre of the Lombardy plain.
Between these two well-known and reasonably well-documented cultures lay one that is, in many ways, still as mysterious now as it was over two thousand years ago.
Herodotus, the Greek, claimed that the Etruscans who held the centre of Italy had migrated from the Middle East, while another Greek, Dionysius of Halicarnassus, argued for a lineage that was home-spun, the Etruscan having evolved from tribes that were contemporaries of the Golasecca people.
Today, much the same debate is still taking place.
What is known is that this last pre-Roman culture had a vitality and civilization that compared with that of the Greeks.
But though their name lives on in the region of Tuscany, the Etruscans actually survived for only a short period; they were expelled from Rome by the Latins and then defeated at the battle of Aricia in 506BC.
This date does not fit well with the founding of Rome by Romulus on 21 April 753BC.
That date was ‘discovered’ by early Roman historians, men who also incorporated the well-known Greek legend that the city was founded by Aeneas after he had escaped from Troy.
Romulus and Remus, the wolf children, were, said the Roman historians, the grandchildren of Aeneas.
Ironically, the latest historical theorists claim as very likely the idea that the first king of the city of Rome was indeed a Romulus.
However, the theory also points out that Etruscan kings are required in the lineage of Roman kings so it is by no means clear that the Romans who emerged out of the Etruscan shadows in the late sixth-century were true descendants of Romulus himself.
At first the Romans consolidated their position in central Italy, moving north only in the third-century BC, when the battle of Mediolanum in 222 BC won them the most important city on the Lombardy Plain.
This battle was a bitter, strongly contested affair, the Romans under Claudio Marcello defeating the Gauls who then held the city.
The city's importance derived from its position, right at the centre of the most fertile section of the plain, bounded by the lake peaks to the north, the Po to the south and the lake outflow rivers of the Adda and the Ticino to the east and west respectively.
To the west of the Ticino lay the high Alps, and those entering Italy from that direction were funnelled down the Aosta valley towards Mediolanum.
To the north the passes through the Alps brought the traveller to Como or Maggiore, and then on down to Mediolanum.
Only to the east, was the Lombardy Plain not decisively held by those who held Milan.
So strategic was the city's position that the present inhabitants claim that the dwellers were a people in their own right even by the time of the Roman conquest, and that when Julius Caesar gave them Roman citizenship they were already famed as an industrious, peaceable, practical people with a legendary ability to confront any misadventures with incredible resources of energy.
But then, city dwellers have never been long on modesty.
The rise of Christianity was opposed by the Romans, and most famously by Nero, whose persecutions of the earliest Christians started around 64AD.
In all the persecution lasted for about 250 years, being at its height during the reign of Diocletian.
Diocletian was Emperor from 284 to 305, a period during which the Empire was under severe threat.
To the north the Franks and Lombards threatened, while to the east the Vandals and Huns were carrying out attacks with the violence with which their names are now synonymous.
During the years 303–305 Diocletian, convinced that the threat to the Empire was due to the presence of the Christians among the loyal followers, ordered outrageous purges: even his wife and daughter were killed.
However, the Christians survived.
After Diocletian had surrendered power there was a time of confusion until Constantine the Great became Emperor in 324.
He had already been converted to the new faith, and had, with the Edict of Milan in 313, granted equal status to Christianity.
In 391 Theodosius made Christianity the state religion, and died shortly after in Milan, which had become, for a short time, the seat of the imperial court in the western half of the Empire.
The city quickly acquired its first Christian bishop, a man now revered as Milan's patron saint, St Ambrose (Sant 'Ambrogio).
Ambrose, a  native of Treviri, was a severe man, who it was said, would weep bitter tears when confessing a sinner.
He laid foundations for Christianity in the city which were to survive the coming of the Barbarians.
St Ambrose died in 397.
The Barbarians came in 538.
The Goths had been forced out of central Europe by Hun pressure from the east.
They settled in the Lombardy Plain, taking the city only after having controlled much of the surrounding area and penetrating deep into southern Italy.
The city was devastated and took years to recover.
Indeed, full recovery might never have occurred had it not been for the invasion of the area by the Lombards, the people after whom the plain on which the city is set and the region of which it is the capital are named.
There is still uncertainty about the origins of the Lombards — frequently called the Longobards — but it is now generally agreed that they were central European, and probably arrived over the Alps from Hungary.
It is known that the Lombard King Alboin brought his army and then his people on to the plain in 568, and that they met with little resistance as the Goths had almost vacated the area by that time.
The Lombards had soon occupied an area that extended as far south as Perugia, though not all the way east to the Adriatic coast.
The people were pagan, but were converted to Christianity by Theodolinda the daughter of a Bavarian duke who married the Lombard king.
For her services to the Christian faith the Pope gave Theodolinda a True Nail.
The Lombards incorporated this into an iron crown which was used to crown the kings of Lombardy.
Charlemagne was crowned with it, as were the later kings of Italy, including Napoleon.
Today it is kept in the cathedral of Monza a little to the north-east of Milan, where it is displayed at certain times.
The Lombard capital was at Pavia, but Milan was rebuilt and slowly regained its former significance.
The new rulers were noted for their commercial sense, and the city site was too important to remain undeveloped.
It is to the new city rulers that the origins of banking are usually attributed; not for nothing is the home of the London banking community called Lombard Street.
Towards the end of the eighth-century the Lombard kings began to cast a jealous eye on the remnant Roman Empire to the south.
The Popes appealed to the Franks for help and they  responded by invading Lombardy to administer a sharp lesson.
The lesson was not heeded, and when a second call came Charlemagne decided not only to march into Lombardy, but to stay there.
He took the Lombard crown and then, in 800, became the first Emperor of the Holy Roman Empire that he formed by annexing central Italy.
Charlemagne was a charismatic man who held his widespread and disparate peoples together as much by force of personality as by force of arms.
After his death his empire could barely be sustained by the new rulers (including Charles the Bald and Charles the Fat — is it possible to hold an empire together when the populace is taking the mickey out of you to that extent?) and crumbled away over a period of two centuries.
As the Carolingian Empire was declining, north and central Italy saw the rise of the city states, a progression that was to have perhaps the most profound influence on the history of Europe.
The reasons for the rise are many, difficult to unravel with certainty.
There was an increase in the population of central and northern Italy which led to a rapid development of agriculture, a rise in general prosperity and a subsequent increase in merchant goods.
The coastal ports also saw an increased trade, especially with rich Byzantium.
Equally important was the existence of a ruling class willing to put commercial considerations before personal gain.
In southern Italy the Normans held the country and imposed a feudal system that stifled mercantile expansion.
In the centre and north, and most especially in the north, the new rulers were communes of merchants, men with a vested interest in expanding the local economy, and more concerned with making money than making war.
Of all the cities in the north, Milan was the one that expanded most rapidly in the period up to 1100.
Sadly, the idea that friendly trade rivalry could entirely replace warfare was not well founded, and wars sometimes broke out between the city states.
Pisa fought Genoa for control of Mediterranean trade, Florence fought Siena for control of the trade route to Rome, and in the Ten Years War (1118–1127), Milan fought the city of Como for control of Lombardy.
Como was defeated, but gradually rose again to prominence.
It asked for and received the help of the ruler of the Hohenstaufen (Germanic) Empire, Frederik 1, known as Barbarossa (‘Red Beard’) who  crossed the Alps and attacked Milan.
In 1158 the city was partially destroyed.
In the wake of this defeat Como utterly destroyed the commune from Isola Comacina that held Lake Como for Milan.
Comacina never recovered from the beating.
Como soon discovered that it was in the nature of winners to enjoy their winnings, as Barbarossa stayed in the north in an attempt to subjugate all the city states.
Milan challenged the new ruler and for its troubles was razed to the ground in 1162.
Again Milan rose, this time almost miraculously, and formed the Lombard League of city states.
This included both Verona and Venice, as well as Brescia, Bergamo, Novaro and, ironically, Como and was a formidable alliance.
In 1176 the League defeated Barbarossa at Legnano to the north-west of Milan.
The relative stability in the north that followed Barbarossa's defeat set the stage for the next step in the rise of the city states.
The cities of northern Italy, most importantly Genoa on the Mediterranean coast, Milan in the centre of the Lombardy Plain, dominating the Po valley, and Venice on the Adriatic coast, were on the route of the Crusades.
The wealth the Crusades themselves brought was soon eclipsed by the trade wealth that followed in the wake of the construction of the Crusader ships.
By the middle of the thirteenth-century Milan's ruling commune had lost its power, and the city had become one of the first to fall to the signori , the city lords.
At first Milan was ruled by the della Torre family; Martino della Torre had the revolutionary idea that the city should be governed by the people, with taxes calculated on ability to pay.
The experiment did not last, and della Torre rule ended with the family defeat by the Viscontis at the battle of Desio in 1277.
The Viscontis, a family that originated in a tiny village, Massino (Visconti), above the western shore of Lake Maggiore, were later themselves replaced by the Sforzas.
In view of the benevolent rule of the communes this might seem to have been retrograde step.
In some cases this is true, but Milan fared well, and the Viscontis especially proved to be very able rulers.
Gian Galeazzo Visconti was responsible for the construction of a set of canals — here at the lowest point of the Lombardy Plain — and initiated the building of one of the wonders of Italy, the Duomo.
He also started the city's silk industry which was to underpin its economy for many years.
By the mid-fourteenth-century Milan was a city of 12,000 houses, 120 bell towers, with 400 bakers, 440 butchers, 180 pubs and more than 1,000 shops.
There were 28 doctors, 92 teachers and 1,500 lawyers.
The population rose, but was savagely reduced by the Black Death.
On its recovery from the Plague the city could claim to be one of the most progressive in Europe, with trade in leather and metal goods, knives and weapons, as well as silk.
As well as prompting a rise in trade, the existence of a new class which found itself with spare time and spare cash at its disposal also heralded an era of unprecedented artistic achievement.
This movement has become known as the Renaissance in the English-speaking world, the Rinascimento in Italy.
By the fifteenth-century, the ducal patronage that supported the Renaissance had provided one of the finest artistic climates ever to have occurred in world history.
At one time Leonardo, Michaelangelo, Raphael and Titian were all working simultaneously in northern Italy.
Some of their masterpieces were housed in buildings designed by their contemporary Palladio.
In Milan the recipient of the patronage was Leonardo da Vinci, the ultimate Renaissance man, inventor of the submarine, the helicopter and the contact lens, painter of the Mona Lisa and the Last Supper .
The latter survived the bombings of World War II better than it survived the ravages of time after Leonardo's highly original method of fresco working failed to live up to its inventor's hopes, but it still remains one of the masterpieces of Renaissance art.
The sixteenth-century started with a power struggle in Europe between the Holy Roman Empire and France, a battle that continued for many decades, with the conflict chiefly centring around Milan.
The city's importance was owing to the new Emperor, Charles Habsburg, succeeding his grandfather in 1519 to become Charles V. The House of Habsburg held Germany and Spain, and Milan and the eastern end of Lombardy held the key to a potential land bridge between the two — a bridge desired by Charles and feared by France.
On the domestic front the Archbishop of Milan in the mid-sixteenth-century was St Charles (San Carlo) Borromeo, born in Arona Castle on the western shore of Lake Maggiore in 1538.
Charles was a cardinal at 22 and archbishop at 26, a spectacular rise to prominence,(although  probably helped by his uncle being Pope Plus IV).
Charles did a great deal to assist the lot of the Lombardian peasantry whose lives had fared badly during the conflicts that succeeded the Renaissance.
This assistance inevitably spilled over as an increase in general prosperity for the ordinary Milanese city dweller.
On the debit side Charles was legendary for his rooting out of heretics, and the area was frequently lit up by the glow of those perishing at the stake.
After his death miracles were attributed to him and he was made a saint; there were many who maintained that he was too ugly to be anything else.
Those who would like to check the validity of this view can see his portrait in the church at Arona or, more spectacularly, visit the colossal statue to him that stands a little to the north of the town.
The statue, nearly 24 metres high on a plinth itself 12 metres high, has the large ears and nose that appeared to have been such prominent features of the great man.
Ultimately, the fragmentary nature of the Habsburg empire led to its fall, leaving the Spanish in control of Italy, a position they would maintain until the early part of the eighteenth-century when they lost it with the War of the Spanish Succession.
The last Spanish governor left Milan on 29 September 1706, to be replaced on the following day by Austrian and Piedmontian troops.
The Milanese cheered until they were hoarse.
The change of ruler was formalized by the Peace of Utrecht in 1713 which gave Italy to the Austrian Habsburgs.
Initially the city responded well to the change of ruler, and its economic fortunes improved.
In 1769 the Golden Madonna, unofficial symbol of the city, was placed on the highest spire of the Duomo.
There followed a burst of building that radically changed the face of the city.
Some of these buildings were galleries and libraries, and the city underwent a mini-Renaissance in the wake of the Spanish departure.
Milan became the first city in which all the houses had glass in their windows rather than draped waxed canvas, a material that was virtually opaque and frequently filthy.
At the same time most of the streets of the centre were cobbled.
Part of this reconstruction had important implications for the rest of Europe, each street being given an official name and every house a civic number.
The year after this, street lighting was  introduced using oil lamps on pillars; there was a drastic reduction in the number of muggings at night, a plague of city life in the late eighteenth-century.
In 1788 La Scala was opened.
It was immediately described, by no less a personage than Maria Theresa, the hand of the Habsburgs in Milan, as the most beautiful theatre in the world,— an ambitious claim.
At the time it was poorly lit, with no heating, and it was soon being equally definitely described as ‘dirty’.
The stages were used as dining rooms, with the orchestra pit a bedlam of shrieking servants.
In the foyer a gambling room operated, legend having it that the young Alessandro Manzoni was discovered there by Vincenzo Monti and beaten so hard by him that he never gambled again.
Yet despite all this La Scala soon became the focal point of Milan society and culture.
Later, when there was a resurgence of Italian nationalism, La Scala became an even more potent symbol to the Milanese.
The rise in nationalistic fervour coincided with the rise in standing of Verdi, whose initials spelled Vittorio Emanuele, Re d'Italia an anthem for the return of the monarchy and a united Italy.
Everywhere the city rang to cries of Viva Verdi , a call which did neither the composer nor the opera house any harm at all.
As the eighteenth-century came to a close, the rise of Napoleon following the French Revolution resulted in war between France and Austria, with the French army marching across the Alps to invade the Austrian territories of Piedmont and Lombardy.
In a series of bloody encounters in 1796 Napoleon threw back the Austrian, liberating the Italians — again — and created several new republics, one of which, the Cisalpine Republic, had Milan as its capital.
Having secured the area, Napoleon went off to fight elsewhere.
The Austrians returned in his absence, and were assisted in their reconquest by the Russians and the Italians themselves who were never more happy, it seems, than when they were assisting one despot to overthrow another.
In 1800 Napoleon returned, winning the decisive battle of Marengo to overthrow the Austrians yet again.
This time, in an effort to produce a lasting solution to the Italian question, Napoleon created a kingdom of Italy, making Milan its capital and having himself crowned with Monza's iron crown.
It was a short-lived kingdom.
Napoleon  went on to meet his Waterloo, and the Congress of Vienna, in 1815, reinstated the Austrians in Lombardy.
OPPOSITE View along Corso Vittorio Emanuele II from the roof of the Duomo
There is a dispute among historians about whether the Napoleonic episode, with its creation of an Italian state by name, was a benefit or a hindrance to the Italian nationalism which had begun to be voiced along with the cries of Viva Verdi .
The facts are that within a decade of the Vienna Congress, nationalism was gathering furious pace.
In 1842 a new newspaper was launched in Turin.
It was called Il Risorgimento , the ‘the reawakening’, and it gave its name almost as a battlecry to the forces of unification.
The opportunity for unification came in 1859 when the Kingdom of Sardinia — the island of Sardinia itself, together with Piedmont, Savoy and territory around Nice — sided with France in a war against Austria.
The campaign was supported by a disparate band of politically astute Italians who loyally buried their differences in order to fight for unity: Carlo Alberto, the Piedmontian king of Sardinia, and Camillo de Cavour, his Prime Minister, Giuseppe Mazzini, an anti-monarchist from Genoa, and  Guiseppe Garibaldi, a romantic, enigmatic guerilla leader born in Nice.
The war for independence was fought on several fronts.
In the north Lombardy was liberated after the bloody but decisive battles of Magenta (mid-way between Milan and Novara) and Solferino (to the east of Milan, near the southern tip of Lake Garda) in 1859.
Following this northern campaign, in which Garibaldi commanded a force, the new Italy ceded both Savoy and Nice to its French allies.
Appalled by the loss of his native town, Garibaldi left the army of Piedmont, but did not leave behind the cause of unification, sailing to Sicily with his famous ‘Thousand’.
On the island Mazzini had already prepared the ground for an uprising against the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies which controlled the island and the mainland province of Reggio-Calabria.
Garibaldi defeated the Neapolitan army and added the territory to the new Italy.
Just before this famous victory the army of the north succeeded in annexing Tuscany.
In 1866 the Austrians were thrown out of Venetia, and in 1870 the last remaining territory of the Papal states was annexed.
The new Italy was complete; almost.
Peace within the new boundaries allowed Milan to make up for the time lost during the bloody years of Napoleon's campaigns  and the Risorgimento .
The city grew to 250,000 people and became a centre for the paper industry.
In line with the rest of Europe, Italy invested in the railways, and soon Milan was connected to Zurich, Paris, Berlin and Vienna, as well as the more local commercial centres of Genoa, Venice, Rome and Naples.
The main central station was completed in 1864 in grand, if angular, style.
At the same time, or shortly after, there was other building in the grand style that best reflected the new confidence of both the city and the country — the main Duomo square was rearranged, and the Galleria built.
Towards the end of the nineteenth-century there was general unrest in Italy, a situation brought about by a number of oddly conflicting factors.
In Africa the Italian army set about building an empire, encouraged by the British, but found that the natives of Somalia and Ethiopia (then Abyssinia) were less enamoured of the idea than were their new masters.
On two separate occasions they slaughtered large number of Italian troops, and these events caused civil unrest at home.
Unrest was also being caused by a rise in socialism, and the odd situation arose where socialists and expansionists were united in common disagreement with the government.
In Milan there were riots which, in 1898, resulted in the army being ordered to fire on the crowd.
Almost 100 Milanese died.
In 1900 the king, Umberto, was assassinated.
He was quickly replaced by his son, Vittorio Emanuele III, who appointed Giovanni Giolitti as Prime Minister.
Giolitti was an astute politician who satisfied the socialist leanings of the populace with a series of enlightened reforms, but who failed to do anything to control the corruption of those in power.
Indeed he almost perfected the system to his own advantage, sowing the seed for the rise of Fascism at the same time by installing in the population the notion that the business of politics was none of their business and that they should shrug their shoulders in a resigned way and let it continue.
Giolitti also harnessed the nationalist fervour that still existed by embarking on a colonial war for Libya.
The war was costly and pointless.
Giolitti lost power, and his government was pilloried by the socialists who whipped up public opinion in their newspaper,Avanti , edited by a young man with a future, Benito Mussolini.
Before Mussolini was able to take his chance, Italy was drawn into World War I. At first she remained neutral, but in 1915 threw in her lot with the allies and declared war on Austria.
The Italians fought with great courage, especially in 1917 when they stopped a superior axis force that threatened to take over the whole of the northern part of the country.
Sadly though, when the peace came it was not so glorious, and the Treaty of Versailles in 1919 gave the Italians little of the territory they had been told to expect in whispered conversation in secret corridors while the war was in progress.
Italy got the south Tyrol and Istria — although not the town of Fiume (modern Rijeka)— but little else of consequence.
The Italians were outraged.
 D'Annuzio led a group of men to occupy Fiume for the Italians, lording over the city for almost a year before being ousted by the wartime Allies.
The occupation did nothing except to fuel the sense of outrage the Italians felt about their treatment at the hands of the older powers.
The outbreak of nationalist fervour that followed these events was the impetus for the meteoric rise of Mussolini's new party, the Fascists, formed in Milan in 1919 with a grand total of 145 men.
The Fascists claimed that their name derived from the fasces , bundles of rods carried as a symbol of power by victors of the Roman Empire.
In reality this was a later touch, added to increase authenticity when the rod bundle was adopted as the party's emblem.
In truth the name was just derived from the Sicilian (fasci ) for a group.
Mussolini had some ominously persuasive sayings —‘who has steel has bread’ was one of the most popular — but failed miserably at his first attempt to gain legal power in 1920.
Only when his party took to wearing black shirts, and ‘disrupting’ meetings of the opposition in order to save Italy from them, was there any ground-swell of popularity.
In elections in 1921 Mussolini won a seat in Milan, and his party gained 35 of 535 seats in the country.
In 1922 the Fascists marched on Rome and forced the king to accept Mussolini as Prime Minister.
Mussolini himself did not take part in the march, but waited at Milan for the call to power.
It came on 28 October, and Il Duce took an overnight train to Rome to accept the king's offer on the following day.
In 1924 Mussolini survived a personal crisis when he was accused of colluding in the murder of Giacomo Matteotti, an opposition  leader, and finally became head of state in 1925 when the Fascists banned all other parties.
The rise of Fascism was welcomed at the time, not only by the Italians but by many others, including the British Prime Minister, Baldwin, and Winston Churchill, who probably saw in the movement a bulwark against Bolshevism.
In Italy the regime worked, at least in the early stages.
During the early 1920s the Italian economy expanded dramatically, and by 1931 Milan had more than a million inhabitants, a formidable industrial power base.
The city now realized an old dream by recovering the canals.
The problem was that Fascism was a movement with a hollow centre.
Mussolini harangued his people long and often, peppering his speeches with slogans like ‘it is better to be a lion for a year than a sheep for a hundred years’.
It was rousing stuff, but what did it actually mean?
Ultimately to support his power Mussolini was required to invent goals.
It is a popular story that the Fascists did at least get the trains to run on time, and had that been all things might have turned out for the better, but the Duce also evolved the theory of Italia Irredenta , ‘Unrecovered Italy’.
In support of this the trains were filled with young Italians, dispatched to liberate Abyssinia, to help Franco in Spain and to capture Albania.
The axis formed with Hitler's Germany in 1936 became the Pact of Steel in 1939.
At first Mussolini was the senior partner, a position which gave him the feeling of power he clearly relished.
Too rapidly, however, Mussolini became the junior partner, carrying out the Führer's personal wishes and dragging Italy into a disastrous war when it had neither the industrial base of Germany, nor Hitler's personal enthusiasm for total war.
Italy entered the war in 1940.
It went badly almost from the start, the Italian soldiery having as their only motivation for fighting the increase of Hitler's empire.
There was little glory for Italy in dying on the Russian front, as so many did in 1942.
By 1943, when the Allies invaded Sicily, the Italians had had their fill of Fascism and changed sides, although the removal of the Germans from their country was a long and bloody business.
Hitler had Mussolini rescued from Rome and installed as head of the Republic of Salò, a small, relatively insignificant town on the western shores of Lake Garda, but it was a temporary measure.
Pressed by Hitler, Mussolini gave speeches of encouragement to the still-occupied Italians of Milan, but his heart was no longer in it.
In April 1945, as the partisans and Allies were freeing the last parts of northern Italy, Mussolini was smuggled out of Milan by the Germans.
He was driven north along the edge of Lake Como.
At Dongo the motor column was halted and Mussolini, his mistress Clara Petacci and other leading Fascists were hauled out.
All but Mussolini and Clara were executed in Dongo; those two were taken off towards Milan.
They only reached Azzano, where a partisan leader, fearful of the kind of publicity the Italians would receive if they handed over their ex-Duce to the Allies, had them put up against a wall and shot.
The bodies of the leaders were taken to Milan where they were hung upside down from a girder in front of a petrol station in Piazza Loreto.
Following the end of the war the king, Vittorio Emanuele III, abdicated and a national referendum abolished the monarchy in favour of a republic, with the new king, Umberto II, going into  exile.
In 1949 Italy became a member of NATO and later a founding member of the EEC whose charter was established in the Treaty of Rome.
Typical open air art exhibition — this one is in Via Francesco Sforza
Milan did not survive the war intact.
Allied bombings in 1943 devastated the city, and the light from the fires was visible for many miles out across the plain.
Piazza Duomo suffered terribly, although the cathedral itself remained largely intact.
The Galleria was shattered, La Scala gutted.
The Ambrosiana was destroyed, the Natural History Museum reduced to a pile of ashes.
The refectory that housed Leonardo's Last Supper had suffered almost complete destruction, yet the fresco itself survived, almost, it seemed, by a miracle.
Official data suggests that 80 per cent of Milanese houses were struck by bombs or incendiaries , with about 15 per cent destroyed and a further 20 per cent damaged beyond repair.
Almost all the city's factories were gone; its tramway system, the main artery for transport, had suffered 70 per cent total damage.
There was severe   disruption to the gas, water and electricity supplies; the schools had all but disappeared.
Map of Milan
The Milanese turned to reconstruction with a will, deciding that everything that could be returned to an ‘as before’ condition should be.
In ten years the city had risen, phoenix-like, from the ashes; in five more it was leader in the Italian economic miracle.
In the 1970s and 1980s Milan had changed again, in an equally remarkable fashion, passing early into the age of electronics and computers to become the undoubted economic capital of Italy.
LAYOUT OF MILAN
Like most other cities with a long history, Milan has evolved as a series of concentric rings.
It is believed that the extremes of the original Gallic town were Piazza del Duomo and Via Andegari, which lies close to the Poldi-Pezzoli Museum some 600 metres to the north.
In the old language andegari meant hawthorn, and a bush of that type probably at one time marked the external borders of the city of Mediolanum, although little or nothing is known of that first town.
The Roman city was larger, and more ordered, lying within a wall erected by the Emperor Augustus in the first-century AD.
Parts of the Augustinian wall have been found in the streets of the inner city, enough to trace the route of the old walls along Via Agnello, that runs into the north-east corner of Piazza del Duomo, Via Paolo de Cannobiro, Via Brisa, Via Cusani and Via Filodrammatici, as well as several of the roads in between these.
The enclosed area is roughly triangular, not at all the square you might imagine, and is surprisingly big, about 1km (over half a mile) across its longest axis.
Within these walls (and contemporary writing says they were formidable), the city remained for two centuries.
Then in the third-century AD, at the time of the Emperor Maximian, the city outgrew its walls, and new walls were added to allow an extension to the northeast and the west.
The old wall was not removed, but fell intro disrepair, disappearing over the years.
If other cities are a guide to Milan then it also served as a useful quarry for the inhabitants.
Enough of the old wall existed in the fourth-century for the poet Ausonio to speak of the ‘town of two walls’.
It would seem that the old wall did not finally disappear altogether until the eighth-century, well after the city had been devastated by the Goths.
The next bursts of building coincided with the city's conflict with Barbarossa, when a wide and deep ditch was dug about 300 metres outside the Maximian wall.
The resulting circular defence was not complete, its traceable line ending where the castle now stands.
This was because earth from these defensive earthworks, or terraggi , was thrown up to form the city's first fortress.
It was not until the first half of the fourteenth-century that Azzone Visconti reinforced the structure with walls.
When the city decided to construct its canal system the defences of the terraggi were flattened and a circular waterway — with obvious defensive uses — was constructed just outside it.
The line of this waterway is readily discernible on maps and photographs as it follows a circular path from the castle along the streets of Pontaccio, Fatebenefratelli, Senato, San Damiano, Visconti di Modrone, Sforza Francesco, Santa Sofia, Molino delle Armi, de Amicis and Carducci.
Although the central waterway was a spectacular construction, the most remarkable work was the Martesana canal that linked the city's internal waterway system with the river Adda.
The canal can be readily followed from the river near Canonica d'Adda through to the Central Station where it peters out beside Via Tirano.
Elsewhere, the most evocative waterways lie to the south of the city centre where morning mist over the water adds a wonderful dimension to views around the Porta Ticinese.
The circular waterway remained until the early nineteenth-century when it was filled and converted into a road.
Today, where once silent, slow barges made their way along flat, calm water, mornings offer a view of a noisy metal river.
Even the canals were not the last protective ring around the city, the ramparts or Spanish walls being built — between 1549 and 1561 — in a circle a few metres outside the waterway circle.
The name ‘Spanish walls’(mura Spagnole or bastione ) commemorates the Spanish governor of Milan, Ferrante Gonzaga, who had the walls built to plans by an Italian architect, Giuntallodi.
The position of these ramparts is also visible on street maps, the walls running along the line of Corso di Porta Vercellina, then between the gates of Porta Ticinese, Porta Romana, Porta Venezia, Porta Nuova and Porta Garibaldi.
Again the castle formed the focal point of the walls.
Here, however, there is a difference because  the canal ring has formed two parallel roadways — for instance, near Porta Romana the line is given by the parallel streets of Regina Margherita and Montenero.
The names are interesting too, the city fathers deciding to name much of the outside ring after sites made legendary by exploits of Italian soldiers in World War 1 — Montenero, Premuda, Monte Grappa, and so on— while many of the inner ring streets were named after women famous in the history of the city — Regina Margherita, Beatrice d'Este, Bianca Maria, and so on .
Following the rebuilding after World War II one last ring was created, not set on the line of an ancient set of bulwarks, but designed with the future in mind.
This wide boulevard forms the impressive (some would say interminable) Viale delle Regioni, which winds its way for miles through what were once the Milanese suburbs, and which today form an area close to the heart of metropolitan Milan.
STRUCTURE OF THE BOOK
Within these great defensive rings, particularly the outer ones, there is too Much to see in one go; as with all cities Milan can comfortably fill almost any amount of the inquisitive visitor's time.
The best way is to ignore the ring structure and explore the city in chunks that are easy on the feet and brain, keeping in mind your position with respect to the old city plans where it is relevant.
This book covers six journeys within the city, all of them — with a few minor exceptions — staying within the boundary of the old city walls.
There is much to see, and hopefully the detailed instructions and maps will prevent you from getting lost.
The city of Milan has also thoughtfully provided virtually all of its better buildings with name plates to help the visitor.
These are bright yellow and usually mounted on poles outside the entrance to the building.
The plate has the symbol of the city, a stylized version of the Visconti family's snake/saracen symbol, together with the building's name, its age (either as a date for construction or as a century if the true date is not know or irrelevant), and the name of the architect if known.
Each of the journeys has been chosen to visit one of more of the city's parks or quiet areas where the visitor can pause and take stock.
No attempt has been made to choose worthwhile bars that can be visited for a coffee break en route .
Milan is full of excellent  coffee shops and it is better for the visitor to choose what appears to be best for him, her or them.
The same argument could readily be made for restaurants, but there is a difference.
If you do not like a coffee house you have lost only the price of a cup of coffee and a few minutes of your time.
If the restaurant is a disaster, the price, both in money and time, is that much higher.
For this reason I have made a suggestion for eating on each journey.
There is also a section (pages 25–27) giving restaurants that are thought excellent, either by me or by trusted friends.
After the six inner-city journeys there is information on those parts of the far-flung city that might be of interest, together with transport suggestions for reaching them.
There is also a short section on the area around Milan, or, at least, those pads of it that can be comfortably reached in a day's road or rail travel.
I hope you find a stay in Milan as rewarding as I always have.
CLIMATE
The average monthly temperatures in the city during the year are given below:
January 4 °s; C (40 °s; F) February 6 °s; C (44 °s; F) March 11 °s; C (52 °s; F) April 17 °s; C (62 °s; F) May 22 °s; C (72 °s; F) June 24 °s; C (76 °s; F) July 27 °s; C (80 °s; F) August 24 °s; C (76 °s; F) September 22 °s; C (72 °s; F) October 18 °s; C (64 °s; F) November 11 °s; C (52 °s; F) December 6 °s; C (44 °s; F)
The normal summer day will be hot and sticky, the city haze holding in some moisture.
Bright clear days when the Alps can be seen are rare,(and the more pleasurable for being so), and if you want such days you had better come in spring or autumn when the heat haze is reduced.
Those who have viewed the Lombardy Plain from a distance will know that even on clear days Milan has its own atmosphere, the way that other cities do, although, in fairness, it is very much less than many others, despite its low-lying position.
In winter, snow is rare, and the normal day is damp and cold.
Indeed, fog can overwhelm the city on as many as 15 days in a winter month, while that will happen on only about 2 days a month in summer.
This incidence of fog is the reason that Linate has such a notorious reputation for re-routed flights.
Milan is usually still, the wind rarely sweeping full tilt across the Plain.
Statistics show that the average wind speed is around 6 knots (about 7mph or 11kph), and that the wind blows from the south-west.
Those wanting to avoid rain should avoid winter trips, in December in particular, but, as is usually the case, such generalizations will almost certainly not apply to your trip!
PUBLIC HOLIDAYS
1 January 6 January (Epiphany) Easter Sunday and Monday 25 April (Liberation day, 1945) 1 May 15 August (Ferragosto) 1 November (All Saints) 7 December (Sant' Ambrogio) Christmas Day and Boxing Day 
PART THREE: MILAN
Piazza del Duomo 63
North-west from Piazza della Scala 85
East from the Duomo 108
South from Piazza del Duomo 131
San Ambrogio and Santa Maria della Grazie 155
North to the Castle 187
The Outer City 210
Out of the City 221
Galleria Vittorio Emanuele from Piazza del Duomo
Map of Piazza del Duomo
PIAZZA DEL DUOMO
It would be barely conceivable to start a journey of exploration through Milan other than in the Piazza del Duomo.
As with all big cities, to the first-time visitor Milan is too big, too noisy, too fast, its people too busy, in too much of a hurry.
But whether you are here for the first or merely the latest time, as you enter the square — better still, as you emerge into it, blinking away the bright Milanese light as you climb up out of the Metro — there can be no doubting its magical ability to conjure a timeless moment of calm from out of the bustle.
The reasons for this are many — the sheer size of the square, the three surrounding sides that are dominated by elegant palazzo walls that add a solidity that speaks of permanence, but mostly the Duomo, the cathedral, whose façade is among the most beautiful in the world; in the sun, its marble is eye-achingly white.
THE DUOMO
Only St Peter's in the Vatican and Seville Cathedral are bigger than Milan's Duomo.
It is 157 metres long, 92 metres across at its widest, the façade is 68 metres wide, the top of the golden Madonna's statue (Il Madonnina ) is 108 metres  high, and the whole cathedral has been calculated to weigh in excess of 325,000 tons.
There are nearly 3,200 statues of all sizes, varying from the very small to the very large; the building can seat almost 40,000 people.
Finally, someone once calculated that if the pillars and spires were stood one on top of the other they would be 5,300 metres high.
Mont Blanc is 4,808 metres high.
Piazza del Duomo
In Roman Mediolanum there was a temple, probably to Minerva, where the cathedral now stands.
This was replaced in the fourth-century by a church built by Sant' Ambrogio and dedicated, at a later time, to St Tecla.
Near the site, perhaps under what is now the Palazzo Arcivescovile, was the city's first Bishop's Palace, called the Domus , from which the name Duomo derives.
Later, a second church was built behind Sant' Ambrogio's church, making the site one of the focal points for Milanese religious life.
In the mid-fourteenth-century the Archbishop of Milan, Antonio da Saluzzo, spurred on by the population, asked Gian Galeazzo Visconti, Duke of Milan, to support the building of a cathedral on the site of the two old churches.
The Duke gave his blessing to the project, placing his own marble quarries at Candoglia in the Ossola valley at the disposal of the builders.
The official date of the starting is 1387, as shown on a plaque set in the wall at the south-west corner of the building:El Principio il Domo di Milano fu nel Anno 1386 .
However, this tablet was only set in the wall in 1456, and is in conflict with an account written about events on 17 September 1387.
Then a group of local armourers assembled in the square, were blessed at a makeshift altar and turned the first shovelful of earth on the foundations of the new building.
Before the end of the month the armourers had been replaced by drapers, bootmakers, butchers, bakers and millers.
All these workers gave their time and labour freely, their efforts being supported by other citizens who hauled stone and earth at every available opportunity.
The stone came from Candoglia by water, each stone being inscribed AUF,ad usum fabricae , ‘for building use’, a sign that freed the stone of all city taxes.
Ironically, later auf became a local expression for a long wait, or working for nothing.
Certainly those who were in the square in 1387 hoping to see the completion of the Duomo would have had to wait a long time, far longer than the span of a human life.
Not until 1774 was the Madonnina added to the top spire, and even then the façade  was not finished.
Over the centuries the best Italian architects, Solari, Amadeo, Pelligrino Tibaldi (known as Il Pellegrini ) and Richini, worked on the building, although the façade was actually finished by Carlo Amati, the final stage being completed after many years of inactivity, and only after Napoleon took an interest in the building.
Opposite The roof of the Duomo
Externally the most dominating part of the Duomo is the façade, although technically the best is the apse at the furthest end of the Square, which is best seen from either Corso Vittorio Emanuele II or the Piazza Fontana.
The apse is widely believed to represent the peak of Gothic architecture in Italy and was completed at a time when many of the architects working on the project had been brought in from Germany.
The façade, as well as the rest of the outside, is of Candoglia marble, a white stone with a pink tinge and blue veins that could not have been bettered as a choice for so ornate a structure.
The façade is pierced by five doorways filled with bronze doors, some of which are remarkably new for so ancient a building.
The central doors are by Ludovico Pogliaghi and were finished at the end of the nineteenth-century; the door panels represent episodes in the life of the Virgin, the ‘light’ being the Coronation.
Those interested in seeing more of the sculptor's work can visit a museum to him in the village of Sacre Monte, just north of Varese, where he died in 1950.
That museum includes the plaster casts of the doors.
The extreme left doors date from 1948, the work of Arrigo Menerbi, showing the tribulations of early Christians.
The next doors are by Giannino Castiglioni, completed in 1950 and showing scenes from the life of Sant' Ambrogio, including his miraculous appearance at the battle of Parabiago in 1330.
To the right of the central, Pogliaghi, doors is another set from 1950, the work of Franco Lombardi with scenes from the history of Milan.
The fifth set was completed only in 1965 by Luciano Minguzzi with scenes from the building of the Duomo, and the life of San Carlo Borromeo.
Covering the façade are a fine array of statues which have survived the increasingly grim Milanese air remarkably well.
The statuary is continued on the sides, where some of the better examples form a sub-section of the 96 giant gargoyles.
From the façade and sides rise a mass of spires that form a small forest of  stone through which to view Milan from the roof of the cathedral.
There are both steps and lifts to the roof — two sets, one on each side of the apse — and a visit is a must.
On very clear days (sadly, all too infrequent in Milan), the pre-Alps are visible to the north and the Apennines to the south.
On such days the Lombardy Plain is also laid out in great detail.
More usually, but no less spectacularly, the view is over the city and a visit to the roof offers a good opportunity to set the internal map and compass ready for walks of exploration.
A visit to the roof need not concern those afraid of heights or exposed positions: it is quite safe, with all drops well away from the visitor, and all exposed places neatly protected by wire mesh or clear plastic screens.
The area is also wide and spacious, the main roof itself being quite remarkably formed with huge flat slabs of stone.
Above it all rises the Madonnina, glinting in the sun.
So attached are the Milanese to this symbol of their city that no building that is close to it is allowed to overtop it.
(Indeed, it is only within the last thirty years or so that the skyscraper has arrived in Milan).
The statue is much bigger than it looks; it is always foreshortened because of the need to look sharply upward, and is actually over 4 metres high.
While you are on the roof there is so much to look at that it is easy to miss some important feature.
If you can go again this is no problem, but for the once-only visitor it is a great pity.
So, be sure to pick out the campanile of San Gottardo, to the south beyond the Palazzo Reale, the Sforza castle, to the north-west, Corso Vittorio Emanuele II running away to the north-east, the Torre Velasca to the south and, if the weather is reasonable, the San Siro football stadium far away to the west.
Within the Duomo, if time allows and opportunity occurs, go to the remains of the paleo-Christian buildings that have been opened at the western (main door) end.
The remains include a section of the first church, of St Tecla, but are chiefly of a baptistery built about the same time.
The entrance to the site is close to the entrance doors.
To the right of these doors is the stone commemorating the start of work, close to a superb copy — the original is in the Museum of the Duomo in Palazzo Reale; indeed, several of the statues and works of art in and on the Duomo are exact copies, with the originals being kept in the  museum — of a wood and copper eleventh-century crucifix marking the grave of an early Archbishop.
Further along the right wall is a list of the Duomo Archbishops, a list that includes many men who went on to become Pope.
This century there have been two, Pius XI and Paul VI.
Il Madonnina
Before the visitor has had the time to see the baptistery ruins, the plaques or the crucifix he will have spent time near the door.
As eyes adapt to the darkness after the brightness of the Milanese day, the sheer size of the church that emerges from the gloom is enough to enthrall most visitors.
The red light that shines out from high up in the nave roofing indicates the position of a True Nail held in a glass reliquary at the centre of a crucifix.
Tradition has the Nail being given to Sant' Ambrogio by the Emperor Constantine.
During the Archbishopric of San Carlo Borromeo, a man we shall meet several times on our walks around Milan, the Nail was processed around the city at the height of an outbreak of plague, with immediate results.
In November of each year the Nail is brought to the floor of the cathedral so it my be seen by the faithful.
It is, somewhat surprisingly, shaped like a horse's bit.
The procedure of bringing the nail down and taking it back up is performed using a small platform, worked by an ancient system of ropes and pulleys and known as La Nivola , the ‘little cloud’.
Set into the floor near the entrance is a brass strip running the width of the building to a sundial set on the left wall.
High in the roof a hole allows the sun to strike the brass line twice annually, on 21 June and 21 December, at noon.
The Milanese used the event to reset watches and clocks at a time when there was no acceptable absolute measure of time.
Sadly, however, subsidence of the building means that the sundial is no longer accurate.
Within the Duomo there is so much to see that a full inventory is impracticable.
No one thing is outstanding, and in that way the cathedral compares somewhat unfavourably with other Milanese churches, the very specific treasures of, say, San Maurizio church do not detract from the sheer majesty of the cathedral.
In any case, there are excellent works of sacred art in the Duomo.
The right nave has several altars by Il Pellegrini, while at its end, in the right transept, is the tomb of Gian Giacomo Medici, known as Il Medeghino .
As a young man Il  
A statue on the Duomo
Medeghino was exiled from Milan to Lake Como for killing a man, and there he took over a castle on the natural fortress of the Sassoi di Musso near the village of Musso at the northern end of the lake, killing the castle's governor.
From the castle he ruled the lake, more as pirate than governor, choosing just the right moment to sell the fortress to the Milanese during the time of the Spanish-French war.
This remarkable condottiere — the word is pure Italian and does not translate at all well; it describes a mercenary, but perhaps ‘soldier of fortune’ is more polite and catches the flavour better — not only managed to hold on to his head, but to great booty as well.
His brother, Pope Pius IV, had the tomb erected in 1564.
It is decorative and interesting, with Il Medeghino shown between statues representing Peace and War.
The tomb is the work of Leone Leoni whose own memorial, his house, stands close to the Duomo (see page 90).
Opposite the tomb, at the other side of the transept, is a statue of St Bartholomew, remarkable for its subject and for its conceit.
The subject is the saint after his martyr's death, the result of being flayed alive, with his skin over his shoulder like a cloak; go around behind the statue to see the face, with hair, beard and eye holes.
The anatomical detail of the muscles below the skin is alarming, but very much in keeping with the times, when there was a great interest in anatomical detail.
The effect is macabre.
The conceit comes from the inscription which, translated, reads ‘Not Praxiteles but Marco d'Agrate carved me’.
I fear that d'Agrate had an inflated opinion of his worth!
Around the corner is a work of Francesco Messina, a famous contemporary Italian sculptor whose studio is open to visitors.
The work is of Pope Pius XI, the Milanese Archbishop Achille Ratti.
The contrast between the two works is stark.
At the corner of the apse is a memorial tablet to the consecration of the Duomo by San Carlo Borromeo on 20 October 1577.
In order to reach this tablet you will pass the entrance to the crypt that holds the Duomo treasury and the body of the saint himself.
San Carlo Borromeo was born in Arona on the western shore, but southern tip, of Lake Maggiore, in 1522.
His birthplace was the town castle, a stronghold of the Borromeo family that held most of the western shoreline, as well as the castle of Angera on  the opposite shore.
Today their name is still associated with that latter castle, which the family owns, and also with the Borromean islands, Isola Bella and Isola Madre, that stand in the lake off Stresa.
Carlo was made a cardinal at 22 and Archbishop of Milan at 26, though it has been suggested that these appointments were as much due to the boy's uncle being Pope Pius IV as to any inherent abilities.
Nevertheless, during the time of his Archbishopric Carlo was a diligent worker for the Christian faith, a builder of churches and rooter-out of heretics.
He was also a brave man, taking personal risks to comfort the sick during an outbreak of plague.
Many years after his death Carlo was sanctified and a successor as Archbishop of Milan — another member of the Borromeo family, Federico — had a statue to him erected near Arona.
It can be visited from Milan, and is worth the time.
It is huge, over 23 metres tall, and can be climbed (on the inside).
It shows San Carlo to have had a big nose and long ears, features which must have been real as they also appear in several portraits.
To check, look at the portrait by Crepsi in the northern sacristy.
But was he really too ugly, as some said, to be anything but a saint?
San Carlo's body lies in a silver and crystal casket given by Philip IV of Spain.
The body is dressed in jewelled vestments, the face covered with a silver mask fashioned from a wax death mask.
In comparison to the bodies in the crypt of the church of Sant' Ambrogio the burial is quite tasteful.
On the way to the tomb there are some mementoes of the great man, a crucifix staff and a mitre.
Also in the crypt is the Duomo treasury, a pay-to-enter collection that is closed for a long period at lunch.
The collection is small, but contains some delightful exhibits.
Among these are silver reliquaries, a beautiful ivory cover (diptych) for an evangeliary, dating from the fifth-century and covered with early Christian designs and a later (early eleventh-century) cover for Archbishop Ariberto's evangeliary, a magnificent work in gold and enamel.
Back in the main body of the Duomo, after crossing the apse one of the building's great works will be found in the left (north) transept, the Trivulzio candelabrum.
This, in finely-worked bronze inlaid with semi-precious stones, is thought to be by the twelfth-century French master Nicola de Verdun and was  presented to the Duomo by Giovanni Battista Trivulzio in 1562.
In Jewish tradition the candelabrum tree, which is five metres tall, has seven branches, and is inscribed with events from both the old and New Testaments.
In front of the tree is a group of tombs including that of Cardinal Federico Borromeo.
The chapel of the transept, to the Madonna of the Tree, is by Francesco Maria Richini, an architect whose work adorns much of the city.
The left (north) nave contains more altars by Il Pellegrini.
This short visit has ignored the stained glass of the Duomo, impressive for both its form and its size.
Do look out for the windows.
 PALLAZZO REALE
On the southern edge of Piazza del Duomo, beside the Duomo itself, a small irregular square opens  out, the Piazzetta Reale.
The piazzetta is formed by the Palazzo Reale, the royal palace (some pedants would say the ex -royal palace and its irregular shape is produced by the off-line main section of the building; the two ‘arms’ of the square are completed by two wings of the palace.
These wings are (not surprisingly) of different lengths and known as the mancia corta and the mancia lunga by the Milanese, the ‘short sleeve’ and the ‘long sleeve’.
Buildings on the site go back to the eleventh-century, when the town hall, the Broletto Vecchio , of the free city of Milan stood here.
Later, under the Viscontis, the ducal palace occupied the site, although the dukes themselves moved into the castle following the murder of Giovanni Maria Visconti on the steps of the nearby church of San Gottardo.
Following this move of the ducal seat the palazzo fell into disuse and disrepair, a state from which it only recovered when the Spanish governors took it over many years later.
Later city rulers, the Austrians, tore down the original front wing of the building to turn a courtyarded palace into a three-winged palace around the piazzetta .
The Austrians installed a theatre which was the scene of many of Mozart's early successes, including the performance of his first opera when he was all of fourteen years old.
Unfortunately, in 1776 a fire burnt the theatre to the ground, and with the building of La Scala it was never rebuilt.
Ariberto's Evangeliery, Duomo treasury
After the numerous alterations the palazzo was renamed several times, becoming the Palazzo Nationale of the Cisalpine Republic and the Palazzo Reale, the royal palace, property of the Crown, following unification.
Vittorio Emanuele III gave the palazzo to the city in 1920.
During the allied bombings of 1943 it was very badly damaged and much of the internal work and stored archives were lost.
Today the palazzo , an enormous Neo-classical building, the work of Piermarini whose workers toiled from 1770 and 1778 to transform the existing building on the site, houses the headquarters of several institutes of history and art.
The second floor also houses the museum of Contemporary Art.
The exhibits cover an interesting range of work all the way from the frankly odd to the vaguely classical, but the gallery should be visited to gain an insight into the current position of Italian art.
The colourful works of Tancredi are particularly appealing.
The Palazzo Reale also houses the Museum of the Duomo in which are held some of the original statues and other works from the cathedral.
These include the original of the Crucifix of  
The statue of the Archangel Michael had its head removed in the seventeenth century by a marksman in the castle.
The man fired a single bullet, and the decapitation of St Michael prevented him from suffering the same fate.
He had been sentenced to death by the castle commander and had been given the chance to prove his prowess with a gun and so saved his life.
Ariberto and the keystone cover for the apse, known as the Padre Eterno , the ‘Eternal Father’.
It is a fourteenth-century gilded copper work modelled on a design by Jacopino da Tradate.
Several of the original spires of the cathedral are also here.
The Hall of Columns has at its head a replica of the raza , wheel, of the Viscontis used as the central element of the largest of the apse windows.
There is also a very fine wooden model of the Duomo, handy for a first look at the roof statuary before the visit.
At the back of the Palazzo Reale, and reached from the Via Pecorari which runs behind it, is the church of San Gottardo.
It was erected as a ducal chapel in 1336 by Azzone Visconti who was buried in it just three years later.
In 1412 one of Azzone's descendants, Giovanni Maria Visconti, an unpleasant, unpopular man, was murdered on the steps of the church; with that, the ducal family moved into the castle.
Once the church had a beautiful Gothic façade, but during renovation work on the Palazzo Reale in 1770 this was demolished to make way for a new main staircase.
Today only the superb campanile and a section of the right side of the church remain from the original fourteenth-century building.
By common consent this campanile is the finest in the city, and was built by the architect commemorated in the name of the street where the church entrance is found — Francesco Pecorari of Cremona.
The campanile was the first in the city to have a clock that struck the hours (although that of the church of Sant' Eustorgio was the first to have had a clock, in 1306) In its lower part the campanile is square, but it soon becomes octagonal, rising in elegant brickwork tiers separated by delicate friezes.
The lower tiers have neat windows, but not one to each face of the octagon, while the upper tiers have windows in each face, beautiful windows with elegant marble columns.
The campanile finishes with a galleried loggia, its conical roof topped with a gilded statue of the Archangel Michael.
On the inside, be sure to find the fresco of the crucifixion on the front wall.
The fresco, completed in the fourteenth-century, was originally on an outside wall, near the campanile.
At first it was attributed to an unknown painter of the Giotto school, but more recent academic opinion is hardening to the opinion that it is by the master himself.
To the right of the High Altar there is also a fine canvas by Cerano showing St Charles.
A painting by Tancredi, Museum of Contemporary Art, Palazzo Reale
PALAZZO ARCIVESCOVILE
To the east of Palazzo Reale, and still in the Piazza del Duomo, is the Palazzo Arcivescovile.
The present palazzo was built in about 1170 on the site of an earlier episcopal seat destroyed by Barbarossa.
After this initial rebuild, further work was carried out by several resident archbishops, most particularly San Carlo Borromeo who used his favourite architect Pelligrino Tibaldi (Il Pellegrini ).
Externally the palazzo is severe and a little dull — though you should look for the symbol of the Viscontis, the snake eating the saracen — but inside it is exquisite, comprising two courtyards which are occasionally open to the visitor; as the palazzo now houses private offices, visiting is not unrestrained.
The first, and larger courtyard, is the Archbishop's Court, but the smaller Canon's Court is the better.
It is the work of Il Pellegrini and a masterpiece of clever stonework and simple, clean lines.
The two statues on the walled side — there are three porticoed sides and  one walled — are of San Carlo, the architect's boss and Sant Ambrogio, the City's first bishop.
On the south side of the palazzo has a strange addition, the
Above The Piermarini fountain and the Duomo
Right The lantern above the entrance gate to the Palazzo Arcivescovile
Rotonda of Pellegrini.
This was once known as San Carlo's Stable because of the archbishop's mules were kept on the ground floor, the horses of the higher clergy on the first floor and hay for the animals on the upper floor.
The eastern side of Palazzo Arcivescovile — with its entrance into Archbishop's Court — lies in the Piazza Fontana.
The Piazza is named after the Piermarini fountain that stands at its centre.
Milan has few fountains for so Mediterranean a city and this one, the oldest, was itself only built in 1782 to a design by Piermarini.
It is very popular with the Milanese, and the seats around it are filled at most times of the day.
From the square the view of the Duomo is tremendous and this, together with the surprising peace, due in large part to the absence of local traffic, makes Piazza Fontana a very pleasant spot to rest aching feet.
On the opposite side of the piazza from the Palazzo Arcivescovile is the Palazzo dei Tribunali, the imposing courts of justice, built in the late sixteenth-century and seeing service as both a jail and a courthouse.
Today it houses the Vigili Urbani , one of the many factions of the Italian police forces.
LA RINASCENTE
Going around behind the apse of the Duomo the visitor passes the Palazzo dell'Orologio, named after the clock at the top, which is flanked by statues of night and day.
The palazzo is also notable for the huge Corinthian columns that break up the façade.
Turning left back along the Duomo's side, you are between the outside of the northern transept and La Rinascente, a modern shopping area built in 1950 to replace one destroyed during World War II.
The name is from the destroyed building, built in 1921 and called ‘The Re-born’ by Gabriele  D'Annuzio , hero or villain — depending on your interpretation — of the Fiume expedition.
Tacked on to the back of the building is the church of San Raffaele, entered from Via San Raffaele.
This is an early church, dating from the ninth-century, which was rebuilt under the direction of San Carlo Borromeo.
Inside there are three naves, as there were in the original church, and several fine paintings.
In the chapel on the right of the entrance is a painting  depicting St Matthew and the Angel, the work of Ambrogio Figino, an artist who died in 1608, while in the presbytery there is a fine canvas by Cerano (Giovan Battista Crespi).
The choir contains some interesting Flemish frescoes.
GALLERIA VITTORIO EMANUELE
Further along is the justifiably, famed Galleria Vittorio Emanuele which links the cathedral square with that of La Scala.
It is the most beautiful covered walkway in Italy and also the first in which metal and glass were used as structural elements rather than purely, for adornment.
The gallery was begun in 1865, soon after the unification of northern Italy, and took thirteen years to complete.
The last element to be added was the magnificent triumphal arch at the entrance from the Piazza del Duomo.
This takes a similar form to the Arch of Peace and is set off by the extended, arcaded arms that drift along the edge of the square.
The Gallery is formed like a Latin cross, 196 metres along the longer arm, 105 metres along the shorter, the central section being octagonal.
This central part, with its huge and impressive glass cupola, was once decorated with niched statues, but these have been removed as they were too difficult to keep clean.
Now only the four mosaics  representing Europe, Asia, Africa and America together with those representing Agriculture, Art, Science and Industry remain.
At the La Scala end the architect was faced with a difficulty of geometry, the Piazza delle Scala being offset from the Piazza del Duomo.
If the line of the Gallery was maintained then the exit to La Scala would have been equally off line.
To get over this problem the latter exit is gently angled so that from La Scala the exit/entrance is square to the Piazza.
So good is this solution that many visitors only recognise the change of angle when viewing the Gallery from the top of the Duomo.
Galleria Vittorio Emanuele
The Gallery is known as Il salotto di Milano , the ‘drawing room of Milan’, being the traditional meeting place of the Milanese, who use it at all times of day attracted by the city's best cafés and restaurants, together with a range of fine shops whose windows are dressed by masters in the craft.
Among the restaurants is the Savini, Milan's most prestigious, where opera-goers congregate after a performance to while away the rest of the evening in expensive surroundings.
As a contrast, the Gallery has the Magic Restaurant, the best sandwich bar which also sells pizza and coffee, ice cream and soft drinks.
The Galleria is also the location of a SIP office for those wanting to make telephone calls.
ABOVE The roof of the Galleria
LEFT Savini, the Galleria's most famous restaurant
WEST OF THE DUOMO
Westward of the Duomo across the Piazza del Duomo, one of the finest sweeps of paved pedestrian walkway in Europe and, thankfully, not badly scarred by the two entrances to the new Metro Line 3, is a monument to Vittorio Emanuele II, a bronze equestrian statue by Ercole Rosa dating from 1896.
The king is shown as he appeared at the battle of San Martino, the basal frieze showing the entry into Milan of Piedmontian and French troops following the battle of Magenta.
The extreme western edge of the square has the now compulsory big city billboards extolling the virtues of consumerism.
It is in keeping with the teams of hawkers and stallholders in the square offering flapping birds, ice creams and drinks, postcards, souvenirs and packets of seed for the apparently endless flock of pigeons.
It is also in keeping with the history of the square which has always been the centre for vendors and street artists.
In ancient times one regular performer apparently used to swallow stones and then make music by banging on his stomach.
Piazza della Duomo from the roof of the Duomo
PIAZZA DEI MERCANTI
Via Mercanti leads off from the north-west corner of the square.
Very soon this leads to an arcaded building on the left, the arcades forming a raised dais that is usually home to another flock of pigeons.
Go left here into Piazza Mercanti.
Although close to the Piazza del Duomo and its hubbub of city life, and surrounded by cars, the Piazza Mercanti manages to preserve a little of the quiet that must occasionally have existed in Medieval, pre-car, times.
Some have bemoaned the fast food outlet that has now taken over the odd corner of the Piazza, but this is the site of the ancient Milanese fiera (fair)— the name itself means Square of the Merchants — and doubtless on fair days the Piazza was not the ocean of calm many claim it must have been.
In Medieval times all the city's most important public buildings were here, standing in a closed square linked with the rest of the city and reached only through one of six gates or vaults, each of which corresponded to a gate in the old city wall.
The most important building was the Broletto or Palazzo della Ragione, the Righteous House, so called because the judges for both civil and penal cases sat there.
On the west side of the piazza were the offices of the city governor and the prison; to the east was the college of lawyers; to the north were the offices of the public magistrates; to the south, at the Portico della Ferrata, public auctions were held.
The piazza itself was filled with the stalls of local merchants and shopkeepers.
At the centre of the square is a well which, until 1879, was the other side of the Palazzo della Ragione.
At that time the square was bigger, with the palazzo standing at its centre, and the northern limit being the Palazzo Giureconsulti which now stands on the far side of Via Mercanti.
The well was moved because of this road, which went through its original position, although it was not put into its present position until 1921.
It was originally a public well, but fell into disuse in the late sixteenth-century.
The Palazzo della Ragione, also known as the Broletto Nuovo, is the oldest and most important surviving example of Romanesque Milanese civic architecture.
Broletto is the ‘little’ version of brolo which in the Middle Ages was a tree-lined meadow, a place where, traditionally, the Archbishop dispensed justice.
In the newly emerging cities this meadow was symbolized  in the Broletto, even after the communes had taken all powers in the making of laws and handing out of justice away from the church.
In time the cities chose to further stamp their authority on the matter by calling these new palaces of justice the Palazzo della Ragione rather than the Broletto.
In many cities the names are still interchangeable, a fact that has given many a visitor a mystified look.
The ‘new’ building was erected in 1229 to replace the Broletto Vecchio, the old Broletto, which stood near the present Piazzetta Reale.
The building was sanctioned by Oldrado da Tresseno in his capacity as the city governor, and the city's chief magistrate sat in the huge room on the first floor flanked by two judges who adjudicated for the civil and criminal trials.
These two judges were called the horse and the hen, because it was said, they needed to have the swiftness of the one and the vigilance of the other.
Later, the Palazzo played host to the Consiglio dei Novacento , the Counsel of the 900, 150 counsellors from each of the six ‘gate’ districts of the city.
Francis I of France reduced the number to 60, and a later Austrian ruler abolished the counsel altogether.
In 1786 the city's administrative offices were transferred to the Palazzo del Carmagnoli — which instantly became know as the Broletto  Nuovissino , the very new Broletto!
Externally the Palazzo della Ragione is a column-arcade-supported rectangular brick building, elegant and business-like, as one might expect.
The relief on the square side is of Governor Tresseno and is attributed to Benedetto Antelami.
Under the statue is an inscription mentioning Tresseno —Dominum Oldradus de Trexeno, Pot (estas) Mediolani — and dated MCCXXXIII, 1233, making it the oldest equestrian statue in Milan.
Look, too for the iron horse rings on the wall below the relief, each of the rings held by a Visconti snake.
On the Via Mercanti side of the palazzo is a relief sculpture of the ‘half wool sow’, the mythical half-pig, half-sheep that legend had it was the real derivation of the name Mediolanum — from medio lanae .
That theory has now been replaced in the minds of all but the most incurable romantics by the idea that the name derives from medio e lanus , half-way plain,lanus being a Celtic corruption of plane .
Access to the palazzo , basically one huge room measuring 50 metres by 18 metres, is by a stone bridge.
Serpent wall ring, Piazza dei Mercanti
Across from the Palazzo della Ragione the most impressive building is the Palazzo delle  Scoule Palatine, the Pallatine School, built in 1645 by the architect Carlo Buzzi as a copy of the Palazzo dei Giureconsulti — proving perhaps that imitation is indeed the sincerest form of flattery.
It occupies the site of a former school that was razed by fire.
The Pallatine School was reserved for the teaching of the law, rhetoric, medicine and mathematics.
In niches above the arcade are statues of St Augustine, to the left, and the fourth-century poet Ausino, who dedicated some of his most famous verses to the city.
These verses are on the tablet to the left, the right tablet being a celebration of the Spanish governor Pietro Giorgio Burro who was responsible for the school's construction.
To the left of the Pallatine School — looking from the well — is the Loggia degli Osii, an elegant fourteenth century building of black and white marble built by Matteo Visconti.
Major alterations in the seventeenth and eighteenth-centuries covered  up the marble and we have to be grateful to renovations in 1904 for the fact that it is now visible again.
The statue of the Virgin at the centre of the building is a work of the Maestro Campionesi, a group of sculptors and architects working out of what is now an enclave of Italy entrenched in Switzerland, Campione d'Italia.
This group is remarkable not only for the quality of its work, but also for the fact that no individual has ever been known by name; only the corporate identity has come down across the years.
The balcony in the centre of the building shows the Visconti snake emblem together with the Imperial eagle and the mythical half-sheep half pig.
From this balcony, the city palera , or public proclamations were made.
Palazzo della Ragione, Piazza dei Mercanti
Forming the other part of the arched passage of the Pallatine School is the Palazzo dei Notai, the lawyer's house, sometimes  known as the Palazzo dei Panigarola, which held the city Statute Office where the acts and orders of the city governors were held.
It is a fine building, an example of fifteenth-century Gothic, with a good sculpted figure of Hercules as a child under the last on the right of the four arches.
Underneath one of the porticos is a memorial plaque that bemoans the fact that in any dispute it is only ever the lawyers who grow fat!
Palazzo della Ragione, Piazza dei Mercanti
Today the palazzo houses, in its lower left side, the restaurant of the Piazza dei Mercanti.
To sit here, or much better, outside under the sun umbrellas, is one of the great pleasures of a visit to Milan.
The city traffic is distant enough to be a world away, so your meal will be served in almost perfect surroundings and will also be peaceful.
The Palazzo dei Giureconsulti, which formed the old northern edge of the Piazza dei Mercanti, was built in the sixteenth-century by order of the Milanese Pope Pius IV as a college for jurists.
Here the children of the rich and famous, children destined to take over the city's highest offices, were trained.
Although it was begun in the sixteenth-century the building was not actually completed for over a hundred years, the upper floor being added in the seventeenth-century.
When the college closed in 1797 the building housed several city departments, and now houses the chamber of commerce.
The outside of the building is decorated in fine style, but the eye is drawn to the centre of the facade, to the ancient tower of the city commune, built in 1272 but later remodelled in Baroque style.
The clock at half height was added in 1601.
In a niche at the base is a statue of Sant' Ambrogio which, in 1833, replaced one of Philip II of Spain.
Before the complete replacement the head had been removed from Philip's statue in 1797 and replaced by one showing the tyrant Brutus.
Inside, the palazzo was originally decorated with numerous fine frescoes, but many of these did not survive the war years.
Of those that did, the best is on the vaulted ceiling of what was a college chapel but is now a space occupied by a marble staircase, This is a Glory of Angels and was painted by the Neapolitan artist Giovan Battista Sassi who worked in the city during the early years of the eighteenth-century.
N.W. from Piazza della Scala
NORTHWEST FROM PIAZZA DELLA SCALA
PALAZZO MARINO
At the far end of the Galleria Vittorio Emanuele from the Piazza del Duomo is Piazza della Scala, the second most famous of the Milanese squares.
Although it is the theatre of La Scala that visitors come to see, the Palazzo Marino, to the right of the Galleria exit, dominates the square.
For many years this palazzo has been considered the most beautiful private house in Milan.
Indeed, the man for whom the Palazzo was built claimed it was the most beautiful house in Christendom.
The Palazzo was started in 1558 by Galeazzo Alessi, another very famous Milanese architect, for a rich merchant, Tomaso Marino, its starting date explaining the delightful blend of Renaissance and Baroque styles.
The size of the palazzo , and the intricacy of its design ensured a very long building period, the main staircase being completed only at the end of the century, after Alessi's death.
The work continued under another architect, but the death of Marino, combined with the vast expense of the building together with the losses his surviving family also suffered at the hands of the new Spanish governors, meant that work stopped altogether for many years.
Ultimately the Marino family surrendered the site to the governor who sold it on to another Milanese businessman, Carlo Omodeo, who did at least allow a member of the Marino family to live in part of it — at an agreed rent.
Finally, in the second half of the eighteenth-century the palazzo was returned to the city and used as an extension of the town hall.
The building was eventually completed in 1880, over 300 years after the first stone had been laid.
By contrast, when the palazzo was badly damaged in World War II, the rebuilding took a mere nine years.
When contemplating the history of the palazzo you have to wonder whether there might not have been some truth in an ancient prophecy made at the time when Alessi began work on the building.
It was stated in Latin — although by whom and to whom no one is sure — and the original read Aut uret, aut ruet, aut alter raptor rapiet which translates as, ‘either it will burn, or it will fall down or another thief will take possession of it.’
I was told by a Milanese, with a wry smile, that it was as well the prophet had not heard of smog, or that would have been included as well.
Externally the palazzo is genuinely four-sided, I say ‘genuinely’ because although all buildings are four-sided (unless they are triangular), each of the four sides cannot always be viewed and walked along as they can here.
The better, three-tiered sides face the Piazza della Scala and the Piazza San Fedele.
Each tier is pierced by a symmetrical row of windows, the windows varying very slightly from floor to floor — double with rectangle and square, as before but with arched, decorated lintel, single with triangular lintel — and the whole is finished with a stone balustrade.
Inside there are two fine courtyards, the larger, the Cortile d'Onore , is quite beautiful with a double loggia supported by double columns.
In Italy the palazzo has a literary claim to fame because in one of the rooms overlooking Piazza San Fedele Virginia Marino, wife of the son of the first Spanish governor of Milan, gave birth to a daughter, Marianna, who became the ‘Nun of Monza’ celebrated in a well-known Italian novel.
LEONARDO MONUMENT
The Piazza della Scala was created in 1859–60 when several old buildings between what is now La Scala and the Palazzo Marino were pulled down.
The last buildings to be completed were those of the Banca Commerciale which were only finished in the first quarter of the twentieth-century.
At the centre of the square is a monument to Leonardo da Vinci by Pietro Magni, completed in 1872.
The monument comprises a statue of the great man on a plinth of red granite, the plinth protected by four of Leonardo's favourite pupils, Marco d'Oggiono, Cesare da Sesto, Andrea Solaino and Giovanni Antonio Boltraffio.
The decoration on the monument is intended to convey the idea of Leonardo as artist, sculptor, architect and engineer.
LA SCALA
Beyond the Leonardo monument and the row of yellow taxis, each with a driver whose disregard for your safety if you try to cross the road in front of them is as remarkable as any of da Vinci's theories, is La Scala.
The theatre of La Scala was completed by 1778 by Giuseppe Piermarini following the decision by City Governor Ferdinand Hapsburg not to rebuild the theatre in the Palazzo Reale which had just burned down for the third time.
The site for the new theatre was given by the governor, but the money for its building was donated by the Milanese, mostly the rich who bought boxes well in advance.
The theatre was completed in the very short time of two years.
Stendhal, on his return to his adopted city after an absence of two years, claimed La Scala to be the most important opera in the world, since which time no one has felt the need, or had the temerity, to fault his judgement.
The theatre was built on the site of the old church of Santa Maria della Scala which had been founded in 1381 by Beatrice della Scala, wife of Bernabo Visconti.
Those visitors who know Verona will recognize the name della Scala, since both the city and its neighbourhood — particularly the eastern shore of Lake Garda — are well endowed with castles of the family, also frequently known as the Scaligeri.
The family took as their emblem a ladder, hence the family name, hence the name of the church and hence the name of the opera house.
Piermarini's new theatre was inaugurated on 3 August 1778 with the work L'Europe Riconsciuta by Antonio Salieri In its earliest days — when the theatre was used for balls and as a gaming house of, at one time, ill repute — the theatre was decorated in Baroque style, but in 1807 it was redecorated in Neo-Classical style only to be redecorated yet again in 1830 by  
Piazza della Scala, with the Leonardo monument and La Scala
Antonio Sanquirico.
The theatre was very badly, damaged by the bombings of 1943 and the first of the city's monuments to be rebuilt, when the original was faithfully recreated.
On the evening of 11 May 1946 La Scala was officially reopened with a performance of La Gazza Ladra , conducted by Arturo Toscanini who travelled from the United States specially.
Externally La Scala is straightforwardly Neo-Classical with absolutely no pretensions .
Indeed, the visitor could be forgiven for being a little disappointed, although when it is floodlit at night the theatre very much comes to life.
Inside there are busts of the great composers — Bellini, Donizetti, Rossini and Verdi — and one of Stendhal, presumably in thanks for his kind words.
The auditorium is horseshoe-shaped with four tiers of boxes and two galleries and is very luxuriously, decorated with friezes and gilded stuccoes in Neo-Classical style.
The lighting is aided by the timed Lampadrio di Boemia chandelier installed in 1923 which has 365 light bulbs, one for every day of the year.
The stage covers nearly 800 square metres, the largest in Europe, and its size is further enhanced by the optical trick of its being slightly sloped.
In theory the theatre can hold about 2,800 people, although new security measures limit this on most occasions to around 2,000.
La Scala's season starts — in very grand style — on Sant' Ambrogio's Day, 7 December, and continues until the end of May.
There are concerts during June and from September until November, with a short ballet season in September.
Those who do no have the time to go to a La Scala performance or are visiting out of season, must make do with going to the theatre museum; this normally, but not always, includes a trip to the auditorium.
The theatre museum was opened in 1913 and holds many important records and documents, as well as busts and drawings of musicians and famous singers who have performed at La Scala, together with more general information on the history of the theatre.
The collection of Verdi memorabilia is particularly impressive, with several manuscripts in his own hand.
There is also a fine library on the history of opera, a collection of eighteenth and nineteenth-century musical instruments, posters from early works in the theatre and masks and statues for Roman and Greek theatre.
To the left of La Scala is Via Filodrammatici.
At No.2 is the Piccola Scala, the ‘little Scala’, a small theatre that is part of the La Scala complex, and in which are performed modern, experimental works, rare operas and concerts of chamber music.
The theatre also offers the chance for singers and players who are starting out on their careers to make a first impression.
Occasionally plays are also performed.
The first work was Matrimonio Segreto (Secret Marriage) by Cimarosa on the night of 26 December 1955.
The Little Scala holds about 600 people.
Also in Via Filodrammatici, at No. 1, is a door that is worth a quick look.
The portal of Palazzo Vimercati is no ordinary door, but the rarest and one of the most elegant Gothic Renaissance doors for many a mile.
The door,— like most of the building that originally stood around it!— is mid-fifteenth-century and through it went members of the family whose name is now attached to it, even though the family palazzo was elsewhere.
When that palazzo fell into disrepair the door was brought here, to Via Filodrammatici, where it was set up at the entrance to a convent.
Look especially for the sculpted form of Francesco Sforza, modestly flanked by Julius Caesar and Alexander the Great, and for the nail heads, a unique Milanese example.
PIAZZA SAN FEDELE
On the far side of Palazzo Marino from Piazza della Scala is the church of San  Fedel , an interesting building.
It is of Romanesque — and apparently unfinished — brickwork at its Via Catena end, and of the most beautifully finished Baroque style on the façade that overlooks Piazza San Fedele.
In fact, this is probably, the most completely original church from the sixteenth-century in Milan and has a long history of being attended by the rich and powerful.
Another church built at the wish of San Carlo Borromeo, it was started in 1569 and, when completed, ‘given’ to the Jesuits who still look after it today.
Since the church was the work of Pelligrini Tibaldi it means that at one time the two most famous of Milanese architects —Il Pellegrino and L'Alessi — were working in Piazza San Fedele at the same time, the one on the church, and the other on the Palazzo Marino.
The church doorway is splendid, flanked by columns and elegantly arched, a neat balcony above it, set in an elaborate second tier, the whole under a triangular gable section.
Many have seen more than a hint of Greek architecture about the Baroque façade.
Inside there are several excellent canvasses worth your time, but it is the wood carving that holds the attention.
The sacristy, reached after the second altar on the right, is widely believed to be the most beautiful in Milan because of the carved cupboards, the work of Giovanni Taurino, a master carver who was also responsible for the confessionals which he completed in 1596.
Look too for the frescoed Madonna in the chapel of the Madonna dei Torriani, once known as the Madonna di Ballarin, the Madonna of the Ballerinas, because it was beloved of the dancers of La Scala.
They would come to San Fedele on the morning after a show with bunches of flowers to offer as gifts to the Madonna in gratitude for their safety during the performance.
From the Piazza San Fedele it is a short step to see the brickwork of the church's north-eastern end, and to view the Casa degli Omenoni, the House of the Giants.
The house was built in 1573 by the sculptor Leone Leoni,(an example of whose work we have seen in the Duomo).
Leoni had it built for his private use and pleasure, decorating it with eight giant caryatids who stand guard on either side of the door.
The caryatids were sculpted not by Leoni himself but by Antonio Abbondio working to drawings by the owner.
On the columns are the names of peoples defeated by Rome.
Above them the lavish sculpture  continues with a graphic depiction of a man being eaten by lions, a play on Leoni's name.
(The part of the man being bitten by the lion on the left is enough to bring the tears to anyone's eyes; I wonder if the sculptor would have liked to have done that to someone he knew).
Leoni was an adventurer in the service of Charles V and Phillip II of Spain, and also claimed — rightly, it would appear — to have seen service at the oar of a rowed galley.
The church of San Fedele and the Manzoni statue
In the Piazza outside the church of San Fedele is a monument  by Alessandro Manzoni who was a regular worshipper at San Fedele.
The monument, by Barzaghi, was completed when the writer was old and in poor health, as can been seen.
It is sad that he could not have been turned so as to face his favourite church.
Perhaps the decision was made because it was here that Manzoni fell when attempting to negotiate a stairway with more enthusiasm than regard for his age.
Although he survived the blow to his head, the accident turned out to be the start of a rapid decline and he died just a few months later.
PIAZZA BELGIOIOSO
Go past the House of Giants, along Via Omenoni, named after the big men, and you will reach, to the left, the Piazza Belgioioso, another delightful and very fine quiet square.
To the right is the Palazzo Belgioioso d'Este, dominating the square's north-eastern side, the palazzo of the family whose name — which appears to have just too many vowels — the square takes.
It is a huge and ostentatiously rich house built around 1780 by Piermarini for Prince Antonio Barbiano di Belgioioso and his son, Albercio, who married Princess Anna Ricciarda d'Este.
(Her family home, now the Hotel Villa d'Este, has astounded many visitors to Cernobbio on the western shore of Lake Como.)
The Prince and his son wanted, it is said, a palazzo worthy of their station in life.
It seems that they got their way.
The pair's desire for recognition even extended to having the family name carved in the paving slabs of the piazza outside the palazzo and one or two of these can still be seen.
LEFT Piazza Belgioioso with the Palazzo to the right and Casa Manzoni at the far end
ABOVE A ‘giant’ on Casa degli Omenoni
Ahead of you as you walk along the length of the piazza is the Casa del Manzoni, Manzoni's house, a fine nineteenth century building in which the writer lived from 1813 until his death on 22 May 1873.
It now houses the National Centre of Manzonian studies, with a precious and extensive library, consulting and reading rooms and the Manzoni Museum which includes one wing of the house left exactly as it was when the writer was alive.
Two things are immediately impressive in this part of the wing: firstly, the austere nature of the furniture.
Manzoni was a modest man and never enjoyed the standards of living which his fame would have allowed — the bedroom has a simple iron bed, the fireplace is small, the armchairs ordinary.
I wonder how Manzoni must have felt as he gazed out of his window at the Palazzo Belgioioso and the comings and goings of Prince Albercio; the Prince rode out of the square each day on a horse, dressed in a bright general's uniform, in order to review the private bodyguard he equipped and maintained.
The second impression is less tangible — the curious feeling you get when you realize that those books on the shelves are Manzoni's books, the ones he read or consulted.
The sense of the writer's presence in the museum is very real.
You can also visit the room of Tommaso Grossi, Manzoni's lawyer friend who practised from the house.
Elsewhere, be sure to see the full-size portrait of the writer (known as Il Grande , by the Italians) by de Notaris, completed after Manzoni's death, the exact dimensions of the man having been collected by post-mortem measuring.
There is also an impressive collection of first editions.
Of Manzoni's work only  Il  Promessi Sposi — translated into English as The Betrothed — is well known to the English speaking world.
Manzoni was born, in 1785, near Lake Como and The Betrothed is set near Lecco on the eastern arm of that lake.
The book was praised by Goethe and by Sir Walter Scott, who called it the finest book ever written.
It is now accepted as his masterpiece and has spawned a small industry in northern Italy.
Near Lake Como there is even an annual cycle race that visits the sites mentioned in the book.
POLDI-PEZZOLI MUSEUM
From the Casa Manzoni it is a short step only to the street that carries the writer's name.
Go right here to reach almost immediately the Poldi-Pezzoli Museum  and one of the most prestigious private art collections in the world.
The museum began as a purely private collection by Gian Giacomo Poldi-Pezzoli in the last half of the nineteenth-century and was given by him to the city when he died in 1879.
The collector was born in Milan in 1822, inheriting great wealth from his father Giuseppe Poldi-Pezzoli who had inherited Parma estates from his Poldi father and wealth from his mother's family, the Pezzoli of Bergamo.
In addition, Gian Giacomo inherited an accepted position in Milanese society, from his mother Rosa Trivulzio, a member of a family whose superb chapel you can see in the basilica of San Nazaro.
The young Gian did not take up his position in society, however, preferring to travel and to spend his money on his collection.
Although seriously damaged in World War II the museum has now been returned to its original magnificence.
Antonio Pollaiolo's Profile of a Young Woman , Poldi-Pezzoli Museum
The museum is housed in a seventeenth-century palazzo , although only the Baroque façade is original, the interior having been completely remodelled in the eighteenth-century.
Today that interior decoration forms part of the museum itself, rather than acting merely as a backdrop to the works of art on display.
The museum extends to about twenty rooms on two floors, and the visit starts with a room of ancient weaponry and then moves on to rooms that contain sacred parchments and vestments — some with designs from the school of Leonardo — and lace.
The staircase to the upper floor is in beautiful style, with a fountain at its base and leads to the more important art treasures.
The first room contains fine works by Lombard artists, including Bernardino Luini, Zenale and Boltraffio.
There is a room of ceramics, including pieces from the  Miessen , Doccia and Capodimonte factories, and then the Black Room, so called because its walls were originally covered with ebony inlaid with ivory.
Here there are some fine early sacred paintings.
In the Dante Room that leads off the Bedroom (which contains a collection of early Murano glass) is a magnificent stained-glass windows by Giuseppe Bertini, dating from the mid-nineteenth-century.
Two rooms of paintings, including further work by Boltraffio as well as superb panels by Tiepolo, are divided by a room of jewellery which includes some Renaissance bronzework.
The best-known work in the Poldi-Pezzoli is to be found in the Golden Room.
This room has a Deposition by Sandro  
Room of Clocks, Poldi-Pezzoli Museum
Botticelli, works by Piero della Francesca and Andrea Mantegna and the museum'smost famous work, the Profile of a Young Lady by Antonio Pollaiolo, now used as a symbol of the Poldi-Pezzoli and a painting that adorns the face of many Milanese tourist brochures — including one on the city's museums in which it has been reproduced the wrong way round!
Beyond the Golden Room is a further room of art and then a temperature-controlled room of old clocks, one of the finest collections in Italy.
The clocks date from the sixteenth-century through to the nineteenth-century.
NORTH ALONG VIA MANZONI
Continuing northwards along the Via Manzoni the visitor reaches, to the right, Via Bigli, named after the Palazzo Bigli about 120 metres down the street on the right-hand side.
The palazzo is an excellent town house dating from the early sixteenth-century, although almost all that you see now is from a remodelling in 1841.
It is worth seeing for its two marble medallions which show the Annunciation, with the angel on the left and the Virgin Mary on the right, the work of Agostino Busti.
Busti, who completed the reliefs in the early sixteenth-century, was known as Il Bambaia , another to have acquired a curiously Milanese nickname.
The other noticeable thing about the palazzo is the motto:Alta quid miraris tecta.
Intus nil nisi benignum et humile .
This translates as ‘Why are you marvelling at this exceptional house.
Inside reigns only courtesy and modesty.’
The next road to the right, Via Montenapoleone, is by common consent the finest shopping street in Milan, the main thoroughfare of an area of ‘high class’ shopping.
For details of the street's potential for the window (and real) shopper, see pages 27–30; here are all the great names of Italian shopping including Gucci, Missoni, Armani, Krizia, and jewellery shops of Beccellati and Calderoni, as well as leather shops and shoe shops.
In this famous road is Palazzo Melzi di Cusano, once one of the most important centres for Milanese high life.
The palazzo dates from the mid-nineteenth-century and was built for Count Melzi di Cusano.
It suits the Via Montenapoleone perfectly, with a wonderful elegance that is accentuated by the pastel colour of the façade, and the portico in the form of an Ionic temple with four huge columns.
The Palazzo Melzi di Cusano is at the corner of the Via San Spirito in which stands the Palazzo Bagatti-Valsecchi, soon to be another of Milan's fine series of museums.
This palazzo is actually two buildings, one on each side of the road, built by brothers in the late nineteenth-century.
No. 7 is in fifteenth-century Lombardy style, while No. 10 is in sixteenth-century Neo-Renaissance style.
Between the two is the road, and a small piazzetta that takes the palazzo's name.
The combination was built to accommodate the brothers' collection of Lombardy objets d'art , and these — ivories, terracotta, furniture, sculptures, bronzes and ceramics — will form a new museum when the necessary building work is completed.
This museum (eastern)palazzo is elegant, its inner courtyard façade topped by a fine clock.
In the courtyard is the Madonna of the Mouse, so called because of the mouse sitting on the shoulder of the baby.
The opposite palazzo is private, but the view to the small arcaded courtyard, especially if it is sunlit, is enough to make you yearn to have spent time in Renaissance Milan.
Back in Via Manzoni, continue north to pass the church of San Francesco di Paola, a fine example of what might be termed flowery Baroque.
At the top of the façade is the motto of the order of the  
Via Montenapoleone
Little Fathers of San Francesco di Paolo who built the church:Charitas , charity.
Inside is a huge fresco, the Glory of San Francesco di Paola, some fine wood carving and a High Altar in marble.
Beside the church is Palazzo Gallarati-Scotti, a sixteenth-century building, substantially remodelled in the eighteenth century.
Behind the clean and tidy façade — I especially like the shutters, especially those of the top row of windows — is a fine cobbled courtyard.
North again, Via Manzoni ends at the Arches Communale of Porta Nuova, the most beautiful of the three ancient doors in the town walls.
Originally the gate was in wood, but after the destruction of the city by Barbarossa it was rebuilt, in 1171, in brick.
The gate is probably indicative of the way the new wall looked when it was eventually completed by Azzone Visconti in the thirteenth-century.
Some of the sculptures and stones now in the gate were taken from the Porta Orientale (the eastern gate) which was demolished in 1819.
On the outer, country, side of the gate the stonework is a pleasant mix of pale Roman marble and brown Lombard stones.
Through the arches is Piazza Cavour, named after the hero of the Risorgimento, a piazza that gives on to the Giardini Pubblici (Public Gardens), one of several splendid oases of green in the city.
before crossing the gardens go first along the western edge, up Via Manin, to reach the Palazzo Dugnani.
The palazzo was built in the early seventeenth century and after spending a period as one of the centres of Milanese high life it was taken over by a prestigious academy, the Accademia dei Fenici.
Later it passed to the city and was the first site for the Natural History Museum.
Externally it is very grand, its grandness enhanced by the off-setting of its constituent blocks.
Inside the palazzo is the Museum of Cinema and Italian Cinematography.
Although the title suggests a wider scope, the museum is in fact wholly Italian and consists of photographs and posters, a marvellous collection of early cameras and sound-recording equipment.
There is an extensive library too.
Also within the palazzo is the Spazio Baj , a permanent exhibition of the ultra-modern engravings and collages of the artist Enrico Baj.
GIARDINI PUBBLICI
The public gardens beside the palazzo were laid out in 1784 by Giuseppe Piermarini who started by uniting the gardens and orchards of several monasteries.
The gardens were later enlarged by annexing a few more gardens   so that the total area is now nearly 18 hectares (about 44 acres).
Most of the area is a garden in English style, with a remarkable number of native Italian trees and shrubs, together with some exotics.
Within the garden boundaries are not only the Natural History Museum, the Planetarium, the City Zoo and the Palazzo Dugnani, but also the small hill of Monte Merlo, several springs, a lake and ten monuments to important Milanese inhabitants of the nineteenth-century (the Top Ten, as it were.)
Here too is a tiny gauge railway which offers children one or more trips around a small circuit that includes a tunnel.
Elsewhere there are fine leafy walks and excellent play areas.
The zoo, on a small site, has a varied collection chiefly of Italian animals but including some foreign species.
It will soon be moved to another site where, it is hoped, the animals will have more natural surroundings.
LEFT Miniature train, Public Gardens
BELOW The Barriera di Porta Venezia
The eastern edge of the gardens is defined by Corso Venezia, a road that ends at the Barriera di Porta Venezia.
This is an interesting monument because the architect, Rodolfo Vantini, who completed the work in 1828, wanted to get away from the conventional Roman triumphal arch,(a decision said to have been as much due to the local inhabitants complaining that they did not want their view of the Lombardian Pre-Alps blocked as to any creative urge).
The structure is two identical cuboids, each with a smaller cube on top, added later to confer greater importance to the monument.
Note the little half-moon windows and the niches with their statues of pagan gods.
The bas-reliefs show scenes from the history of Milan.
AROUND PORTA VENEZIA
Northward from Porta Venezia is a site with little enough to show the visitor but an impressive place in the Medieval history of both Milan and Europe.
During the two-hundred-year period from the mid-fifteenth to the mid-seventeenth-centuries plague swept Europe, different countries reacting in different ways.
In Milan the victims and suspected victims — and it is hard to believe that non-sufferers ever survived being suspected sufferers — were herded in to a custom-built enclosure.
Based on the combination of the name of a similar building in Venice, Santa Maria di Nazareth, and the patron saint of plague victims, San Lazzaro, the Milan building was called the Lazzaretto.
The building was huge, almost 14 hectares (about 35 acres) according to contemporary records, and was elegantly  porticoed by Il Filarete .
There was even a church for the victims, dedicated to San Carlo Borromeo who had an earlier one replaced.
It is doubtful whether the unfortunates impounded in the Lazzaretto had time to concern themselves with the aesthetic niceties of the building, and it can only be hoped that the church offered them some spiritual comfort.
They must have constantly wondered whether they would ever return to the world outside the moat that separated them from it, a moat that also served as a sewer.
If you go north from Porta Venezia, taking Corso Buenos Aires to reach Via Palazzi, and taking the third turning to the left, you can view what remains of the Lazzaretto, the church of San Carlo — of no great merit despite being the work of Il Pellegrini — and a section of the portico that forms part of the northern section of the school at No.12 Via Tadino, the first road crossed by Via Palazzi.
Going south down Corso Venezia, away from Porta Venezia and the Lazzaretto, you will reach the Planetarium, which lies within the public gardens.
The Planetarium was built in 1929 in the style of a classical temple.
It consists of one huge room with a hemispherical vault on which are displayed the stars and planets.
Visitors take one of 600 revolving seats.
Next along Corso Venezia is the Natural History Museum, housed in a pseudo-Romanesque building dating from 1893, although the collection was started earlier.
Displays include vertebrates and invertebrates, minerals and fossils, and of special note is the collection of birds.
Other rather exceptional items include a 40-kg topaz, a full-size Triceratops, a huge gorilla and an even bigger elephant.
The section on Italian animals is particularly interesting to visitors intending to spend a day or two out of town.
Villa Reale
Beyond the Natural History Museum turn right into Via Palestro in order to reach the Modern Art Museum housed in Villa Reale, a fabulous building in pure Neo-Classical style completed for the Count Ludovico Barbiano di Belgioioso and later bought by the Government of the Cisalpine Republic for Napoleon.
Napoleon actually spent time at the villa, staying there with Josephine.
After the Emperor had met his Waterloo, both Eugene di Beauharnais and Marshal Radetzky lived at the villa.
Visitors to the villa arrive at the front, to be greeted by a huge work by Marino Marini, and if they are not careful see only the  front.
This is a mistake.
The back of the villa, which overlooks a last section of the gardens, is by far the best façade, especially if viewed across an acre of grass, or across the delightful duck pond at the bottom of the slope below the house.
This façade is stupendous, a riot of columns, arched windows and reliefs of scenes from mythology.
At each end there are set-forward wings, and the whole is topped by a stone balustrade and a row of statues.
The interior of the villa is largely taken over by the Modern Art Museum which is spread through 35 rooms that are still marvels of late eighteenth-century elegance, with luxurious decoration in plaster, parquet floors and chandeliers.
The art collection concentrates on the effect of world movements on northern Italian painters of the nineteenth-century.
Here, therefore, is the work of Lombard, Tuscan and Piedmontian artists in Impressionistic style.
Much of the work will be new to English-speaking visitors as Italian painters have not ‘travelled well’, but there is much to admire.
Certainly the work of Arturo  
Villa Reale
Tosi — who was born in nearby Busto Arsizio and died here in Milan — is superb, as is that of Sironi and Carrà.
The sculpture of Medardo Rosso is also worth more than a passing glance.
To make comparisons easy there are works by the more famous artists in the Impressionistic field, Renoir, Dufy, Cézanne, Gauguin and Manet, together with later ‘modern works’ by Picasso and Matisse.
One section of the building holds the Marino Marini Museum, a collection of the art — sculpture, paintings and drawings — of the artist who completed the courtyard entrance work.
The collection was donated to the museum in 1973.
The parkland at the back of the Villa Reale is separated by a fence from the Boschetti di Via Marina, the little wood of the Via Marina, an elegant tree-lined street designed by Piermarini but now thoroughly ruined by the car park of ACI, the Italian Automobile Club.
Before the building of the street the local lime wood was famous as a recreation area.
LEFT One of the rooms of Villa Reale
ABOVE Marino Marini statue, entrance to Villa Reale
TWO FINE PALAZZOS
Where the Via Palestro leaves Corso Venezia the visitor is close to two quite delightful  palazzis  .
Palazzo Rocca-Saporiti, just across the street from Via Palestro, was built in 1812 to a design by the set designer of La Scala.
It is elegantly Neo-Classical, although few other houses of the style have such enormous loggias, even though the loggia is such a feature of Italian architecture.
This one has Ionic columns and a balustrade, and the speaker's gallery seems to have been right.
At the top is a fine row of sculpted Roman gods.
Palazzo Castiglioni stands across Corso Venezia and a little way down from Palazzo Rocca-Saporiti.
It was built in 1903 with a façade in what the Italians could call Liberty style, but which we would call Art Nouveau.
It is virtually one complete relief of figures and flowers, trees and shrubs.
The overall effect is extraordinary.
The architect's wish was to celebrate nature and in this Sgr Giuseppe Sommaruga succeeded admirably.
Not everyone was impressed, however.
Originally on either side of the doorway there were statues of nude young ladies, languidly posed.
Soon the statues had become famous — or perhaps, infamous  — the Milanese christening the house Ca' di Ciapp (the House of Buttocks’), to the great amusement of Sommaruga.
The nudes became a favourite meeting place of young men, at which point the local wives and mothers could contain themselves no longer and insisted that they be moved elsewhere, much to the annoyance of the sculptor Ernesto Bazzaro.
Today the girls stand in the courtyard of the Columbus Clinic in Via  Buanarotti near the Fiera (Metro stops Buonarotti or Wagner, for those determined to see what all the fuss was about; purely in the interests of research, of course).
They stand close to a wall, now partially covered with ivy.
Palazzo Rocco-Saporiti
Close to the palazzo there is a fine restaurant.
Girarrosto, at No. 31 Corso Venezia (Palazzo Castiglioni is at No. 47) is Tuscan, which might seem a bit unreasonable in this, the capital of Lombardy.
Such thoughts will not survive the eating of a Florentine steak.
The restaurant is closed at lunchtime on Sunday and all day Saturday.
PALAZZO DEL SENATO
From either Palazzo Castiglioni or the Boschetti di Via Marina it is not far to the Palazzo del Senato.
The palazzo was built by Cardinal Federico Borromeo as a  headquarters for the College of Swiss Seminaries.
It was begun in 1608 by Fabio Mangone and completed, after his death, by Francesco Maria Richini who was responsible for the elegantly curved façade.
However, work progressed very slowly with many pauses for second and third thoughts, and the project outlasted not only Richini but the seventeenth-century.
It was, in fact, completed only shortly before the College was moved elsewhere, the palazzo becoming a government building.
Under the French it housed the senate (hence the name), and today it houses the State Archive, a collection of documents covering 1,200 years of Lombardian history, one of the most important archives in Italy.
Palazzo Castiglioni
Richini gave the façade a concave curve so that carriages could  more easily approach the doorway.
This is not only practical but the effect of the curve is also very pleasing, particularly after all the flat façades that have been passed to reach the palazzo .
To the left of the doorway is the first postbox in Milan, dating back to the Napoleonic era.
Palazzo Senato
Inside the palazzo there are two vast linked courtyards.
They are occasionally the venue for outdoor sculpture exhibitions which give the visitor the chance to see not only some fine art, but also the courtyards themselves.
On the way back to Corso Venezia along the Via Senato the visitor passes San Pietro Celestino, a fourteenth-century church, once attached to a convent of the Benedictines of the Celestial Congregation.
It was built of soft stone and has needed considerable renovation, some of it in cement, so that it is now almost pure, but delicate, rococo.
The campanile dates from the first building and has a delightful bell loggia.
Inside there is a fine painting of St. Benedict by Camillo Procaccini.
SEMINARIO ARCIVESCOVILE
Go right along Corso Venezia again reaching to the left across the road, the Palazzo Fontana-Silvestri (see pages 128–9) one of the best buildings in Milan.
Opposite the palazzo , on your side of the road is the ornate and awesome entrance to the Seminario Arcivescovile, the Archbishop's Seminary.
The two sculpted figures that flank the entrance symbolize holiness and wisdom (la pietà e la sapienza ) and were completed in the mid-seventeenth-century by the sculptor Giovan Battista Casella.
Apparently much amusement was caused when it was learned that the bill for the work was even more excessive than the shape of the statues.
The seminary itself is difficult to see, the approach from the road leading only to an imposing wall with faceless windows and a usually, barred door It was built by San Carlo Borromeo in 1564 and is square, the four walls enclosing a courtyard that measures 56 metres on one side and is surrounded by a double tier gallery, each floor of which is supported by double Doric columns.
The colonnade supports the Borromeo family motto,Humilitas (humility).
Behind the seminary, in the Palazzo Morando-Attendolo-Bolognini, is the Civic Museum of Milan which houses pictures and memorabilia from the history of the city.
Chiefly the   collection covers the period from the eighteenth-century until the early part of the twentieth-century and so covers the most interesting period in the history of the city.
Some of the paintings of the city are fascinating for the changes they highlight.
Look out for the girl, modelled in bronze by Giuseppe Grande, who symbolizes one of the ‘Five Days’.
Also in the palazzo is the Museum of Contemporary History which covers the history of the city through the period from 1914–1945.
There are newspapers and posters, photographs and mementoes but it must be said that a lack of Italian language will limit the appeal of the collection.
Finally, the palazzo is now the permanent home of the Ugo Marsia collection of marine art.
This includes some fine prints of early sailing ships and a library of books on marine topics, pirates and folk stories as well as marine architecture.
Among the better items is a superb painted figurehead.
TWO MORE PALAZZOS
Finally, head back towards the Duomo, passing on the way two interesting palazzi .
Palazzo Spinola lies in Via San Paolo.
It was built for a rich banker in the early sixteenth-century but is more renowned as the home of the Societa del Giardino, the oldest and most prestigious club in Milan which has used the palazzo since 1818.
Some of the most renowned Italian artists and aristocrats, including Alessandro Manzoni and Stendhal, Count Cavour and Vittorio Emanuele II, have been members.
At the bottom of the same road is the elegant triple-tiered Palazzo Tarsis, built around 1836 for Paolo Tarsis and reckoned to be the finest example of Neo-Classical architecture in the city.
When it was built it was a significant addition to the city's houses as it heralded the start of the restructuring that saw the completion of Corso Vittorio Emanuele II.
Look especially for the frieze of statues on the upper tier.
OPPOSITE The entrance to the Seminario Arcivescovile
Map — East of Duomo
EAST FROM THE DUOMO
Our trip around this part of the city defines a crude triangle, formed by Corso Venezia and Corso di Porta Romana, with Piazza del Duomo as its point.
This is a widespread area with the real interest concentrated in the southern part, from the Ospedale Maggiore to the Rotonda.
The northern part is also worth visiting though, and there are several excellent areas to rest and soak up the sun and the atmosphere.
Leave the Piazza del Duomo along Via Marconi, going past the Milan tourist office and reaching the Piazza Diaz with its ultra-modern, but truly delightful, monument to the  carabineri  by Luciano Minguzzi.
Beyond, go out of the square by the left exit, Via Baracchini.
Go right at the junction where Via Baracchini ends, then left into Via Chiaravalle and left again into Via Sant' Antonio to see the church of Sant' Antonio Abate.
This was built in 1582 by the Teatini Fathers and took its name from a former church attached to a monastery of the Brothers of St Anthony, a curious horse-riding fraternity who ‘kept alight the fires of St Anthony’.
It is claimed that the church is one of the most complete examples of the Milanese baroque style, but I think the best feature is the campanile, the only part of the older building that remains.
In brick, it is superb and rises above a cloister that is all that remains of the monastery.
The cloister has  three open arcaded sides and above it runs a gallery with a brick frieze along which winged griffins compete, each holding a shield with horse's heads.
Elsewhere other assorted monsters complete the decoration.
Piazza Diaz
Opposite the church is the Palazzo Greppi, an elegant Neo-Classical building dating from 1776.
Its owner, Antonio Greppi, had social aspirations and spent much time and more money creating a fine façade and rooms so luxurious, and so dedicated to rich parties, that the city nobles came in droves.
For a while the palazzo became an important meeting point of the political and  artistic halves of the city, but history does not specify whether in the longer term Sgr Greppi was admitted to the ranks of noblemen.
Torre Velasca
If instead of visiting the church and palazzo you continue across the piazza and into Via Velasca, your view is dominated, as any photograph taken south from the roof of the Duomo will be by the Torre Velasca.
This tower was built in 1957 by local Italian architects, including Ernesto Nathan-Rogers.
It is 106 metres high, its height not limited by technology, but by respect for the Madonnina on top of, the Duomo.
The widening at the top is a tribute to the towers of the Sforzas, who were also fond of this sort of fungal shape.
The name commemorates Don Juan Fernandez De Velasco, the Spanish governor of the city who, in 1598, allowed the widening of a local road so that the citizens could better celebrate their carnivals.
BASILICA OF SAN NAZARO MAGGIORE
Go left before reaching the end of Via Velasca, following Via Pantano to the basilica of San Nazaro Maggiore.
The basilica stands in a piazza named after the church, where there are also three small granite columns marking the entrance to the Vicolo Santa Caterina.
These are all that now remain of a series of columns that surrounded the convent of Santa Caterina in the Middle Ages.
The columns represented the start of sanctuary and many fugitives made their way there when the law threatened.
Also outside the church is a single column, the column of Sant' Ulderico, brought here when the Corso di Porta Romana was being reconstructed.
The column is in the pink granite of the quarries of Baveno on the western shore of Lake Maggiore.
The basilica beside the columns is very ancient, one of the oldest in the city, founded in the fourth-century.
That first foundation was called the Basilica of the Apostles, this being changed later to the Roman Basilica because of its position beside the Porta Romana.
Only in 396, when Sant' Ambrogio had the remains of the saint brought to the city and placed in the church, did the name finally change to San Nazaro.
As with many of the city's churches, San Nazaro was gutted by fire in the early Middle Ages, when light could only be provided by open flames and work on roofs meant using braziers to melt lead.
The rebuilding was in Romanesque style, although this work has now been lost behind a Baroque frontage with later  
One who sought sanctuary was a Milanese noble called Landriani, who was pursued to the columns, but escaped inside the convent.
The police, finally becoming fed up with being outwitted by the sanctuary laws, continued the chase inside, arresting the nobleman at the High Altar.
The infuriated Milan Cardinal told the city governor that both the Chief of Police and the governor would be excommunicated if Landriani was not immediately released back to the convent.
The governor also had enough, however, and sent a message to the Cardinal saying that if the excommunication threat was carried out Landriani would be hanged outside the Bishop's Palace.
Neo-Classical additions.
Recent renovation work has shown that beneath these modifications the fourth-century church is virtually complete.
One of the most interesting features of the building is the Trivulzio chapel through which the basilica is entered, its position on the original façade of the church having been responsible for the loss of the early, Romanesque, frontage.
The chapel was started by Gian Giacomo Trivulzio to house his family mausoleum.
Trivulzio was a  condottiero  , a general in a private army, and fought well and loyally for his Sforza duke, first against the French and then against the Venetians.
For these considerable services he received nothing, his enemies using the time he was away to poison Francesco I Sforza against him, not least because they were jealous of the work on the chapel.
 Triculzo died in 1518, a worn-out man overcome by the injustices of life.
Not for another two decades was his great work finished, and then only because a local artist, Bramantino, used his own cash to do it, believing the work to be a masterpiece.
The tomb of Trivulzio bears a Latin inscription that, translated, reads, ‘He who never found peace now rests — Silence’.
The basilica itself is in the form of a Latin cross with a single nave.
Immediately on the right of the entrance, be sure to look through the small opening to catch a glimpse of part of the Romanesque façade which disappeared from view following work on the construction of Trivulzio's mausoleum/chapel in the early sixteenth-century.
Further on, near the eastern edge of the apse, is the little basilica (basilichetta ) of San Lino, a very rare example of tenth-century pre-Romanesque architecture, also with a cruciform plan.
This contains a stone, to the left of the altar, with an inscription that starts ‘Ambrogio founded…’.
Many believed that this means it is the foundation stone of the earliest basilica.
Finally, look for the chapel of Sant Caterina that can be reached from the left transept.
The chapel is mid-sixteenth-century and can also be reached from the Largo Richini.
It has very recently been cleaned and restored, a work that was carried out with great care.
The chapel should be visited to see the superb fresco showing the martyrdom of St Catherine painted by Bernardino Lanino in 1546.
The artist put himself in the picture; he is the man with the black beard and cap.
OSPEDALE MAGGIORE
The Largo Richini, an airy square, leads to a pleasant length,(but narrow width) of parkland that is used by early morning paper readers on Sundays, and by students on all days.
To its right the bicycle stands delineate grass from walkway as you approach what is definitely the better side of what was the Ospedale Maggiore.
This huge old hospital is known by the Milanese as the Ca'Grande , or ‘Great House’, and was built by Francesco Sforza in 1456 as a way of bringing together in one place about thirty little hospitals which had grown up around the Porta Romana.
The design was by the Tuscan architect Antonio Averulino, popularly known as Il Filarete, who produced two vast quadrilaterals separated by a huge central courtyard and closed in by square porticos on two floors.
Sadly, Il Filarete died before completing his masterwork which was taken up by the Milanese Guiniforte Solari.
In fact, the work was never really completed, additions simply being made over many years as the need for extra wards arose.
This lengthy period of building explains why it is  possible to find such a diversity of architectural styles, brilliant work from the Tuscan Renaissance period being mixed with the Baroque pieces and sections in later styles.
The Basilica of San Nazaro
To pay for the considerable expense of running the hospital, the directors of  Ca'Granda offered portraits to any worthy donor, the portrait to be painted full face for a large contribution, profile for a much smaller one and in various degrees between the two.
The portraits were hung outside the hospital on all feast days so that the Milanese could admire their benefactors and those portrayed could bask in the glory of it all.
It was a good system for everyone except the artist, who was frequently offered a low rate for the job, then had his payment deferred, and sometimes had to battle for months to receive anything at all.
One artist, in an attempt to fight the system, painted a benefactor on horseback, claiming double payment — one for the man, one for the horse.
The directors considered this, and decided that one payment only was in order because, although they could find evidence of the donation by the man, they could find no  evidence of any donation by the horse.
ABOVE Detail of western facade of Ca'Grande
RIGHT The Western facade of Ca'Grande
The completed portraits now hang in the Quaderia dell'Ospedale Maggiore, and can be seen on occasions, for just a few weeks every other year as a rule.
Ask at the tourist office for details.
That the building exists at all is a wonder, as it was very badly damaged in World War II.
The Milanese took great pains over its reconstruction in order to properly reinstate the great courtyard that formed the heart of Il Filarete's dream.
The courtyard is breathtakingly beautiful, although to have your breath taken away it is necessary to keep student hours, the entrance from the Via Francesco side being controlled at all times, while that on the Via Festa del Perdono side is open when the University is also open.
The central square of the courtyard is laid with grass, and trees break up its outline, while the defining walls are two-storeyed and arcaded, the upper arcade being filled on symmetrical sides to create windows.
The façade on the Via Fiesta del Perdono is over 280 metres long, a continuous sweep of elegant porticoes and arched windows   of red terracotta, separated by sculpted medallions.
By contrast, the Via Francesco façade is straightforward, almost ordinary.
The main courtyard, Ca'Grande
Today the hospital is part of the University, housing the senate and the Faculties of Arts and Law.
It also houses part of the local hospital administration, a nice link with the past.
PIAZZA SAN STEFANO
North of Ca'Grande is the Piazza San Stefano.
This is an odd square, the Baroque façade of the church to the saint and the rococo façade of the church of San Bernardino contrasting poorly with the modern buildings whose architectural qualities — if they exist at all— are fairly well hidden.
Away from a purely stylistic assessment, the square has great merits, the presence of students locally (there is another section of the University here) having resulted in a range of fine restaurants, take-away delicatessens and sandwich bars which the visitor to the centre will find delightful for offering a real Milanese touch to the menu at an affordable price.
The basilica of Santo Stefano Maggiore — once known as Santo Stefano in Brolo, because when it was first built it stood in the middle of a field; through the field ran a stream which fed ponds in which toads croaked noisily enough in the mating season to affect the services — was begun in the fifth-century.
Like many of the other city churches it was destroyed by fire in the eleventh-century, being totally rebuilt (on the same foundations) in Romanesque style over a period of two hundred years.
Unfortunately, at the end of the sixteenth-century the whole façade was remodelled, as was the inside, and the local population was outraged.
The campanile was saved but it soon became ruinous.
A fund was set up for its restoration, but before the work could even be started the campanile collapsed.
The locals believed that the collapse was in protest at the new building work, but that hardly seems fair.
There were two victims of the collapse, a beggar and an old priest.
When the priest was searched it was found that he was carrying his will, and that he had left money for the restoration fund.
The present campanile is one of the better features of the building.
Later work completed the Baroque look, a Neo-Classical reshaping of the interior being the last work completed.
In 1979 the church was closed for worship and now houses the Diocesan Archive.
OPPOSITE A corner of the main courtyard, Ca'Grande
Of interest near the entrance to the old church is a floor-mounted grate that protects the Pietra degli Innocenti , the Stone of the Innocents, on which, legend has it, the Roman Emperor Valentian executed four innocent court officials framed by jealous colleagues.
Another reminder of Milan's bloody past is the inscribed stone that commemorates the murder near the spot of Galeazzo Mari Sforza.
This member of the ducal family was stabbed in the neck on Boxing Day 1476.
To the north,(that is, to the left when viewing from the square) of Santo Stefano is the sanctuary church of San Bernardino, together with an ossuary, built in the twelfth-century to minister to patients of, and to take the dead from, the local hospitals.
The chief of these was the Ospedale del Brolo, the ‘hospital in the field’, the same field in which the basilica stood, one of the hospitals that was amalgamated into Ca'Grande.
The buildings were damaged by the fall of the campanile but rebuilt, just in time to be almost completely razed by fire.
A second reconstruction took many years, perhaps not surprisingly.
The ossuary inside the sanctuary is square with a vaulted ceiling.
A fresco that is barely visible because of the darkness of the interior, and the effect of smoke from centuries of candles burning in front of a statue of Our Lady of Sorrow, shows the Triumph of Souls and dates from the turn of the seventeenth-century.
It adds a macabre touch to the bones from the hospital.
When the piles were examined it was found that the bones of condemned men were also placed here, some of the skulls showing clear signs of decapitation.
The rear of the church overlooks the Piazza Fontana, back close to the Duomo.
Go right along the Via Verziere, passing another delightful park to the right where the lunching office workers help dispel the gloom of the ossuary.
The square ahead, Piazza Verziere, commemorates one of the city's best fruit and vegetable markets which was held here in the nineteenth-century.
The column in the piazza is of Baveno granite and was set up where San Carlo Borromeo celebrated Mass during the plague of 1576.
The plinth at the base was used as an altar, Mass being celebrated in the open so that people too afraid to move from their houses could benefit from the service.
The site was used again during the subsequent plague in 1630.
The present name of  Colonna del Verziere is new, the column having once been the column of the cross' — after the statue of Christ holding an iron cross was added in the seventeenth-century — or ‘of San Matroniano’.
It is believed to be to a design by Il Pellegrini, although its actual construction was not until a century after the architect's death.
PIAZZA VERZIERE TO THE ROTONDA
East from the Piazza Verziere is the Palazzo Sormani-Andreani, on the high-angled junction of Via Francesco Sforza and Via Guastella.
The palazzo looks so much like a 1950s cinema (or is it a small-town railway station?), with its curves and ornate super-structure, that it comes as a surprise to learn that it is seventeenth-century.
Today it is the headquarters of the Milan Public Library and houses a vast collection of books, newspapers and periodicals.
The historical interest of the collection and, indeed, of the palazzo itself has led to a decision to open it as a museum.
By now this has probably happened, and the interested visitor will need to contact the tourist office for exact details of opening times.
The Colonna del Verziere
Go down Via Francesco Sforza, and look out for the façade of the church of San Giovanni in Conca, the majority of what remains of a church that once stood in Piazza Missori.
(For the rest of what remains see page 134.)
The façade is Lombard Romanesque style, probably built in the thirteenth-century, and still contains the old doorway.
The church that now stands behind the façade is Waldensian.
Further down the main road is the western end of the Giardino della Guastella, the Guastella Garden.
The garden is the oldest, and many would say the most beautiful, of Milan's public gardens.
Anciently it was the garden of the Guastella College.
This college, renowned in its time, was built by the Countess Paola Ludovica Torelli della Guastella — thankfully, her name was  shortened for the dedication — for the daughters of noble but impoverished families.
The college was built by Il Pellegrini, but only the doors now survive.
They can be seen at No. 6 Via Guastella, a street named after the college rather than the other way around.
The fishpond, Guastella Garden
The highlight of the gardens is a wondrous Baroque fish pond that most definitely should be seen, even if there is occasionally just a little too much rubbish in the water.
The rest of the garden is cool and shady, although the section across the Via San Barnaba is noticeable for its basketball courts which are far from shady and on which groups of young Milanese are frequently very warm.
On the fish pond side, be sure to look for the small Neo-Classical temple, the work of Luigi Cagnola.
Along Via San Barnaba you will pass the church for which the street is named, another work by Galeazzo Alessi, although here he was enlarging and modifying an existing building.
The façade is elegant, if ornate, with four statues in niches and much scrolling work.
The interior frescoes include several works by Aurelio Luini.
Also here is the tomb of San Saccaria, the founder of the Barnabites for whom the first church was built.
Detail of rear facade, Palazzo di Giustizia
Inside the  Rotanda di Via Besana
Beyond, the street is sandwiched between the heavy rear façade of the Palazzo di Giustizia and the more delicate brickwork of the church of Santa Maria della Pace.
The church was deconsecrated in the early nineteenth-century and converted into a warehouse, at which time its art treasures were moved out to the Brera where they still remain, despite the church having been reconsecrated in the twentieth-century.
The palazzo itself will be dealt with later when the trip reaches its frontage, but it is worth a long look as you move past.
To the right at the end of Via San Barnaba is the Rotonda di Via Besana, one of the most delightful buildings in the city.
The Rotonda is a large, simple brick structure, built in 1695 as a cemetery for the dead of Ospedale Maggiore.
It was closed in 1782, after which there was an attempt to convert it into a Pantheon for the new Italy.
This attempt failed and the Rotonda served time as a hospital for contagious diseases and as the Milan hospitals' laundry before becoming a permanent centre for exhibitions.
The inside is a distinct change from the outside, with the walls porticoed in fine style and with a (now deconsecrated) chapel dating from 1713.
On Sunday mornings the Rotonda is used by Milanese families who bring their children, secure in the knowledge that they will not be harmed by traffic and that the arcaded walkway is a good place to play.
Here and there someone will be reading a newspaper.
It really is a fine place to spend time.
AROUND PIAZZA CINQUE GIORNATE
On the eastern side of the Rotonda is the wide major road of Via Regina Margherita which leads to Piazza Cinque  Giorante , the square of the Five Days, where stands the monument to the Five Days.
The monument is the work of the sculptor Giuseppe Grandi and was completed in 1895 to celebrate the Cinque  Giorante , the Five Days of Milan (18–22 March 1848).
The bronze obelisk is 22 metres high and is decorated with the names of the dead of the Five Days together with a group of five weary people symbolizing both the period and the spirit of the Milanese.
The latter is further symbolized in the awakening lion and the eagle that holds the emblem of the city in its feet.
Beneath the monument, in a hundred urns, lie the victims of the battle.
The piazza is huge, and roads meeting there are wide and not easy to cross; you need one eye on the traffic, one on the trams  and another on the tramlines to make sure they do not send you sprawling.
You might wish to choose one of the square's bars and have a coffee and rest before risking a crossing to the monument itself.
After, find Corso di Porta Vittoria and follow it westward to reach the frontage of the Palazzo di Giustizia.
What to say about this palazzo ?
The facts are that the Palace of justice was built between 1935 and 1940 in a style that is known in Italy as Littoria, but which we would term Fascist.
It is entirely faced with marble, over 30,000 square metres of it.
It is functional rather than decorative, but does hold some important modern artwork, sculptures by Arturo Martini and frescoes by Gino Severini and Carlo Carrà, the latter an artist whose work is also seen in the Villa Reale.
I am inclined to leave it at that.
On first sight I thought the building the ugliest in Milan, but my opinion changed a little after seeing the Via San Barnaba façade, which is less sense-slaughtering and even has some redeeming features.
Perhaps ‘one of the ugliest buildings in Milan’ might be more appropriate…
The church of San Pietro in Gessate
Opposite the palazzo is the beautifully tree-lined framed Romanesque façade of the church of San Pietro in Gessate.
Did they deliberately position the palazzo to make impolite comparisons easy?
The church is a much reworked building that began life in the sixteenth-century and is now having its interior restored to that period.
The work has brought to life a number of fine frescoes which were concealed beneath a thick layer of plaster.
The church is Romanesque and approached along a tree-clad path that makes a very pleasant change from the more normal city approach — straight off the road.
Inside there are three aisles and twelve side chapels.
In those on the right there is sixteenth-century work by Antonio Campi,Il Bergognone and Aurelio Luini.
On the left the frescoes in chapels two, four and six are attributed to the fine fifteenth-century artist Donato di Montorfano.
The real treasure, however, is in the chapel of Sant' Ambrogio where Ambrogio Grifo was buried in 1493.
The lid of his now-gone sepulchre remains, a marble piece with Grifo's carved effigy.
The lid, in red and white marble is attributed to Antonio Busti, known as Il Bambaia, who was born in 1483 and died in 1548.
Almost as good are the chapel frescoes, scenes from the life of Sant' Ambrogio by Bernardo Zenale and Bernardino Butinone.
When it was new the church was attached to a monastery, the cloisters of which can be still seen at the back (reached from Via Corridoni).
SANTA MARIA DELLA PASSIONE
Continuing along Via Corridoni you will reach Via Conservatorio to the left.
Take this to the huge church of Santa Maria della Passione, the largest church in Milan after the Duomo and renowned for the art treasures it holds.
It was founded by Daniele Birago who gave land for it and a monastery of Lateran Canons towards the end of the fifteenth-century.
The tomb of the founder can be seen beside the door into the sacristy.
Work on the church progressed slowly, after its founding — the superb cupola was built in 1530 and the naves in 1573, while the façade was added only in 1692.
The façade is squat and heavy — the architect deliberately lowered it to allow a frontal view of the octagonal tiborium that surmounts the cupola — but it is difficult not to admire the effort  that must have gone into it.
The tiborium itself is thought to be a masterpiece of Renaissance art, although it hardly seems to be in the same class as that on Santa Maria delle Grazie.
Those who visit the church in late spring and early summer will be entranced by the swifts who have set up home in the upper reaches of the building and wheel about the place, filling the area with their raucous but comforting squealing.
Inside, the church is the shape of the Latin cross, with a plethora of side chapels.
There are so many works of art in the church that it has been declared a museum and is included as such on the official list of Milanese museums.
Much of the fresco work is by Daniele Crespi, including the scenes from the Passion on the columns that support the nave and octagon.
Strangely, these scenes do not name the church as you might think; that honour goes to a fresco by an unknown sixteenth-century artist, the Madonna of the Passion, in the fifth chapel on the right.
In the chapel in the left transept is a Last Supper, the work of Gaudenzio Ferrari, while on the altar of the chapel in the right transept is a  
The church of Santa Maria della Passione
Deposition by Bernardino Luini.
The sacristy has fine frescoes by Ambrogio da Fossano (known as Il Bergognone) and his son Bernardino.
From the front of Santa Maria della Passione go west, following Via Passione to Via Visconti.
Go left to return to Piazza Verziere, exiting along Via Cavalotti.
Ahead now, and then right, is Corso Europa in which stands the interesting Casa Litta — not to be confused with the even more interesting Palazzo Litta.
The House of the Litta has a beautiful rococo doorway behind which is an even more beautiful Renaissance courtyard with porticoes supported on Doric columns.
When foundations for the house were being dug — the house was built for the Marquis Litta in the sixteenth-century — Roman mosaics were discovered.
A little to the west of Casa Litta is the church of San Vito al Pasquirolo, a church in a more than usually pretty Baroque style that once stood in meadow land, its position explaining the name —‘San Vito in the pasture’.
Today it stands less elegantly, surrounded by modern buildings which do their best to dwarf and ignore it.
Mass is celebrated here at midday, the church having been reconsecrated after a long deconsecration period.
Inside, the church has lost all its movable decoration, although the stucco work is interesting.
Note too the Roman remains around the outside, the church having been built on the side of Roman Milan's Hercules Baths, one of the last pagan works completed in the third-century before the city became Christian.
Those not inclined to make the detour to see the Casa Litta will content themselves with turning right earlier, into Via Durini.
Here, to the right, you will find the church of Santa Maria della Sanità, with its weird-looking façade.
It has long been held to look like a cello, but the elliptical window above the door looks like a beak to me, so that with the round windows above the upper façade looks nothing so much as a chick wearing a Napoleonic hat.
Further up the road stands the Palazzo Durini which, along with the Palazzo Annoni, represents the most beautiful example of a seventeenth-century private Milanese house.
The façade is wonderfully elegant, the Baroque dressing being set off by superb windows.
The palazzo is named after the rich merchant, Giova Battista Durini, for whom it was built.
Unfortunately the orientation of the palazzo means that it gets  very little sun to set it off; this together with the dark paint and stonework, means it looks rather sombre.
TO PIAZZA SAN BABILA
At the top of Via Durini go right along Via Borgogna.
To the right here is Via Cerva in which stands a restaurant named after one of Milan's ancient mortal enemies, Barbarossa.
It is a fine place in a delightful old palazzo .
It is incumbent upon you, should you choose to go there, at least to contemplate the idea of Risotto Barbarossa, or even the same gentleman's kidneys.
Opposite Via Cerva is Via Cino del Duca in which you will find Palazzo Parravicini and Palazzo Bolagnos.
The former is one of the best examples of early fourteenth-century architecture in Milan, even though it is a small house almost lost among the surrounding buildings.
It was built for the Parravicini family, a family of noble birth from Brianza and has a fine, if dirty, façade of red brick and elegantly simple windows.
Palazzo Bolagnos is almost as good, being a near-perfect example of a rococo house.
At the top of the street go left to reach Piazza San Babila and the church of the same name.
San Babila is set on the ruins of a fourth-century church, and that itself was built on the foundations of a pagan temple to the sun.
From across the square the Romanesque lines of the church are masked, not only by later work that war in the Baroque style, but also by the adjacent multi-floor modern buildings and the traffic lights, the latter set in such a position that no useful photograph can be taken that does not include them.
The frontal view also misses the octagonal tower, one of the church's better elements, although it does catch the tall, slender campanile.
It would be nice to find that the campanile is original Romanesque, but alas it is as modern as 1820, replacing the first that had long since collapsed.
Inside the church there is a plaque commemorating the baptism of Alessandro Manzoni on 8 August 1785, and a fine altar surround by Ludovico  Pogliahi , who was responsible for the central doors of the Duomo.
On the opposite side of the campanile, and at the front of the church, is a column surmounted by a lion.
The lion is a symbol of St Mark, but also of the Venetian empire, although whether either of these symbols is relevant here is not known with certainty.
Some say the lion was set up to celebrate a victory  over the Venetians — although that seems barely credible, a defeated, down-trodden beast being the more usual symbol for a defeated enemy — others that it simply marks the position of the old eastern gate, through which travellers to and from Venice would go.
It has also been pointed out that the ancient quarter of the city around the eastern gate took, as its own symbol, a black lion on a white background.
Piazza San Babila
ALONG CORSO VENEZIA
Going north along Corso Venezia you reach Palazzo Fontana-Silvestri standing almost opposite the entrance to the  Semanario Arcivescovile.
The palazzo is a very rare example of a private house from the time of the Sforzas, and is attributed to Bramante.
In its earliest history the building housed the guardian of the eastern gate, but it was taken over by the Fontana family and completely remodelled, a reshaping that was carried out with all the grace of Renaissance art.
The façade is  a delight, from the Tyrolian-like overhanging eaves down past the circular windows, the slender arched windows, the wrought iron balcony and even the odd chopped-off arches and remodelled square windows.
To find such a delight in the middle of a modern street makes any trip worthwhile.
Palazzo Fontana-Silvestri
Further north along Corso Venezia is Palazzo Serbelloni, an enormous building in Neo-Classical style created in 1793 for Duke Serbelloni by the enlarging of a seventeenth-century palazzo , part of which can still be seen — the brick section in Via San Damiano.
Napoleon Bonaparte, Metternich, Napoleon III and Vittorio Emanuele II all visited the house, and each must have been impressed by the colossal Ionic columns that hold up the façade and hem in the doorway.
The Italian author Parini also spent time at the house, as tutor to the family children.
BACK TO THE DUOMO
Our return to the Duomo is by way of Corso Vittorio Emanuele, a pedestrian-only street that is used as an outdoor art gallery, works by contemporary sculptors being erected at intervals along the length and changed regularly.
The effect of the works, all with a backdrop of the Duomo itself, is stunning.
Not so visually exciting, but of considerable interest from an historical point of view, is the statue of the Man of Stone at No. 13.
The statue was raised to the honour of Archbishop Adelmanno who died in 956.
Originally it stood in a small church in Via San Pietrò which has long since disappeared, and was christened the ‘Man of Stone’ when it was repositioned.
On the pedestal the chiselled inscription from Cicero reads, ‘he who judges his neighbour should be free from all defects himself.’
From the early nineteenth-century this inscription inspired the local wits and the statue was frequently used for posters commenting on local politics or politicians.
The posters were fixed at night and the culprits were never caught — or, more likely, never looked for by a police force who enjoyed the joke as much as the rest of the city.
One particularly good comment at the time, much appreciated by everyone — except the recipient I assume — was the card that read Arciduca 6 1 0 , translated as ‘Archduke VI, you (one) are nothing’.
The statue is late Roman, the head of (it is assumed) Archbishop Adelmanno having been added at a later stage in what was believed to have been tenth-century style.
Map — South from Duomo
SOUTH FROM PIAZZA DEL DUOMO
SANTA MARIA PRESSO SAN SATIRO
The church of Santa Maria presso (near) San Satiro is an awkward church for the visitor, lying between two roads in such a way that a detour along a busy shopping street is required to complete a visit.
Still, the busy street is home to one of the very few city-centre supermarkets (a grand title for a relatively small shop, but it does capture the flavour).
If you are parched and need a large bottle of something fizzy at a reasonable price as opposed to a small bottle at an extortionate price, Via Mazzini is the place to go.
Santa Maria is a quite beautiful church, and one with a fascinating list of unique features.
The first church on the site was built by Ansperto da Biassono, archbishop of Milan when the city was part of the Carolingian empire.
It was built in 876, and those ancient parts of the church that remain are among the few fragments from that time that still exist, not only in Milan, but also in Lombardy.
The archbishop dedicated the church to San Satiro, the brother of Sant' Ambrogio.
Of the earliest church the major remaining section is an apse in the chapel of the Pietà, although most of the chapel is from the rebuilding by Bramante in the 1400s.
The bell tower dates from the eleventh-century and is the oldest in the Lombardy Romanesque style that still exists.
The Bramante building — it was the architect's first work in Milan — is thought to be from the finest period of the Lombardy Renaissance and is a masterpiece of space and depth, the more so because of Bramante's superb use of a perspective fresco beyond the High Altar.
From the entrance to the church the fresco makes the flat wall behind the altar look like an apse, and only when the wall is approached is the illusion of curvature broken.
Look too for the cupola and arched ceilings that marry the high decoration of Catholic churches with an excellent sense of style.
From the outside it is difficult to know whether to curse Bramante's decision to demolish the original church — apart from the internal apse structure and the (later) campanile,— or to marvel at the soaring lines.
The main, and best, façade, the one seen from Via Torino from where the church entrance is reached, was started by an earlier architect, but in an assumed battle between the early man and Bramante the latter won the day, completing the work seen today.
Interior of the church of Santa Maria presso San Satiro
The reason for the odd name for the church, St Mary near St Satiro, is because of an ancient fresco of the Madonna and Child that stood over an external altar of the earliest (San Satiro) church.
This fresco is mirrored by another that can be seen from Via Falcone at the back of the church.
The story is told that on 25 March 1242 a ‘man of vile condition called Massaccio’ was walking in Via Falcone having, it is said, just lost all of his latest ill-gotten gains —‘vile condition’is a euphemism for criminal — at a local gaming house.
One version of the story has Massaccio losing all of his clothes as well, which not only adds a new possibility to the origin of the saying ‘to lose your shirt’, but also a certain piquancy to the vision of the gambler outside the church.
Massaccio was aggravated.
Indeed, he is said to have been beside himself with rage and looking to pick a violent quarrel with anyone who happened along.
No one did, so Massaccio attacked the fresco, stabbing at the neck of the Child Jesus.
The ‘wound’ in the painting spurted blood all over the attacker.
This miraculous event caused Massaccio immediately to repent his past life, and he became a Benedictine monk, dying at a great age with the reputation of having led a saintly life in his chosen monastery.
Not surprisingly, the Milanese were impressed by the miracle and over the years their offerings to the Madonna amounted to enough money to build a new church, the one that Bramante designed.
The new church, although it incorporated the old  church of San Satiro, was named for the Madonna, which explains why the new church is renown as Santa Maria presso San Satiro, the church of St Mary near St Satiro.
Piazza  Guiseppe Missori
Having viewed the replacement external fresco and the church — although only through a haze of overhead tram wires — from the little square where Via Mazzini crosses Via Falcone and several other minor roads, go inside and see the real one which stands above the main altar, beneath Bramante's masterly pseudo-apse.
A visit should also include the Chapel of the Pietà, occasionally known as the chapel of San Satiro, where there is a superb Deposition made up of terracotta figures by the artist Agostino De Fondutis.
De Fondutis was also responsible for the brick frieze with cherubs in the sacristy.
PIAZZAS GIUSEPPE MISSORI AND SANT' ALESSANDRO
If a look at the Via Falcone end of the church is late in your visit, continue your walk by going south down the road, away from the church, to reach Via Unione.
There go right to see the Palazzo Erba-Odescalchi, a sumptuous palazzo built by the Cusani family in the early 1500s, although it takes its name from a later Archbishop who used it as his palace in the eighteenth-century.
The style is difficult to place, and is perhaps best describes as exuberant.
Now go ahead to reach Piazza Giuseppe Missori, a square dominated less by the buildings, which are not well enough ordered to impose any discipline on the place, than by the statue of General Missori himself.
He has been seated on his horse since 1916, when he was installed, contemplating a chaos he would never have allowed from his soldiers.
An alternative route to reach the square is to go right along Via Unione, then first left into Via Arcimboldi and left again into Via Lupetta to reach Piazza Sant' Alessandro.
just as you reach the square you will pass, to your left, the Scuole Arcimbolde, a huge building adjacent to the church of Sant' Alessandro.
This school was built in 1609 and run by the Barnabites who were also responsible for the church.
Giuseppe Parini, famous throughout Italy, but not elsewhere, was a pupil of the school; he was born near Lake Pusiano to the north of the city.
It would appear from records at the school that Parini was not an inspired scholar.
The fine, Baroque-domed church after which the square is named was built in 1602 on the site of an earlier ninth-century  temple.
The façade is on two levels the lower one with Corinthian columns in a contrasting colour that adds to the general attractiveness.
The façade is flanked by symmetric towers.
Inside there is a black marble stone with an inscription stating that entombed below are the remains of Bernabo Visconti transferred from a neighbouring church which was demolished.
Regina della Scala, who built the church that gave the name to La Scala and was the wife of Bernabo, is also buried here.
Elsewhere, the church has some excellent frescoes, especially the Life of the Saint, and the work of such artists as Daniele Crespi and Camillo Procaccini.
On the opposite side of the piazza from the church, beyond the row of elegant short pillars and the less fetching white domes erected to stop the Milanese from parking on the pavements, is Palazzo Trivulzio, a sixteenth-century building that has been remodelled and is in need of a little loving care.
The son of the Marquis after whom the palazzo is named was the founder of the library that bears the family name — the Biblioteca Trivulziana — and is now housed in the Sforza Castle.
When the collection was still in the palazzo (it was moved about 60 years ago) it was the most important private library in Milan.
It was also one of the biggest, with over 70,000 books as well as a large collection of manuscripts and some ancient parchments.
In Piazza Missori, whichever route you have taken to reach it, are the ruins of San Giovanni in Conca, whose repositioned façade you have seen elsewhere (see page 120).
The remains are of the apse and crypt of the historically well-known Romanesque Lombard church, and they stand incongruously between more modern structures.
The church was demolished towards the end of the last century when the new road was laid down, and only the rescued façade was wholly retained.
The crypt that remains here is thought to be the best-preserved Romanesque crypt in Lombardy and contains remains from paleo-Christian times through to the Renaissance.
The vault is held up by ten small columns.
PIAZZA SANT' EUFEMIA
Leave Piazza Missori along Corso di Porta Romana, heading back towards San Nazaro, but first stopping to admire Palazzo Annoni, to the left just before Via Velasca is reached.
This house and Palazzo Durini (see page 126) are believed to be the first two town houses to have been built in the city after the population had been decimated by plague in  1630, when, it was thought, as many as 70,000 Milanese died.
The palazzo therefore represents the height of architectural fashion for the mid-seventeenth-century, and was at the centre of the post-plague reawakening of city life.
After the palazzo take the next road to the right, Via Rugabella, and follow this to the Corso Italia.
Go left to reach the small square of Piazza Sant' Eufemia, where across a small lawn that is longer than it is wide and bordered by tall conifers, you will see the church that gives the piazza its name.
The church is in Romanesque style, but in this case it is mock-Romanesque, completion being many years after the style had ceased to be used.
Although the chalk and brickwork is striking, the over-elaborate design is indicative of a later period of construction.
Internally, Sant' Eufemia is pleasant rather than exciting, although the large altar piece, by Marco d'Oggiono, a follower of Leonardo and one of the supporters of his monument in the Piazza della Scala, is excellent.
Across from Sant' Eufemia is the more sombre church of San Paolo Converso, set behind a seventeenth-century column — sometimes named after San Senatore, sometimes after Sant' Eufemia — topped by the saint himself.
The church war built in mid-fifteenth-century as a convent church for a now long-gone convent.
San Paolo was deconsecrated many years ago, and its huge interior is now used as an art gallery.
Some of the external marble work is superb, although the overall effect is a little too sombre for easy viewing.
SAN CALIMERO CHURCH
Take Via Sant' Eufemia up the side of the church of Sant' Eufemia, as the view of the rear end of the church is very good.
Turn right into Via San Senatore and go left when this ends at Via Santa Sofia.
On the right side of this road is Santa Maria della Visitazione, the church of St Mary of the Visitation.
The original church here was taken over as a convent church when San Carlo Borromeo set up the convent for girls who had been orphaned by the plague.
The convent was in the protection of St Sophia and the church was dedicated to her, but changed its dedication when the building was taken over by the nuns of the Salesiane della Visitazione order.
In time the nuns remodelled the church so that it is now Neo-Classical.
The façade is dominated by a statue of the Virgin, but the best feature is the courtyard, still flanked by  sections of the original convent.
The interior of the church is disappointing.
The fresco above the doorway of the church of San Calimero
Beyond the church go right into Via San Calimero to reach a church that is far less disappointing.
The first church here is believed to have been built in the fifth-century on the site of a pagan temple to Apollo.
Some of the later remodelling work was done by Francesco Maria Richini, although what we now see is in Romanesque style, even though it post-dates the period by many years.
The pinnacles on the façade top are especially good.
Although the façade is not true Romanesque, the campanile most certainly is, as is the doorway of the canonica (the best translation is ‘rectory’, although in Italian the house of a priest is actually called the presbytery).
The doorway is a very rare specimen, its arch a double layer of brick separated by a thin layer of Angera stone.
The only other example of such a doorway in Milan is on the Palazzo Radice-Fossati.
From the courtyard of the rectory to the right are fragments of old tombstones, some of Roman origin which suggest a one-time use of the area as a cemetery.
The interior of the church — reached by going through an ornate entrance archway that seems to be competing with the presbytery doorway for the eye of the visitor — has some good frescoes, particularly the Crucifixion with the Virgin and St John the Baptist by Giovan Battista Crespi, and a canvas study of the Nativity by Marco d'Oggiono.
To the right of the altar is the ancient well-head into which, according to tradition, San Calimero was thrown by pagan priests after having been stoned.
TWO LESSER-KNOWN CHURCHES
Return to Corso di Porta Romana by going back up Via San Calimero, and go right to see two churches that are little visited.
Go right into Corso di Porta Vigentina to visit Santa Maria del Paradiso, the church of St Mary of Paradise.
The church took its name from that of an older church a little way off that was demolished to make way for the ramparts of the Porta Romana in 1532.
The ‘new’ church was built in 1482.
Along with the name came the Servite Fathers who had officiated at the old church.
Under Napoleon these fathers were disbanded and the church came under the governorship of the more important building to San Calimero.
The façade is late Renaissance, with friezes and status in fine style.
Note that there is no campanile — very unusual.
There was  one, but the Austrians had it reduced in size because they believed that it might be used as an observation tower by the recalcitrant Milanese.
Strangely, it was later used for the first city telegraph!
Later again, it was demolished altogether.
A pinnacle on the facade of the church of San Calimero
Inside the church, fixed in front of the presbytery, there is a circular stone with a hole at its centre.
On 13 March each year a wooden cross is placed in the hole.
The ceremony is said to derive from the day in the year 52 when San Barnaba did the same thing outside the walls of Milan to symbolize the city's conversion to Christianity.
Back on Corso di Porta Romana continue eastward to reach the second church, San Pietro e Paolo dei Pellegrini, the church of Saints Peter and Paul of the pilgrims.
The church gets its name from the adjacent hospice where pilgrims on their way to or from Rome once stayed.
The hospice was closed in 1770 and pulled down.
The church is noticeable for its dowdy appearance, the barely visible fresco of St Peter in the circle above the door and its general air of being run down.
At one time there were fine frescoes inside by pupils of Giotto, but even these have gone.
So why bother to come?
There are two reasons: firstly, in the summer of 1990 major work started on the church which could restore it to something like its original form; this would make it interesting, because pilgrim churches are rare.
Secondly, its position, hard up against a modern building, and beside and across from many more, demands attention.
The little church has suffered from the rigours of time and town planning, normally a lethal combination, and survived.
For that it deserves a little of everyone's time.
TWIN CHURCHES
To continue, take Via dei Pelligrini, the Pilgrim's Road, or, better still, continue along Corso di Porta Romana to Piazzale Medaglie d'Ora where the old arch of the Porta Romana itself stands.
The arch of Porta Romana ai Bastioni, to give it its full title, was built in 1598 to commemorate Margherita of Austria leaving the city on her way to marry Philip III of Spain, although the ramparts into which it was fitted had been erected half a century before.
It is a triple arch of somewhat sombre appearance despite the elegant decoration of friezes and figures.
Nevertheless it is widely believed to be the finest of all the remaining gates of the Spanish walls.
To continue your journey, follow the line of the old bulwarks, taking Viale Flippetti, and then Viale Beatrice d'Este and Viale Gian Galeazzo beyond, westward (right) along the old line.
This route would lead to the Porta Ticinese in Piazza XXIV Maggio, the Square of 24 May, but deflect at Corso Italia, and follow that road back into the city to visit the twin churches of San Celso and Santa Maria dei Miracoli.
The church of San Celso, now standing somewhat forlornly beside the bigger, more illustrious church, has the longer history.
On this site Sant' Ambrogio built a basilica in the fourth-century, but that early church was replaced in the tenth-century by the Milanese Archbishop Landolfo II.
Landolfo's new church had a Benedictine monastery attached to it and a hospice opposite for orphans, the little Children of San Celso.
A Baroque façade was added in the seventeenth-century but much of this was lost when it was suggested that it was shadowing the more important church of Santa Maria beside it.
The new pseudo-Romanesque façade maintained only the doorway.
The beautiful  campaniole , behind and to the right, is real Romanesque.
Through the fifteenth-century wooden door there is little to detain the visitor, just a few tantalizing traces of eleventh-century frescoes.
The church beside San Celso is, technically a shrine,Il  Sanctuario  di Santa Maria dei Miracoli presso San Celso .
At the end of the fourth-century a search organized by Sant' Ambrogio discovered the remains of the martyrs San Nazaro and San Celso in this part of the city.
Sant' Ambrogio transferred the remains of San Nazaro to the basilica that now bears his name, raising a second basilica here for the remains of San Celso; that basilica was replaced by a church.
On an outside wall of this was painted a Madonna and Child.
Some versions of the miracle story actually attribute the fresco to Sant' Ambrogio himself, although there is little hard evidence for the saint having been an artist.
Over the centuries this painting acquired a reputation for being miraculous, although in an ill-defined way, so that in 1413 Duke Filippo Maria Visconti decided to build a church to house the work and shelter it from the weather.
In this new church, on 30 December 1485, while plague was sweeping through the city, a crowd gathered at the church to ask help of the Madonna.
As  they watched the image of the Madonna moved, making signs of comfort and hope.
From that day the plague began to abate, and to show its gratitude the city decided to build a new church.
Money poured in and work began in 1493 although it was to be a century before the work was completed; this timescale explains the stylistic variation of the church, with elements of both Renaissance and Baroque architecture.
In front of the church is a four-sided courtyard, porticoed in red brick on three sides and with the façade on the fourth.
The façade is beautiful, in white marble with height and elegance.
Some might accuse it of looking like a wedding cake, but I would suggest it has just the right amount of decoration.
There are four tiers, with wings over the courtyard porticoes that are crowned by obelisks.
At the top the Virgin is flanked by angels.
On the first tier are the figures of Adam and Eve, while on the second a fine relief of Christ's birth is flanked by figures of the Annunciation, the presentation at the Temple and the Magi.
On the third tier are Jeremiah and Ezekiel.
Inside there is more marble,— the marbled floor is very good — but it is for its art that the interior is famous.
The paintings are virtually priceless, covering three centuries of Lombard devotional work up to the start of the Neo-Classical period, and the  decorative work is exquisite.
The paintings include works by both Camillo and Giulio Cesare Procaccini, by Il  Bergagnone and Annibale Ferrari.
The painting of the Virgin blessing Christ before the Passion by Urbino was once popular with newly-wedded couples who knelt before it and asked for a blessing on their marriage.
Facade of the church of Santa Maria dei Miracoli
Detail of facade of the church of Santa Maria dei Miracoli
The third chapel on the right is called the Crucifixion chapel because it contains a wooden crucifix carried in procession by San Carlo Borromeo during the time of the plague of 1576.
At the head of the left transept is a very early Christian sarcophagus which held the remains of San Celso until, in 1935, they were transferred to the Crucifixion chapel.
On the sarcophagus are carved scenes from the old and New Testaments.
In the second chapel of the left aisle is another miraculous painting, a fourteenth-century fresco of the Madonna with Child called the Madonna of the Tears because it was seen to cry on 13 July in 1620, perhaps as an omen of the plague.
The original miraculous Madonna of the name is to the left of the high altar, protected beneath finely-worked silver slabs.
It, too, is a shrine for newly-weds.
The church is also famous for its sculpture, both statues and the presbytery altar with its rare marbles and gold-faced bronzes.
The choir stalls beyond are excellent.
Finally, in the treasury of the sanctuary is the Cross of Chiaravalle, a processional cross from the Abbey of Chiaravalle given to the church in 1296 by Ottone Visconti, Archbishop of Milan.
The cross is a masterpiece of red jasper, gold, gilded silver and jewels and dates from the eleventh or twelfth-centuries.
It is attributed to Benvenuto Cellini.
Sadly, it is rarely on public display.
THE DARSENA
Continuing along the line of the old ramparts you arrive beside the huge atrium in the Piazza XXIV Maggio.
This huge monumental arch was erected in the early years of the nineteenth century to celebrate the victories of Napoleon, although it was swiftly re-dedicated to Peace when the Austrians returned.
This story will seem strangely familiar when we reach the Arch of Peace!
The frieze at the top is inscribed Paci Populorum Sospitae , To the people's liberty and peace.
The cost of the arch was met by Milanese nobles.
West of the atrium is a large expanse of water popularly known as the port of Milan.
The pool   — more correctly known as the Darsena — was dug at the start of the seventeenth-century, during the time of the Spanish domination of the city, and was connected to the twelfth-century canal which, by excavated waterway and river, connected the city with Lake Maggiore.
For about six hundred years the port,(or the earlier, less grand version, known as the Laghetto di Sant' Eustorgio , the little lake of Sant' Eustorgio, in roughly the same spot) was used to deliver marble for the Duomo from the Visconti quarries at Candoglia in the Val d'Ossola which ends at Lake Maggiore.
By river and canal the stone was brought to the port, from where it was hauled the short distance to the Duomo.
Today the pool is used as a backdrop for fairs, with tents between the water's edge and the Viale Gabriele d'Annuzio, and floating rafts with bands.
On the other side, along Viale Gorizia, there is a morning market.
If you have the time the line 2 (Green line) metro to Porta Genova in the early morning particularly if your trip to Milan is in the winter, and walk the short distance to the Darsena.
As the sun comes up, a light mist rises from the water, softening the focus on the buildings in Viale Gabriele d'Annunzio and shrouding the heavy arch of the atrium.
It is a romantic vision: Milan can never be Venice, but at such times it can also never be anything but Italian.
Atrium, Piazzale XXIV Maggio
Winter market, near the Darsena
SAN VICENZO IN PRATO
From the northwestern end of the Darsena it is a short step — cross Piazzale Antonio Cantore and go right into Via Daniele Crespi, then left into Via Sesto and right  into Via San Calcero — to the church of San Vicenzo in Prato.
June water fair on the Darsena
In his writings Sant' Ambrogio occasionally made reference to the Basilica Vetus, a very early (perhaps the earliest) Christian church in Milan.
Some scholars have claimed that the fact that Ambrose did not give an exact site for the church — indeed, it seems he was actually careful not to — means that it was not a real church at all, merely a metaphor.
Nevertheless, archaeologists and historians have looked for Vetus for years.
Many believe that it lies under the church of San Vincenzo in Prato, even though there is no historical record of the church before the year 806.
San Vincenzo in Prato is the only Milanese example of a Pre-Romanesque church which preserves the early Christian plan of Roman basilicas.
Despite this claim to fame the church has been subjected to several indignities, having been deconsecrated and used as a barracks and a chemical store before being reopened for worship in 1899.
Externally, the church is a simple and dignified brick structure, its lack of decoration suggesting a very early constructional date.
Inside, the roof is of an equally early design.
The campanile, and the octagonal baptistery to the left of the church are modern.
Basilica of Sant' Eustorgio
External pulpit, Basilica of Sant' Eustorgio