

THE STROUD VALLEYS
Lower Frome Valley
The area between the Severn and Stroud is perhaps one of the more interesting as far as Gloucestershire's industrial heritage is concerned.
From the Severn and moving inland towards Stroud there are constant reminders of the industries that changed the social and economic outlook of the area.
The old corn mill at Framilode presents something of a mystery.
Many fail to realise that, due to obvious lack of water for motive power, it was ever a working mill.
Despite this apparent drawback, the mill, which is situated on the banks of the River Severn, had one major advantage: that of cheap and easy transport by water.
It is perhaps ironic that, with such a volume of water just a few yards from the doors, it had to use steam.
Many other rural mills of similar size went out of business in the face of competition from the larger steam-powered urban mills, but Lower Framilode Mill managed to survive up to the mid 1940s.
Framilode itself consists of two hamlets.
Upper Framilode is by far the larger and was originally the location of the Purnells' extensive iron and tinplate works, of which few traces remain, while Lower Framilode consists of just a few cottages, the mill and the Darell Arms.
The latter was once connected with the old ferry that crossed the Severn at this point.
Close to the mill stands what became the mill house, although this pre-dates the actual mill by at least a century and a half.
The brick built and slated roof mill was built around 1840–41, in what must have formed part of the garden, and was obviously steam-powered from that date.
Unfortunately, there seem to be no recorded details of the type of steam engine used.
The mill is best remembered as Ayliffe's Mill, the name of the family associated with it throughout its working life, up to the Second World War.
During the 1860s, it was Thomas Ayliffe, Jasper having replaced him by 1889.
By the First World War it was C.T.
‘Tom’ Ayliffe, who was to be the last miller.
For such a comparatively remote spot, a fairly substantial business was carried out, Tom Ayliffe running several boats in connection with the milling business.
His best remembered boat, the trow Irene , was mainly used for carrying grain from Avonmouth and Sharpness, unloaded onto a small tramway running from a jetty, that formerly stood adjacent to the concrete pier from which the ferry operated.
The tramway carried sacks of grain directly to the mill's main entrance.
Tom Ayliffe apparently operated another trow, used to transport Forest of Dean coal for the steam engine, from Bullo Pill.
In addition to their milling activities, the Ayliffes also operated cider-making equipment, their portable unit moving annually around local farms.
Today, the main mill building is still in a good state of repair, although the present owners found it necessary to demolish the engine house.
The protracted effects of steam, heat and natural decay had weakened the structure to such an extent that it was beyond saving.
The steam engine and boiler were sold for scrap shortly after the mill ceased working, and the tall brick chimney, so long a distinctive landmark of the area, demolished some time later.
Some of the mill's equipment still survives in situ , including a pair of stones.
At least one other pair went to the White family at Fromebridge Mill.
Although its milling days are long over, the mill now forms a useful storage building as well as housing a small electronics workshop, a far cry from the days of steam and dust featured throughout its century of use.
Ayliffe's Mill is an interesting reminder that not all of the small rural corn mills perished early in the century.
In this case it was a combination of steam power and the proximity of the River Severn that allowed it to prosper to such a comparatively late date.
Apart from the mills at Framilode, the nearest water powered site was the long-demolished Whitminster Mill.
Upstream from here stands Fromebridge Mill .
Fromebridge can claim a history as long and as complex as any in the area.
Like many others, it was first recorded in the Domesday survey as a corn mill, but as virtually all mills were corn mills, this is not unusual.
The mill was leased in 1350 to Roger le Walker and it is likely the mill had been partially converted for fulling.
A later reference of 1498 describes Fromebridge as corn, malt and fulling mills.
By 1632, its use for fulling was over, as three corn mills were sold by John Arundell to Urian Wise.
In 1713 the site comprised four corn mills under the control of Stephen Jenner.
The comparatively peaceful existence of Fromebridge was but a few short years from being shattered, for in 1760 the mill came into the hands of Joseph Fairthorne and his industrious partners, William and John Purnell.
During the following years, the mill lost its agricultural links and became a substantial iron and wire works.
Known as the Fromebridge Company, it became part of the Purnell empire which stretched from Dursley, where John Purnell owned an iron works, across the Severn to Ayleford in the Forest of Dean where, in 1765, his son William was running another wire works leased from his father.
By 1767, Fairthorne and the Purnells also worked Framilode mills near the out-fall of the Frome into the Severn.
This comprised quite a large industrial site and in later years became an important iron and tinplate rolling works.
Samuel Rudder's description of Fromebridge mills in 1779 makes it clear that this was a busy and important place.
He speaks of one of the ‘largest and compleatest works in the kingdom for making iron and steel wire’, much of which found its way around the county in the form of ‘cards’ for the woollen industry.
A good deal of it probably went via Dursley where the manufacture of cards was an important trade.
It seems probable that supplies of wire also came from the long demolished Cambridge wire works a few miles away on the River Cam, close to the old road to Dursley.
In addition to carding wire, wire was supplied for fish hooks for the Newfoundland fishery ‘to a very considerable amount annually’.
He goes on to mention that there was also a ‘brass-work lately erected’.
This probably refers to the manufacture of brass wire for which Fromebridge was noted by the mid-1770s.
Joseph Fairthorne was described as a ‘brazier’.
Supplies of brass almost certainly came from the Bristol Brass Company and, as Fromebridge is situated on what was the main turnpike road to Bristol, this makes sense.
Although there is little documentary evidence, it has been suggested that the mill, in conjunction with those at Cambridge and Moreton Valance, could have been used for the production of brass pins.
These two mills were also on the direct route to Bristol and within a few miles of Fromebridge.
At the time, it was fairly common practice for pins to be fashioned at the main mill and sent to smaller mills for finishing.
It was during the late 1770s that the long proposed Stroudwater canal became a reality and this signalled the start of a long war of words between the Company of Proprietors and the Purnells.
For some years, the Purnells had been using the River Frome, the lower stretch of which had previously been dredged and cleared by Richard Owen Cambridge of Whitminster, to move coal and iron to and from the Severn to their mills at Framilode and Fromebridge.
The construction of the Stroudwater Canal would have stopped this practice (which cost them nothing!) and forced them to pay tolls on any goods transported.
The Purnells and their supporters owned land on the proposed route of the canal and were able to delay the construction, as well as ultimately extract the highest price paid for any of the land between the Severn and Stroud.
Under the Purnells' control, this was a busy and a profitable time in the history of Fromebridge; however, around the beginning of the l9th century, the company ran into problems.
Death and financial difficulties finally finished off the business around 1809.
Eventually the mills were mortgaged to John Hicks of Berkley when they comprised rolling, tilting and block mills, as well as the adjacent wire works.
Some time after Hicks took over, the manufacture of nails was noted.
This presumably involved the slitting of rolled plates into bars, these being converted into nail-rods.
The Purnell family still retained an interest in the Framilode site, but by 1841 this too had closed and the mill demolished.
The mill was largely rebuilt in the early 19th century, reverting by the mid-1850s to its original purpose, that of corn milling.
Then the mill acted as something of a milling centre, grinding corn and animal feed for surrounding parishes that lacked milling capabilities or, like Eastington, whose mills had long been turned over to the woollen trade.
Over the years various extensions were built, one of these housing cider-making equipment.
Large, rotting cider casks in a derelict part of the mill bear silent witness to this now forgotten trade.
Much of the cider produced was for local consumption, with farmers bringing in their cartloads of apples for processing.
Another small extension contains a small forge and workshop, where the millwright carried out repairs.
Since the 1880s the mill has been worked by the White family, who still run it today.
It is still at work, producing animal feed and, unlike many others, continues to make use of water power.
A turbine, driving through bevel gears, has replaced one of the pair of iron breast shot wheels that formerly provided the power.
The turbine now drives mixers, crushers and elevators, via a mixture of iron and iron/applewood gears.
Numerous old gears are still in situ.
The main block of the mill is practically empty but the older part now houses grain storage bins.
Part of the wall is constructed from slag blocks, a testimony to the days when Fromebridge rang to the sound of tilt-hammers and roared with the noise of forges — unlike now, a relative peace having once again returned to this lovely and fascinating mill.
Moving upstream towards Eastington is Millend Mill .
This is a very old mill site which has, for much of its life, been associated with the manufacture of woollen cloth.
Indeed, a large portion of its early working life was connected with one family, the Clutterbucks who, like many other notable families of clothiers, were of Flemish descent.
The earliest reference known, that of the Domesday survey, mentions a mill belonging to Alkerton Manor.
There is no definite reference to the site but later notes locate a mill at, or certainly near, the present one.
Little is known of this period, but the mill had become the property of Leonard Stanley Priory by 1456.
The Millend area formed a detached part of Leonard Stanley up to the 19th century.
During the first half of the 16th century, the mill passed through a number of hands before being sold by John Sandford to the Clutterbuck family, who owned and worked it until fairly late in the 18th century.
By 1785 the owner was William Fryer and that year he leased the mill for 21 years to the partnership of Henry Hicks and Edward Sheppard who, in years to come, were to found one of the county's largest cloth mills in Uley.
The next few decades were to be a period of accelerating changes for the mills of the area as Hicks, who in 1806 became Lord of the Manor, systematically extended his empire.
In 1799 he bought Churchend Mill , that stood close by on another branch of the Frome, and rebuilt it.
A few years later Millend too was rebuilt and by 1811 he had built yet another mill, Meadow Mill, downstream from Churchend.
During the period 1800–1830 the company was known as Hicks and Sons.
Although water power was still used in all three mills, supply was sometimes marginal and, despite cutting a new channel at Churchend, before long Hicks had installed steam engines in all three.
These were times of change and Keys in his History of Eastington speaks of Hicks as the man ‘whose water wheels and steam engines shut down many of the cottage looms that had made wealthy many of the Clutterbuck family’.
With the arrival of the 1830s, Henry Hicks stepped into the background for, by 1833, Charles Hooper was managing all three mills for Hicks Brothers.
Three years later Hicks was dead and in the same year his eldest son, John Phillimore Hicks also died.
In 1851 Hoopers of Eastington were noted for the fine display of their products at the great Exhibition.
They were also well known for cricketing flannels and white doeskins, as well as more usual products.
Hooper continued to run the business until his death in 1869 following which his son, Charles Henry, took over.
Between then and 1872 Millend was advertised for sale by auction on several occasions.
The sale particulars included, as well as the mill itself, a comprehensive list of machinery and equipment, outbuildings and fourteen workers' cottages.
There were apparently no immediate takers as for some years Charles continued to run Eastington's three mills, but now in conjunction with Beards and Bonds Mills , just outside the parish.
Under his control, each mill became a specialist centre for separate parts of the cloth manufacturing process, Millend used mainly for fulling, bleaching and drying.
At some point, the mill eventually passed to George Ford and was converted into a substantial flour mill.
Both steam and water power were available (via two water wheels) and used to drive eight pairs of French stones.
Part of the site also appears to have been turned over to saw milling, as it was possible to drive either saws or lathes and machinery from the wheels.
In 1887, the converted mill was again offered for sale.
The late 19th century was a busy time for, despite numerous bankruptcies in other clothing districts, Eastington's mills were working at full capacity.
The writing was on the wall, however, and the fateful day eventually arrived in 1906, when the last of the Eastington mills finally closed, putting large numbers out of work and ending a long history of cloth making in the parish.
The name of Hooper was not forgotten, for the company carried on until 1934, based in Bonds Mill alone.
Millend stood idle for about eight years until it eventually became the home of The Mechanical Malting Company, later The Automatic Malting Co, who remained there until 1931.
The mill became known as Millend Maltings and for its malted biscuits; it was gutted by fire.
Local people can still recall the baleful glow in the night as the mill blazed.
Despite considerable damage, it was repaired and after another period of idleness, worked as a roller corn mill in 1939 under the control of F.C.
Martin & Sons, who also operated in Tewkesbury.
Since then, many of the windows and doors have been blocked with an unsightly assortment of bricks, and the mill relegated to the storage of such diverse commodities as plastics and antiques.
A number of smaller extensions have also been demolished.
The original stone-built block still survives, although much of it is rapidly decaying.
The later brick-built portion, to the front of the mill, is in better condition.
The wings to the rear are much worse, with crumbling bricks and flaking rendering.
As with many of the village cottages, some of the bricks probably originated from the brickworks of Frampton, notorious for their variable quality.
In general, the mill is in a poor state of repair.
In 1984 part of the engine house walls and roof collapsed, the mortar probably weakened from the prolonged effects of heat and steam.
Similar occurrences have been recorded at other mills.
At the same time, the height of the elegant brick-built chimney was greatly reduced.
The row of millworkers' cottages close by had fared even worse.
These were gutted and crumbling shells and almost certainly faced demolition.
Remarkably, they were saved at the last moment and rebuilt, now forming a group of pleasant dwellings.
Although still used for storage, the mill is slowly deteriorating and largely silent, long since stripped of its fulling stocks, its Boulton and Watt steam engine and water wheels.
The present owners continue to do their best to maintain it, although it is clearly no easy matter.
The mill sits forlornly, at the foot of Millend Lane, like some slumbering giant waiting for a call, a call that will undoubtedly never come.
Further upstream, other mills have fared somewhat better.
One such example is Oil Mill .
This lies on a branch of the Frome, sandwiched between Ebley and Kings Stanley.
Although much less impressive in its architecture and much shorter in its working life, Oil Mill, nonetheless, has had an interesting and varied career.
It was built originally in 1721 by a Stroud textile dealer, William Adderly, with the intention of producing rape and linseed oil.
The mill's name clearly originates from the early 1720s.
For reasons unknown, Adderly ceased production and put the mill up for sale.
It was advertised as ‘adaptable for fulling’.
The next recorded owners were the Rimmington family under whose control Oil Mill was converted to fulling.
In 1764 it housed four fulling stocks and two gig mills.
Later the mill was leased to three partners whose cloth-making business went bankrupt in 1786.
In 1791, Samuel Rimmington sold it to James Lewis, who ran it as a cloth mill, later joined by his sons.
They carried on after their father's death in 1826.
The first half of the 19th century saw many changes in the trade with mills rebuilt and workforces reorganised as the ‘factory system’ was adopted.
Weavers, spinners and other allied workers were brought from their cottages to work in much-modified or newly built mills.
If the owner had sufficient capital to adapt to the new methods, he did so.
Those who did not either put their mills to other uses or left the trade.
Oil Mill was perhaps one of the under-capitalised mills for it still relied entirely on outdoor weavers.
Perhaps not surprisingly, by 1840 the cloth production ceased and the mill was converted to corn.
During this new phase it was worked in conjunction with a number of other Stroud mills, including Stratford Mills, under the control of John Biddle, one of the largest millers in the county.
His volume of business was such that he had his own warehouse, built during the 1830s, in Gloucester docks.
Following the opening of the Gloucester-Berkely canal in 1827, large amounts of grain were transhipped at Gloucester and some of it sent via the Stroudwater Canal to his mills in the Stroud area.
The volume carried increased even more following the repeal of the Corn Laws in 1846.
At the time, power for Oil Mill was provided by a pair of water wheels, generating between them around 50 hp.
Various improvements and realignments to the river had been made to aid the flow to the mill, but by the mid-1880s, steam power was also in use.
Oil Mill was particularly well placed for transport, for it had easy access to the road, canal and railway, a special branch line running from the latter across a substantial iron bridge to the rear of the mill, allowing direct loading and unloading.
In later years, many of the rural and semi-rural mills went out of business as a result of competition from the large steam-powered mills built in and around Gloucester Docks.
Oil Mill, perhaps because of its connections with John Biddle, survived.
In 1892 it was offered for sale, as having two water wheels and two steam engines, driving eight pairs of stones.
Although small by comparison with the dock's mills, it was clearly a fairly sizeable concern at a time when many rural mills often had only two pairs.
In 1909 an abortive attempt was made, by the present owner's grandfather, to produce hydroelectric power.
To the rear of the main block, adjacent to the old railway bridge, is a wide stone arch which was part of the installation.
Technical problems apparently robbed the project of success.
It might have given him some small comfort to know that, 75 years later, hydro-electric power was successfully produced a few miles away at Coaley Mill.
Today, Oil Mill is still at work grinding corn, much of the original structure still surviving.
Not surprisingly, power is no longer supplied by steam engines or water wheels, the latter having been removed for scrap in 1956.
The mill still manages to retain an air of tranquillity about it and, despite its continuing commercial use, the area around the mill plays host to many wild birds and animals.
It somehow seems a fitting partnership.
This particular stretch of the Frome valley, between Stroud and Stonehouse, also houses two of the finest monuments to the industrial revolution in Gloucestershire.
These are the grandiose stone-built mill at Ebley and the equally impressive brick-built Stanley Mill .
Like many other mills connected with the woollen industry, their history is inextricably linked with that of the families of Flemish weavers who, following religious persecution, fled to England during the 15th and 16th centuries.
A number of these families, such as the Haigs and Prouts, settled in the Stroudwater valley and resumed their old trade.
Another notable family were the Clutterbucks, who were responsible for Stanley Mill's rise to fame.
The site of Stanley Mill was formerly occupied by a much smaller structure, recorded in 1560 as Giles Mill at ‘Ryeford in King's Stanley’.
By the early 17th century this was owned, firstly by Thomas Clutterbuck, and later by his son, Richard.
By 1660, the mill had been built up to quite a substantial and sophisticated concern, now housing three pairs of fulling stocks, dye houses and shearing and warping rooms.
The business was to remain in the hands of the Clutterbucks for the next 120 years.
1812 saw the formation of a four-way partnership to run the mill.
During this period, much of the structure of the main L-shaped building was taking shape, the majority of the iron castings being dated 1813.
The partnership did not last.
Eventually, by 1827, Charles Stevens alone remained.
It was during the 1820s that Ebley Mill was also rebuilt.
Ebley reputedly stood on the site of much earlier corn and fulling mills.
The rebuilding resulted in three large separate blocks, of which two still survive.
By 1830, the mill had passed from the Clissold family and was being run by Evans, Robson and Severs, who were London-based textile merchants.
Under their control, a huge new mill pond was constructed, to feed the five water wheels that powered the mill.
By this time, the building of the uniquely-constructed Stanley Mill had been completed.
Fire had been a constant hazard in woollen mills from their earliest days, as a result of the large amount of grease and oils used gradually soaking into the wooden floors.
As light was by a combination of candles, gas and paraffin jets, fires were frequent.
Accordingly, Stanley Mill was designed and built so that destruction by fire was a virtual impossibility.
It was, in fact, one of the first truly fire-proof mills in the country.
Perhaps the main feature was the skeleton of iron arches, linking through the floors and extending throughout the five-storey building.
The castings were not only elegant but functional, providing a substantial backbone for the building as well as allowing plenty of room for line-shafting.
The ironwork was cast in Dudley by Benjamin Gibbon and transported by water, eventually reaching the banks of the Stroudwater canal.
The walls of the mill, in contrast with Ebley and most of the other large mills of the area, were made of brick.
Supplies came from the London Brick Company and to a lesser extent from nearby Stonehouse.
As well as these two items, the canal was also used to transport stone and slate.
Overall, Stanley Mill was expensive to build.
The power for this immense mill, as with Ebley, was provided by five water wheels, fed by 16′ diameter culverts that ran the entire length of the building.
The wheels were placed inside in order to protect them from the elements as well as from the deliberate damage that sometimes occurred during water disputes.
By 1834 the wheels were supplemented by a steam engine.
In the following year they were replaced by five more powerful turbines and a larger steam engine.
By 1834, Ebley had become part of the growing Marling empire and, when visited by the Assistant Commissioners, had 42 hand looms at work, 29 not in use, but no power looms.
The mill was now a substantial concern and provided employment for nearly 1,000.
By the early 1830s it was being run by the partnership of Leonard, Woolbright and Co, but by 1840 it was controlled by Nathaniel Samuel Marling, followed by Samuel Stephens Marling.
The Marling family spent substantial sums on Stanley Mills, adding power loom sheds and dye-houses.
1865 saw a short but abortive attempt to run the two mills independently but, by the end of the decade, they were once again together.
That year also saw the construction of the most striking addition to Ebley Mill, the chateau-inspired tower block, known as the New Mill and designed by G.F. Bodley.
During their most productive period, both mills were controlled by the Marling family, who had a total of 182 looms and over 4,000 spindles.
The close links between the two continued, with dyeing carried out for both at Stanley.
Thus the two mills avoided competition by concentrating on different products; Stanley, for instance, made worsteds.
The two mills were thus run in tandem by Marling and Co from 1883 to 1920, when they eventually sold out to P.C. Evans and Sons Ltd.
Stanley Mill now operates under the name Marling and Evans and, with the exception of a short spell as a munition store during World War II, has been producing cloth ever since.
Around 30% of the current output consists of high-quality West of England cloth, the remainder made up with technical fibres such as nylons, polyesters and polyamides.
Stanley Mill has survived, largely because of its ability to adapt to the changing needs of the market.
As one of the few Gloucestershire cloth mills still in operation, may it long continue.
Textile manufacturing at Ebley Mill came to an end several decades ago.
For many years, carding and spinning for Stanley Mill had been carried out there but eventually this ceased.
The company were unable to sell the redundant equipment and finally had to resort to paying for it to be broken up and taken away for scrap: a sad end to a long and honourable career.
For many years, the future for Ebley looked uncertain and, with the exception of the west block, which housed a printing firm, the magnificent buildings stood empty and decaying.
Fortunately their future has at last been settled and work is currently under way converting the mill into council offices.
Happily, the two most important mills of this area will still be in use, both playing an active and important role in the local community.
Painswick valley
The Painswick Stream provided the power for numerous mills.
One of the highest survivors is near Cranham, called Suttons Mill .
It is in an idyllic spot and reached from the winding, narrow lane to Sheepscombe, in beautiful countryside around the little village of Cranham, high in the valley above Painswick.
Unlike the other mills powered by the Painswick Stream, there is no evidence to suggest that it has ever been anything but a corn mill, virtually all the others having been in the woollen cloth trade at some time.
The mill, one of four in Cranham, was built around 1657 and was probably added onto an existing stone-built cottage of two storeys, each of a single room.
It belonged to Robert Bliss, a baker of Painswick, in the later 17th century, although he may not have been the original builder.
By the end of the 18th century it was in the hands of John Sutton.
After nearly two centuries of grinding corn, it eventually fell into disuse in the 1860s, at which time it housed the miller and his large family.
Although no longer used commercially, it was apparently put to occasional use grinding corn up to the start of the First World War.
The dilapidated mill was bought in 1946 by Mr and Mrs Myatt, who subsequently spent two years converting the remains into an interesting dwelling.
Carefully removed, much of the iron  and wood machinery was left stored outside the mill.
During their absence, contractors arrived to remove a quantity of rubbish and unfortunately took all the metal parts as well!
Such was the value of scrap metal after World War Two.
The converted mill is now in excellent condition and still boasts a number of reminders of its former use as a bakery as well as a mill.
There is a bake oven set in a wall in the fireplace probably an original outer wall of the former cottage.
The wheel, now gone, was probably an external one early in the mill's life, covered in by later additions, in a similar way to Damsells Mill near Painswick.
It was originally an overshot wheel of 10′ diameter and has left distinct rubbing-marks on the adjacent wall.
In later years it was fed by a banded iron pipe still in place.
The wheel pit still exists although this has now been concreted up to the level of the existing floor.
The mill pond is still maintained in good order although it is smaller, formerly extending right up to the back wall.
There are still a number of old millstones on the site, one of which is a French burr stone boasting ‘Gloucester Millstone Manufactory’ cast onto its balance boxes, as well as a well-worn monolithic stone probably used to grind animal feed.
Apart from the mill itself, other buildings include the former bakery, stables, hay loft and cart shed.
This is both an interesting and picturesque site, and one that is now well cared for by people who fortunately appreciate its significance.
Further downstream towards Painswick is Damsells Mill .
This is one of the survivors of the many mills formerly strung out along the Painswick Stream and probably took its name from the Damsell family who lived in the area during the 14th and 15th centuries.
There were two other mills further up the stream, Tocknells, which has long been demolished and Eddels, that still survives as a house.
At the foot of a steep hill, Damsells Mill is reached by the once gated lane leading to Sheepscombe and was, in its working days, fed by the combined waters of the Painswick Stream (formerly the Wycke) augmented by those from Painswick Beacon.
Even this combined flow at times proved insufficient and it was found necessary to dig a leat.
The exact age of the mill is not known, although the present foundations are no older than c1450.
There is a reference during the mid-16th century to the mill being held from the manor by Johannis Berry, who may have worked it as a fulling mill.
It was later rebuilt, some of the present structure dating from then.
It was worked by various tenants until the 1730s when a number of owners culminated with the well-known family of Painswick clothiers, the Packers.
They worked the mill for five years, after which Edward Palling, who also ran Brookhouse mill, took over.
His occupancy lasted until 1 761, when he sold it to another local clothier, John Cox, in whose family it remained until 1818 when Elizabeth and William leased it for seven years to the partnership of John Cox and Weston Hicks.
They also ran Oliver's Mill further down the valley but, unlike Damsell's, this has now largely disappeared.
Between 1800 and 1850 there were many bankruptcies in the area and mills saw repeated changes of ownership and tenancy.
Damsell's had a number of different tenants, but was vacant in 1842 and 1843.
Some cloth mills were demolished and others were converted for alternative uses.
Damsell's was one of the latter for, by the mid-1840s the firm of Lord and Archer were grinding corn there.
They remained until their bankruptcy in 1849.
Around 1855 the mill was sold by the Cox family to Charles Gardner, who is variously described as a ‘maltster’ and a ‘meal man’, and he and his family ran Damsell's as a corn mill until 1895.
It was during the early part of his occupation that the last of the Painswick cloth mills finally went out of business and a number of others, such as Damsell's, were converted to other uses.
Around the turn of the century, the mill was bought by a Mr Herbert who, in turn, let it to Henry Boulting who ran the adjacent farm.
The mill continued to be used occasionally to grind flour for home consumption, until his eventual departure in 1932.
The mill has seen a number of alterations and was extended in the 19th century when dormers were added.
In the 1960s it was extended in front using old weathered stone.
Inside, the wheel of around 14ft diameter is still in place, as is some of the wooden gearing.
The three pairs of mill stones have gone.
There is some suspicion that the wheel, as with some other mills, may have originally been an external one and has been enclosed by subsequent extensions.
A substantial stone-lined stepped culvert that supplied water to the wheel still remains under the lane and empties back into the stream via a long tail-race to the rear of the mill.
There was formerly a mill house alongside but this was demolished in 1936.
However, two millworkers' cottages, that formerly consisted of three storeys, each of a single room, stand close by, having been converted in the late '50s.
The mill became a delightful residence in 1968 and, despite its domestic role, still manages to retain the unmistakable characteristics of its former uses.
Damsell's Mill is a little way out of the picturesque town of Painswick.
The town itself is above a steep hillside that leads down to what was originally the source of much of its wealth, the Painswick Stream.
This and its tributaries, helped to create a thriving cloth trade in Painswick.
Cloth making was already well established in the area by the 15th century.
Clothiers, fullers, scribblers and weavers abounded.
A wide variety of cloths were produced, in both dyed and undyed form, in and around Painswick but, as elsewhere, there were fluctuations in trade.
This was clearly reflected in the number of workers and mills engaged in making cloth.
During the 18th century, there were at least fourteen mills on the Painswick Stream and its tributaries, rising to thirty by the first part of the 19th century.
The cloth trade expanded up to around 1830.
Obviously some clothiers fared better than others for there were quite a large number of bankruptcies between 1800 and 1840.
Henceforth the Painswick cloth mills gradually closed in the face of competition.
Mills were either demolished or converted.
By about 1860, the cloth trade in Painswick was all but extinct, one of the last survivors the concern of E.P.
Sampson who was still producing shawls at Kings Mill.
By 1863, he too had gone and Kings Mill had been turned over to the manufacture of pins, an industry that was to become important for Painswick.
The last surviving cloth mill was Peghouse Mill, nearer to Stroud, although still in Painswick Parish, which finally closed its doors in the early part of this century.
Tucked away at the foot of the steep Tibbiwell Lane is the site of one of the largest and longest worked mills in Painswick,Brookhouse Mill .
When trade was good, Brookhouse expanded and thrived and when times became hard, it lost value and was leased out to many different tenants.
Brookhouse was fortunate for, as the cloth trade went into decline, it managed to attract a new industry that enabled it to keep going for a century longer than many of its counterparts.
The first references to Brookhouse appear around 1750, when the owner was a widow, Catherine Webb.
A John Webb, clothier, died in 1736 and was probably her husband.
At the time, the mill, which was powered by the Painswick Stream, was engaged in the cloth trade, as it housed two fulling stocks and a gig mill.
By 1820, it was owned and worked by Robert Wight, who continued to manufacture cloth there, the mill becoming known as Wights Mill, a name that it retained for many years.
This must have been one of the more profitable periods in the mill's history for, over the next few years, Wight installed steam power as well as a new water wheel.
A dye house appears in the references, although part of the site may have been leased out, as both John Lovegrove and William Pitt are mentioned in connection with the latter.
The modernisation and enlargement should have ensured a firm foundation for Wight's business; however, within a decade he went bankrupt, the ownership of the mill passing to Rev William Knight.
The next five years saw the site leased out to various tenants, although Knight retained ownership.
Between 1836 and 1841, J. and E. Wight were the tenants and in 1839, John Driver apparently occupied the dye house.
At some point, a William Clark also produced walking sticks.
However, around 1840, the site was largely unoccupied.
1841 saw the arrival of new tenants and a further change of use, for timber merchants Clark and Son used Brookhouse as a saw mill.
Their stay was fairly brief for, around 1846, the mill was acquired by William Savory.
In 1849, part of the mill containing the fulling stocks was leased to the local clothier, William Palling, yet in 1853, Paul Savory is recorded as working a corn mill at Brookhouse.
At some point, Henry Fletcher, who was also running Kings Mill at the time, took over the section leased by Palling.
In 1858 he was declared bankrupt, his departure bringing to a close the clothmaking chapter in the life of Brookhouse, as well as at Kings Mill.
There followed a period of uncertainty until it found itself with new occupants Savory and Sons.
From 1876, William Savory was the owner, making pins.
Although they were not the first to do so, they became the longest running and, presumably, most successful pin manufacturers in the Painswick area.
Long before the Savorys started their manufactory, pins had been produced (during the 1850s and 1860s) at such places as Painswick and Rock Mills, and quite possibly it was the success of these other concerns that prompted this venture.
The company carried on at Brookhouse, under various members of the family.
By 1880, H.B. Savory was running the mill although, well into the 20th century, the company retained the name of Savory and Sons.
By the turn of the century, the mill employed several hundred.
In 1908, the company took over the pin making concern of Watkins and Okey, who had been based in Kingsmill since the 1860s.
Gradually the other pin makers faded until, as F.H.
Hyett comments in his 1928 Glimpses of the History of Painswick , Brookhouse was the only pin mill left.
The company soldiered on over the years and, up to 1962, still used the water wheel installed during Wight's time.
For many years, as a result of the reduction in the flow of the Painswick Stream coupled with the silting up of the mill pond, this had been used on a 50:50 basis with a gas engine, sufficient water only being available for half a day's working.
Ironically, it was the eventual failure of the gas engine that led to the introduction of electrical power, the wheel finally going out of use in 1962 and sadly, being broken up in 1964.
With its new mode of power, the company continued until it finally closed its doors in September 1982.
It was not long before the empty site was converted into dwellings.
Fortunately enough of Brookhouse still survives to serve as a reminder of two periods of prosperity in Painswick's past, that of both cloth and pin making.
The Painswick Stream, swollen by the waters of several tributaries, such as the Washwell and Sheepscombe Brooks, reach their last port of call before joining the Frome at Lodgemoore.
This final mill, on the outskirts of the town of Stroud itself, was Stratford Mill .
Stratford Mill's earliest mention comes in 1607 in the will of Edward Stratford.
The site then consisted of a grist and two fulling mills.
Stratford had leased them out to Thomas Merryat, or Merret, but by the 1620s, his grandson, John, had taken control and was leasing the mills to a Stroud textile dealer, Gyles Davis.
Just how long this arrangement lasted is not clear but, by the 1680s, clothier Giles Gardner owned the gig and two fulling mills.
No mention is made of the grist mill, but it probably survived, as in 1735, William Little, a baker, is recorded as tenant at (in all probability) the grist mill.
The fulling mills still survived on site, although Stratford Mill's involvement in the cloth trade drew to a close around 1738, the first on the Painswick Stream to do so.
It seems rather ironic that Stratford Mill, which was better placed for access to the transport system and a water supply, should be the first to go.
What happened over the next few decades is not clear, but it seems likely that the fulling mills were dismantled and by 1801, Stratford Mills were advertised for sale, solely as a corn mill.
There then appeared Stroud miller, John Biddle, taking control of the mills somewhere between 1810 and 1820.
This signalled the start of a long association between Biddle and Stratford Mills, the site being adopted as his main base of operation in the Stroud area.
He also ran Oil Mill and  Cuttles Mill at Wallbridge, importing large quantities of corn through Gloucester Docks and transporting it, largely by canal, to his mills in the Stroud area.
He subsequently went into partnership; Stratford Mills were operated by Biddle and Bishop during the 1830s, although in later years, other tenants such as corn merchants, Reynolds and Allen, occupied at least part of the mills.
An advertisement that Biddle placed in 1853 sought a man to supervise the loading of trows and smaller vessels.
This may have been in connection with duties at his Gloucester Docks warehouse or possibly in the Stroud area.
Corn was shipped along the Stroudwater canal to Oil Mill, although it may well be that the last half mile or so of the Painswick Stream was once navigable.
What types of boats were used is hard to conceive, but they must have been small and of shallow draught.
They would have been used for transport between the Stroudwater Canal and Stratford Mills.
Early editions of the Ordnance Survey show a sluice, roughly mid-way between the canal and the mill.
In all probability this was a simple flash lock.
Biddle's time at the mills drew to a close in 1853, when he advertised them for sale.
In 1863 he died and the mills were leased to Reynolds and Allen, who remained there for some years.
By then it was one of the largest corn mills in the district and, using a combination of steam and water power, ran twenty-one pairs of stones.
Reynolds and Allen's stay at the mill was comparatively brief for, by 1876, Butt and Skurry owned and worked the mills.
During the 1890s, Kemble and Dash took over, and by 1901 had sold the mills to R. Townsend and Co Ltd.
They carried on an extensive trade in a variety of products such as cattle cake, seed corn, manure and farm fertilisers.
On the night of 15 June 1908, a tremendous blaze gutted much of the mill.
Subsidiary buildings escaped relatively unscathed but the main block was completely gutted, only the outer shell remaining.
It was the biggest blaze in the Stroud area for some years.
Despite the setback, Townsends continued to operate for many years, through Two World Wars, until they were finally absorbed into the Rank, Hovis, McDougall Company.
In September 1983, the Dalgety Spillers group took over and by June 1984 they had shut the mill.
To date, the site remains empty and vandalised, just another industrial scar.
There is little of interest or character remaining, much of the site consisting of ugly, utilitarian buildings.
As things stand, it is probably only a matter of time before the site finds itself in the hands of property speculators, a sad fate for what was one of the largest mills on the Painswick Stream.
Chalford Valley
Over the years the Chalford Valley and surrounding area has housed many mills.
Perhaps one of the least remembered stood at Oakridge.
Oakridge is generally associated with an episode in the mid-19th century when local men burnt down what was intended to become Stroud's new isolation hospital.
This tends to be remembered as Oakridge's most famous building but, although long demolished, the village also boasted another important structure- Oakridge Mill .
Oakridge Mill was demolished between 1899 and 1900.
It was at Oakridge Lynch, close by the junction of the Whiteway and Broadways, an unusual place for such a large mill, the majority of its brethren being well down in the valley bottoms.
It was built relatively late, between 1844 and 1845, and destined for a relatively short working life, but it did provide a good deal of employment for several decades.
Although in earlier days Oakridge had its cottage weavers, the mill was built specifically as a silk mill, the business run by a number of different concerns.
Several silk mills were set up around the Chalford Valley, but the majority made use of the then-vacant woollen mills.
Two early silk throwsters who worked Oakridge were John William Jones in 1856, and Charles de Bary in 1863.
The mill was powered then by a steam engine, the coal for which had to be carried from the 
Thames and Severn Canal up steep hills on the backs of pack horses and donkeys.
By the end of the 1880 s, Tubbs and Lewis were in occupation, a company more often associated with New Mills at Kingswood, where they specialised in the manufacture of elasticated fabric.
After them, the mill belonged to a Mr Chapman, thought to be the man who was running the nearby Sevilles Mill.
By 1890, Oakridge Mill was closed.
It stood idle for some time, eventually being sold in 1897 and demolished a year or so later.
Few photographs or records survive but a l9th century line drawing shows that it was a fairly substantial building of three storeys, complete with elegant chimney, bell tower and clock.
Chalford itself is yet another small town long established as a centre for woollen cloth.
Here are a number of mill sites dating to the Domesday era; the cloth industry firmly settled itself here by the 12–13th centuries.
By the 18th century, Chalford was well established as a busy cloth producing centre.
In 1712, Atkyns describes a scene of great activity and speaks of Chalford as ‘a remarkable place for the great number of clothing mills and the great quantity of cloth made there in the neighbourhood’.
Rudder also paints a picturesque scene in 1777: ‘On the curious travellers first approach it presents at once a very striking and respectable appearance, consisting of a number of well built houses, equal to a little town, lying very contiguous, but not joined together’.
He goes on to speak of rows of tenters along the side of the hill, in which ‘the cloth is stretched in the process of making’.
Perhaps more ominously, he comments that the trade had recently declined, largely as a result of a dramatic drop in cloth taken by the East India Company for export markets.
These markets had been greatly depressed throughout much of the 1770s, and Chalford, perhaps more so than other clothing areas, suffered badly.
Chalford suffered again during the first half of the 19th century.
Around the time of Rudder's comments, there were eight fulling mills at work within the parish.
A large proportion of the local population was actively employed in the wool trade, although it had certainly decreased.
There had been a number of bankruptcies, and several mill owners left the trade.
Around that time one of Chalford's larger mills, St Mary's, experienced a spate of bankruptcies, as owner after owner's businesses failed.
St Mary's Mill stands on an old site, certainly used in the early part of the 14th century, as a fulling mill.
Its name was taken from the chantry in Minchinhampton Church, to which the mill then belonged.
For many years there was a tradition that the noted scholar, Roger Bacon, had been educated in St Mary's Chapel, Chalford (this later becoming the mill), although by Rudder's time, this had been effectively disproved.
At the turn of the 17th century, St Mary's Mill consisted of two fulling mills, a gig mill and a grist mill.
The next century saw it pass through the hands of the Arundell, Ockold and Ridler families.
In the 18th century, owners William Inell, Thomas Fry Clark, John Bryant and Monkhouse Tate all went bankrupt.
Eventually, in 1819, Samuel Clutterbuck leased St Mary's Mill.
Shortly after, he built a new four-storey block on the west side.
By the 1830s, Clutterbuck had bought the mill, and embarked on a series of improvements and extensions, creating one of the largest mill complexes in the Chalford area.
By 1834, he had built an engine-house and installed a 30 hp steam engine in order to boost the power of the water wheels.
These substantial, and obviously expensive works are perhaps a little surprising, as cloth making in the Chalford area had been declining.
By 1839, only fifteen of Chalford's mills remained in the wool trade.
At one time, there had been more than forty.
During the 1840s, Clutterbuck's enlarged and modernised mill was advertised for sale or lease.
The sale particulars give some indication of the magnitude of the site: a gentleman's dwelling house, manager's house, counting house, rack and steam heated drying stove, drying houses, sheds, stables and land.
In addition, there were the mill's two five-storey main blocks, a four-storey  block and an engine house complete with steam engine.
It was described as ‘extensive and powerful mills and factory buildings’, with the added bonus of easy access to the Thames and Severn Canal, a few yards away.
Clearly, incoming coal supplies and outgoing cloth could be easily transported.
Clutterbuck ceased to work the mill during the latter half of the 1840s, for by 1847 it had been leased to a paper-maker, Frederick Wiggins, who apparently only operated it for a few years.
By 1850, papermaking had ceased, Clutterbuck re-converting the mill for cloth manufacture.
Clutterbuck died around 1860 and at some point cloth making stopped again.
By 1874, William Grist, the flock and shoddy magnate, was Using St Mary's Mill, possibly for around a decade, but by 1890, the mill again fell silent.
St Mary's was destined to lie idle for some years until the foundation of the Chalford Stick Company in 1903.
The company was set up by Mr W.C. Dann and, within a few years, had a workforce of over a hundred.
Although some other stick makers were bigger, this was to become the longest surviving stick manufacturer in the Stroud area.
It remained at the mill, under various owners, until 1981, the St Mary's estate being bought in 1965 by the Reynolds brothers.
They set about an extensive programme of repair and renovation of the complex and have so far successfully restored one of the Clutterbuck water wheels, as well as a Tangye Compound Steam Engine (plus a portable boiler), that formerly powered stick making machinery.
Today, St Mary's Mill is undoubtedly one of the most important and impressive surviving mill complexes in the county.
Stick making is still carried out on a limited scale, the Phoenix Stick Company at present occupying two floors of the main mill block.
Fortunately the mill's owners, G.L. and G. Reynolds, seem intent on ensuring that this wonderful set of buildings and its surviving equipment have a secure future.
The area around Brimscombe was once a hive of industry, with numerous mills.
One such was Port Mill.
Some of the first references are to a fulling mill, known during the latter part of the 17th century, as Fields Mill.
Much of the present structure dates from the 19th century, the mill taking its name from Brimscombe Port, built close at hand by the Thames and Severn Canal Co.
Prior to their appearance it was a cloth mill, in the hands of Samuel Peach, who was also resident at St Mary's Mill.
It later passed to John Peach who in turn sold it in 1786 to the infant Canal Company.
The name Port Mill stems from that period.
The Canal Company leased the mill and, by the early 1800s it was being worked as a corn mill by John Jenkins.
By 1815 Jenkins had gone, the Canal Company selling to Mary Lewis.
At the time, she also occupied nearby Brimscombe Mill, carrying on her late husband's business.
One of her sons, William, appears to have taken over Port Mill, the family also producing cloth at Brimscombe Mill.
By the close of the 1830s Port Mill was leased from the Lewis family by a Mr J. George, who operated a number of boats on the canal.
Following the death of William Lewis in 1843, both Port and Brimscombe Mill were put up for sale.
Brimscombe Mill was bought in 1845 by S. Marling; with Port Mill falling into the hands of N.S. Marling.
Both mills were subsequently leased out, Port Mill taken over by P.C. Evans.
Several changes in tenancy occurred over the following years, but by 1863, iron founder James Ferrabee, of the Phoenix Iron Works, had taken over Port Mill.
Later, Ferrabee took on a partner, as trade references of the early 1870s refer to Ferrabee and Fox as producing cloth at Port Mill.
Within a few years both Port and Brimscombe Mills were again run together, by P.C. Evans and Sons.
Ferrabee now fades from cloth manufacture, although the concern of E.T.
Fox appears a few years later at Churches Mill.
Quite possibly this is the same Mr Fox.
Port Mill continued to be worked by members of the Evans family for some years, eventually being amalgamated with Marling and Evans.
It continued to produce cloth for some time until it closed.
It then passed through a number of hands, eventually taken over by Bensons International Systems, shortly after the Second World War.
Bensons now have a large factory complex, much of  it built on the site of the former canal basin of the Thames and Severn Canal Company.
The old Port Mill still forms an important part of that complex, and to Bensons' credit, is beautifully maintained and landscaped.
Tayloes, or Belvedere Mill , in Chalford stands on one of the oldest confirmed mill sites in the Chalford Valley and is one of the most picturesque.
The buildings, mainly of late 18th and early 19th century origin, are complemented by the large, well-kept mill pond and landscaped surroundings.
Belvedere Mill in 1439 belonged to the Manor of Bisley and was being worked by Alexander Robull.
It was recorded as a fulling mill, although it may at least in part have been a grist mill.
Quite possibly it was a corn mill partially converted for fulling.
During the 16th century the mill was in the hands of various members of the Hone family, later passing to the clothier, Thomas Tayloe, from whom the mill took one of its best-remembered names.
The mill was owned and operated by successive members of the Tayloe family for over a century, until it was eventually sold by Hester Tayloe.
Its new owner was a Mr Ballinger; he died in 1798 and was succeeded by his son, Charles.
Over the next few decades there are references to a Mr S.R. Pattison producing cloth, as well as of a Mr Farrar, leasing all or part of the mill for dyeing.
Both were presumably tenants as Charles Ballinger still owned the mill up to the 1850s.
Somewhat confusing references indicate that the mill was converted to corn by c1855.
What is certain is that the corn milling firm of Reynolds and Allen were using at least part of it during the 1860s.
Silk throwing, under the control of Charles Hodgeson, was also carried out.
He was probably only at the mill for a brief period, and perhaps only occupied part of it.
The mill by then was known as Belvedere Mill.
Between 1875 and 1915 Belvedere was run solely as a corn mill, by Clark Brothers Ltd.
By the 1890s, they had installed steam power in order to boost the power from the Frome.
Around the time of the First World War, Clark brothers ceased operations, and the mill finally fell silent.
Its equipment was removed within a few years and, by the late 1920s, it had become home to the Belvedere Upholstery Company, operated by the Tyler family.
After they left, Belvedere saw various periods of use and disuse but, by the 1970s, stood empty.
Since then, it has been taken over by the firm of Heber, who specialise in high tech electronics research.
Nailsworth and Avening Valleys
Much of the area around Nailsworth was once heavily dependent on its mills, many of which were involved in the cloth trade.
An important example was Days Mill , close to the town centre.
Days Mill was based on the site of a much older and smaller mill, probably built some time during the 16th or 17th centuries.
The extensive mill complex was largely built during the 1770s, becoming known as Days Mill, from the brothers Jeremiah and Daniel, who made cloth in the much enlarged premises.
Within a few years, references to Daniel disappear, and by 1814 the company was operating under the name of Jeremiah Day and Co.
By the 1820s, Day had taken a partner, Davis.
There were changes ahead, and at some point during the late 1820s, Daniel Smith is recorded as in possession, his tenants being Edward (and later, Edward and John) Wise.
During the 1840s, Charles and Edward Davis are recorded at Days Mill, in turn replaced by John and William Wise.
The owner was a local solicitor, William Smith.
The Wise's period saw a number of dramatic changes; Days Mill was enlarged and updated, becoming one of the few in the Nailsworth area to boast the new power-looms.
A new loom shed was specially built, the power supplied by a complex system of line shafting from the water wheels.
The first power loom shed in the area was erected at Staffords Mill in 1831.
As Brian Davis points out, the new shed was necessary, as the main mill buildings were now over a century  old, and would almost certainly have been unable to cope with the additional weight and vibration from the looms.
Clearly, a great deal of capital was invested in Days Mill.
Many of the smaller cloth mills were unable to plough sufficient money into such modernisation schemes, so fell by the wayside.
The only other mill in the area to use power looms was Nailsworth, then worked by Barnard & Son.
In 1838 they had 38 hand looms in use, as well as two power versions.
Unfortunately, by 1846 they had gone bankrupt.
The new looms absorbed a lot of power, and in times of seasonal water shortages, more than the water wheels of Days Mill could supply.
More money was invested and a steam engine installed in a purpose-built engine house attached to the main mill.
It was well established by 1838.
By the 1860s, the re-equipped complex was run by Wise and Leonard, later replaced by Wise, Stephens and Whitby, still making cloth.
Cloth manufacture continued for at least two more decades.
A.B.
Pavey Smith mentions that in 1880 Nailsworth still had two cloth mills at work: Dunkirk and Days Mills.
All the smaller mills had gone.
Time was running out, however, and by the late 1880s, both Dunkirk and Days had finally closed.
Following the end of cloth-making, the mill buildings were let out to a number of tenants, providing some employment.
For a time, the Purified Flock and Bedding Company occupied part of the site, producing flock and shoddy, another part being used for brass founding.
During the 1890s, the mill was in use for corn grinding, in conjunction with Millbottom although, during this decade, Emmanuel Davis moved his extensive furniture business to Days Mill.
At the time, part of the mill was demolished to make way for a new road, some of the remainder being converted to shops.
The loom shed was, by now, used by a firm of silk throwsters, their comparatively modest power requirements met by the remaining water wheel.
This trade continued until the Second World War, still making use of the water wheel which, ironically, outlived the steam engine, which was sold in 1900 for £45 7s.
By 1940, the water wheel had been scrapped.
The Davis's long association continues, for they are still the owners.
The site now houses a number of firms, the loom shed used by sheet metal workers and the main building housing the Davis's furniture, removal and storage business.
A number of smaller firms also operate on the site.
Days Mill, in its diminished form, has now been swallowed up as the town of Nailsworth has expanded around it.
Its twin ponds, of some 3.5 acres, have been built over by the ‘bus station and local shops.
The Nailsworth Stream is joined by a number of tributaries en route , one being the stream that runs down the Horsley valley.
This formerly powered a number of mills, involved in some way with the cloth trade.
Apart from Hosley, Gig and Lock Mills, the stream also provided the power for Millbottom Mill , part way down the valley.
Millbottom has been in and out of the cloth trade and was subsequently turned over to other uses.
Around 1560 Millbottom consisted of a corn mill under the control of a Stroud clothier, William Webb.
A century later, it was in the hands of Edward Webb, followed by his son, Thomas.
Records still give no indications of use other than corn milling, but by the 1690s a fulling mill and dye house had been added, possibly much earlier.
The combination of corn and fulling mills and dye house is encountered quite often around this period.
The mill then passed through the Webb family until around 1700, when it changed hands and was mortgaged to John Fowler, a Stroud textile dealer.
Following his death, it passed to his son.
By the middle part of the century, he was the owner, the mill having lost its fulling mill, now consisting solely of the corn mill and, perhaps rather incongruously, the dye house.
Towards the close of the century, the mill passed to Thomas Whitehead, then to a brewer, Joseph Locke, and later, to Joseph Harwood (Locke's tenant) who was operating the corn mill.
During the first quarter of the 19th century, the mill underwent a fair amount of rebuilding.
It was probably intended to rebuild on a grander scale with an additional floor, but the work was curtailed, and the extra floor not added.
Perhaps the money ran out.
It is likely the alterations were carried out towards the end of a relatively prosperous period, before a collapse in trade, between 1810 and 1820.
In 1832 the mill was sold to Henry Daubney, who later sold it to Samuel Hadley.
Within a few years, he had sold on to George Ford, in whose family the mill remained for over 30 years.
During the 1850s, Ford brothers occupied the site, as mealmen; by the close of the 1870s, it was John Ford and Son, timber merchants, also at Ryeford Mill, near Stonehouse.
Although most of the mill buildings at Ryeford have now gone, a substantial timber works still occupied the site until recently.
1887 saw the bankruptcy of Charles Ford, who presumably then owned Millbottom, the new owner being Edward Benjamin.
For a long time it was known as Benjamins Mill, a name occasionally used today.
The Benjamin family were substantial businessmen in the area, as well as farmers, property owners, millers and seedsmen.
During Edward's time, a Fielding gas engine was installed, to augment the water power, the gas supply being laid on to the Millbottom area specifically for the mill.
It is unlikely that water power was used for the saws.
Benjamin used the site for corn milling; presumably the corn mill survived even when the mill was in use as a timber mill.
During the 1890s, Millbottom was run for a time in conjunction with Days Mill.
By the 1920s Frank Hender had bought it and installed a small brass finishing workshop on the upper floor, the lower section being let to a Mr Thompson for shoe stiffening manufacture.
All the machinery on site could be driven by either the gas engine or the 14 foot overshot water wheel, with rim gearing.
It was Mr Thompson who was responsible for the destruction of most of the gearing in 1952, following which he was evicted from the mill.
The wheel was never repaired and was eventually broken up for scrap.
By 1953, the stiffener works had gone, the buildings turned over to the manufacture of various inks and dyestuffs.
This company, in turn, departed, and by the 1970s, Millbottom had been partially converted for domestic use.
The buildings were not in the best of condition.
A new phase opened up in 1967 with the purchase of the mill by Aonghus Gordon's father.
He was responsible for the Ruskin School of’ Art Appreciation in Venice, and returned to Britain intending to continue his work at what was to become known as Ruskin Mill.
This was not to be, and it was not until 1982, some time after his death, that a group of craftsmen (including his sons, Aonghus and Alistair) took over the building.
A major programme of restoration and conversion started which carries on today.
The last few years have seen a tremendous amount of' reconstruction, both internally and externally, some parts of the building having been perilously close to collapse.
The work unearthed several interesting features.
The basement area, which was filled with cinders and rubble to a depth of several feet, was systematically cleared and repaired.
The remains of a type of bake oven were unearthed, as well as another large oven, the function of which remains a mystery.
This fed directly into the large 40 foot high chimney that formerly graced the mill and of which the lower dressed masonry section remains.
It transpired that the foundations of the chimney were inadequate, with the result that the entire structure sank some ten inches, taking floors and arches with it!
It seems likely that the masonry of the chimney's lower section came from either a demolished house or another mill, as the quality of workmanship is of a higher standard than would have been strictly necessary.
The upper section was brick.
Still in place in the basement is the original supply for the long-departed gas engine.
In addition, this section also has traces of the site of the original overshot water wheel installation, a remnant of the structure that occupied the site prior to the 1810 rebuild.
There are many plans for the mill's future, including a new stone-tiled roof and the installation of a remarkable piece of industrial history, a 1902 generator (built by J.C.
Howell of Llanelly), driven by the new water wheel.
Since the reconstruction of the site commenced, the main building has been converted into workshops housing leather workers, a photographer, iron worker, and a number of other skilled artists and craftsmen.
On the outskirts of Nailsworth is Egypt Mill , which first appears in the record books around the middle of the 17th century, when it belonged to a London haberdasher, George Hudson.
It remained in his hands until at least the mid-1670s.
The mill was then possibly sold to Richard Webb, clothier, or more likely leased by Hudson and Henry Willoby to him.
Following Hudson's death in 1712, the mill passed first to his son and later, to other members of the family.
It then consisted of a gig mill, two fulling mills and a dye house.
During Richard Webb's time the large, gabled clothier's house was built.
A date carved into one of the door lintels bears his initials and the date 1698, although this stone is probably a replacement for an earlier one.
The mill came under the control of  Pharoah Webb, whose curious name probably influenced that of the mill.
By the early part of the 19th century, the business had grown to quite a sizeable concern, and consisted of scribbling and burling shops, wool lofts, a dye house, as well as a rack teaze and Webb's substantial home.
In 1814, Samuel Webb leased the mill to Stephen and Edward Blackwell, who carried on the tradition of cloth making.
By the 1830s, following Webb's death, Peter Playne was the tenant.
In 1839, Playne and Smith were still producing cloth; then, after nearly two centuries of woollen cloth manufacture, Egypt Mill fell into disuse for a number of years.
By the third quarter of the century, it had become a dye works, producing dyestuffs from logwood.
Products from logwood formed an important source of dyestuffs for silk, and more important, woollen cloth.
The wood was imported in the form of dense hard blocks from South America and Jamaica, the dyestuff extracted by ‘lixiviating’ freshly cut wood with water, followed by evaporation.
It was chiefly employed for the production of darker shades of wool as well as for dying silk black, and survived far longer than many other naturally derived dyes.
Logwood dyestuffs were produced at Egypt Mill for more than 15 years, by at least two companies.
Thereafter, the mill was turned over to grinding corn and animal feedstuffs, the latter accounting for much of the business in the later part of its working life.
During the first part of the 20th century, because of its proximity to Nailsworth Station, it became known as Station Mill, although it was still referred to locally by its old name.
During the latter part of its life, it was run by G.H. King and Sons, who traded under the colourful title of the ‘Kings of Egypt Mill’.
Gradually the business declined, but the mid-1980s saw a dramatic change of use when it was substantially renovated and converted into a restaurant, care being taken to retain the two undershot water wheels and much of the machinery, some of which reputedly dates from the late 18th century.
One wheel operates via wooden rim gearing, driving through two sets of mill stones, no longer functional, the assembly supported on Gloucester manufactured cast iron pillars.
Externally, apart from general repair work, replacement of the windows, and landscaping, little has changed, although the building has now lost the look of a working mill.
Overall, the conversion successfully retains much of the mill's charm.
Some mills were small, although others were of much greater magnitude.
One particularly notable example of the latter stands part way along the Nailsworth Valley, a few miles from Stroud and is one of the most impressive monuments to the Stroud woollen industry to survive; the massive range of buildings called Dunkirk Mills .
Its many alterations and additions reflect in stone and brick, the looms and busts at the woollen industry.
The mill's chequered history is almost a Who's Who of eminent local individuals and families of clothiers.
The earliest definite reference to a mill there is 1741, when the New Mills were described as recently built.
At some point they were worked by Samuel Yeats, who remained until at least the  mid-1780s.
As the 18th century drew to a close, it was demolished and replaced nearby with a grand five-storey structure by the new owner, John Cooper.
Within a few years that mill housed a gig mill, four fulling stocks, as well as picking, shearing and press shops.
Dye and scouring houses were also on site.
Cooper's grandiose mill was built mainly to take advantage of increasing foreign markets, almost half of the cloth produced being sold abroad.
John and his partner Joseph Cooper ran the mill for a number of years and prospered, but the Coopers' dependence on export was their ultimate downfall, as trade fluctuated during the French wars.
By 1815, a brief postwar upsurge in trade had been and gone and in the same year they went bankrupt.
Within a few years Dunkirk Mills was under the control, although not in the complete ownership of Peter Playne, of a long-established clothier family of Flemish descent.
They also owned Longfords Mill near Avening.
Between 1818 and 1821, the mill's large southern extension was built, with further extensions completed prior to 1827.
Shortly afterwards, following disagreements between the two, Peter exchanged the share he had retained in Longfords for William's share in Dunkirk.
There were troubled times ahead; as a result of fluctuations in trade and falling profits, the clothiers tried to cut wages.
Industrial unrest followed, culminating in the great hand-loom weavers' strike of 1825, when 5,000 weavers and countless thousands of allied workers were out of work for three months.
A crisis followed the strike which in turn led to more problems and lower wages.
In 1834 Playne and Smith were working the mill and in that year, with sometimes inconsistent water supplies and the need to improve efficiency, the engine house was built and a beam engine installed.
This was followed by power looms, Playne having installed two by 1840.
At that time, there were also 70 hand looms.
By 1844, Peter Playne's partner had gone, replaced by Playne's son, Charles.
The firm then became Peter and Charles Playne.
The Playnes' problems were by no means over, as competition from Yorkshire mills intensified.
Despite fairly regular supplies via the Stroudwater Canal, the price of coal was nearly twice that of their Yorkshire counterparts.
1836 to 1848 were lean times but a change in fashions brought relative prosperity by the middle of the century and in 1855 the large extension to the north was built.
Cloth manufacture continued at Dunkirk Mills up to the late 1880s when, after seven decades in the Playne family, the mills finally closed.
Following the Playnes' departure in 1891, the mill was bought by W. Walker and Son, hosiery manufacturers from Nottingham.
They promptly stripped out the interior of the buildings and completely redesigned them.
The old beam engine was replaced with a newer one which could, with or without the aid of the water wheels, be coupled up to run a dynamo.
In 1903 the Walkers bought a stick making concern and installed this in the mill alongside their hosiery business.
Another part of the mill was already occupied by another firm of stick and umbrella fitting manufactures, Wright, Bindley and Gell, who remained there to the 1950s.
In 1937 the hosiery business was moved back to Nottingham and the mill said ‘farewell’ to its last major industry.
Since then, various parts have been occupied at different times by a multitude of smaller firms.
Today, the mill consists of a fascinating maze of timbers, corridors, cellars, lift-shafts and assorted rooms.
Outside, ivy and shrubbery gradually masks the stonework and rubbish clogs the wheel pits and surviving water wheels.
Three of the original water wheels survive, one of 1818 and one of 1855.
After playing such a dominant role in the employment and prosperity of the area for such a long time, it seemed an ignominious end for these splendid and inspiring reminders of the past.
For some years they stood largely empty, occupied only by the ghosts of yesteryear, prey to vandals, fire and decay.
Happily plans are now well in hand to convert the buildings into around 70 luxury dwellings.
It is intended that care will be taken to ensure that important relics such as the wheels are retained.
After years of uncertainty it now appears that a new chapter is about to open in the life of Dunkirk Mills.
Further downstream nestles Inchbrook Mill .
Its exact age unknown, it was ‘newly erected’ in the early 18th century.
In 1714, in the context of a marriage settlement, at which time it formed part of the Pudhill estate, it was a fulling mill, owned by Ann Cambridge.
In 1758 William Hill was the tenant, still using it for fulling.
Ownership was retained by the Cambridge family, for that year Mary Cambridge sold it to a Mr Wade.
In keeping with the advances in the woollen cloth trade, improvements were made; shortly afterwards, the mill not only housed fulling stocks, but also an example of the relatively recently invented Knapping mill.
This was developed by Sir George Onersiphorous Paul, based at Southfields Mill.
William Hill remained at Inchbrook until around 1770, but by 1780 it was worked by John Rogers.
Following him, there was a rapid succession of occupants.
In 1802 two Messrs Goldsmith (clothiers) went bankrupt, replaced fairly swiftly by Cockle and Wicks.
At some time prior to 1810–1811, the mill was taken out of the cloth trade and converted to a corn mill, run by William Clissold.
He must have been the tenant for, in 1812, the mill had been bought by Peter Playne from the Wade family, in whose hands it had remained since around 1758.
Yet another mill had been added to the growing Playne empire.
Quite possibly it reverted to its former use.
It now became known locally as Playne's Little Mill, run by Peter Playne and Co.
By 1839 it was under the control of Playne and Smith, whose main base was Dunkirk Mill.
By now the tendency for manufacturers to concentrate on a single site was apparent, and many of the smaller mills, such as Inchbrook, fell into disuse.
Where the locality was suitable or where a number of mills were in close proximity to one another(such as the Hicks/Hooper empire at Eastington) it was still possible for a number of separate mills to be run together.
In the case of' Playne and Smith, they concentrated their efforts at a single site, Dunkirk, modernising it and installing a steam engine and power-looms.
Clearly the smaller mills were becoming uneconomic.
The result was that Inchbrook left the cloth trade and was taken over by Grist and Tabram for the manufacture of flock and shoddy.
The likes of William Grist and G.F. Tabram were, in a way, the replacements of the clothier dynasties such as the Playnes, rapidly creating a business that utilised many of the area's mills just as the clothiers had done before them.
For instance, in 1858,Philpotts Mill nearby, was being run by Grist and Tabram for the manufacture of flock and shoddy, and William Grist was running Merrets Mill for the same purpose in 1863.
In 1870, G.F. Tabram was using Dyehouse Mill for shoddy.
By the turn of the century, the mill was out of use.
Then Inchbrook was clearly put back to some industrial use as it was damaged by fire in August 1926.
By the late 1960s, it had been stripped of its machinery and converted for other purposes.
Power for Inchbrook Mill came from the Nailsworth Stream, but the little Stream itself rises in the lakes of the Woodchester Valley and originally powered three mills on its way to join the Nailsworth Stream.
The highest, Park Mill, was situated on the lowest lake, but now remains in name alone; however, the other two mills, farther down the valley, fared somewhat better.
Freames and Pitts Mills were in close proximity to one another and this, coupled with the fact that at various times they shared the same tenants and were put to similar uses, has caused a certain amount of confusion.
The highest of the two was Freames Mill, much of the site having disappeared in recent years.
During the 1980s, an engineering firm built their new premises over the area formerly occupied by the mill buildings and the pond.
Even fairly recent maps show a substantial pond, with buildings at either end of it, now all gone.
Freames Mill is first recorded around the middle of the 17th century, when it consisted of a fulling mill and possibly a corn mill.
By the early part of the 18th century, it housed two fulling  mills and in 1709 was leased or sold by John Freame to Thomas Yates or Yeates.
By c1800, the Norton family were there, by which time it had been reconstructed to house two fulling stocks and a gig mill.
In addition, a grist mill was now definitely in existence, having been built, or possibly rebuilt, during the 1780s.
Following the death of Robert Norton in 1808, the mill passed to his son, James.
By 1820, not only did he own Freames, but he was apparently also the owner of neighbouring Pitts Mill, for in that year he leased both to Nathaniel Samuel Marling.
Marling already occupied Pitts Mill and may well have been in Freames as well.
The latter had now been built up to a reasonable size with the main mill, a dye house, out buildings, stove, stables, press shop and store houses, as well as the grist mill.
Shortly after moving into Freames Mill, Marling installed two new stocks.
Power was provided by a pair of water wheels driven by the Inchbrook.
Little is known of the activities at Pitts Mill; presumably it was run in conjunction with its neighbour.
Marling eventually departed (his lease ran for 21 years) and cloth manufacture ceased.
By the 1850s, Freames Mill had been turned over to the manufacture of pins by Perkins, Critchley and Marmont, who were there for around a decade and who later operated on a much larger scale at Wimberley Mills.
Pitts Mill was also used for pin manufacture.
For a time, Freames was used for the manufacture of chemicals and later became known as Crystal Fountain Mill, then for the production of shoddy and mattress stuffing up to at least the Second World War.
It was then that it was bomb damaged, although apparently this was largely restricted to the toilets!
By now, steam power was being used.
Little of interest now remains at the site, but the 1920s boiler still survived (largely buried) in 1984.
Pitts Mill, now sometimes known as Oaklands Farm Mill, has been luckier and has, at least structurally, survived, although long since stripped of its manufacturing machinery.
Externally, it is little altered, the mill house and mill now forming an elegant dwelling and farm.
Further down the valley, just off the main road, stands Frogmarsh Mill .
By 1658 it had a dye house, a gig mill and two fulling stocks.
At the time, it belonged to a Minchinhampton man, Clutterbuck Deane, but by 1696, a relative, Mary Clutterbuck, was the owner.
Clutterbuck Deane died in 1701 and within a year Mary had sold the mill to Thomas Shurmur, in whose family it was to remain for a century.
Although the Shurmur family retained ownership, in 1706 it was leased to Edward Yeate, who was later replaced by his son, still engaged in cloth manufacture in the latter half of the 18th century.
The Shurmur family kept the mill up to 1800, when a descendant of Thomas Shurmur, who was running the mill at the time, was declared bankrupt.
Within a short period, after over a hundred years in the Shurmurs' hands, the mill was conveyed to William Humphries Bennet and, in 1806, passed into the hands of John Knowles.
The next few decades saw a number of changes of ownership with such people as John Clarke and later, John Chalk running the mill.
By 1840, Chalk's son owned the mill and leased it to the cloth manufacturing partnership of Samuel Francis and A.M. Flint, who remained there until 1853.
It was owned in 1846 by William Haycock, who had mortgaged it to Robert Bamford.
However, Frogmarsh Mill's long involvement in the cloth trade was drawing to a close, for by 1863 it had been taken over for the manufacture of pins by the firm of Perkins, Critchley and Marmont.
The Critchley part of the partnership later started a pin manufactory in what was another old cloth mill, Wimberley Mills, in 1883.
In 1906, the Critchley Brothers also bought Dark Mills at Brimscombe, just above the Bourne Boat Yard.
The manufacture of pins continued at Frogmarsh until 4 May 1934, when the company closed its doors for the last time.
After a period of disuse, the Carr Tanning Co took over the premises and are still there.
The company was founded in 1934 to manufacture sheepskin leathers for the shoe and slipper trades.
Frogmarsh has since developed into one of the most modern tanneries in the UK and today supplies high quality leather goods, mainly for export.
Today, the mill's best face is not at the front but at the rear.
Viewed from the adjacent lane is a long wall showing various features from different periods of the mill's history.
This is the oldest remaining part and, unlike much of' the remainder of the site, is still full of character.
Much of the main three storey mill dates from the mid-19th century, although a large part of this is masked by the addition of later industrial plant and buildings.
The nearby lane leads to Sommerwell House, originally the family home of the powerful Playne clothier family.
At the foot of the lane stands a most interesting little building, formerly associated with Frogmarsh, although now converted to a house.
Many theories have been put forward over the years as to its original purpose.
It is likely that it was originally for wool drying, although there is a local tradition that it was also used for the drying of teazles, imported from Somerset, hence its local name of the Teazel Tower.
In later life it served as a stable, the 16th century structure being initially restored in 1937 and subsequently converted.
Another building of interest in the vicinity is Churchs Mill , just downstream from Frogmarsh.
Churchs Mill, although of fairly moderate size compared with some of its neighbours, is a delightful two-storey building of brick and stone.
It started life in the cloth trade but, as with many other Woodchester mills, was eventually turned over to other uses.
The mill is first mentioned in the first part of the 17th century and is thought to have been built around 1620, although clearly much of the present building is of a later date.
It had two fulling stocks, a gig mill and in addition, a grist mill, not an uncommon combination.
Then it was being run by the aptly named Thomas Mill.
By 1637 the Church family, from whom the mill takes its name, were in residence and were to remain so until the early part of the 18th century.
In 1716, the mill was mortgaged, still comprising the same layout.
By 1793, Thomas Cooper was running it, supplanted in the first quarter of the 19th century by William Peach Cooper.
The mill was later taken over by the cloth producers, Woolwark and Bird, a concern that also occupied a number of other mills.
In 1840 they made such diverse products as doeskins, superfines, scarlet hunters and billiard cloth.
By the 1860s, Oliver Bird was the mill owner and by the 1870s was running the mill within the partnership of Bird and Bubb.
That was fairly short-lived and the mill was sold in 1875, following the death of one of the partners.
After Bird and Bubb came.
T. Fox, a company who maintained cloth making there, where they remained until the turn of the century.
Churchs found itself unable to compete any longer with the larger mills.
Around 1900–1901, the mill was closed and put up for sale, remaining unoccupied for some time.
For a short period it was used for the manufacture of bedding materials and mattresses.
Later, the mill was turned over to the turning and manufacture of wooden items.
Stephen Court well remembers the mill, being first run by his great grandfather and later, his grandfather, Frederick Beard.
The mill produced countless products for Woolworths, such as umbrella and kitchen utensil handles, and broom heads.
At the time, it was powered by a single 36′ diameter water wheel (it originally had two) of iron and wood construction.
One wooden paddle later formed the basis of' the front door of' a nearby house.
The wheel provided the power, via line-shafting and belting, to the wood-turning machinery situated on the upper floor.
This floor also housed a number of paint and varnish vats, into which the handles were dipped.
The wheel also supplied the power to the large circular saw that was on the lower floor.
The water wheel was later replaced with electric motors.
Following this, the mill was occupied by several engineering firms who, in their turn, were replaced by the Chalford Stick Company, a concern originally founded in 1903.
They formerly occupied part of St Mary's Mill in Chalford, but are now at Churchs Mill, turning out countless walking sticks every year, many for the NHS.
It is not uncommon to see hundreds of raw lengths of wood stored outside the building, awaiting conversion, via one of the specialised processes, into walking sticks.
It is gratifying to know that the industry that once gave employment to many hundreds of the local population, is still able to flourish in small pockets.
Not far downstream is Woodchester Mill .
From the earliest references of around 1600, to the start of' the 19th century, Woodchester Mill graduated from a modest corn and fulling mill to a particularly fine cloth mill.
It was owned and worked by a succession of owners and tenants including members of the Dudbridge, Paul, Webb and Wathen families.
Many periods of rebuilding and enlargement must have taken place, but one building was definitely added by Holliday Dudbridge during the 1730s.
The beginning of the 19th century saw Paul Wathen working the mill and, under his control, a radical redevelopment of the site was carried out between 1803 and 1804.
The main mill was rebuilt, additional buildings erected and modern machinery, such as shearing frames, installed, power being provided by a pair of water wheels.
Wathen continued to operate the mill up to 1818, but by 1820, Joseph and Obadiah Paul Wathen were in control.
At some point around 1830, steam power was installed in order to boost the power from the water wheels, the firm of (O.P.) Wathen and Cook in residence.
At the time Woodchester Mill was particularly well known for the production of Superfine Saxony Broadcloth.
Despite the company's high reputation and its updated machinery, 1837 saw Wathen declared bankrupt, the mill passing to the mortgagee, Paul Hawkins Fisher.
For several years it appears it remained empty, but by 1845 was back in business, with tenants John and Edward Wise producing cloth.
Hawkins retained ownership until 1868, when Edward Wise bought the mill for £4,900.
Mr Wise's Mill continued to make cloth for some time, although it is not clear whether the firm of Ellis and Apperly, who were later recorded there, were more than tenants for a while.
Various other reports suggest that Wise was at the mill up to 1890.
By this time, Woodchester Mill, like so many others, had left the cloth trade and stood empty.
The turn of the century saw at least part of the site turned over to saw milling, but by 1911 Gladman and Co, piano makers, were there.
In later years, it became the Stroud Piano Company and later Bentley Pianos.
The late 1920s and '30s seems to have been a bad time in the Woodchester area for fires.
Grist and Inchbrook Mills were damaged, and Rooksmoor was burnt down in 1932, followed by Woodchester in 1938.
The latter fire was one of the biggest for many years, and much of the site was destroyed.
It took a long time to bring the fire under control, the local pubs kept open for three days and nights.
More than one drunken fireman was reputedly found asleep in an adjacent stable.
Following the destruction of the main mill, the company converted a number of buildings on the opposite side of the road and purchased a second site, previously used for the manufacture of incubators.
This became known as the No 2 site.
The Second World War saw the end of piano manufacture, the works turned over to the production of aircraft parts by the Gloucester Aircraft Company, but after the war, piano manufacture started up again.
Both sites were kept going until the early 1980s, when the latter was closed and subsequently covered by new housing in late 1988.
Despite the end of the cloth trade, two World Wars and a major fire, Woodchester Mill has remained a busy working site with Woodchester-built pianos still managing to find their way to every corner of the globe.
Yet another of Woodchester's mills,Rooksmoor , stands a short way downstream.
This was yet another corn mill, probably built during the 16th century, later turned over to fulling and subsequently enlarged to form a substantial cloth mill.
It would have prospered had it not been for the disastrous fire of 1935 that largely destroyed it.
By 1729, it had become a cloth mill worked as tenant by Edward Peach.
Until 1858 it remained a cloth mill, run by a succession of owners and tenants, including Paul Wathen, Joseph Haigh and Charles Peach.
During the 1850s, it was converted to production of flock and shoddy.
1858 brought the partnership of Grist and Niblett, although later reference only mention Richard Grist.
The business carried on, despite the 1932 fire, until 1935, when it changed hands, becoming the Stroud Flock Company and later known locally as Lipsey's Flock Mill.
Manufacture finally ceased in 1960 when the site became the home of Rooksmoor Mills Ltd, suppliers of high quality furniture and related products.
Only the lower storey of the main mill block survives, plus a few ancillary buildings, this having been imaginatively converted into showrooms, still retaining some of the original iron Venetian mill windows.
Although comparatively little of the original mill buildings remain, it is still possible to gauge the size of what was once one of the Stroud area's largest flock manufacturers.
The waters flow on downstream, eventually reaching the outskirts of Stroud itself.
Here the now extensive Lightpill Mill site stands at the confluence of the Nailsworth Stream with a smaller one that runs down from Rodborough Hill.
Lightpill Mill is first mentioned during the 17th century, as a grist mill.
From the middle until the close of the century, it was in the hands of the Escourt family.
It was sold successively to John Bennett and Thomas Roberts, in whose family it remained until 1782, when it was again sold, this time to William Read, who leased the mills (in 1805) to Butlin and Co.
Until then the grist mill existed, but presumably it was then demolished or converted.
Rebuilding started in 1818.
Shillito Stather, who then owned the mill, carried out a fairly substantial enlargement of the site, creating the Little, North, South and Middle Mills, as well as numerous related buildings.
Then he leased them out to J.F. Marling and Westley.
During the partnership's time at the mill, even more building was carried out, including an additional block, powered by three water wheels.
Their stay at Lightpill was relatively brief; by 1830 they had gone.
The Assistant Commissioners' later report mentions that Lightpill was occupied by Brown and Tucker, and that they had only two hand looms, both unemployed.
Despite this, much of the site was still in use for cloth manufacture, although probably on a smaller scale, as parts were leased out to tenants.
The South Mill was used for the manufacture of pins, under Daniel Foote Tayler, credited with the manufacture of some of the earliest solid-headed pins produced in Britain.
Despite his technical successes, over the next decade he was doomed to fail financially.
A further rebuilding occurred in the 1850s, during the partnership of William Barnard and William Jowlings.
They added extensions, steam power and large loom sheds.
After a change in the partnership, Roberts, Jowling and Co produced cloth using ‘thoroughly good machinery’, until their bankruptcy some time between 1906 and 1908.
The Lightpill complex then systematically turned over to other uses.
From 1910, the loom sheds were used by Frederick Steele, a printing firm, whilst other parts housed Syrolit Ltd, a company that produced a variety of articles from one of the new plastic materials.
Following financial difficulties, the company became Erinoid Ltd, a name still well-remembered.
It provided employment for many hands over many decades, eventually being taken over by Kleeman Ltd, which later became part of the Mobil Chemicals group.
The mid-1960s saw the mill part of BP Chemicals, raw materials for the site being stored in a number of locations including old mills at Dudbridge and Eastington.
By the 1970s, hundreds were employed in the manufacture of articles from a variety of polymeric materials.
It was a great blow to the local community when, in 1982, BP quickly ran down their operations at Lightpill and closed the mill.
Recent years have seen the site developed as a trading estate, now housing a number of firms.
Sadly, even their combined efforts cannot hope to compensate for the many jobs lost.
Today, the main blocks of the complex remain, externally altered little.
The mill still boasts its impressive chimney and mill clock, set in the front wall.
Although many new additions cluster around the older buildings, the old mill still stands proudly over all, a reminder of the days when it was one of the biggest and most important mills in the area.
ABOVE: Henry Hicks built Meadow Mill around 1811.
It later became part of the Hooper's complex, specialising in weaving.
Cloth manufacture ended in 1906, and between 1910 and 1935 the mill produced leatherboard.
Meadow Mill now forms the nucleus of a small trading estate.
BELOW: An advertisement from 1930 illustrating the Stonehouse Paper and Bag Mills, housed in one of the lower Frome Valley's former cloth mills.
The ‘bag mills’ were an important employer in the Stonehouse area for many years.
Lower Mills stands between Bonds and Upper Stonehouse Mills, some of the buildings shown having now been demolished.
OPPOSITE LEFT: Particulars of sale by auction of Millend Mill at Eastington, 1887.
Like so many others, by this time Millend had left the cloth trade and, in this case, been turned over to corn and saw milling.
BELOW: Millend was gutted by fire when it was a maltings.
Despite extensive damage it was later rebuilt and used as a roller corn mill.
(BH) RIGHT: Churchend Mill formerly stood on a site in use since at least the 14th century.
It was rebuilt early in the 19th century by Hicks, who installed steam power.
Later in its life, it formed Hooper's spinning centre but closed in 1906 and was largely demolished in 1911.
The weir upstream, built by Hicks, is of slag blocks, possibly from Fromebridge.
LEFT: Beards Mill was used by Hooper as a dyeing centre.
It had earlier been in the hands of the Beard family for around a century.
The main mill was demolished around 1910 although the workers' cottage/dyehouses still survive.
The large mill owner's house is on the extreme right.
RIGHT: One of the most interesting buildings at Beards Mill is this early 19th century wool store, which may also have been used for weaving.
BELOW: A pause from work at Bonds Mill.
(WM)
LEFT: Bonds Mill was originally built in the early 18th century although many of the buildings date from the 1887 rebuilding.
Owners and tenants included Messrs Ball.
Wood, Playne, Warner, White and latterly Charles Hooper.
This was the last bastion of the Hooper empire, cloth manufacture ending in 1934.
RIGHT: The present Stanley Mill was built early in the 19th century, using a complex structure of iron arches, linked throughout its five storeys.
It was one of the first truly fireproof mills in the country.
BELOW: Stanley Mill in 1987, but it could have been in the last century, with its elegant, yet functional iron arches, which allowed plenty of room for line-shafting.
ABOVE: Oil Mill started life producing rape and linseed oil, later became a cloth mill, eventually converted to corn.
The large arch formed part of an early but abortive hydro-electric scheme.
A turbine still survives.
BELOW: Ebley Mill on the Stroudwater Canal, now infilled.
It has been converted to municipal offices.
(WM)
LEFT: For some years Ebley Mill stood empty and decaying.
Even in this condition its buildings remained magnificent; the chateau-inspired tower block was added during the 1860s by C.F. Bodley.
ABOVE: Lodgemore Mill has been in use since at least the 12th century and is still in use for cloth manufacture.
This was the 18th century clothier's house, partially used for storage.
It is now a company office.
BELOW: Lodgemore Mill had a history of fires, the one in 1871 destroying virtually all the stone-built mill.
The present building dates from 1875.
OPPOSITE ABOVE: Suttons Mill at Cranham, one of the few mills on the Painswick stream having no connection with the cloth trade.
The internal water wheel was originally fed via an iron pipe.
BELOW: Damsells Mill, now a house.
A cloth mill for many years, it was converted to corn.
The internal water wheel and gearing survives.
ABOVE: Brookhouse Mill in the throes of conversion to dwellings, the last of the Painswick mills to be worked commercially, producing pins.
BELOW: Savery's pin manufactory; the water wheel survived until the 1960s.
(WM)
ABOVE: Kings Mill at Painswick: there has been a mill here since the 1400s.
During the 19th century it was a cloth mill run by the Palling family, powered by two water wheels.
By the 1860s, it was a pin mill.
Most of it has been demolished but some forms part of Kings Mill House.
Power was provided by the combined waters of the Painswick Stream and the Washbrook.
BELOW: Lovedays Mill at Painswick during the 18th century was both a fulling and grist mill.
By the 1850s, it was solely a corn mill, working up to the First World War.
It was known locally as The Creamery and is now a house.
ABOVE: A number of the tributaries of the Painswick Stream also powered cloth mills.
This little mill stands on the Washbrook.
BELOW: Stratford Mill, gutted by fire in 1907.
OPPOSITE ABOVE: A 19th century line drawing of Oakridge Mill.
Coal for the mill's steam engine was carried up the steep hill on donkeys.
CENTRE: St Mary's Mill is one of the most outstanding complexes in the Stroud valleys.
It now houses a restored water wheel and steam engine.
LEFT: Undoubtedly one of the prettiest mill sites in Chalford, Belvedere Mill houses an electronics company.
RIGHT: Port Mill took its name from the canal basin of the Thames and Severn Canal.
Brimscombe Port was once a hive of activity but has now largely disappeared.
ABOVE: Port Mill, showing its proximity to the canal basin.
Its distinctive chimney was demolished many years ago.
BELOW: From its source, the Avening Stream once powered a number of mills, the highest, Avening Mill, used for cloth manufacture, corn grinding and possibly silk throwing.
The main building dates from the early 19th century.
ABOVE: Longfords Mill site has been used since c1300, mainly for cloth.
It was bought in the 1790s by the Playne family, who built the lake (Gatcombe Water), as well as new buildings.
It became one of the most successful in the district and in 1920 was amalgamated with Hunt, Winterbotham, Strachan & Co.
New weaving sheds were built in 1912 and a new spinning mill in 1951.
Playne & Co still occupy the mill, specialising in cloth for tennis balls.
BELOW: Iron Mill stood immediately below Longfords, and was an iron works during the 17th century.
The Playnes used it as a cloth mill in the 19th century but it was also a saw mill.
Much has been demolished but the remodelled mill owner's house survives.
LEFT: The chimney of Holcombe Mill is one of the few survivors of its kind.
ABOVE: This interesting building at Holcombe Mill was formerly the wool drying stove and since then, has been both cottage and shop.
BELOW: The site was originally quite complex and has been used for cloth manufacture, flock and shoddy production.
The little Spring Mill was built around the middle of the 19th century.
The main mill had three water wheels and Spring Mill a single 20 foot wheel.
OPPOSITE LEFT: Days Mill, in Nailsworth, was one of the first in the area to have power looms installed in a specially built loom shed.
A steam engine was installed during the 1830s.
Part of the main mill and the mill ponds have now gone.
BELOW: Millbottom (Ruskin) Mill has been a cloth, corn and saw mill as well as a brass finishing works and shoe stiffener manufactory and in its later life used for the manufacture of dyestuffs.
It is now being rebuilt and houses a small community of artists and craftsmen.
RIGHT: A door lintel at Egypt Mill House is dated 1698, the initials those of Richard Webb, clothier.
Since its conversion to a restaurant, many surviving components have been used around the site.
ABOVE: Egypt Mill, out of use during the early 1980s and BELOW: the area around Egypt Mill was carefully landscaped and much of the equipment restored.
The two internal water wheels and much of the gearing remain inside open to view.
LEFT: Inchbrook Mill now partially in domestic use, around the turn of the century.
Notice the ventilated walls.
(WM) BELOW: Delivery of a new boiler to Freames (Crystal Fountain) Mill, thought to be during the 1920s.
The boiler was produced by George Cohen & Sons, of London.
(RB) INSET: Freames Mill has now one but remains of the old boiler were still visible in 1984.
ABOVE: Pitts Mill and house in the early 1980s, virtually unaltered.
BELOW: Dyehouse was formerly known as Philpots Mill.
A mill has occupied this site since the 16th century, initially for cloth manufacture and later for flock and shoddy production.
Grist and Tabram operated the mill later in its life.
It is now used by an engineering business.
LEFT: Merrets Mill was used as a cloth mill but was later turned over to the production of flock, shoddy and mill puff, by the Grist family.
It now houses an engineering works.
RIGHT: Churchs Mill at Woodchester, one of the few surviving stick manufacturers in the county.
BELOW: Dunkirk Mills, one of the most magnificent mills in the county, when used for hosiery knitting and stick manufacture.
(WM)
ABOVE: The teazle tower next to Frogmarsh Mill.
Its uses have included wool and teazle drying, stabling and latterly, a dwelling.
BELOW: The interior of Dunkirk Mills in 1985, when the huge building was virtually empty.
RIGHT: After standing empty for many years, plans are in hand for its conversion to dwellings.
ABOVE: Frogmarsh Mill, showing the oldest section, now houses the Carr Tanning Company.
In the 1930s Lord Aberconway bought the Mill's Music House, dismantled and reconstructed it at Bodnant in North Wales.
LEFT: The No 2 site of the Bentley Piano Company, still producing pianos today.
BELOW: Supplies of wood being allowed to season, prior to use at Woodchester Mill.
(LB)
ABOVE: Woodchester Mill during the 1920s, home of Bentley Pianos.
(LB) BELOW: Inside the woodworking department around 1920.
The line shafting and drive belts were used to transmit power.
(LB) INSET: The finished product, 1920s.
(LB)
ABOVE: A 19th century drawing of Rooksmoor Mills.
Only part of this extensive cloth and flock mill remains, much having been destroyed by fire.
BELOW: Lightpill Mill is now a small trading estate, housing a number of different companies.
This aerial shot shows how extensive the site was when Erinoids occupied it.
(WM)
GLOUCESTER AND THE SURROUNDING AREA
The Dock Mills
Gloucester has always been an important centre for the water-borne movement of goods, its quays dating back many centuries, and as far back as anyone can trace, the Severn has been used for both the import and export of a multitude of commodities.
Added importance was given Gloucester by its docks and the Gloucester and Berkley Canal, the latter eventually completed in 1827.
This resulted in increased volume of grain imported, transhipped at Gloucester and sent out (often by canal) to various mills, such as John Biddle's at Stroud.
Clearly this operation greatly complicated matters and consequently added to the cost.
In a number of cases, grain was carried up the canal to the docks, was transhipped, and promptly retraced its steps along the canal to Saul Junction where it passed onto the Stroudwater Canal.
The demand for flour continued to rise and it soon became apparent that considerable savings in both costs and labour could be effected if the repeated handling and transportation could be reduced.
The result was the appearance of a number of substantial steam-powered mills in the vicinity of the docks itself.
The first actual direct steam-driven flour mill is thought to have been that of Young and Co, of Bristol in 1780, in Lewis Mead, near the city centre and powered by a Wasborough/Pickerd engine.
There were a few others of the same period, Youngs Mill being advertised for sale in 1828, with a 16hp engine, driving three pairs of four foot diameter stones.
There were about 45 rotary steam corn mills built before 1800.
The London Albion Mills was one of the biggest, built in 1784 near Blackfriars Bridge, with two steam engines, powering 36 pairs of stones.
This burnt down in 1791 but had a dramatic effect on milling in London and clearly had an influence on the Gloucester Docks scheme.
Steam was not only utilised by the larger mills but was also brought into service in various rural mills, in an effort to compete with their urban counterparts.
In some cases, such as Lower Framilode, steam was used to power everything in the mill, whereas in others, such as Stoke Orchard Mill, it was limited to providing the power for ancillary equipment.
The adoption of steam power in such places as the docks meant that the milling operation was no longer limited to water-powered sites, often in remote locations.
The first in the docks area was the Gloucester Steam Mills, arriving around 1840.
It was followed in 1850 by the City Flour Mills of the brothers Joseph and Jonah Hadley.
Their operations began on a modest scale, using a small steam engine to drive two pairs of stones and some ancillary equipment, but so successful were their efforts that they installed two new larger engines and built their own warehouse.
The repeal of the Corn Laws in 1846 clearly had a great influence upon the increase in grain arrivals at Gloucester.
The establishment of the dock mills effectively sounded the death knell for many of the smaller rural mills, such as those on the River Twyver and Horsebere Brook.
A similar situation was happening in nearby Tewkesbury when, in 1865, Samuel Healing opened his large steam-powered Borough Mills in Quay Street.
This effectively shut down many of the smaller mills, such as many of those along the Carrant Brook.
Over the next few decades, more steam mills were established in Gloucester.
The 1860s saw the Quay Street Mills started by Samuel Luker.
He had been milling in a modest way at Grove Mill near Painswick, but presumably saw where the future lay.
The latter part of the decade saw St Owens Mill start up, followed within a few years by the Island Street and Victoria Street Mills, Luker also involved with the latter.
The City Flour Mills later came into the hands of Reynolds and Allen who had previously been working a number of other sites and had, since 1863, been working Stratford Mills in Stroud.
They subsequently worked the mill to great effect, but fluctuations in trade caused problems for them among others.
Around 1885 the company went out of business, replaced within a year by Priday Metford and Co.
Within a few years, that company suffered a serious, albeit temporary, setback when fire gutted much of the adjacent warehouse.
This was rebuilt and updated.
By the early part of the 20th century, milling on such a scale had become concentrated in two main mills, the Albert Mills (which James Reynolds had set up in the Albert Warehouse in 1869) and the City Flour Mills, described in 1906 as ‘large and well equipped, having adopted the roller system at an early date’.
Between them they had a weekly capacity of 5,500 sacks.
The Albert Mills finally closed in 1977, but the City Mills, still in the hands of Priday Metford Ltd, continues to work.
Previously, most local grain was ground in the many small mills around the city and outlying areas.
As with a number of other regions, a number of these early mill sites were in the hands of religious foundations, such as the Benedictines and Cistercian Orders who, up to the time of their suppression in the 16th century, owned as many mills as any of the estates or manors in Britain.
Many were run along efficient lines and provided substantial income for their Order.
Not surprisingly, monastic mills were put to a variety of uses.
Some were in use as fulling mills whilst others were used predominantly for the grinding of barley for brewing the monastery's beer supply.
Probably the greatest number were always corn mills, those more distant being used to provide a steady income.
There was, as at St Peters in Gloucester, often a mill in close proximity to the Abbey (the precinctual mill), mainly used for the preparation of flour for the Order's use.
In some situations, the mill had to provide for substantial numbers of people for, apart from the monks themselves, there were frequently large numbers of lay brethren and servants.
In 1380 there were 50 monks at St Peters, with no less than 200 servants.
Clearly, the precinctual mill had an important role to play.
Daily operation was usually carried out by a miller who, like a number of other employees, was actually paid a salary and granted a number of other privileges.
River Twyver and Horsebere Brook
The operation of such monastic mills was usually supervised by the Cellarer, whose function was to inspect and supervise the production of both beer and bread.
He usually worked with a sub-cellarer who controlled the delivery of oats, barley and wheat from the Order's farms, and supervised the actual grinding operations, as well as baking.
Some of the religious orders built up substantial commercial empires.
During the 12th century, the Abbot of St Peters had a great deal of construction work carried out, the result of which was the creation of the River Twyver, powering no less than seven monastic mills, all under his control.
To the east of the Abbey precinct, the manor of Abbot's Barton stretched for nearly three miles towards Upton St Leonards, and it was through this that the waterways and mills were constructed.
A further two mills appeared later.
Following the Suppression, mill sites came into other hands, many being re-used time and time again.
The old monastic sites along the Twyver later came to be known as Barnwood, Court Farm, Fishers, Woods, Browns, Morins and Abbey Mills, the latter adjacent to the Cathedral, in what became known as Millers Green.
Some sites eventually fell out of use, as Arthur Causton's  map of 1843 shows only three main sites in the vicinity of the City.
These are not named, but the first mill is next to the hamlet of Wotton St Mary, the second is in the hamlet of Barton St Michael and the third, nearer Upton.
The River Twyver had by then been culverted for much of its length and is shown making occasional appearances near the Cathedral and St Mary De Lode, before emptying into the Dockham Ditch, and hence to the Severn.
The Abbey Mill had been replaced with The Old Mill House (number 2 in Millers Green) in the late 18th century, an original millstone apparently surviving in the cellar to this day.
The tributary of the Twyver that provided the power still flows underneath in a culvert.
Number 7 was originally the monastic granary, now sporting a new frontage, put up around 1890.
Many of the Twyver's mills were swallowed up as the City of Gloucester expanded.
Such an example was Browns Mill, which formerly stood where India Road is now.
A painting in 1871 by Edward Smith, now in the City Museum, shows it to have been fairly large, partly domestic and partly industrial.
It appears that the mill was built onto a half-timbered house of mediaeval origin (greatly extended), the mill wing of red brick construction.
Early editions of the Ordnance Survey still show mills on a number of the old monastic sites, as well as a number in and around Upton St Leonards itself.
Not all off these were powered by the Twyver.
Of the Upton Mills, there are still remains at several sites, although a number of others have recently been demolished, apparently with little resistance, to disappear under intensive housing development.
Running north and roughly parallel to the Twyver is the Horsebere Brook.
This was responsible for powering Pitts Mill , at Hucclecote, and was once under the control of Zoons Court.
The mill no longer stands although a few traces remain, near the farm.
The Domesday Survey records a mill at Hucclecote which would have been Pitts or Ptymilne Mill.
There are records of a windmill near this site (a sale notice of 1761 refers to ‘a wind and water grist mill with a french stone and dwelling, stable and cider mill’) but the exact location is unclear.
The Witcombe reservoirs (where the Horsebere originates) opened around 1860 and were responsible for depleting the water supply to the mill, which eventually led to its downfall.
There was an inquiry about this in 1867, when Richard Colwell was said to have left wheat at the mill for three weeks, while waiting for enough water to work the mill.
There are rumours that the mill was used as recently as 1923, although no records confirm this, and the mill race was filled in by 1958.
The Horsebere has been culverted around the old site, although the former path can still be made out today.
It is rumoured locally that there was also a mill on the site of the weir, now surrounded by the Millfields development in Hucclecote.
Further upstream towards Brockworth, the brook also powered a corn mill, but of Brockworth Mill there is now little trace.
Today, the little River Twyver (and the Horsebere Brook) is largely forgotten, much of its lower section completely culverted.
It is now difficult to imagine it wending its way towards the City through open fields, the river itself, like so many of its mills, having long been engulfed by the suburbs.
Standish Mills
South towards Stroud, passing Quedgeley and Hardwicke is the little village of Standish, which originally had four mills in its vicinity.
The Arlebrook provided the power.
Of these, two were corn mills, one eventually became an iron works and the other probably a corn mill, although there may have been a period when it was used as a fulling mill.
The latter had a connection, in the 16th century, with a Dursley clothier.
This particular mill was at Oxlynch and stood close to the twin sources of the Arlebrook.
The latter flows down towards Standish itself, where it formerly provided the power for two corn mills in fairly close proximity to one another.
These were Standish Upper and Lower Mills .
The Upper Mill formed part of a group of buildings around Standish Court and stood immediately to the rear.
Constructed of stone and with a tiled roof, it went out of use shortly after the First World War.
Following a period of disuse, its machinery and water wheel were removed.
The mill saw some use for storage and was eventually converted to a dwelling during the late 1940s.
Lower Mill was a short distance along Standish Lane, this too being fed by the diverted waters of the same stream.
The Lower Mill site had clearly been re-used on a number of occasions, as references during the 16th century describe it as a structure of mud walls with a thatched roof.
It was replaced with the elegant stone-built building during the 19th century.
In 1889, the miller was W. Butt, of Standish Court, although by 1897 it was Percival Prout, the Prout family by then living there.
Both Lower and Upper Mills appear to have been worked by a single miller, both presumably owned by the Prouts.
The last miller at Lower Mill was Mr E. White, who worked it up to 1925.
During the following years, Lower Mill was damaged by fire and a house eventually built on its site.
This still retains the name and reputedly made use of some of the stonework from the mill itself.
Traces of water courses can still be identified around the site.
From Lower Mill, the Arlebrook makes its way to Putloe, where it was again put to use.
The Putloe site was recorded in 1810 as a forge, and by the 1820s as an iron works.
Slag blocks used in local building work probably date from that period.
Later the site became known as Putloe Mill, its last use reputedly that of pin manufacture, possibly in connection with Fromebridge Mill.
Reynolds Flour Mills, Gloucester Docks.
LEFT: An advertisement from c1925 for the various products of Foster Brothers' British Oil and Cake Mills, in Gloucester Docks.
The engraving gives some idea of what a hub of' industry the Docks formerly were.
RIGHT: By the early 20th century, milling in Gloucester Docks had become centralised in two main mills, one of which was James Reynolds, who was based in the Albert Mills.
The company operated from 1869 until 1977, this advertisement dating from 1927.
BELOW: The long-running concern of Priday-Metford Ltd is now the last survivor of what was once a trade of great importance to Gloucester.
The company has operated the City Flour Mills for around a century.
This advertisement is a typical example of their marketing strategy during the 1920s.
LEFT: Priday's complex, with a tanker ready for loading from the mill.
RIGHT: Browns Mill (taken during the 1870s) was fed by the River Twyver and a corn mill throughout its life.
It was eventually swallowed up by the expanding city.
(RAB) BELOW: A 1777 map of the River Twyver, showing the numerous corn mills between Gloucester and Upton St Leonards.
ABOVE: Owens Mill at Upton St Leonards and BELOW: a close-up of the remains of the launder in October 1987.
ABOVE LEFT: Greens Mill at Upton St Leonards was once a working corn mill but is now derelict.
A new house has recently been built in its grounds and the mill is likely to disappear.
RIGHT: Pitt Mill in Hucclecote in 1910, here a rural mill.
Today a house stands on the site, at the entrance of the Millfields development.
(AD)
BELOW RIGHT: Pitt Mill and farm in 1906, the farmer in the foreground.
The belt wheel (left) on j the mill wall was used to drive auxiliary equipment.
(AD) LEFT: Lower Mill at Standish, in the hands of the Prout family of Standish Court.
The miller is Percival Prout.
(MH)
THE VALE OF LEADON & FOREST OF DEAN
The River Leadon and its tributaries
To the West of Gloucester, close to Maisemore, the River Leadon joins the Severn, near Over Hospital.
This river has, in its time, supported many mills, put to a variety of uses, from corn milling to pin making.
The first mill site is near Highnam.
This was Rudford Mill , a three-storey building with a two-storey loft and storehouse.
Little of interest now remains, with the exception of the relics of a chimney, built when steam power was added in the mill's heyday to supplement water power.
The second mill of importance is Highleadon Mill (often referred to as Hartpury Mill).
This originally had two large diameter undershot wheels, both of iron construction with timber floats.
Only one wheel now remains, although this is fixed at its base.
This corn mill ceased operations around 1940, becoming a grain store, and since part of a large landscaped garden near the impressive Highleadon Tithe Barn.
Just below this mill at Tibberton, the Tibberton Brook joins the Leadon and nearby, to the west, is Tibberton Mill .
This again was a corn mill, that continued to work, although producing animal feed in later life, until the late 1950s.
Apparently, towards the end of its life, the demand for its products soared and an oil engine was installed to supplement the water power.
Like many mills, its comparatively remote position, coupled with oil price rises in the late 1950s to early 1960s, plus increasing competition from the big producers at Gloucester, caused the mill to eventually go out of business.
The wheel, of 16 feet diameter, and most of the machinery is still intact although apparently in a poor state of repair.
The Leadon, just north of Tibberton, is joined by another tributary, the Ell Brook, which wends its way towards Newent.
The first mill, near where the Leadon and Ell join, is at Malswick, and is called Malswick Mill .
During the 1880s and 1890s, the miller was Francis William Giles, by 1914 it was in the hands of James Faulks and between 1927 up to shortly before the Second World War, William George Perry.
It now forms part of a farm, close to the main Gloucester-Ross road.
The farm/miller's house is adjacent and, like the mill, of brick construction.
The mill still contains its iron half-breast shot wheel together with all the machinery, stones etc, although much of this has been idle since the early 1950s and has fallen into disrepair.
The Ell Brook formerly worked several mills, including Oakle Pitcher Mill and Brass Mill .
Oakle Pitcher was always worked as a corn mill and, during the 1860s, was operated by Richard Phillips Jr.
Brass Mill was originally a corn mill, but was briefly used for the production of the ‘finest quality’ brass pins.
It was converted to a private house, with only the leat still visible in the landscaped gardens.
It is on the site of the old Malswick Halt, which was once part of the Newent to Gloucester Railway, another industrial relic that has long disappeared.
Further upstream, now hemmed in by the Newent bypass and the sewage works, almost cowering under the bypass bridge, in Cleeve Mill lane, stands Cleeve Mill .
It is close to the centre of the little town of Newent and a typical example of the moderately-sized, brick-built mills that have ground corn for the area.
Cleeve Mill reputedly occupies the site of a Saxon predecessor.
It must have been rebuilt on many occasions, the present building and  adjoining mill house dating from around 1726.
Both were built from bricks fired locally in the Newent area.
The water supply is still sufficient to keep the, now landscaped, mill pond supplied.
The water arrives via a long, straight mill race, about half a mile in length.
The now defunct sluice gates are still in place at the head of the race, which is much higher than the Ell Brook.
This enabled the use of an overshot wheel, uncommon in this area, with a drop of around 8 feet into the mill pond below, before rejoining the Ell Brook.
The mill passed through the hands of many millers over the centuries, finally ceasing operations in the mid-1950s.
As far as can be ascertained, it has always been a corn mill, mainly grinding corn from local farms for local consumption and in later life, rolled oats for local farmers.
Records show that, by 1914, a Miss Flora Mead Jones was the miller and was resident there until 1927.
By the early 1930s, it was in the hands of John Henry Lawrence, who continued to work it until the mid-1950s.
Inside, the three-storey mill retains much of its equipment, which is of a fairly conventional layout.
The machinery drives two sets of stones, all of the equipment, such as hoppers, etc, still being complete.
The iron overshot wheel is still in place, fed by a wooden launder.
It would apparently only require minor repairs plus a reliable water supply to put the mill back into operation.
The water supply to the mill house comes from one of the many springs in the area and has always been known locally as Newent Spa Water.
Fortunately, the mill and its adjoining house are both in a good state of repair and with today's increased awareness of the importance of such buildings, it is likely to stay that way.
It is a good example of a typical local mill, of the type that was once commonplace in the region.
Another interesting site just to the north west of Newent, at Oxenhall, is the remains of the Elmbridge Furnace, near the former Newent Railway Station.
There is documentary evidence that a corn mill stood here in 1624, although by 1645 it was used as a blast furnace.
Then it was in the hands of the Foley family, who were also operating Guns mill at Abenhall.
By the late 1880s, the mill had returned to corn milling, ceasing work completely in the early part of the 20th century.
The remains of the blowing house, with the bricked-up water wheel aperture, is still visible.
The large barn, supported by stone buttresses, may have been the charcoal store.
The furnace pond still survives and is about 200 yards east of Oxenhall Church, near the remains of the Hereford and Gloucester Canal.
The River Leadon runs in a southerly direction, joined just above Upleadon by the Glynch Brook.
Close to Upleadon Court stands Upleadon Mill .
This has an unusual external iron undershot wheel, thought to be of the Poncelot type, complete with iron buckets.
The water course was embanked for around half a mile and is partially stone lined.
A sluice and some of the mill machinery is still present.
To aid drainage of the area, the Leadon has been culverted, so much of the mill pond is dry.
The three storey brick-built mill is now used by an angling club although, with electrical equipment, animal feed is still produced.
The next mill is at Pauntley, where, situated by the Church, it was powered by the Leadon, via a long leat.
This is followed upstream, near to Chapel Farm, by Payford Mill .
This is in Pauntley and is an impressive, large, half-timbered building which underwent restoration in the early 1930s.
In 1889, the miller was the aptly named Mr T. Miller, and between 1897 to the First World War, Frank Parry.
It was originally a corn mill but converted for paper production; by the 1900s it had reverted to corn milling.
It now forms an impressive dwelling and the water wheel survives.
Redmarley is next along the Leadon, the site of Durbridge Mill .
Although out of action for a long time, an internal iron water wheel survives.
The mill was built from a combination of sandstone and brick and is still in good condition.
Much of the water control equipment and the mill pond embankments have not survived.
Apparently the severe winter of 1947 was responsible for their destruction.
As well as being used for corn grinding, the mill was also used for cider production, and as a maltings, confirmed by the presence of the adjacent oasthouse.,
Yet another tributary of the Leadon is the Glynch Brook, joining the River Leadon near Upleadon.
The first it powered was Pitts Mill , now restored, at Staunton.
The miller's house stands adjacent to the three-storey mill, but the original water wheel has been removed, a replica in its place, along with most of the original machinery.
In the same village stands Staunton Mill , also a three-storey building, which originally had a 20-foot wheel, and is now a private dwelling.
Further upstream stood Blackford (or Reading) Mill, followed by the two-storey Bury Mill , next to Bury Court, in the confines of Redmarley D'abitot.
This mill was powered by a 14-foot diameter internal iron overshot wheel, similar in construction to the one found at Cleeve Mill in Newent.
This, plus most of the machinery, is still intact.
Three other mills, of which little of interest remains (either demolished or turned into private dwellings) are Silver Mill, and on leaving Gloucestershire, Pepper Mill at Bromsberrow, and Clencher Mill.
The Forest of Dean Rivers and Streams
The Forest of Dean was once a great and thriving centre for a number of industrial activities, the best-known being iron and coal production.
A number of lesser industries flourished too.
The Forest's streams were dammed and used to power mills.
Some were particularly heavily utilised.
The Forest of Dean is not an area with a vast quantity of mills although certain areas were quite heavily utilised.
It was not until the late 1700s that woodland was replaced substantially with farmland.
On the edge of the Forest, on the Gloucester side, is the Ley Brook, rising at Huntley, near the bottom of May Hill.
In earlier times there was a water mill at Huntley, but only the outline of old water courses can be seen today.
Further on the Brook splits, and one tributary leads to the few remnants of what was Upper Ley Mill .
This had an iron undershot wheel but ceased operating some time in the 1920s.
This was the last mill, the brook now wending its way towards the Severn at Minsterworth.
Another water course that rises on May Hill is the Hope Brook.
This formerly powered Parish Mill , one of the more important in the Longhope area.
The mill is stone built and adjoins the mill house.
Both house and mill were recently offered for sale and, although not in the best of condition, their potential was obvious.
The mill pond still existed during the 1950s, but has now been filled in.
Much of the mill's corn milling equipment, as well as the iron water wheel, still survive, although not worked for many years.
Parish Mill is thought to have been built around the beginning of the 18th century and, later in its life, formed part of the property of The Charity Trustees of Longhope.
Around the middle of the 19th century, they were still the owners, their tenant being Mr J. Perry.
By the 1920s, the owner was Mr Bowkett.
The mill was last operated on a regular basis around the end of the Second World War.
Local information suggests that it was occasionally worked for a few years after this, but by the 1950s had stopped completely.
Another local mill was known as Furnace Mill .
Presumably it saw service for iron working at some time, although in later life it was used for corn grinding, saw milling, as well as being operated for a time as a maltings.
It was converted into cottages many years ago.
The next site along the brook, towards Boseley, is the stone-built Blaisdon Mill , still surviving, although not worked as a corn mill since around 1890.
It originally ran two pairs of stones.
There are indications that the mill was turned over for a time for saw milling, and possibly even cider production.
The adjacent mill house still survives.
Near Longcroft Farm, the Hope Brook is joined by the Flaxley Brook, their combined waters flowing on towards Westbury (the Westbury Brook) providing the power for Westbury Mill .
This little corn mill was certainly still being worked up to the late 1920s.
Millers during the 19th century included Messrs Bailey, Hooper and Watson.
Within a few years of closure, the mill pond was filled in and much of the mill's machinery removed.
It was originally powered by an  iron and wood breast shot water wheel, replaced with a turbine around the turn of the century.
The mill was relegated to storage for many years, and by the 1960s was in a somewhat parlous state.
It has since been cared for rather better and now appears much improved.
Although the pond now lies under the garden and the road, it is still possible to trace the mill's tail race as it flows to meet the stream in the gardens of Westbury Court.
From here, the Westbury Brook flows on through the meadows, towards the Severn, where it once powered Severn Mill , on the river bank.
Severn Mill occupied what was possibly an ancient site, recorded as Garne Mill during the 13th century, when the Abbot of Flaxley granted it to Henry of Bath.
By the early 17th century, the mill was part of the Westbury Estate and by 1642 in the possession of the Batherne family, who occupied it for at least three decades.
The mill later became known as Garden Mill.
Early maps refer to Garden Pill.
Clearly, the mill must have been rebuilt on a number of occasions, becoming known from the 1850s as Severn Mill.
Its last rebuilding is believed to have been during the first quarter of the 19th century.
Power was later provided by a water turbine.
There has been a long debate as to whether Severn Mill was operated as a tide mill, the general opinion now seeming to favour this idea.
As the tide rose, water was forced back up the Westbury Brook and held back by the sluice gates.
Once the tide had fallen sufficiently, the pent-up waters could be released to power the mill.
The waters of the Littledean Stream may well have been, at least partially, diverted to augment the mill's supply.
Severn Mill continued to work up to the end of the 19th century.
The turbine and the remainder of the mill's machinery were removed, after which it was relegated to storage and housing pigs!
Another of the area's streams is the Flaxley Brook, joined by the waters of St Anthony's Well, near Abenhall.
The latter once provided the power for a series of mills, Lower, Upper and Middle.
At the site of Lower Mill stands one of the most interesting and important reminders of the Forest's industrial past,Guns Mill .
Guns Mill is one of the most complete surviving examples of an early charcoal blast furnace, of which the area once had a number.
It was built during the 1620s by Sir John Winter who, by 1640, had control over 18,000 acres of the Forest.
In 1682, following the end of the Civil War, it was rebuilt.
There are two iron beams surviving, with 1682 and 1683 cast into them.
In later years, the site became quite complex, with a number of mills operating in close proximity to one another.
These comprised both corn and fulling mills, as well as the furnace.
The early 18th century saw various periods of disuse and 400 tons of iron were produced between 1731 and 1732.
This must have been near the end of the furnace's working life, as some time during the following decade, the buildings were converted to a paper mill.
Guns Mill was an ideal site, as the pure water supply required for paper making was available from St Anthony's Well.
The waters from here were reputed to be a certain cure for ‘the itch’, as well as curing dogs of the mange.
This was accomplished by throwing the unfortunate animal in three or four times.
The business became well established and, by the early 19th century, was producing a wide range of blotting papers.
Paper making over the next eight decades at different times produced coloured, white, cartridge, wrapping or brown papers.
In 1847 the owner was George Lunnan and by 1860, Aron Goold.
Within a few years it was the Guns Mill Paper Company.
When it closed is something of a mystery.
Some reports put this around 1880, but others claim the mill was still operating at the turn of the 20th century.
Over the years, it has passed through many hands since Sir John Winter established it, including members of the Foley and Lloyd families.
For a long time there was a tradition that the mill took its name from a period in 1629, when The Crown had 610 guns cast for The States  General of Holland.
The name actually derives from a corn mill, recorded on the site in 1620, belonging to William Gunne.
Before this it was known as Cunes Mill.
The main half-timbered building now forms part of a farm, and is in a poor state of repair.
The ghostly, overgrown, skeleton of the wheel survives in the adjacent part, although signs of decay are evident everywhere.
There have been recent attempts to obtain planning permission for the mill's conversion into a dwelling and this may be its best chance of survival.
Further downstream is Flaxley Mill which, by the 1950s, was in a poor state of repair, but has since been fully restored, now forming the  headquaters of an electronics company.
This was once the manorial mill of Flaxley Abbey, and a board showing the grinding charges was formerly exhibited at Gloucester Folk Museum.
The present building was originally a corn mill, and is thought to have been built around the mid-18th century.
The Flaxley Valley was once heavily utilised, especially for iron working.
Earlier the Brook provided the power for at least four and possibly five forge mills.
Iron working in the area goes back a long way.
Rudder speaks of the manor being given to Flaxley Abbey by the Earl of Hereford, and that the ‘Abbat had a grant of an iron forge and of two oaks every week out of the Forest of Dean, for the maintenance of the forge, of King Henry the Second’.
This arrangement was terminated as it apparently consumed too much valuable wood.
Another small stream, also put to good use, was the Soudley Brook, sometimes referred to as the Forge Brook, which rises at Bilston Green and was used to take water away from the old iron workings.
This powered a mill at Ruspidge near Cinderford.
This appears to have been known locally as Cinderford Mill , although it is more widely remembered as Brights Corn Mill, the last miller being Samuel Bright.
It dates from the early part of the 19th century and was worked around the 1850s by Allaway and Henry Crawshay, the latter probably having connections with William Crawshay of Camp Mill, at Soudley.
Before that, Thomas Brace was in residence.
The mill was eventually forced to cease operations during Mr Bright's time when a large pond, further upstream, was drained by a colliery to reduce water leakage into the coal workings.
A protracted legal battle ensued, but Mr Bright declined the offer of a steam engine from the colliery owners and eventually the mill closed down.
From Cinderford, the brook flows on through Ruspidge, past the 17th century Soudley furnace and, on reaching Upper Soudley, becomes known as the Soudley Brook.
Just below Sutton Ponds is the site of Camp Mill .
This site not only makes a picturesque scene, it now has the important role of housing the Dean Heritage Museum, a centre devoted to the recording and exhibiting of much of the Forest's industrial heritage.
As with numerous other mill sites, it has waxed and waned in importance, and over the centuries has been home to many individuals and industries.
Some of the earlier references to the area have confirmed that this was near the site of the 17th century Kings Forge, where iron produced in the Kings Furnace, a mile away, was refined.
For some time it was suspected that Camp Mill was the site, but this now appears unlikely.
By the turn of the 19th century, it was in use as a foundry.
A letter from James Wintle of Newnham to the Office of Woods in 1865 states ‘…at present as for the last 50 or 60 years or more, power for the machinery at the foundry’.
The first plans definitely showing the site in use as a foundry appear in the 1820s.
Samuel Hewlett, a carpenter of Frampton on Severn, first arrived in the Forest around 1794.
By the end of the first decade of the 19th century, he had become quite prosperous and eventually established himself in one of the old Bradley furnaces, building Bradley House around 1817.
He became involved in iron founding (a number of castings dated 1826 still survive) but the earliest confirmed date of his connection with Soudley Foundry is 1838.
Hewlett carried on a great trade, producing many components for the network of tramroads that were then being developed in the Forest.
In later years, a good deal of business was carried out with the Severn and Wye Railway Company, Hewlett supplying this trade for at least several decades.
The Soudley site subsequently came into the hands of notable local iron master, William Crawshay who, in 1838, re-leased it to Hewlett.
Following the latter's death in 1852, the lease passed to his eldest son, George.
The site continued as a foundry until the mid-1860s, and the following years saw Peter Constance, who already had an interest in the site, making various turned wooden components, such as handles and brushes.
In 1886, a dam was built to improve the water supply to the Brush Factory for previously water was supplied by a leat, there being no mill pond.
Around 1876 Constance demolished the majority of the old foundry buildings, and built the present Camp Mill.
This was purpose-built as a corn mill, although Constance used part of the building to house his wood-turning business.
Constance was described as a ‘miller and brush handle maker’, the latter until at least 1879.
Edmund Lane, a corn miller of Steam Mills at Cinderford, now appeared as an undertenant.
Lane had to relinquish his tenancy in 1885, the mill remaining empty until 1888.
Then Camp Mill saw yet another change converted to production of millboard, under Moses John Mason.
Two vats were in use, with maximum production in the region of three tons per week.
Contemporary advertisements describe a range of related products such as‘Portmanteau, Engined and Milled boards’.
By the turn of the century, the partnership of Jane Mason and G. Smith ran the mill, but by 1901 it had come into the hands of James Joiner, who had bought it from Crawshay and Co.
In 1902, Joiner sold the mill to the Somerset-based Dulcote Leatherboard Co, of which he was already a partner, and the mill became home to a number of special processes, mainly for the manufacture of shoe stiffeners.
The company's stay was fairly brief, for in 1908 operations ceased and the mill was put up for auction.
There was little interest and once again it came into the hands of James Joiner.
There followed a lengthy period of inactivity and decay, until the early 1920s saw the establishment of a saw milling business, set up by the Joiner family.
The following years saw the surviving water wheels replaced by a turbine, the power continuing to be provided by the Soudley Stream, much water coming from the Soudley Ponds as well as the Shakemantle Iron mine.
The turbine eventually gave way to a pair of diesel engines.
By the early 1950s the saw milling business had moved elsewhere and the site had become a scrapyard, a sad and unsightly end to a long and varied career.
The scrap business remained until the 1980s, at which time the Dean Heritage Trust came into being, the nucleus for its various functions being the old Camp Mill.
The yard was cleared, the mill pond dug out and an extensive programme of rebuilding and renovation carried out.
Eventually the museum opened its doors.
Perhaps fittingly, a member of the Joiner family is actively involved with the Trust, the formation of which was long overdue.
The Soudley Brook flows on from Camp Mill, towards Bradley, passing the site of the 19th century Tilting Mill, past the 19th century Soudley Furnaces (Lower Soudley) and on to Bradley itself, where there are the remains of an 18th century wireworks and a later foundry.
The Brook flows via the site of at least two, now demolished, corn mills, towards Blakeney.
Now swollen with the waters of a number of small tributaries, it becomes the Forge Brook.
It flows on to Blakeney, where there were two working corn mills.
The Lower Mill was a stone building, as was the substantial mill house.
The mill's equipment was removed many years ago following which it was converted to a row of cottages.
The remains of the iron overshot water wheel eventually went for scrap in the late 1960s.
The miller in 1887 was Stephen White.
Blakeney Upper Mill was always used as a corn mill.
By the middle of the 1 9th century the White family was running it.
The mill was originally powered by an overshot water wheel, turned by the waters of the Blackpool Brook (as was Lower Mill); it stopped working around 1898–99.
For some time, the mill stood idle and decaying, but was eventually stripped of its machinery and converted to two cottages.
The mill section was supported internally by iron pillars, cast locally in the Soudley Forge.
The Blackpool Brook is still channelled beneath the cottages, now passing unhindered through a tunnel.
The Blackpool Brook also powered the old mill at Nibley.
This is marked merely as a Mill on early editions of the Ordnance Survey, close to the line of the Forest of Dean Central Railway.
The stone-built mill now forms part of a house.
Beyond Blakeney, the combination of waters from the Blackpool and Soudley Brooks become known as the Bideford Brook, wending its way through the meadows, eventually emptying into the Severn at Brims Pill.
The last mill these waters powered was Awre Corn Mill, an old site in use at least since the time of the Domesday Survey, having reputedly belonged to Edward the Confessor.
It is still possible to trace its water courses, some distance from Awre, close to Hall Farm.
Amongst the other Forest streams, there are two that flow down from Herefordshire.
These powered mills at Lea, Aston Crews and Aston Ingham.
Other streams harnessed to drive mills include the Rudhall, Coughton, Ley and Lyd Brooks.
In addition, a small stream flows from Drybrook to power a mill that once stood at Tusculum House, which contained an internal iron overshot wheel.
Another water course formerly of great importance in the Forest of Dean is the Cone Brook.
This once worked a number of mills, one of which was Rodmore Mill .
This stood close to the confluence of the Cone and Aylesmore Brooks.
It was originally the site of a furnace powered by the Aylesmore Stream (near St Annes Spring) and was out of use by 1680.
By the early part of the 18th century, a forge occupied the site, and by 1736 it had an annual output of around 60 tons.
It was run then by Henry Thomas, who owned this and a number of other local mills.
It was later converted to a paper mill.
From the 1780s, the mill was worked for the production of both white and brown paper, passing through the hands of J. Stephens, W. Stephens and James Stevens.
The last reference to its use for paper production appears around the 1840s, following which it went out of use.
It was eventually converted to a corn mill, operated during the 1880s by George Lewis who was followed around the turn of the century by Mr J. Nicholls.
Further down the Cone is the site of Clanna Forge, which can just be made out.
Later in its life it was in the hands of the Pidcocks, local iron masters, who were also responsible for building a canal from Lydney Docks.
The forge closed in the early 1700s but the addition, later in its life, of a pool and dam, helps to show its location.
The water from this dam powered the Clanna Weir Paper Mill and also supplied water to power a dynamo at the home of the local mill owners, the Marlings, at the now-demolished Clanna House.
Clanna Weir Mill was established as a working paper mill by the late 1700s.
By 1878, Frank Noble ran it, making ‘machine and handmade mill boards’.
Noble sold the mill and by 1887 it had been taken over by Moses John Mason who, at his peak, was producing up to four tons of millboard per week.
Following his time at Clanna, he moved into Camp Mill, still carrying on his trade for some years.
The present Clanna Weir House was formerly the main card mill and one of the other mill buildings was later taken over as a saw mill, power coming from a water turbine powered by waters channelled from the ponds above the site.
Rowley Mill , next downstream, like Clanna and Rodmore, was originally an iron forge and was advertised for sale in 1797.
It was bought by Thomas and Joseph Morris who, by 1809, had converted it to paper production.
It was later occupied solely by Thomas Morris.
It stayed in the  Morris family until c1841 when John Lavender was the occupier.
By 1851, one beating engine was in use, Rowley Mill having been modified for the manufacture of cardboard.
Trade references mention Henry Williams, of Rowley Mill, as making ‘milled and engine boards’, much of the machinery still being water powered.
The raw materials used and the procedures adopted were somewhat similar to those at Camp Mill for production of millboard.
This consisted of pressed bales of waste paper which were chopped, shredded and then steamed, stirred and pulped.
The pulp was then passed onto rollers and subsequently pegged out to dry.
It was dipped into a sealing solution, rolled again, this time in steam, and then pressed and trimmed into cardboard.
This trade carried on for many years, but as a result of more advantageously located competition, it finally ceased working in about 1930.
The pond, sluices and some of the buildings can be seen today, but the majority of the surviving buildings have been incorporated in a private home.
As the Cone moves towards Woolaston, it reaches the site of Cone Mill , formerly one of the most important mills in the area.
It had, in earlier times, been both a corn and fulling mill.
Richard Barrow is reported as the owner, making in 1774 ‘many different kinds of writing and other paper’.
The mill had a number of owners over the years, its major business starting when, by the 1860s, it was taken over by Reece and Sandford.
It was now in the business of producing ‘white and pottery tissue, double and crown and cap papers’.
By that time, there were ten papermakers employed and one engineer.
By 1869, Cone Mill was bought by the Gloucester Paper Company, later to become the Gloucestershire Paper Making Company Ltd.
They modernised the mill and it is believed that it became the first in Britain to make paper from wood, ie: the first Natron-cellulose pulp mill in Europe.
Close to the mill was the Severn Engineering Works, at which the boilers and apparatus for making paper from wood were manufactured.
In 1873 much of the mill was destroyed by a huge boiler explosion.
The mill eventually reopened, the year after the blast, and carried on producing commercial papers, but to a reduced capacity.
By late 1874 it was producing various types of coloured printing papers, as well as newsprint, on a 54-inch machine.
By 1891 Thomas Patterson Gillespie, who lived at Cone House, was making ‘blottings, printings, news, E.S.
writings, envelope papers, square and angular and tinted papers’ on a machine of 80-inch width.
Output varied between 20 and 25 tons a week.
During the last 20 years of the mill's working life, Esparto Grass had featured in the manufacture of some products.
Esparto was grown in such places as Spain and Algeria, imported and transported from either the South Wales Railway, via Woolaston Station, or the diminutive wharf at Cone Pill.
Paper manufacture gradually diminished, the main works closing in 1895.
The site was later partially converted to a steam laundry.
This too, eventually closed, in 1945.
Apart from the former mill owner's house, there are only a few other remnants, such as the remains of a mill pond, sluices and the reservoir.
Within a few years, the last of the Forest's paper mills ceased operations.
As in many other areas of the country, the paper mills there had been unable to compete with bigger mills, sited close to larger areas of manufacturing.
This trend was destined to continue, the ‘rural’ paper maker soon becoming a thing of the past..
The River Leadon and its tributaries.
The Leadon flows into the Severn at Over (just below Rudford), providing the power for many mills.
The Leadon's major tributaries are the Tibberton, Ell and Glynch Brooks, each brook having its own mills
LEFT: Malswick Mill, still complete although it has not been worked since the 1950s, is part of a farm.
BELOW: Brass Mill, formerly a corn mill, took its name from its time as a brass manufactory.
It became a house in the 1930s.
RIGHT: Cleeve Mill at Newent.
The little corn mill was last worked during the 1950s but is still essentially complete.
The Ell Brook provided the power.
LEFT: Upleaden Mill with its uncommon Poncelot-type metal-bucketed wheel.
RIGHT: Parish Mill at Longhope.
BELOW: The half-timbered Payford Mill, at  Pauntly .
ABOVE: Blaisdon Mill.
BELOW: The corn mill at Westbury was originally powered by a breastshot wheel, although later changed to a turbine.
It has long been a house.
ABOVE: Severn Mill, on the banks of the Severn, adjacent to the Westbury Stream's outfall.
BELOW: Guns Mill.
LEFT: Flaxley Mill.
RIGHT: This rare, surviving winding engine now forms part of Camp Mill's fascinating display.
BELOW: Camp Mill at Soudley, now home to the Dean Heritage Museum, produced leatherboard for the Dulcote Leatherboard Company.
(AP)
CHELTENHAM AND TEWKESBURY
The Chelt's Mills
People not familiar with Cheltenham often assume that it has been a large bustling town for a long time.
Yet for many centuries, Cheltenham consisted of no more than a single street, lined with a few houses.
Leland, during his travels in the 1540s, spoke of Cheltenham as ‘a long town having a market’ referring to it as ‘Cheltenham Street’.
The River Chelt flowed to the south of the town, but during the great population explosion between 1800 and the mid-1820s (the population grew from 3,000 to over 20,000), the built up area gradually encroached on the empty fields and spread towards it.
Trinder's map of 1809 clearly shows this.
William  Cobbet passed through during the period of expansion, and hated it!
He speaks of Cheltenham as being ‘a nasty, ill-looking place, half clown and half cockney’, and of being ‘one street about a mile long’.
Over the centuries, a string of mills had been built along the Chelt, virtually all of them corn mills.
There are references to Chelt mills put to other uses, but these are few.
There are several early references to a fulling mill at Cudnell, let to Robert and Joan Walker, although there is little else to suggest that Cheltenham and the surrounding area had any substantial involvement with the cloth trade.
There are records showing weavers, a tucker and a silk weaver in Cheltenham in 1608, although operations were almost certainly on a modest scale.
The majority of the Chelt mills were probably corn mills.
The River Chelt has two headstreams, dammed at Dowdeswell in 1886 to form the substantial reservoir that now occupies the site.
The first, and apparently only casualty was the little corn mill at Dowdeswell , immediately deprived of its water supply.
The mill building still stands in the shadow of the dam wall, well maintained and now used for storage, its machinery and water wheel removed many years ago.
The Chelt flows on towards Cheltenham, its water swollen by the Ham and Lilly Brooks.
It formerly powered Charlton Mill , before reaching the first mill on the outskirts of the expanding town,Sandford Mill .
Below Sandford's came Barretts Mill , also known as Cambray and Cheltenham Mill.
This was the site of what must have been one of the longest running water disputes in molinological history.
From the 1500s, the miller was supposed to allow a certain amount of water to flow from his pond, along the main street, its purpose ‘to cleanse it’.
Millers have always been, understandably, possessive of their water supplies and consequently, this sometimes failed to happen.
Various disputes occurred over the years, culminating in a protracted battle at the beginning of the 19th century, with the owner, William Humphries Barrett.
From Barretts mill, the Chelt flowed on to successively power Alstone Upper and Lower , and Arle Mills .
During the 1860s, the miller at Alstone Lower Mills was Fredrick Boulter, replaced towards the close of the century by George Gardner, a decade or so before resident at Arle Mill.
Alstone Upper Mill was worked during the 1860s by Elijah Snowsell, although by the 1890s William Ride and Co were working the mill, using steam power.
Gradually parts of the Chelt's course were culverted and later built over as the town grew.
Having emerged from the built-up area of the town, it now flows through open fields to the site of the next mill at Withybridge .
The mill still stands and is a curious mixture of brick, elm, slate and corrugated iron.
It appears that the brick mill section was built onto a much older barn, already in existence.
There are a number of farm buildings at the site that date from the 17th and 18th centuries, the actual mill appearing to date from some point in the 19th century.
Apparently the mill only had a short working life as a corn mill, having been turned over to saw milling by the 1920s.
There are now little traces of machinery, the wooden section is in a somewhat dilapidated condition, while the outflow arch, sluice remains and the bypass channel can still be seen.
Depending on the time of year, the Chelt at this point is often no more than a trickle, although after heavy rain it can rapidly become a muddy torrent, rushing through the fields (and now beneath the M5 motorway), via Butlers Court, to the next mill at Boddington.
The Chelt's course has been diverted in this area and consequently, it no longer actually flows to a mill which, like the majority of the mills on the lower section of the Chelt, is of brick and slate construction.
Boddington originally had two mills belonging to the Manor, although the (Upper) one had disappeared by the start of the 18th century.
The present Boddington Mill appears to retain parts of an older structure for, as well as the main brick-built part, it incorporates a half-timbered, gabled section.
Although the water wheel has gone, it still proudly boasts an impressive wooden clad, iron belt wheel on its front wall.
Close by stand a number of well-renovated half-timbered dwellings, known as Mill Cottages.
The Chelt's penultimate mill, the next one downstream, is Slate Mill , formerly known as Slade Mill, now converted to form an impressive dwelling.
Although this is an old site, the present three-storey building appears to date largely from the 19th century.
Slade Mill was in the hands of Edward William Cook from the 1890s, up to the First World War.
It used both water and steam power, the latter probably installed by Cook.
It has always been a corn mill and continued working, somewhat sporadically, up to the middle of the 1950s.
Both corn and animal feed were ground at different times.
The mill was originally powered by an iron water wheel although this, as well as the substantial mill pond, has now gone.
The mill has a large belt wheel at the second floor level and, at such a height, must have presented a few problems with the fitting of the drive belt.
Beyond Slate Mill, the Chelt weaves its way unhindered for a few miles before reaching the last mill on its course, the little corn one at Norton .
This is largely constructed of red brick although the structure shows traces of many rebuildings and alterations.
Various parts are built from rubble and other sections heavily braced with iron tie bars.
Further evidence of rebuilding is inside, as the rear wall is of the timber framed brick infilled variety, clearly much older than the remainder of the mill, which mainly dates from the 19th century.
The machinery, apart from the internal breast shot wheel, survives; the wheel was removed early in 1988, as renovation work began.
The last recorded miller was Duncan Preston, who worked during the 1880s and '90s.
There are references to a dye house in the Norton area and it is rumoured that the mill was involved in some way with this.
A pair of French burr stones have just been removed from the mill, as well as the bedstone of the other pair.
Apparently the French  burs were used for corn grinding whilst the others were used for animal feed, a common combination to be found in many rural mills.
It is still possible to identify the location of the external belt wheel, as well as the courses of the head and tail races, although the Chelt at this point has been diverted to avoid flooding.
Having stood empty for many years, 1987/88 saw the start of considerable renovations and rebuilding.
This was the last mill on the River Chelt which, its work now complete, passes through empty meadows for a mile or so until its eventual outfall into the Severn.
Today the Chelt is regarded as little more than a nuisance, its former importance long forgotten.
In fact, most of the central section has all but disappeared, the river now wending its subterranean way beneath the town.
Apart from some of the actual buildings, little remains in the way of water wheels and machinery, to remind us of what was clearly once an important chain of mills which played an important role in the development of Cheltenham.
To the north west of Cheltenham, the little village of Stoke Orchard is watered by a number of streams, one of which is the Hyde Brook.
This provided the power for the only mill in the locality,Stoke Orchard Mill .
The brook was diverted into the mill race, which is now dry, but can easily be followed, around a quarter mile from the mill, and was controlled by a now defunct sluice gate.
The water was fed to the mill through a cast iron sluice box set in the back wall.
The wheel was an internal overshot type of modest proportions (around 8′ diameter and 47′ width) an unusual combination for this area.
The mill originally had two sets of fairly small stones of approximately 2′ diameter, which have not survived.
The water passed from the mill into the little River Swilgate, which wends its way through the fields towards Tewkesbury.
The mill is of brick construction and consists of three floors and a basement.
The building is partitioned into three sections, the central one being the main mill, with two dormer windows in the roof.
A date stone, 1784, is on the adjoining bakehouse, which later in life saw service as a blacksmith's shop.
A wooden chute still survives, which fed grain or flour from the mill to waiting waggons in the bakehouse.
There has been a mill on or near this site from at least the early 14th century, when it belonged to the Earl of Gloucester's Manor.
By the latter part of the 17th century, the mill was part of the Manor of Stoke Orchard and Downing, and in 1805, for £800, mill and bakehouse were sold to Richard Evans.
By 1839 the mill was in the hands of Richard Hone and in 1840 he installed some form of steam engine, probably to power such auxiliary equipment as a winnower and bolting machine.
Within a year he died as a result of injuries inflicted by his own machinery.
By the 1890s the mill was being worked by a Mr Corbett, who is the last one recorded.
Shortly after the First World War, the mill ceased operating commercially, although it is said locally, that it was still used occasionally for the production of animal feed.
Today, the mill is in reasonable condition and, although most of the milling machinery has long been removed, there are a number of overhead drive shafts and wheels still in position as well as the six grain bins which occupy the upper floor.
Close to the mill is a large and attractive half-timbered mill house, which is still inhabited, as well as a substantial dove cote, dated 1741, which stands taller than the mill itself.
Mill Lane leads from the village to the mill and a short way along it stands a 15th century thatched cottage that formerly housed the millhand.
The water's work being done it passed into the Swilgate, this wending its way to the outskirts of Tewkesbury, where it joins the Severn.
Tewkesbury's Mills and the Carrant Brook
Tewkesbury boasts a wealth of old buildings of different periods, few of which indicate that Tewkesbury had much of an ‘industrial past’.
This is not the case, as the town was once a busy centre of commerce.
During the 16th century it was heavily involved with the wool trade, as well as noted for its production of mustard.
Over the next few hundred years, Tewkesbury remained a busy commercial centre, often ranked only second to Gloucester.
At different times, the town was well known for its stocking frame knitters, the substantial brick works at the Mythe, as well as, during the 19th century, its large brewery, originally founded by David Jones, and later taken over by Blizard and Colman.
It was during the latter part of the 19th century that Tewkesbury's commercial decline began for, at the time of building of Healing's substantial mills, many of the smaller cottage-based trades disappeared.
It is perhaps fortuitous that Healing appeared when he did, his milling business helping to fill the void.
As far back as the Domesday Survey, records show that there were two mills at Tewkesbury of ‘twenty shillings’.
By 1100, the Avon had been diverted to power mills that were later to become the property of the Benedictine Monastery.
Towards the end of the 13th century, the Abbot had two mills, the foundations of at least one of them (the precinctual mill) being rumoured to be beneath those of the present Abbey Mill.
Abbey Mill is perhaps one of the best known having played an important role in Mrs Craik's book of 1852,John Halifax Gentleman , where it is described as Abel Fletcher's Mill.
It still survives, and has retained vestiges of its water wheels, but is no longer worked as a mill, having become a restaurant.
Opposite the mill is the Abbey, where Mrs Craik, studying the old grave stones, acquired names for her fictitious characters.
In contrast to Healings, the traditional looking Abbey Mill still smacks of days long gone.
It has been rebuilt and extended on many occasions with the passing centuries, much of the present buildings dating from the middle part of the 19th century.
Abbey Mill (c1600) consisted of no less than four mills, forming a single range across the Mill Avon, and for a time following this, there were five, although the latter was fairly short-lived.
Around 1793, a substantial rebuilding programme was carried out, the result being eight pairs of stones, powered by four water wheels.
For part of its life, the site was run as two separate mills, known as the Abbey and Town Mills.
Both were offered for sale during the 1820s although, by the 1850s, they were apparently run together.
At some stage earlier in the century, a malt roller mill was added.
In 1858, Samuel Healing took over the running of Abbey Mill, yet another in a succession of local mills that he had either owned or worked.
At the time, he was also running the steam powered Quay Mills of Thomas Bluck in Tewkesbury.
Healing later left Abbey Mill, his new large steam powered Borough flour mills clearly of much greater importance.
For a time after his departure, the Abbey Mill site was run by William Rice and Co, and towards the end of its working life was running eight pairs of stones and producing its own electricity, using a water turbine and two of the remaining waterwheels.
It continued, in sometimes sporadic use, until shortly after the First World War, one of the last references coming in 1921.
Since the 1930s, it has served as both a tea shop and now a restaurant.
Much of the structure still survives, largely (visually) unaltered over the last century.
Most of the machinery has long gone although there are still remains of several of its large diameter, but fairly narrow, water wheels.
It was not until 1865 that any really large scale milling development occurred in Tewkesbury.
In this year, Samuel Healing opened his new mill, the business destined to remain in the family for many years.
The Borough Mills were the culmination of Healing's long involvement in milling.
His new seven storey mill was built to house 12 pairs of stones as well as fairly advanced cleaning and dressing machinery.
In 1885, the mill was re-equipped with Carter's Automatic Roller System, this relatively sophisticated setup supplanting the use of mill stones.
This rapidly established the mill as one of the most productive in the county.
The Company became known as Samuel Healing and Sons Ltd for much of its life and remained so until 1961, when the whole operation was purchased by the international milling group, Allied Mills Ltd.
The Mill was sited next to the Avon for good reasons.
The river was originally used, and still is today, for the transportation of incoming wheat, and outgoing flour.
The Avon also supplies the large quantities of water required for steam raising, a process that powered the mill for over 75 years.
Steam power finally gave way to electricity by the mid-1950s and in 1977, the mill was completely gutted and re-equipped with modern machinery, much of it made locally by Simon-Barron of Gloucester.
Barges nowadays travel from Sharpness to Healings Mill via the Gloucester-Sharpness Canal, and the River Severn.
Typical barges, often seen moored at the mill, have an average of around  300 tonnes, the five barges owned by the company named after Gloucestershire villages.
It is believed that the discharging system used for grain removal is unique and involves removing the grain and transporting it to the mill without having to remove the boat's hatch covers.
The mill buildings themselves tower over Tewkesbury and can be seen for many miles around.
Major extensions were added in 1889 and 1935, but the original 19th century section has been kept largely intact.
More recent extensions include office units built along with extra hardstanding, around 1980, all of this blending in with the character of the remainder of the site.
Externally, much of the building retains its 19th century heritage, although it now houses the sophisticated roller mill system installed in 1976/77.
The waterway has proved an invaluable asset.
As many of the smaller local mills closed.
Healings have managed to stay in business and take advantage of the cost effectiveness of water, not for powering wheels, but as a navigable waterway.
As well as the waterway, Healings own a fleet of road tankers for grain transport, and the location of motorway junctions, built in the 1970s and 1980s near Tewkesbury, has also been of great advantage a far cry from the early years of the century, when deliveries were made by a 12 mph Foden lorry.
This is one mill which, with the cooperation of local government and the company, has managed to retain much of its historic character and still manage to modernise and remain competitive.
Several small waterways have also played their part in Tewkesbury's history.
To the north is the Carrant (formerly Carron's) Brook, and to the south, the River Swilgate.
Both have powered mills, but the Carrant Brook was much more heavily utilised.
Taylor's map of 1777 shows four mills on its lower section, with a number of others further upstream.
Many of these remain in name alone, but there are two mills on the lower reaches that still contain much of interest.
The higher of the two is Aston Mill , near the village of Aston-On-Carrant.
Aston Mill was the last of the Carrant Brook mills to be worked, finally going out of business in the early 1960s.
The miller during the 1880s was James Spiers who was also running the Upper Mill at nearby Kemerton.
By 1897 he had gone, the mill coming into the hands of John Wyman, who was to remain for more than thirty years.
By the 1930s, Wyman had been replaced by Charles Dee, who worked the mill throughout the decade.
Structurally at least the mill is in fairly good condition, although sadly, it is now devoid of its doors, windows and all of its ancillary equipment.
Behind the mill is a modest sized pond, partially brick lined, supplying water for the surviving iron overshot wheel, of approximately eight feet in diameter, along with its iron penstock.
The grinding side of the mill is virtually intact, all of the gearing, iron and wood, and line shafting, still in place.
The mill originally ran three pairs of stones, of which a pair of French burr stones (still in fairly good condition) as well as the bed stones of the other two pairs still survive.
One of the stones remains, although the other two have been removed.
The mill also housed a bakehouse on the lower floor, several bake-ovens set in the rear wall being largely intact, surviving as a reminder of what was once an important local trade, carried on at Aston mill for over a century.
Today, the mill stands on the site of a busy gravel pit, and is surrounded on several sides by large mounds of gravel.
Huge lorries regularly thunder by, but the old mill stands firm.
It would seem fitting for it to be converted and put to some useful purpose, retaining what remains of its equipment, before the deterioration becomes too great.
The next mill downstream is Northway Mill and this, like Aston Mill, is of a red brick construction, with a slate roof.
Northway is a typical example (if there is such a thing) of the little rural mills of this region, though unlike many others it is in remarkably good condition.
The mill was operated by Alfred Greening between 1889 and 1900, and although it does not appear in references after this, it was certainly operated in conjunction with the farm.
Although this site is quite old, the present building dates from the 19th century.
The mill is of conventional layout, of three floors plus attic configuration, and still retains much of its machinery.
Power was provided by a channel, fed from the Carrant Brook, driving an overshot wheel, of iron and wood construction.
Water control was via an iron penstock, similar to the one surviving at nearby Stoke Orchard Mill.
The mill race is partially filled in, the Carrant Brook now flowing exclusively through what was once the bypass channel.
It appears that erosion may have been a problem, as much of its course, in the vicinity of the mill, is brick lined.
The mill is now unused apart from storage, the last miller a relative of the present owner.
Commercial milling is said to have ceased with the Second World War.
The mill was originally run as part of the adjacent farm and, not surprisingly, was used to provide power for a number of other uses.
There is a large, narrow belt wheel on the front wall, used on occasions for driving such things as an apple crusher at cider-making time.
It is perhaps surprising, with Healings' huge mill in nearby Tewkesbury, that a few mills such as Northway and particularly Aston, managed to function for as long as they did.
Sandford Mill, now in the heart of a greatly expanded Cheltenham, and converted to a house.
ABOVE: Withybridge Mill.
LEFT: Boddington Mill.
RIGHT: Mill cottages at Boddington.
LEFT: Slate Mill.
RIGHT: Norton Mill, the last mill on the River Chelt.
BELOW: Some of the gearing and equipment from Norton Mill, now a house.
ABOVE: Stoke Orchard Mill, and BELOW: the interior with the line-shafting still in place during the 1950s.
LEFT: The impressive Abbey Mill at Tewkesbury.
RIGHT: The rear of Abbey Mill, showing the waterwheel openings.
The water was supplied from the Mill Avon.
BELOW: The Mill during the 1920s.
ABOVE: Abbey Mill early this century, from a painting by Alec Gould.
BELOW: The sophisticated and impressive Healings Mill, the majority of whose buildings date from 1889, 1935 and 1980.
LEFT: The barge Apperley, named after a local village, with its novel loading/unloading system in action.
RIGHT: The Blizard and Colman brewery, close to the access bridge to Healings Mill.
BELOW: Aston Mill, near Aston-on-Carrant.
Mill and bakery went out of business in the 1960s.
OPPOSITE ABOVE: Northway Mill near Tewkesbury.
The outside drive wheel was sometimes used to power an apple crusher.
BELOW: The two pairs of surviving stones at Aston Mill.
ABOVE: Coberley Mill, converted to a house in the 1930s.
The buildings largely date from the 16th and 17th centuries.
Although the wheel has gone, the millpond is well maintained and is home to a great assortment of wildlife.
BELOW: Coberley Mill early in the century.
THE COTSWOLDS AND SOUTHERN GLOUCESTERSHIRE
The Churn, Coln and Thames
Gloucestershire has many small streams and rivers, one of the better known being the River Churn.
The Churn, whose ancient name was Coryn, rises at a place known as Seven Springs and makes its way down the valley, ultimately to join the Thames.
Its waters formerly turned many a mill wheel on the way, although they are no longer put to any commercial use.
The first mill powered was the one at Coberley which still survives, although now converted to form a sizeable and elegant dwelling.
Coberley Mill, formerly known as Cubberly, nestles deep in the valley, close to the village church.
It has remained a corn mill throughout its working life, having had no known connection with the wool trade.
Perhaps surprisingly, there is little evidence of the cloth trade in the parish at all.
There are occasional references to fullers during the 13th and 14th centuries but theirs must have been a small scale operation compared to that encountered further downstream around Cirencester.
The main part of the mill was built around 1585 with additions later in the 17th century.
The mill also encompassed a bakehouse, and inside are the remains of what was once the bake oven, originally of considerable depth.
The mill was worked from at least 1889 to 1897 by William Wilson, but by 1914 Mrs Mary Wilson was the miller.
She was probably William's widow, and stayed there until 1927, near the end of the mill's working life, when it was worked by her son.
Commercial use finally ceased in the 1930s when the machinery was removed and the domestic conversion carried out.
Although the wheel has now gone and the wheel pit is blanked off, the mill pond is still well maintained, edged with stone and wooden piling.
There are still three old millstones surviving in the garden, two burr stones and one monolithic, the latter used to grind animal feed.
It is gratifying to know that the old mill has survived and prospered in its retirement, unlike the next mill and bakehouse downstream, at Cowley.
This was demolished during the landscaping of the gardens of Cowley Manor during the 1850s, a most ungrateful ending.
From Cowley, the Churn rushes on towards Cirencester.
It is a fast-flowing river and falls around 400′ to its confluence with the Thames, formerly powering a number of mills en route.
Trinity Mill , near Bagendon, is one such and has been put to a number of different uses.
It is first mentioned in the Domesday Survey as the Manor Mill, sited away from the village to take full advantage of the head of water.
Around 1382 it was bought from the Lord of the Manor and made an endowment of the Trinity Chapel in the impressive Parish Church of Cirencester.
Although there appears to be little documentary evidence to support it, there is a long tradition that Trinity Mill, at some time in its life, was a fulling mill.
Rees, in his History of Bagendon , refers to an area known as Rack Orchard, close to the mill, a possible indication of its connection with the cloth trade.
For centuries, Cirencester was an important wool centre and made much of its living from wool stapling and sorting, as well as cloth production.
The Abbot of the Abbey of St Mary, John Blake, built two fulling mills in the town during the 16th century, these being duly  noted by the much-travelled Leland who, in 1535, describes them as ‘being wonderfully necessary by cause the town standith all by clothing’.
There is nonetheless little doubt that it has spent much of its working life as a corn mill, grinding corn for the local population.
During the latter part of the 19th century, the mill was used by the Lane family in connection with their edge-tool business in Cirencester.
This was once an important industry there and survived until the 1870s.
Mr Edmund Lane was partner in one of the last concerns engaged in it.
The mill, which consists of a single long block, is joined to a gabled mill house, both of which are in good condition.
It still retains all its working parts and would require only minimum repairs to put it into full working order.
Inside, a beam on the first floor is marked with the name ‘Hayward’, a family that also ran the now-demolished mill at nearby Baunton.
Joyce Barker has had a long association with Trinity Mill and recalls that the gearing was so light and precise that, even as a child of five, she could easily control the milling process and the sack hoist!
The Barker family have had a long connection with Trinity Mill, the miller during the 1880s being George Barker, followed later by Denzil Barker.
Outside, a sizeable iron drive-wheel projects through the front wall.
The usual function for these wheels is to provide power for auxiliary equipment such as a saw-bench, apple crusher etc, but in this case, the system also worked in reverse.
At times of particularly low water supplies, a steam engine was used to power the mill via a drive belt.
This system was not widely used in Gloucestershire.
It is sometimes possible to determine when this procedure has been used, by examining the wear patterns of the gears.
Trinity Mill has been out of commercial use since the 1930s but is fortunate enough still to retain its fine internal, breastshot wheel, as well as a number of other remains, including a bolter, chaff-chutter and sack scales.
The mill now houses a tank and pump for the water supply to the mill house, fed from the spring that also supplies the nearby Trinity Well.
From Bagendon, the Churn rushes on its way towards Cirencester where, over the centuries, it has powered cloth mills, fulling mills, a carpet factory and edge-tool works.
It now passes largely unhindered on its way to the Thames.
A few miles to the east of Cirencester is the pretty village of Ampney Crucis, the Ampney Brook flowing through its centre.
There were two mills there, the smaller long converted to a house.
The other is a large stone-built and stone-tiled building and still in regular use until recent years.
It dates largely from the 18th century and straddles the Ampney Brook, which powers the internal wheel.
An elegant mill house adjoins the mill, as do several barns, all constructed of mellowed local stone.
A large iron drive-wheel projects high up through the front wall, providing a source of power for ancillary equipment.
Ampney Crucis Mill is a long-term survivor for, in an age when many rural mills went out of business as a result of their comparative remoteness, coupled with competition from large steam-powered town mills, it still continued to grind corn.
The fact that it was larger than most local mills and within a few miles of Cirencester probably saved it.
A number of millers are recorded in Ampney Crucis, including several members of the Sterry family.
The last miller was Mr William Stallworthy, who operated the mill from 1900 until his retirement in 1977.
Then commercial milling ceased, but the mill, which is a Grade II listed building, still retains all its equipment.
A short way from the Cirencester to Lechlade road, the mill and its associated  buidings form a picturesque group recently put up for sale.
Within a short time, extensive building work was carried out.
Around five miles to the north east of Ampney Crucis is one of the most picturesque and well-known villages in Gloucestershire, Bibury.
This little village has a number of buildings of note, one of which is Arlington Mill .
Arlington Mill is one of those mills that was pulled back from the brink of destruction in the nick of time.
In this case, the mill was saved by the much-respected and sadly missed author, David Verey, who purchased and restored the derelict mill in 1965.
It had stood idle and decaying since 1914 and had lost most of its floors and part of the roof-a far cry from today's substantial and elegant building that now houses the Cotswold Country Museum.
This consists of a fascinating collection of rural bygones, as well as a complete cobbler's shop and wheelwright's.
The latter formerly stood opposite the main entrance to the mill.
The site is first mentioned in the Domesday Survey as a corn mill but, by the end of the 17th century, it was operated as both a corn and fulling mill.
A small, but thriving, woollen industry existed around the village then.
Fulling finally ceased, and the mill was rebuilt during the 18th century, solely as a corn mill.
A steam engine was installed in 1859 by the Bowly family, who were the millers then, to supplement the sometimes erratic water supply from the River Coln.
This necessitated strengthening the building with large external buttresses and cast iron girders.
This probably saved the structure from even worse decay following the cessation of commercial milling at the start of the First World War.
It was during this period that the wheel and most of the machinery was stripped out.
The wheel was originally a large low breastshot type with wooden buckets, supplying the power for six sets of stones.
During the mill's restoration, David Verey, with the co-operation of Lord Bathurst, was fortunate enough to obtain the working parts from a mill at North Cerney, these being fitted to the restored building.
The machinery was of mainly wooden construction and dated largely from the 18th century.
A water wheel was later added, although this is non-functional.
The restored corn milling equipment is now powered by an electric motor and of the six pairs of original stones, four survive, of which one set is actually driven.
Arlington Mill is well worth exploring, even for those with only a passing interest in milling history, its other exhibits and displays both interesting and informative.
Many of Gloucestershire's smaller streams and rivers are not widely known beyond the county boundaries.
However, a number are household names; the obvious examples are the Severn and the Thames.
Like most other rivers, the Thames was harnessed to drive many mills.
In the area around Cirencester the still infant river only powered small mills, unlike the much larger ones encountered further along its route towards London.
Many of these local mills remain in name alone, having fallen into disuse and demolition.
The most important to have survived is Lower Mill at Somerford Keynes.
Not only is it in remarkably good condition, it is also totally complete, even down to sacktrucks and shovels!
This compact mill now forms a fascinating time capsule and gives a valuable insight into the life and workings of a small country mill in years gone by.
Lower Mill continued in sporadic use up to the early 1970s, when it was still used to grind animal feed for the adjacent farm.
Cereals for human consumption have not been ground for some years.
The little brick-built mill has an internal iron wheel that provides the power for the two sets of stones as well as the various ancillary equipment.
The stones consist of a pair of burr stones for corn grinding and a set of what are thought to be Peak stones used for animal feed.
The latter are well worn and crudely balanced with chunks of lead.
Much of the machinery dates from the latter part of the 19th century, as evidenced by the extensive use of iron parts.
Various components are quite sophisticated, such as the jack ring assemblies, adjusted by a hand wheel operating through a pair of bevel gears.
Although many of the gears are of iron construction there are still a number with wooden teeth, this leading to quieter running, as well as making repairs easier.
Apart from its milling equipment, it is also comprehensively equipped with a variety of ancillaries.
There is a winnower, a bolting machine and a crusher, as well as a root chopper, used  to chop turnips etc.
Names, like ghosts, rise from the past, cast into various pieces of machinery: ‘Kell and Co’, ‘Gloucester & Ross’, ‘The New Patent Albion Grinding Mill’ and ‘Albion, Harrison, McGregor and Co’.
The mill, like much of the surrounding land, which now largely consists of gravel pits, belongs to the Amey Roadstone Corporation, who fortunately realise what an important and interesting property they now have.
The future looks bright for Lower Mill.
Dickler, the Eye and Windrush
In the North of Gloucestershire, and in the heart of the Cotswolds, is Donnington Brewery .
It is undoubtedly one of the most picturesque and idyllically situated working sites in the county, if not the country.
The brewery, which blends so harmoniously with its surroundings, is fed from a four acre lake that draws its water from the infant River Dickler.
The brewery is unique in many respects, especially as a result of the outstanding beauty of its buildings, pond and meticulously maintained surroundings, this being due in no small part to the fact that it has remained in the hands of the Arkell family for well over a century.
They have been at Donnington since Claude Arkell's (the present owner's) ancestor, Thomas, began producing his distinctive beers in the old mill in 1865.
Today, the brewery is still at work, producing three types of draught and three types of bottled beers, that are fervently supported locally and supplied to sixteen local pubs in the surrounding towns and villages.
The recipes and procedures currently in use are much the same as those used by Thomas Arkell in 1865.
The Donnington site can be traced back to at least 1291, when it was one of the two mills of the Manor of Broadwell.
Then it was a corn mill but, by the 16th century, it had become a cloth mill, presumably used for fulling.
Around 1580, the Lord of the Manor rebuilt it, the result being two corn mills under the same roof.
At about that time the river was also dammed to form the mill pond, the Dickler having previously been used directly.
The site continued in use as a corn mill up to its acquisition by the Arkell family in 1827, by then consisting of three corn mills, a malt house and a bakery.
In 1865, Richard Arkell started brewing, for corn millers often took up brewing as a sideline.
In this case, what started out as a sideline soon became of major importance.
The brewery later formed part of the inheritance of Richard's three sons, one of them, John, ultimately buying out the other two.
His son, Claude, took over the mill in 1952 and is still at the helm.
The family also owned surrounding land that, up to the mid-1960s, supplied the barley used.
Nowadays it comes from the Norfolk Maltings, with hops from just over the border in Worcestershire...
The mill and brewery buildings date largely from the 18th and 19th centuries and are all in excellent condition.
Two water wheels are in situ and in complete working order, these until 1959 supplying all the necessary power.
The outside wheel is an iron breastshot unit locally made in Tewkesbury over a century ago, and replaced an older wooden one.
It will produce around twelve horse power and can be connected up to drive various pumps and machines as well as the mill stones.
It also acts as a standby in case of breakdown elsewhere in the brewery.
The drive is transmitted into the adjacent mill building which houses two complete sets of grinding gear and allied crushers, etc.
The basement houses the wooden toothed pit wheel and wallower, jack rings, stone nuts and so on, all in working order.
The mills were apparently last used around thirty years ago.
A second water wheel is in the heart of the main building, this being a smaller one producing around six horse power.
Also fed from the pond, one of its primary uses is to pump water, via a pipe beneath the lake, from the spring, part way along the valley, which supplies the water for the brewing process.
This is a wonderful piece of ancient machinery of indeterminate age, and consists of a crank-driven triple piston pump.
Apart from resleeving the cylinders around three  decades ago, it has continued to function satisfactorily for as long as anyone cares to remember!
A drive shaft passes through an adjacent wall and, because of slight misalignments, suffered problems.
Apparently, the ‘shaft broke as regularly as clockwork, every twelve years!’
A rubber coupling was added and the problem was banished.
A reduction off the shaft consists of a belt drive to what was originally the flywheel from a portable steam engine.
Water power is put to use in various ways throughout the brewery, including the pumping of beer to different tanks.
The majority of the buildings house the vats and equipment used in the brewing process, a scene that, with a few modern exceptions, could be straight from the 19th century.
Donnington now produces the only beer on the Cotswolds and, with the possible exception of Uley, is the smallest working brewery to survive in the county.
If there is such a place as an ideal situation, Donnington Brewery must surely be in it, surrounded as it is by beautiful scenery, an abundance of wild life and a remarkable air of peace and tranquillity.
Not only do the water wheels survive, miraculously they are still put to work, once again proving the viability of the small scale use of water power.
In this day and age, Donnington is a remarkable anachronism, one that manages to combine a wealth of tradition with economic survival in the 1980s, no mean achievement!
Claude Arkell and his forefathers have much to be thanked for.
Between Donnington and its confluence with the Windrush, near Bourton, the Dickler was originally used to power a number of mills.
The first mill downstream was at Upper Swell .
This was always worked as a corn mill, in 1897 by William Lionel Hiatt.
The mill still survives and is constructed of stone, with a slate tiled roof.
It is a plain building with loading doors in one end wall, and the wheel arch and a single window in the front wall.
There is a sizeable iron water wheel still in situ although, with the exception of some iron framing and a few odd belt wheels, little else remains of its milling equipment.
The wheel was fed from a large lake at the rear of the mill, the water exiting under the adjacent road through a substantial stone tunnel.
The tunnel's exit forms one of the three arches of the bridge over the Dickler at this point.
There are also references to a mill at nearby Lower Swell but this does not survive, having gone during the latter half of the 18th century.
The next mill downstream was Hide Mill, followed by those of Wick and Rissington.
The former was converted into a dwelling during the 1920s; the latter two have both been demolished.
Following Rissington Mill the Dickler joins the Windrush, just above the New Bridge.
The Windrush has supported numerous mills over the centuries, some of which are still standing.
The first edition Ordnance Survey shows a succession, the highest being Wood Mill, on the edge of Guiting Wood, followed by Castlett Mill, near Guiting Power.
These were followed by mills at Naunton, Aston and Bourton on the Water.
At one time there were three mills at Bourton itself, known as the Upper (or Bourton) and Lower Mills.
For a time there was also a steam powered mill near the centre of the village.
The Upper Mill stood at the western end of the village, and was always a corn mill.
During the 18th century it was leased to Walter Kyte, the actual miller being Thomas Kyte, possibly a son.
It was known as Kytes Mill.
It continued in use as a corn mill up to around 1930, although the business apparently diminished during its last decade.
By the late 1930s it had been converted to a dwelling and remains so to this day.
For a time it became known as the Old Mill, and later Mill House.
Bourton's other mill was nearer the centre and played an active role from the early part of the 19th century to the end of the Second World War.
The mill's history is inextricably bound up with that of the Wilkins family, who were involved with it from 1840 to 1947.
During the first half of the 19th century, there were still many small water mills working in the area around Bourton.
In 1840 Thomas Wilkins, who was at the time running a successful baking  business, took over the mill in the centre of Bourton then known as Lower Valley Water Mills .
He began producing his own flour, carrying on his baking business to 1855.
Then the mill was auctioned and fell into the hands of a competitor, the miller who was running the Upper (formerly Kytes) Mill at the top end of the village.
Wilkins' response was to set up another mill only a few hundred yards away, this time using steam power.
He installed a steam engine and boiler from Saverys of Tewkesbury and used it to power three pairs of stones and flour dressing equipment.
The new site, because of its dependence on steam, needed regular coal supplies and, as the railway had not by this date reached Bourton, coal supplies had to come by cart from either Adlestrop Station, some six miles away, or Cheltenham, sixteen miles away.
Following Thomas's death in 1863, the business continued, now under the control of his widow and Thomas, Edward and Henry, his three sons.
It then became known as T., E. and H. Wilkins.
Henry carried on the milling and baking side, Thomas was the corn dealer and Edward the dairy man and grocer.
Henry was the most appropriate of the three to carry on as miller as he had served his apprenticeship at Healings in Tewkesbury.
The steam mill continued to 1870, when the Wilkins family returned to the old mill, buying it in 1882.
Business was good, the mill sometimes being run day and night.
In 1878 Edward died, the business becoming T. and H. Wilkins, ‘Millers, corn, cake and seed merchants’.
In the same year, a horizontal steam engine and boiler was ordered from the High Orchard Works of Summers and Scott, in Gloucester.
Coal and flour supplies still had to come by cart, the flour deliveries to Cheltenham being transported by a three horse team and covered wagon.
The business carried on until 1891, when Thomas died, leaving Henry in control, aided by his four sons.
Two years later, in 1893, they installed roller milling equipment, supplied by Gardners and Sons of Gloucester.
Shortly after, the mill became known as the VOB (Vale of Bourton) Flour Mills.
The following years saw the installation of a 40 hp suction gas engine, followed by a 50 hp crude oil engine.
The business continued to produce flour up to 1932, after which they concentrated on flour factoring and the preparation of animal feed.
This continued throughout the Second World War and until 1949, when the mill finally came into the hands of a new owner, a Mr Carr.
His stay was brief, for in 1950 it was sold to the West Midlands Farmers Association who remained until 1974.
The chimney was demolished, the mill race and arch filled in and the milling equipment removed.
Following a period of use for warehousing, the mill stood empty for two years, until it was taken over by Mike Cavanagh in 1976.
By this time the structure was in a rundown condition.
It was to form the ideal location for Mike Cavanagh's motoring collection, started in 1959 during a protracted stay in South Africa.
The collection of cars and related objects gradually increased and, on Mike's return to England, came with him.
The old mill provided an excellent location, as well as an important addition to the many tourist attractions that Bourton already possessed.
The motor museum now has an interesting collection of cars plus an incredible number of advertising signs (over 600) and artifacts from the 19th and early part of the 20th centuries.
Following the establishment of the motor museum, part of the main block was turned over in 1984 to the ‘Village Life Exhibition’.
This, like the motoring section, is now absolutely crammed with reminders and relics of yesteryear.
There are exhibits showing the mill during its working life, a blacksmith's forge and wheelwright's shop, as well as a reconstruction of the general village shop.
Yet another tributary of the Windrush is the River Eye, or Eye Brook.
This modest stream flows east through the village of Upper Slaughter, before joining the Windrush.
It formerly provided the power for one of the most picturesque and much photographed mills in the region, that of the pretty village of Lower Slaughter.
This mill may well stand on the site of that recorded here in the Domesday Survey.
By the 14th century there was a mill in the vicinity, then called Slaughter Mill , and by the 18th century, this had been separated from the manorial estate.
In its later years it came into the hands of the Wilkins family.
They took over the mill in Bourton in 1840, other members of the family running Lower Slaughter.
Precisely when the Wilkins family began running the latter is not clear, although they were certainly in residence by the late 1870s.
Trade references from the 1880s and 1890s refer to the millers as John Wilkins and Sons.
From the First World War up to the mill's final working days in the 1940s, the miller was Joseph T. Wilkins and Sons.
By 1914 it used both water and steam power.
For many years the mill also housed a thriving baking business.
The milling side of the business ceased, following the Second World War.
Clearly, the mill was largely rebuilt at some point in the 19th century, the brick-built section tying into the much older stone range.
Much of the structure survives with few alterations in its appearance since then.
Although milling ceased around four decades ago, the mill machinery both externally and internally is still virtually complete.
Apart from the obvious iron water wheel, there are two sets of stones complete with damsels, hoppers, tuns etc.
On the attic floor the grain bins are still intact, along with the remains of sack trucks, leather shovels and so on, left by the last miller.
The stone floor is now mainly used for storage for the baking business that is still carried on there, although it is still home for a new and completely unused mill stone.
Much of the sack hoist mechanism and line shafting is still complete, although the flour dressing equipment is no longer on site.
The mill could be put back into full working order with a minimum of effort, should the need ever arise.
It is now used for the baking business of A.C. Collet and Sons, and still continues to fulfil an important role in the local community.
Blockley Mills
There have been many volumes written on the Cotswold wool trade but comparatively little ever said about the silk industry.
Most of the Cotswold silk trade was carried out at Blockley, over some 200 years.
Only a few mills were built specifically for silk, the majority being converted to silk from corn milling.
The earliest record of a silk throwster in the area is that of Henry Whatcott, around 1700.
This is not the earliest example in the county, for silk weaving took place in Gloucester as early as 1637.
The silk trade blossomed in Blockley due to the sheer number of mills in the locality plus the abundance of pure water.
The local water also contained just the right quantity of lime for the production of ‘sheened’ washed silk.
For these reasons, and together with the appearance of a number of wealthy families in the village, Blockley joined the silk industry at a time of great expansion for the industry.
The major waterway in Blockley is the Blockley Brook, which forms the water course for the first mill in Blockley,Dovedale Mill , now called Dovedale House.
The wheel and associated machinery has long gone but remnants of the mill race can still be traced under the drive.
It was originally a corn mill and later became well known as, in about 1890, it became the site of Lord Edward Spencer Churchill's first electric power generator.
It has also been suggested that the mill was used for tanning.
The Brook provided the water for at least eight mills and over the years there was often great competition for the supply.
Mill owners deliberately held the supply back from competitors further downstream.
The Brook has a tributary, the Colebrook, which itself supported over four mills.
The Blockley Brook eventually joins the Severn, at Tewkesbury (via the Knee Brook, the Stour and the Avon) whilst the Colebrook travels via Evenlode to join the Thames near Oxford.
The next mill downstream has had a variety of names over the years: Russell Mill, Lowes Mill and more recently,Malvern Mill .
The mill pond no longer exists, its place now taken by two fast-flowing  streams.
Some machinery but not the wheel still survives, in the cellar of what is now Malvern House.
In its prime, it had three sets of stones, powered by an overshot wheel.
Malvern Mill started life as a corn mill and was converted to silk in around 1840.
It then reverted to flour milling and was producing flour and animal feed up to the early 1920s.
The owner and miller at that time was Mr D. Lowe.
As well as flour production, power was taken off to drive cider making equipment, a threshing machine and a saw mill.
Two types of stone were employed here, French burr stones for the production of high quality flour, and coarse English stones for grinding animal fodder.
The next mill downstream is Cheshers Mill , later referred to as The Old Mill, one of the few in Blockley never to be used for silk.
This was the Lord of the Manor's own mill, dated around 1670 and, of all the mills on the Blockley Brook, had the greatest head of water.
It was used mainly to grind for flour and animal feed.
Like Malvern Mill it had an overshot wheel, of 12 feet in diameter, and although this no longer exists, traces of the machinery do.
Blockley Mill , further downstream, has also lost its wheel, although it retains the axle and the head and tail races.
This mill has been known as Mill Dene and before that Wagstaffs.
It started life as a flour mill, had a brief connection with the silk industry and finished up making iron piano frames.
Water power was used for the powering of hammers and bellows.
The site later became known as the Vulcan Works, now demolished, and produced castings and iron gratings, some of which can still be seen in the village, and elsewhere throughout the county.
The largest mill complex in Blockley is the next downstream, originally called Westmacotts Mill and now known as Blockley Court.
It consisted of two large blocks of buildings which have now been converted into flats.
It was, in fact, two mills in one and contained two water wheels, although because of the silk slump only one was ever used to its full extent.
The removal of the tax protection against imported silk in 1859 led to its and many of its neighbours' ultimate downfall.
It had a brief rise to fame when, in 1895, it started producing ‘Ramie’ fibre but, with the launch in 1905 of Courtaulds artificial fibre, the mill could no longer compete.
Further down the water course came Snugborough Mill .
In earlier times this had an overshot wheel, later replaced with a turbine.
There is some suggestion that this site was the original French mill, and was a fulling mill, followed by a number of years' service as a saw mill.
Next down stream is The Old Silk Mill .
This was one of the largest silk mills in the vicinity, although it started life as a corn mill.
The mill and workshops now form a large dwelling as well as holiday homes.
Following its days of silk production, it was turned over to piano making, and became known as the Evans Piano Factory.
Unlike the Piano making concern at Woodchester near Stroud, it failed to stand the test of time.
This mill also has a famous past, related to its previous name of Sleepy Hollow.
This originated from the story of Rip Van Winkle, which was filmed for the cinema at this site many years ago.
The next mill downstream was also originally a corn mill, named The Good Intent , and now called The Limes.
All of the machinery has long since disappeared, together with all the man-made water courses and ponds.
It was converted c1830 from corn to silk (the mill then had three) floors and 360 dozen spindles) and by the 1850s had reverted to corn milling.
The Stanley family held it, son Richard running the mill, whilst his father, Robert, ran nearby Snugborough Mill.
In 1866 a fire was set deliberately, for insurance purposes, by a Mr Compere, who later received a ten year prison sentence for arson.
By the early 1900s, the mill had been converted to a dower house, the water wheel used to grind bracken, etc, for the deer.
Next is the Saw and Bone Mill , which had been the headquarters of the Northwick estate, and was used mainly for the grinding of bones to produce fertilizer.
The wheel was removed and in its place still stands a turbine.
The whole site was originally built in 1843 and was run by Conrad Warner.
The turbine had little success as it emptied the mill pond too quickly and thus became inefficient, a common problem with the early turbines.
The next mill downstream also has  connections with the Northwick Estate and is called Northwick Mill .
This is one of the best preserved in Blockley and retains much of its original equipment.
It also had one of the longest lives as it was working right up to the late 1940s.
Not far from Blockley is the Knee Brook, powering several mills at nearby Paxford, called Pye and Bran Mills, the latter often referred to as Brand Mill.
Both were flour mills and still retain some of their original machinery.
One other flour mill graces the Knee Brook,Ditchford Mill .
This was in use for flour milling up to the 1930s, and records show a mill on that site since at least 1376.
The other tributary of the Blockley Brook, the Colebrook, also has a number of interesting mills along it.
The first was called Smiths Mill , although the mill pond was converted into a reservoir and the site became the Water Works.
The mill was originally converted from fulling to corn and then to silk in 1747.
Following the collapse of the silk industry it became a centre for collar and shirt manufacture.
The Colebrook, after leaving the Water Works, passes a number of dwellings to Mill Close , where a silk mill was built in 1714.
This site apparently had two 22-foot diameter overshot wheels.
This mill, in the late 1800s, also benefited from the addition of a turbine.
It became known as the Astral Works in 1887, and was used for the generation of electricity.
By 1914, it had become the headquarters of the Village Institute stopped generating electricity and was, in the 1930s, largely destroyed by fire.
The last mill in the area is Colebrook Mill , which has also been known as Strattons Mill.
This began life as a silk mill in the late 1700s, built by Anthony Stratton.
The mill was later converted into dwellings.
The Little Avon
In the southern half of Gloucestershire, a river known as the Little Avon gradually wends its way across the county towards the Severn.
Like most other water courses of any size, the Avon and its tributaries were harnessed to drive a number of mills, many engaged in various stages of woollen cloth manufacture.
Some of these mills were fairly small but a number, mainly built during the 19th century, were of considerable size.
One such was that at Charfield built during the first half of the 19th century.
Impressive as Charfield Mill undoubtedly is, it pales in comparison with its neighbour a few miles away,New Mills at Kingswood, near Wotton-Under-Edge.
This building is one of the most impressive and elegant brick-built structures in the county.
The site is recorded during the 16th century as being occupied by ‘Sury’ or ‘Shewry’Mills, which at the time was operated as both a corn and two fulling mills.
By the beginning of the 19th century the site was in the hands of Thomas England but shortly afterwards was leased and run by members of the Austin family.
In 1801, Rev Warner of Bath visited: ‘New Mills belongs to Messrs. Austin, and employs under its roof about 195 men, women and children…
. Spanish wool is manufactured at this works and prepared for the weaver of broadcloth and Kerseymere’.
He goes on at some length referring to the machinery used for scribbling, spinning, fulling etc, all of these processes carried out under one roof.
The only stage process not in the mill was the actual weaving.
Humphrey Austin leased the mill, but in 1806 he bought what came to be known as New Mills.
It was later leased to Thomas Mercer of Kingswood.
The Little Avon was used to feed the millpond via a half mile long leat, the mill powered by five large internal wheels, producing between them over 40 hp.
The Little Avon must have provided a reasonably reliable source of power for, in an era when mill owners were beginning to install steam engines to supplement or replace water power, during the 1830s New Mills still relied solely on water.
The mill changed hands several times.
In 1844 it was owned by a partnership of two Wotton clothiers, Lewis and Dutton, while shortly afterwards the owners were Le Gros Thompson and Co.
They used the mill for silk manufacture for a few years but by 1860 ownership had passed to  Samuel Long, who was also running Charfield Mills.
The Long family continued to run the latter mill up to the end of the 19th century, hut by 1870 New Mills had been taken over and substantially reorganised by Tubbs and Lewis, who converted it to production of elasticated fabric.
Tubbs and Lewis ran the mill for some time but finally ceased production there.
There followed a period of disuse and partial use until the mill, which was then owned by Courtaulds, was sold to the local company of Renishaws.
They clearly appreciated what a magnificent building they had acquired and spent £800,000 on restoration and conversion of the Grade II listed structure, which was subsequently turned over to the manufacture of high-technology measuring equipment.
Clustered around the main building are a number of older stone-built dye-houses, drying stoves and outbuildings, some of which have been imaginatively converted.
The area around the mill pond has also been landscaped, the whole site now looking magnificent and a credit to its new owners.
Kilcott Brook
A few miles to the south east of New Mills, east of Hillesley, stands the lovely little mill at Kilcott .
This is a survivor of the many small country mills, the majority of which have long disappeared.
The mill occupies what is thought to be a Domesday site; however, the present building dates partially from 1655, when it was rebuilt.
There are many later alterations and additions.
The mill house that stands close by was built a little later in 1677 and, like the mill itself, retains many original features.
During the 1890s the Lower Kilcott Mill was worked by George Curtis Senior, with George Curtis Junior, operating Upper Kilcott Mill.
Water comes from the Kilcott Brook and is fed via a short penstock to the 18′ diameter pitchback wheel, a design not often encountered in this area.
The tailrace empties through a 100 yard tunnel that rejoins the stream after running under the mill house.
Around a century ago, the mill housed three sets of stones; there is now a single pair of French Burrs, of at least 70 years of age and probably much older.
Surrounding the stones is a wooden tun lined with zinc.
The restoration of the once-derelict mill was carried out by Wilf Medlam who steadfastly stuck to his policy of using the correct parts and materials wherever possible.
Many rotten beams were replaced, as were doors and windows.
Old wood was used for certain areas such as the floors, the problems encountered in obtaining supplies being enormous.
The rusted, corrugated iron roof was replaced with stone tiles.
The mill pond also came in for attention and was thoroughly dredged, and the dam, tunnels, gates and wheel repaired.
Extensive repairs were also necessary to the gearing inside the mill, this including replacement of several hundred individual cog teeth, all hand finished from matured oak.
Eventually, after years of effort, the mill was run for the first time in 1977.
Since then, the mill (which is not open to the public) has been visited by a large number of interested bodies, all of whom must have been greatly impressed with this tale of hard work, expense and  perseverence .
Wilf Medlam's task was clearly not an easy one, but his efforts have ensured that at least one little country mill has been saved in order to show future generations just how a mill of 1830 would have been operated.
It is doubtful if the mill could ever be operated on a commercial scale and in Wilf Medlam's words it is ‘a desirable and harmless anachronism, doing its bit to satisfy the immense demand for 100% wholemeal flour’.
The mill now has a new owner and fortunately, he too, fully appreciates what an important acquisition he has made.
Wilf Medlam's labour of love has not been in vain.