

The concept of marketing — what do parents want?
Marketing is a pretty loose term.
Crosier (1975) found fifty definitions so we had better make an early stab at identifying the notion of marketing that is being applied in this book.
There are three strands common to most definitions:
Needs satisfaction
This involves attempting to put yourself in the consumer's shoes so as to identify with their hopes and expectations and finding ways of meeting these.
Too often we assume that others want exactly what we want or need those things we find easiest to deliver.
Marketing as a function
Making sure that relationships and the range and the quality of the services on offer are of the highest standard.
Marketing as a series of techniques
The most important of these techniques being the application of market research, market analysis and the use of effective and efficient communications.
Even though these activities appear innocuous enough many teachers and administrators are suspicious or even hostile to the idea of marketing schools and the education service.
They seem to equate marketing with the ‘stack it high and sell it cheap’ philosophy of the  discount supermarket.
It's glaringly obvious that schools are not commercial organisations and children, unlike bars of chocolate, are not commodities.
There are marketing techniques that are totally inappropriate to education, these include: cut throat competition, volume discounts, aggressive advertising, free coupons, ‘two for the price of one’ and money back offers.
There has been a long tradition of professional marketing activities by a wide spectrum of non-profit making organisations including political parties, the Health Education Council with its anti-smoking campaign, the Right to Read programme, Oxfam, Christian Aid and the Salvation Army.
All take marketing seriously and the time has come for education to be added to the list.
Marketing has spawned a great deal of ‘mumbo-jumbo’ but its prevailing theme is people, at the heart of our business are the children and their parents and the community that we all serve.
Through the selective use of marketing techniques, particularly through listening and responding, schools can be as effective at marketing as the most successful commercial organisations.
Sainsbury's, Marks and Spencers, Rolls Royce and IBM have highly effective and sensitive marketing systems.
They listen to their customers and make incremental improvements in mature systems of management and organisation to improve the service they offer people, by this means they enhance their reputation for quality and reliability.
Their status has not been gained through public relations hype or through brashness but through their relentless pursuit of quality in all their activities.
Worthwhile marketing isn't a ‘hit and run’ activity but needs sustained effort, it's not necessarily expensive as it's more to do with attitude and ingenuity rather than resources.
The best publicity doesn't come from banging a big drum but from personal recommendation, though when schools do something worthwhile we should make sure that the public know all about it.
Marketing washing powders or mouse traps is a much simpler task than marketing a school.
There is a clear consensus about the purpose of washing powders or mouse traps; it's easy to judge whether they are efficient, effective and provide value for money.
The aims of education or complex and sometimes contradictory.
Schools have to attempt to satisfy the conflicting demands of a whole range of individuals and groups.
Brunt's (1985) description that:
Marketing a school involves balancing a society's needs for a cultured population against the immediate demands of parents, providers and consumers so as to maximise the school's contribution to the well-being of society at large emphasises the inherent difficulty of the task.
The Department of Education and Science, the Local Education Authority, potential employers and a whole host of other organisations bring pressure to bear to influence the direction that schools take and all these pressure groups demand speedy and effective responses.
Changes brought about by the National Curriculum and Local Management of Schools have altered the content and balance of the curriculum and brought about a radical revision in the style of school management.
Much as we might like to, we can't turn the clock back on these fundamental changes, we have no choice but to proceed with all faith in the new and make it work.
Generally primary schools meet with a great deal of public approval.
The MORI poll conducted for the Sunday Times (Jan 1988) showed that 11 per cent considered the quality of primary school education as excellent and a further 61 per cent as good.
More than 75 per cent of primary parents were happy with their level of involvement with 20 per cent wanting more to say in what went on in schools.
There is no room for complacency even though 72 per cent of parents in the survey rate primary schools as good or better.
It must be a cause for concern to those of us in the public sector that in the period 1979–90 the percentage of children receiving private education increased from 5 per cent to 7.8 per cent a growth of over 50 per cent.
Many of those that are dissatisfied with state education quietly withdraw their children from the system rather than campaign for improvements.
Whatever changes take place the most successful schools will continue to be those that have an obsession for children and education, putting children and their parents first remains the essential priority.
Parent influence is a major factor in children's educational progress and winning parents' active support should be an important task of the school.
Meadows and Wood (1991) conducted some small scale research into the attitudes of a group of parents with primary aged children in LEA schools and a group with children in independent schools.
Their findings were that parents regarded a good school as being one where:
the curriculum is academic, but within a rounded context, wherein the whole child is educated to his or her whole potential and the arts and sports take their place;
children are encouraged to work co-operatively, but also to develop self-confidence, competitiveness and leadership;
class sizes are not too large and there is concern for the individual;
there is an effective strategy for managing (or expelling) the disruptive;
teachers are highly-trained, well motivated and prepared to work long hours;
teachers find ample time to communicate with parents, giving detailed and constructive feedback on pupils' progress;
there is a close partnership between school, child and parent.
Similarly Hughes, Wikeley and Nash (1990) investigated what parents of infant children perceived as the characteristics of a good primary school.
Well over half the parents mentioned relationships between parents, teachers and children as being an important factor.
The staff, atmosphere, ethos, discipline, range of education offered, headteacher, development of the whole child, academic results, resources, facilities, modern methods, small school and small classes were mentioned in descending order.
The research didn't explore the sorts of relationships that parents wanted but it's a pretty safe guess that they wanted teachers that didn't shout; the Newsons (1984) reported that shouting by teachers was the major complaint which mothers made on behalf of their eleven-year-olds.
The parents in the Hughes, Wikeley and Nash survey didn't see themselves as ‘consumers of education’.
Macbeth (1989) argues that there is no reason why they should, in that children are the consumers of education and parents are the clients of the school.
Whether the parents in the sample saw themselves as consumers or not they used their right to choose; 31 per cent sent their children to schools other than the nearest and 58 per cent would, if they were not happy, consider moving their child to another school.
Caring
Marketing will only work for those who really believe in listening and responding, it starts and ends with caring for people.
Parents see relationships as the most important aspect of primary schooling and marketing has much to do with relationships, it simply starts with nothing more than an insistence on common courtesy — or is it more like uncommon courtesy?
Integrity is vital but in all types of organisations including schools there are examples of thinly disguised contempt for customers and consumers.
A lecturer visiting a student on teaching practice tells of being mistaken for a parent and being kept standing in a cold corridor while behind a closed door the head shouted and screamed at a tearful child.
Any visitor would receive an unmistakable message about the quality and tone of relationships at that school.
It's often from untypical or casual routine  events that lasting impressions are made.
The most important marketer for the school could be the secretary who snarls at parents when they call or phone.
The action of one individual can undo much of the good work done by others.
All schools market themselves whether they are conscious of it or not.
The only difference is that those that are aware do it better.
Paying attention
Marketing is a powerful management tool through which energy, resources and skills can be focussed to greatest effect.
Too many schools demand that parents and children be uncritical fans.
Have you ever taken the time to ask parents what makes a good school?
How do you know that your perceptions of the school match those held by others?
Is there frequent monitoring of other people's perceptions of the school?
What stereotypes exist in the school about parents?
Are the middle class lumped together as ‘pushy’ and the working class as ‘apathetic’?
Are single parent families always categorised as ‘disadvantaged’?
Schools that operate on assumptions about parents' beliefs and attitudes face the danger of stick in the mud complacency, become resistant to change and, through the adoption of self-fulfilling prophecies, limit both ambitions and achievements.
Being out of touch is bad news so we need to be constantly on our guard that we don't assume that we know what our consumers and clients are thinking or that we know what they want.
If the school is misunderstood then it's a problem created by the school.
Some schools in fact survive because parents are operating under the mistaken assumption that the school is run and organised in very much the same way as the one that they attended as a child, even more so when it's the same school.
Parental views of schools are influenced by television programmes particularly by the way that stereotypes are reinforced in drama.
It's not unknown to eventually track back the source of rumour and confusion to events at ‘Grange Hill’.
Greater understanding of what goes on in school doesn't necessarily mean a greater approval of its organisation and its methods.
It is possible to attempt to justify poor practice by claiming that it's response to parents wishes: silent classrooms brought about by severe discipline, numerous paper exercises completed to provide evidence of industry and antiquated forms of behaviour paraded as good manners are just some examples.
It's part of the school's job to convince parents that they want what the school wants and values.
There are numerous examples of ways in which schools have worked to establish an understanding and identity with the curriculum by parents.
Ruth Merttens and Jeffrey Vass (1987) in an article headed ‘Parents in schools: raising money or standards?’ discussed ways in which they structured the involvement of parents with their children's learning of mathematics and Boland and Simmons (1987) describe ways in which they altered parents' and children's attitudes to reading.
Chatting in the playground with parents and children will provide a great deal of valuable feedback on the success and popularity of the school but there are times when a more systematic gathering of opinion is needed to counter or confirm wishful thinking.
The traditional way of undertaking market research is through using questionnaires but there are difficulties in gathering information by this method.
It's too easy to ask closed questions which almost predetermine the response given.
‘Is our school a good school?’ is unlikely to draw many negative responses or to provide much insight into the sources of satisfaction or dissatisfaction.
Surveys ought to focus on how parents and children perceive the ways in which the school satisfies their needs.
These can include everything from curriculum content to phone courtesy.
A good starting point is to ask parents to list ten things that irritate them about the school plus ten things that the school does rather well.
The results are likely to come as a surprise presenting many untapped market opportunities and will certainly dispel complacency.
There may in fact be little street credibility for the intentions and claims of the school, for example it's no good boasting of an open door policy if people feel intimidated and never come across the playground.
There must be limits to the power of consumerism.
Responding to parents'needs doesn't imply abandoning hard won professional judgement based on knowledge, experience and common sense.
Being responsive to parents doesn't mean the development of a situation where ‘parent always knows best’ about the education of the children and the way that the school should be run.
Certainly as far as curriculum is concerned through the imposition of the National Curriculum it's a matter of ‘Government knows best’.
In some situations the legal obligation to follow the requirements of the National Curriculum and provide a broad and balanced programme of study is an unbreachable defence against the attempts of pressure groups to influence the curriculum within the school.
It is in the management of effective communications that ‘parents know best’ and this is the area where we need to be giving them the very best of our attention.
Families from ethnic minorities
Few schools serve a homogeneous intake, the majority draw on a wide range of social and cultural backgrounds and care needs to be taken that false assumptions are not made about parents' hopes for their children and their beliefs about the purpose of education.
Do you know what families of ethnic minorities feel about your school?
Tomlinson (1984) showed that Caribbean parents wanted schools to focus on basic skills, discipline and equal opportunities in examinations and that Muslim parents felt that schools didn't attempt to recognise their cultural and religious values.
Have you up to date information about the perceptions that minority groups hold of your school's policies and practice?
If so, how do you use the data?
As well as gathering information about parental hopes and beliefs it's important that detailed knowledge is gathered about home language, religion and culture so that sensitive and effective links can be established.
In most areas LEAs have well-organised inter or multi-cultural support services and also an inspector or advisor with special responsibilities for this work.
These specialists can offer useful advice and practical support.
Communications check list
What is the language of the home?
Do the parents have a good knowledge of English?
Do the parents have problems with written communications from school?
If so, are letters and notices translated into the home language by the school or by other volunteer translators?
Do the parents have knowledge of the British educational system?
Do the parents and the school share the same expectations about discipline, teaching methods and curriculum content?
(Where parents have no previous experience of the British system of education then they rely heavily on the school's opinion and guidance.)
What is the home religion and culture?
The traditional role of women in some cultures makes it difficult for them to approach or be approached by the school.
How should the school tackle this problem?
Is the home culture and background reflected in the curriculum?
Has the school displays of materials including mother-tongue books that reflect the home culture?
Does the school share in the celebration of non-Christian festivals?
Care needs to be taken that the school doesn't  breach the regulations imposed by the Education Reform Act.
Are their special cultural or religious regulations that govern the children's dress or food?
Does the school respond sensitively to these requirements?
What about PE and swimming?
What about the wearing of jewellery?
Finding out the answers to these questions is best done by going out and talking to parents and others.
Too often we act on assumptions and speculations that bear little resemblance to fact or evidence.
Direct contact helps dispel myths and dissolves stereotypes.
Responding
It's vital that people have easy access to the headteacher and that the head is constantly on the move checking, listening, being interested and praising and rewarding.
In this way there is less chance of being caught at a disadvantage or being ambushed by circumstances.
There needs to be personal contact when things have gone wrong, the head and staff need to be generous in their apologies when they make mistakes.
Looming confrontations can usually be defused by simple non-defensive humbleness.
Marketing is about infinite improvements, by listening and by responding to people you increase involvement, engage commitment and win loyalty.
A good example comes from the computer industry.
Alan Sugar made a tremendous breakthrough with the development of his Amstrad PC 1512 machine.
His computer was totally compatible with the machines of the brand leader IBM, but with the added advantage of being about half the price and running at a much faster speed.
There was some concern amongst computer buffs that the Amstrad machine, unlike IBMs, didn't have an in-built cooling fan — research by Amstrad's engineers had shown that his machine ran perfectly well without one.
Typically Sugar responded to the market perceptions and within weeks gave the customers what they wanted an upgraded 1512 with not only a fan but with cooling vents too!
Sugar was asked to change something which was peripheral to the main function of the machine.
There are parallels for schools; if it pleases the customers then revamp the reading record card, add a parents' race on Sports Day — making accommodations at the margins is equally easy for us too.
At one school during a parents' coffee morning the conversation drifted around to the subject to school uniform.
There was a ground swell of opinion in the group that one should be adopted.
The opinions of staff and governors were sought and although there were  some reservations it was decided that a questionnaire should be distributed to parents.
A great deal of discussion took place at the playground gate and when questionnaires were returned there was a 95 per cent response rate with over 98 per cent of those parents in favour of adopting a uniform on a voluntary basis including an agreement on colour and style.
The parents were delighted that the decision was theirs and was not imposed on them by others.
Celebration
Remembering, and using people's names when talking to them pays dividends in personal relationships.
Those that get on well with others always do a lot of smiling and find positive things to say.
We should always be looking for opportunities to celebrate success.
Parents appreciate genuine interest, concern and lavish thanks.
Creating heroes of parents and children is a must in building a climate of success.
If you need parent support in the bad times then you need to encourage and reward it in those times when everything is going well.
Making the best of what you have
Even though your school may not have the most modern and well equipped building set in extensive playing fields serving a prosperous suburb this need not put you at a great disadvantage in marketing the school.
Resources and facilities ranked tenth and eleventh in the survey by Hughes, Wikeley and Nash (1990) of parents' views of the attributes of a good primary school.
The National Primary Centre have produced a pamphlet aimed at parents and governors and suggests that judgements are made under the following headings:
Is the school welcoming?
Is the school bright, fresh and interesting?
What are the children learning?
How are the children learning?
How is quality encouraged and sustained?
Are there plenty of activities available?
How is the school helping the child to develop as a person?
Are there active home/school links?
The pamphlet also includes a checklist for parents with three quarters of the items relating to people and relationships, with few items concerned with facilities or materials.
1.
Were you able to make an appointment to meet the headteacher?
2.
Is there a school prospectus?
3.
Were you able to find your way in easily?
4.
Was your welcome friendly from all the staff?
5.
Were you shown all around the school including the classrooms?
6.
Was there a sense of calm and order in the classroom and corridors?
7.
Did you feel impressed by the standard of work displayed on the walls?
8.
Was there a sense of industry among the children?
9.
Was the noise level acceptable to you?
10.
Were you aware of many aspects of the curriculum taking place (eg science, maths, computer)?
11.
Was equipment easily available and set out for children?
12.
Does the school promote an interest in music and/or sport?
13.
Are parents actively encouraged to help in the classrooms?
14.
Is there a PTA or parent association?
15.
Is there a parents' room?
16.
Is there a feeder nursery or playgroup?
17.
Are school policy documents on curriculum matters available for you to read and take home?
18.
Do you feel that the school will value the contribution you make to your child's education?
19.
Do you think, knowing your child, that he/she will be happy coming to this school?
20.
If you were a child again, would you like to be a pupil at this school?
Appearances matter
A subject that always causes controversy is whether headteachers should advise or instruct members of staff on their dress and appearance.
Not many heads would go as far as one who insists that male members of staff must wear their jackets in classrooms even on the warmest of days.
On the other hand heads have every right to expect staff to be well groomed and reasonably dressed at work.
Identifying the school's strengths
A school can squander its assets if its playing fields are litter strewn, flower beds trampled, lawns unkept and ponds neglected.
Some schools rarely use the playing fields they have on site yet others whose only facilities are public parks have built tremendous reputations for sports activities.
There are schools that have extensive stage  and lighting equipment that make no use of drama in the curriculum.
Availability of resources and their actual use seem frequently to bear little relationship to each other.
Identifying strengths needs to relate to what actually goes on with children and their learning and not to neglected or under used physical resources.
Energy, imagination and enthusiasm will be needed to bring under-used resources back into action either for school or community use.
There are unlikely to be any problems in attracting a junior football club to share the school field.
A stage in search of actors would be a news item any local paper would be keen to carry.
The number of children at the school may have dropped considerably either through competition from other schools or through a fall in the number of children of school age in the neighbourhood.
The result could well be small classes, a problem or a USP (unique selling point) for the school.
Many prep schools use small classes as their trump card in their marketing campaigns rightly claiming that small classes allow each child to have a big slice of teacher time.
Discussion with staff, parents and children may well reveal strengths that are not obvious at first sight.
Most LEAs are adopting systematic procedures of school inspections and viewing what goes on in classrooms.
The feedback from these is helpful in that the school strengths are illuminated from yet another perspective.
A review will need to start with curriculum and teaching and learning.
Staff changes through resignations and promotions can affect curriculum and extra-curricular provision as new recruits may have interests and strengths in other areas.
What should remain constant is ethos.
A school with a long tradition of extra curricular activities is likely to continue with an extensive provision even if the activities alter to reflect the expertise of the adults involved.
A strong base of parental involvement is unlikely to be shed even though membership of the group of active parents constantly changes as children move on to the next stage of education.
The shape the support takes may radically alter, reflecting the enthusiasms and interests of individual helpers.
Those that remain have made a personal investment in time and energy; they have a stake in maintaining the system that has been developed and replacements will need to make their mark and have freedom to develop new ideas, from this a sense of identity, ownership and commitment will develop.
There needs to be a sense of ownership of ideas.
Unless there is personal identification and commitment, then there is no responsibility for making things work — one of the reasons for the generally poor attendance levels at meetings where governors present their annual report to parents is that the system is imposed on schools.
Identity and pride
The attitudes that children develop towards their primary school last a lifetime.
A school that develops a warm sense of well being with its pupils, even in the toughest neighbourhoods, suffers far less from casual, endless vandalism.
One disadvantaged urban primary schools springs to mind.
Even though the school site was very open and the playground used by hordes of unsupervised teenagers and children in the evenings and weekends the only graffiti for a number of years was a ‘smiley face’ with the headteacher's name scrawled beneath.
A few panes of glass were broken during that time, but by accident rather than deliberate action.
Making the most of the school
If there is spare accommodation available during the school day then turning some space over to use as a parents' room is well worth while.
A parents and toddlers group, toy library, bulk buy groups, senior citizens clubs, adult learning classes, bingo, whist drives and all sorts of fund raising activities can use the room as a base and add to the income of the school.
Evening and weekend lettings of the school hall and classrooms not only brings revenue but brings in visitors that would not normally visit the premises.
Even though school generated activities are not taking place at these times judgements are made about the standard of work on display and the general state of order and cleanliness.
Changing reputation
It's important to let people know that the school has changed and is changing.
One important indicator of change is the school's name.
Many primary schools still go under the title of junior mixed infant, a very curious and old fashioned title.
A simple resolution is a governor's meeting can change the title to the more modern county primary.
A more substantial change in name may need approval of the LEA.
Winning the support of staff
Marketing is all about people.
The school can't market successfully without the staff's active commitment to the idea.
There are problems for both new and well established heads in convincing staff that marketing the school is a productive and worthwhile activity.
Quite naturally the focus of teachers is on the classroom, their principal concern is the business of teaching and learning.
A new head will, more than likely, face unfavourable comparisons with his predecessor in whose time there were never naughty children or wet playtimes, all teachers were perfect and parents, government and headteachers stayed out of class room business leaving teaching to teachers.
The established head taking up a keen interest in marketing may well be seen as no more than a leopard cynically changing spots to match the climate of LMS and the introduction of pupil driven funding.
What a sceptical or defeatist system needs is motivation.
The trick in bringing about a change in attitudes towards marketing is to go after the easy stuff first, there is nothing to be gained from knocking your head against a brick wall.
A review of the staff's perceptions of a good school is a useful starting point.
One way of going about this is to invite people at a staff meeting or training day to:
1.
individually list the ten most important attributes of a good primary school;
2.
in pairs compare and discuss lists and compile a new agreed list;
3.
in fours compare and discuss the pairs' list and compile a revised list;
4.
compare the final lists and look for agreements and differences.
A great deal of discussion will be generated and it's certain that the  bulk of the attributes will focus on relationships rather than on curriculum or administrative matters.
The next stage is to take the attributes identified and generate polar opposites, at this stage additional pairs of opposites could be added to the list.
In pairs then in fours and finally as a whole staff mark the performance of your school as a point laying between each pair of opposites.
The process identifies and rates strengths and weaknesses leaving the way open for targeting action (based on the work of Rodger and Richardson 1985).
An example of the responses generated at one school is given below:
Attributes of a good school
1.
All should feel that the school is cared for and caring.
2.
There is purposeful work matched to children's abilities.
3.
The school is an attractive environment.
4.
There is a broad and engaging curriculum.
5.
Children are engaged in active learning.
6.
Staff engage in positive eye ball contact with parents.
7.
Staff and parents work as a team.
8.
The staff are both firm and kind.
9.
Communications are open and friendly.
10.
All are happy to come to school.
Taking small bites
Once there is a recognition that there is room for improvement there comes the task of developing a commitment and determination to bring about change.
The total task needs to be broken down into small easily achieved wins, eg every teacher will be in the playground five minutes before the bell goes to greet children and parents, four children from each class will have their names entered in the ‘Gold book’ for good work or praiseworthy actions, any child in hospital for more than one night will receive ‘get well cards’from the class and a visit by a member of staff, the entrance hall is cleared of clutter and made more welcoming for visitors.
A vast number of frequent marginal improvements are more effective than one large single improvement as the momentum is maintained and realistic manageable change is always on the agenda.
There is also plenty to celebrate and lots of opportunities to make heroes.
Adjusting to small changes is always easier than adjusting to large and the whole aim is that the school should be a nicer and more effective place for everyone.
The visit to see a sick child at hospital is always well appreciated and the following note by a mum is typical of the response generated
This note is to thank you very much for going to see Paul in hospital.
I am very grateful and so was Paul because after seeing you on Tuesday night after you had left I noticed the vast improvement in Paul which was all down to your visit.
Paul couldn't get over how his headmaster had been just to see him which made him feel very important which I thank you for.
I wouldn't let is pass without thanking you which is the reason for this note because at the moment I haven't got that much spare time on my hands to thank you in person.
A superior quality of relationships or quality of teaching isn't built upon genius in the headteacher's room or any magical acts, but built on listening, trust and respect for the dignity and creative potential of each person connected with the school.
‘What have you done in school this week that's been interesting?’ is a question that we should put to other members of staff, and ourselves at every staff meeting.
It's also a vital question to raise regularly with children too.
There is often an assumption that it's obvious to any fool that the benefits of attending the school are overwhelming and that image and reputation are constants.
This is an attitude which will block attempts to bring about anything other than token or superficial change.
It's worth taking the assumption by the scruff of the neck  and shaking it till it falls apart, otherwise there will be no fundamental lasting change in relationships, the school will remain inward looking with no real growth in active listening and responding.
It is frequently difficult for staff to accept the notion that anyone other than teachers should have an active part to play in the development of the school and they are often suspicious of the motives of parents who wish to take an extensive part in school life.
It's almost as if some teachers hold the belief that the best parents are those that are docile and ignorant about the school, leaving the professionals to get on with the job.
Even the Plowden Report expressed fears of excessive parent power and the possible harmful effects of a strong PTA.
Although this potential does exist, actual examples of abuse of parent power through PTAs in the quarter of a century or so since the publication of the report are few and far between.
This is not to deny that cliques and ‘school gate agitators’ sometimes operate with the sole intention of fermenting a campaign aimed at causing damage to the reputation of an individual or the school.
Parents have traditionally adjusted -to the school and note the school to the parents and the child.
Parents are expected to have total confidence in the school yet schools don't often reciprocate trust and confidence in the judgement and goodwill of parents.
Tizard's (1988) work on the attitudes of reception class teachers confirms this view.
Trust always involves risk by others, even though in all schools children are occasionally injured in accidents and some children bullied, parents, on the whole, have absolute trust that teachers will see that no harm will come to their child.
Those members of staff who have reservations about the value of a genuine partnership with parents can best be convinced by the successes of many small actions.
The complacent needs to be challenged.
How many new ideas have you introduced during the past year?
How many ideas have come from parents and children?
What are parents', children's and governors' perceptions of quality?
How do you know?
Have you ever bothered to ask?
Curriculum and standards
There has been something of a revolution in raising standards of quality in a number of manufacturing firms by encouraging departments within a factory to operate almost as separate companies.
Each department acts as if it is the purchaser of another department's production and then ‘sells’ on materials that it has processed for the next stage of production.
At the ‘buying’ stage the department takes on all the roles of the critical customer, including complaining loudly, if the quality isn't sufficiently high.
This model of internal marketing can be applied to schools through encouraging teachers to see themselves as customers.
The merchandise that they acquire being the class of children that they take on in September.
If the children don't have the skills, knowledge and attitudes that can be reasonably expected, or records of achievement indicate, then the teacher ought to complain.
As customers if they don't get the quality that they want they need to bring pressure to bear on the in-school supplier.
The problem behind the complaint may be related to styles of teaching or a mismatch of goals and objectives.
Non-teaching staff
It's essential that all the staff including caretaking, clerical, kitchen staff and school crossing patrol feel valued contributors to the success of the school.
It might be impossible to draw everyone together for a single meeting but all need to be kept in touch with what's going on and their opinions sought.
Meetings with lunch time supervisors can be held just after afternoon school starts and meetings with cleaning staff can occasionally be held before they start their shift.
Non-teaching staff need to share the view that children are the most important people in the school.
It's useful to hold regular meetings of non-teaching staff not only to reinforce the message but to look for ways of improving the school.
Often the only staff who live within the school's catchment area are the caretaker and the ancillary workers.
These members of staff can be vital two way channels of informal information between the school and the community.
The Headteacher
The headteacher has a crucial role in not only convincing the staff of the importance of marketing but in actually getting them to do something about it.
It's important that marketing — listening and responding to the needs of others gets a high priority at each and every staff meeting.
Those things on which attention is focussed regularly are the things that get done.
Breaking down activities into a number of small wins not only creates a rewarding climate for action but concentrates attention on the possible.
Marketing is to do with attitudes and action not bureaucracy, paper work needs to be kept to the minimum, there is a pernicious effect of petty rules.
There are leaders and opinion makers on the staff whose power of influence is completely unrelated to their official status.
We have all met the school secretary or a main scale teacher with a strong personality who exerts more influence on staff attitudes than senior  post holders.
I keep hearing, supposedly true, stories about the new milkman to school who remained convinced for months that the secretary with whom he had been chatting regularly was the head!
It is important that the power of these opinion shapers is both recognised and utilised by the head in bringing about positive change.
The gain from marketing is increased productivity through the reduction of misunderstandings and potential friction, more effective communications, the generation and channelling of parental support for learning, and the unleashing of ideas from a whole host of people on ways of improving the school.
The head needs openly to celebrate successes with sincerity and to enthuse about efforts made, to be lavish with praise for other people's efforts.
In one school towards the end of July the staff arrived to discover that the staff room was festooned with balloons and streamers, the wine glasses were dusted off ready for use later in the day but, most importantly on the display board was a very large notice in thick felt pen:
The head who goes about the job with tremendous enthusiasm and courtesy is likely to generate these attributes in other members of staff.
Not only should school be a good place for children but a good place for teachers and other adult workers too!
Aren't there times when a little purposeful impatience needs to be shown?
Too much energy can be spent looking for the perfect idea when being pragmatic and settling for a satisfactory solution is best.
There is too much busyness in schools, staff need ‘dream time’ too and also the security to try out ideas without becoming nervous about making mistakes or being afraid of failing.
There are occasions when the Nelson touch is needed and a blind eye turned when events are not turning out quite as well as planned.
Though the head needs to bubble with enthusiasm reasonable requests will sometimes need to be refused solely to keep a balance and not let pressures get out of hand.
At these times the strength of personal relationships and conviction will be tested.
The good head gains credibility by never pointing the finger at others to explain failure but takes personal responsibility when things don't go well.
The head also needs to reward those who are on the right lines through drawing attention to successes, prominently displaying thank you letters on the staff room notice board, using time to convince, cheer, direct, push and urge.
People need freedom to develop good links with the community.
The head who plays the role of buffer or filter of communication between the school and the outside world will never have a well marketed school.
Where there is a climate of trust, respect and responsibility, initiatives can be left to others; is there a need for the head to meet every visitor, make every telephone call or sign every letter?
Heads could make better use of their time by paying attention to those encouraging little friendly attributes, searching for the successes of others and praising them shamelessly.
Peters and Austin take the view that
The best bosses — in school, hospital, factory — are neither exclusively tough or exclusively tender.
They are both: tough on the values, tender in support of people who would dare to take a risk and try something new in support of these values.
Praise and support are the food and drink of innovation and are so often undervalued.
No one starts out by trying to do a bad job but if neglected and not respected potential will be stifled and performance falter.
Much can be done in-house to boost morale.
The plaintive cry of the deputy head that ‘the only way to get a pat on the head around here is to sit under a cow’ will strike home with staff, children and parents in many primary schools.
Another important marketing task for the head is to encourage teachers to become more professionally involved with parents outside normal school hours — through curriculum workshops on reading, maths, science, etc where parents and teachers actually listen to each other.
There is a place for the social PTA ‘faggots and peas evening’ or ten pin bowling at the George and Dragon, though it needs to be understood by all that attendance by staff at such social evenings is purely a matter of personal choice and not to be taken as an indicator of loyalty to the school.
Heads need to find time to wander into classrooms, parents and toddlers groups, dining halls and playgroups to chat to people and take an interest in what's going on.
Parents like to see the headteacher's initials on their child's reading card, they appreciate that the head is taking a personal interest in their child's progress and keeping a general eye on activities in classrooms.
No matter how busy headteachers are in shifting the paper work disaster looms if they fail to keep in daily contact with teaching and children's learning.
The head needs to encourage staff to scrounge for good management, display and communications ideas from schools where they have previously worked, schools where their own children attend, industry, supermarkets, courses, magazines and even books.
With a bit of modification and improvement ideas lifted from all sorts of sources will help in improving the school.
Those heads who are likely to be most successful in marketing their schools are those who are competitive, egotistical, passionate and persistent.
In practice brute consistency breeds believability and it's unflagging consistency that convinces others of personal commitment.
Maintaining the impetus for change is brought about by nothing less than dogged determination.
Focussed listening
Perceptions need to be challenged.
My boasts that our school was an open school run on democratic lines with no special privileges took no account of the reality that my car was always parked closest to the door and that no one else dared use that space!
It's too easy to inadvertently fail to practise what we preach.
The staff news sheet
It's vital that everyone has a sense of belonging to the school and is kept fully informed of events that are taking place.
Even within the smallest schools a staff news sheet can be an important tool in  keeping people in touch with what's going on.
Setting up a template of headings on a personal computer including days of the week, staff meeting agenda, coming soon, etc makes preparing the news sheet even easier.
Named copies distributed well before the start of school on Monday, with spare copies posted on the staff room notice board gets the week off to a good start.
Figure 3.1 is a good example.
The staff meeting
In the best run schools there is a clear cut agenda for the staff meeting with a tight timetable and with everyone well prepared for the business of the meeting.
No one wants a head's rambling, spur of the minute monologue at the end of the day.
Not only do minutes of the meeting need to be kept but there should be an ‘action’ column indicating, as a result of decisions reached, who is going to take action and by when.
The weekly staff meeting is where the message that marketing is a priority is hammered home.
Look at the agenda and your personal notes from the staff meetings for the past half-term.
How many items were there that centred on curriculum content and administration matters and how many focussed on individuals?
How much of the discussion was given over to reporting back on the perceptions of others including children?
There needs to be ferocious research into the views of others and action taken in response.
The staff meeting is the theatre for celebrating heroes, improving self-image and boosting morale.
Staff appointments
Most headteachers will spend their time convincing, motivating and re-generating the enthusiasm of an established staff.
When the opportunity arises to appointment a new member of staff a considerable amount of attention needs to be given to attract the right person.
The wording of the job advert can say much about the school and the direction in which it's moving not only to potential applicants but to a much wider audience.
Certainly the message ‘defeatists’ need not apply' is worth making loud and clear!
A school that is taking marketing seriously will look to appoint ‘people persons’, individuals that are not necessarily charismatic but who show a strong concern for others.
Parents and children too have concepts about what makes a good teacher.
Asking the children to write advertisements for a new teacher provides valuable insights into children's values: kind, not too strict, gives interesting lessons, doesn't shout, all seem to appear frequently in children's   specifications.
Emma and Roberta, two ten-year-olds devised the following advertisement, which, along with several others, were on prominent display when candidates visited the school.
Particularly when good applicants are in short supply advertisements placed in Teachers' Centres and nearby colleges, faculties and institutes of education cost nothing and improve the trawl.
Supply teachers
The work of a supply teacher isn't easy.
Often they are recruited or assigned at short notice to an unfamiliar school and are expected to instantly mould themselves to its systems of operating and style.
When a supply teacher's standards of discipline or expectations of children's performance don't match those of the school, trouble can develop resulting in strained relationships, unhappy children, disgruntled parents and tales that will damage the school's reputation taken to other schools by the supply teacher.
Supply teachers are more effective and happier when they are given some guidance on routines and expectations.
Do you have a ‘supply teacher survival kit’ assembled and given automatically to temporary teachers or students on teaching practice at the school?
A suitable kit includes just a few sheets of basic information about collecting children from playgrounds, marking registers, assembly times, break times, discipline and marking policies, a list of staff and their responsibilities and a sketch map locating various key areas in the school — particularly the location of the staff toilets!
The pack  should also include a set of new pencils, a pack of exercise paper, pencil sharpener and red and blue biros.
Dealing with the marketing agnostic
What about the member of staff who has beliefs and attitudes that are not in tune with those that are being encouraged?
There may well be teachers in the school who will not be convinced that teaching is about anything other than delivering the curriculum and will have a restricted view of their role as professionals.
All new ideas need to be strongly challenged and tested at the planning stage and the marketing agnostic on the staff will often usefully worry out unsuspected flaws.
There is however a difference between being positively critical and being obstructive.
There needs to be a degree of tolerance and a willingness to accept that not all are willing or able to make the same level of commitment, but there are limits.
If, despite all efforts of encouragement, there is a member of staff who is consistently negative and undermines all attempts to make the school a better place engage in firm action.
Make it clear that if they are unable to wholeheartedly support school policies then they would be better suited in a post elsewhere.
This isn't always easy but can be done.
We have met the enemy to good marketing and good relationships and it's us.
I don't want my child taught by that teacher!
What about the member of staff who has a poor reputation in the community?
The school has a responsibility to support those who have a poor reputation and to work vigorously to dispel it if it's undeserved.
Popularity isn't a pre-requisite to good teaching though it certainly helps; at least advice on projecting a more positive image should be given.
Where the public lack of confidence focuses on teaching competence and it's justified then all steps possible should be taken to provide additional training and guidance.
Bullying in school isn't just an activity undertaken by children.
Where members of staff are unkind or even cruel to children or even other staff swift disciplinary action needs to be taken.
Efforts must be made to limit damage when things go wrong in the classroom.
Maintaining teacher credibility and teacher self-respect is important but often this is done at some cost but if apologies to children and parents are justified then they should be made handsomely.
Teacher appraisal
The development of schemes of teacher appraisal gives further opportunity to celebrate success and for teachers to identify ways in which the school can be improved.
It's not unusual to find schools that have for many years undertaken a job analysis for all staff including ancillary assistants, caretaker and nursery nurses.
The head and individual staff members meeting for about an hour to discuss the staff member's responsibilities and the way that the school has progressed over the year; particular stress being placed on the successes of the staff member and in finding areas of development and growth.
The session is a great opportunity to total and celebrate all the small wins made over the year.
The deputy head normally conducting the job analysis.
An agreed summary of the meeting is drawn up and signed by the staff member and the head.
At the conclusion of all the interviews the whole collection of agreed summaries are duplicated and circulated to all staff members at the weekly staff meeting.
Changes in roles over the year and changes in emphasis in areas of responsibility are outlined at the meeting.
The job analysis is a voluntary activity at these schools and has not been seen as another way of pulling the teacher's leash.
It does take time, about two hours for each member of staff when preparation and writing is included but it has been an investment that has repaid the school with great dividends.
Staff have been given the effective reward of being valued through a positive acknowledgement of their competence providing a greater sense of identity and improving self-esteem.
A typical job analysis sheet is shown in figure 3.2.
Do the children like school?
All of us, including children, benefit from a secure, happy and stimulating environment.
Do we actually spend enough time on developing good relationships with children and making schools places which they enjoy attending?
How many courses or conferences have you attended or even seen advertised that mention children in their titles?
A phone call to the DES about the funding of some research received the surprising response that ‘We don't have a department dealing with children’.
How frequently does children's enjoyment of school feature in discussion at staff or governor's meetings?
What are the children's absence rates like?
How many children are reluctant to come to school?
We teachers need actually to say to the children that they are going to enjoy the work that day, that it will be interesting, and that they are going to know or be able to do things at the end of the day that they didn't know or weren't able to do before.
Teaching through stimulation and enjoyment should be our stock-in-trade.
Teaching delivered through coercion, bullying and threats may achieve learning but at tremendous cost to children's confidence, self esteem and personal dignity.
Over anxious children afraid of school and afraid of making mistakes present themselves and their parents with all sorts of problems.
A poor match of work to ability can place children in no win situations.
The work being too demanding and impossible for them to cope with or so undemanding that they under achieve becoming bored or disaffected.
Children need reassurance, praise and success, we need to turn every child into a winner so that they will grow into good, caring and generous adults.
Primary education isn't some form of factory farming based on controlled diets of programmes of study and attainment targets.
We need to give children dignity and self-respect.
There is a multiplication effect created by happy children at school.
There is also a multiplication effect created by unhappy children.
The overriding priority for parents is that their children should enjoy coming to school.
If children hate the teacher or the school then the parents may move them to another.
Success
Success is important and in a well organised school children succeed in gaining new knowledge and skills each day.
This tends to make the expectation of success the norm for most children and failure as an exceptional event.
Celebrating success is a recurring theme throughout this book and is the very essence of marketing.
Children, like everyone else, enjoy being praised and their parents and teachers enjoy sharing in their triumphs.
We do make a great deal of fuss when children fail to match our expectations particularly when standards of behaviour are concerned.
It's too easy to fall into the trap of being negative.
Shouting at the two children talking when they shouldn't during assembly rather than praising the other two hundred for sitting quietly is typical of a pre-occupation with failure.
Praise is a hugely powerful management tool particularly when selectively employed and linked to great expectations.
Your school may well have school rules and even a discipline policy but do you have a policy for catching children being good?
As a rough rule of thumb there seems to be a ratio of 90 per cent teacher comment of the ‘don't do’ and ‘stop it’variety to 10 per cent praise.
If we placed as much effort into making a fuss of children when they are good as we do when they are naughty we might make even greater gains.
Not that I'm suggesting that we should be soft when children do wrong but that we just reverse the ratio of our attention and energy from the negative to the positive.
Children aren't natural criminals or even our enemies or prisoners!
Indiscriminate use of praise devalues its power as a motivator and reward.
Lavish praise given for undemanding and second rate efforts lowers standards rather then enhances them.
Raising standards doesn't come from giving children harder sums or difficult words for their spelling list, all that does is increase failure and disaffection.
Setting achievable goals and building confidence through the celebration of success is the way that standards are raised.
It is not by accident that the excellent report by Norman Thomas on Improving primary schools for the ILEA (ILEA 1985) was governed by the requirement to
identify and recommend those whole school strategies which appear to enhance the confidence and achievement of pupils
Children are swept along by waves of enthusiasm and some teachers are so expert at whipping up energy and commitment that they can even persuade children that a tables test is a great reward for good behaviour.
In conversations and discussions the thrust should be that school is a good place and that learning is fun and worthwhile.
Winning and being successful aren't necessarily the same thing.
How do you celebrate children's achievements in your school?
Do you have a ‘gold book’ or its equivalent where the names are entered of those children who have particularly pleased during the week?
Is there a great fuss made when names and citations are read out with hand shaking, back slapping, badge awarding and rounds of applause?
‘Tell your mum to buy cream cakes for tea — you deserve it!’ is the message that should be going home.
A new reading book, swimming a width of the pool for the first time, managing at last to play the National Anthem on the recorder without a mistake are the sort of milestones well worth a fuss.
Assembly time is a natural occasion for identifying just a few children who have done well — a whole succession of children called to the front for praise in a single assembly simply devalues the reward.
Very frequent reward sessions focussing on small numbers of children are the most effective.
There is even opportunity to praise failure if great effort and determination have been shown.
B F Skinner's work shows how important intermittent rewards are as a positive motivator in shaping behaviour, when you win fairly regularly you want to keep on trying.
We should be spending a great deal of our time making children into heroes, identifying good work, putting good examples of work on display and bringing it to the attention of others.
Some teachers say that they can't leave out attractive or valuable items on open display in classrooms and corridors in case of theft or damage.
With the right sort of approach and encouragement all primary children will respect being given your trust and confidence and treat displays of work and artefacts with care.
They too value a visually rich and stimulating working environment.
Now that we are facing demands to keep the most detailed records of children's progress it makes sense to involve children in some of this work.
In the early years of school children can contribute to an ‘I can do’ booklet which records such milestones as naming shapes, tying shoelaces, writing name and address unaided, counting to twenty and many other significant causes for celebration.
Julie Barsby argues that self-evaluation by seven year-olds can become quite a sophisticated exercise.
Even the simplest forms of self-evaluation are much more fun and more meaningful than ticking boxes in sheaves of attainment target records.
Children need reassurance and praise.
Success in one area tends  to give confidence to tackle other challenges.
Extra-curricular activities, sports, drama, music, chess clubs, gym club etc all improve the chances of making every child a winner, boosting self-image and giving reason for celebrating plus the additional spin off of enhancement of the school's reputation.
It's worthwhile to give certificates on almost every conceivable occasion.
Some certificates can be linked to attainment targets in the National Curriculum.
The class teacher retaining a copy of the certificate to place in the child's personal file.
Even the certificates and rosettes gained from egg and spoon races are honours that will be kept proudly by parents and children for decades reinforcing good memories of the school.
Examples of certificates are shown in figure 4.1.
We were only playing
School life is more than cognitive development, children's social development is important too.
Much of this takes place in the give and take of the unstructured world of the playground.
Here children will share and squabble, will make and break friendships.
We do put children out into playgrounds for a long time, those children that take lunch in school will spend about 20 per cent of the day in the playground.
There are often complaints of bullying in primary schools and there have been a number of research studies that have highlighted the problem.
Research by Michael Boulton and Peter Smith (1990) from Sheffield University showed that in the average middle school playground nearly half the children either pick on their classmates or are bullied themselves.
The figures for primary schools are unlikely to be very different.
There is an increasing number of Kung Fu, Judo and martial arts clubs attended by even young children.
This often leads to problems as boys will share their new found skills and knowledge with others in the playground, no matter what warnings are given against this by adult trainers in their clubs.
Our society does seem to be far more violent that it was or, perhaps, we are more sensitive to aggression that we once were.
Also bullying now seems to be used to describe not only acts of physical violence and threats of violence but also playground teasing including name calling.
With a variety of adults exercising control of children during the school day including class teacher, teacher on playground duty and lunch time supervisors it is possible that patterns of repeated bullying are not picked up by adults.
It's too easy to tell a child not to   make a fuss, it's a big playground and to go and play away from whoever has hit them or kicked them or fallen out with them.
The child making the complaint can often be classified as a fuss pot engaged in attention seeking behaviour — a case of the victim being held responsible for the crime?
How does this summary dismissal affect the child with a genuine grievance?
Does it reflect the image of the caring school that we are trying to project?
Play times can be a time for reducing stress and keeping trouble out of school.
The member of staff on playground duty can be taking a policing role or can be using the time to motivate and interest children.
John Evans (1990) in some research on Australian play times found that by far the greatest percentage of interactions recorded invoked the teacher in an authoritarian role, issuing requests and orders to children.
If they were not actively asserting their authority they were taking a role of judge and referee as a consequence of children's requests.
Active, occupied children are less likely to get into trouble.
A couple of bins tilled with skipping ropes, tennis balls, a few plastic bats, a football and even some homemade stilts help keep children happy.
Children are usually capable of organising their own games, though an eye needs to be kept on the isolate or child rejected by others.
Playground markings are inexpensive and a bit of imagination can produce all sorts of attractive game grids.
Children can be involved in the design of these and consulted about the sort of games that they would like to have organised for them in break times.
Certainly on warm windless days board games, comics and recorder corners can be encouraged in playgrounds.
The option of letting children stay indoors during breaks could be considered though providing adequate supervision sometimes provides problems.
Balls will burst, become permanently borrowed or lost and bats will break.
The initial investment and costs of occasional replacements are well repaid by improvements in behaviour and happier children which reduces the number of tales going home of playground fighting and bullying.
Listening to children
We spend a great deal of time talking at children.
Most of us need to spend much more time talking with children and listening to them.
Ask children what they line best about the school.
Ask about ways in which it can be made better.
Ask children what they dislike about the school.
Ask if they have ever been frightened at school and what frightened or upset them.
There could well be an under culture  in the school of which adults are unaware.
The Opies (1959) and more recently Andrew Pollard (1985) have explored the very private world of children of primary school age and have provided us with many valuable insights.
Encourage children to write about ‘the trouble with teachers’ and ‘the school I would like’they may well come up with ideas worth adopting.
Let children choose the special guest for the leavers, service.
One Y6 thought vaguely about inviting Michael Jackson but finally plumped for the local third-division full-back who lived just down the road.
Let the children choose the format for the Christmas celebrations, maybe you too will be surprised by the choice of a disco with fish and chips wrapped in newspaper rather than a traditional party with jelly and ice cream.
Sit on the floor in the library, look at the books from a child's level — are they interesting, would you be tempted to take one home if you were a child?
Involve the children in the selection of books for the library by asking the school's library service or a book shop to regularly send along a large range of new titles on a sale or return basis and let the children have a say in what's bought on their behalf.
School meals
In the past there has been considerable dispute between teachers and their employers over the teachers' role in the collecting of dinner money and the supervision of children during the mid-day break.
Eventually teachers were able to shake themselves free of the legal requirement to supervise at lunchtime, though the responsibility tor the good management of the school during the break still remains with the headteacher.
The effect of this change in responsibility has been that in many schools the provision of meals and the supervision of children during the mid-day break has drifted out to the margins of importance and there has been, in general, a gradual decline in the numbers of children receiving cooked meals on school premises.
Pupil driven funding is now re-establishing school meals as an important issue in school management and funding.
Providing an assurance to parents that children are not only well fed but properly supervised during the mid-day break adds to the appeal of a school and could well be the deciding factor which finally influences parental choice in sending their child to your school rather than to your neighbour's.
In many areas the indicator taken by the LEA for extra funding to compensate for urban disadvantage is the number of children registered for free school meals.
Each child registered may  well bring the school an additional £500 — this extra money forming a significant part of a school's funding.
Like most things in education there is no single market for school meals.
We need to convince both the parent and the child that there is something attractive to offer.
In some LEAs the uptake is as low as 55 per cent in primary schools.
Even more worrying is that in some LEAs the uptake of free school meals by those eligible for them is less then 65 per cent.
There is a serious problem in that even when the LEA is giving meals away the customers don't take them!
Under competitive tendering requirements, the responsibility for the production of meals may be contracted out to a commercial organisation.
Whatever the commercial arrangements LEAs enter into with other organisations parents and children see school meals as part and parcel of the school provision.
It is in the best interest of the school to make sure that the meals offered on the premises are value for money, nutritionally sound and are attractive to children.
There needs to be regular joint reviews held between the contractor and the school to find ways of improving the service offered to children.
As part of the review, advice could be taken from the community health physician, the home economics adviser, a paediatrician, a senior officer of the LEA, local politicians and, most importantly, parents, children, lunch time supervisors and teachers.
There is more to a meal than what's put on the plates.
Spend a Saturday lunch time in any town in Britain and you are bound to come across several fast food outlets crowded with teenagers, young children and their parents spending a great deal of money.
These are the same youngsters who spurn the school dining hall on weekdays.
Why are they seduced by the marketing of the fast food producers?
What is it that MacDonalds, Pizza Parlour, Kentucky Fried Chicken and the Wimpy Bar offer that schools can't or don't provide?
The fast food outlets certainly pride themselves on speed of service, an attractive environment and a friendly and courteous staff.
Is your school meals organisation user friendly?
Is it an integrated part of the service the school offers?
Or is it more like feeding time in a wartime army canteen?
Do the kitchen staff treat the children as valued customers?
Do they smile?
Do they try to remember the children's names?
Do they see their job as offering a service to children or do they see themselves as doing the children a favour by serving them?
Are menus prominently and attractively displayed?
Do the children really want what is on offer?
These things matter and they are part of the school's service to parents and children.
Many primary schools have the good fortune to have a separate dining hall while others have to make do with a hall that serves for dining, assemblies, PE and numerous other activities during the day.
If you do have a separate dining hall take a critical look at it.
Is it a welcoming environment or is it bleak and unattractive?
Are there well tendered plants and flowers in hanging baskets and window troughs bringing splashes of colour to the room?
Are there examples of children's work or even commercial prints on display to catch attention?
Is the dining hall painted in cold whites and creams or are rich, warm colours used?
If there are large wall spaces difficult to fill then why not have a mural?
There may well be a reputable graffiti artist in the area who would take on the challenge for little more than the cost of the materials!
If this sounds too outrageous then the art department of the local secondary school might take on the design and painting of a mural as a project for older pupils with children from the primary school working as their apprentices.
This sort of example of partnership between schools is always of interest to the local press.
Rearrangement of the furniture within the dining hall is something that may well be worth considering.
An attractive dining area will enhance the appearance of the school and could turn out to be a much sought after local resource that will generate revenue for the school through after school lettings.
A small investment of time, energy and imagination in improving the environment of the dining hall could pay big dividends.
No matter what sort of accommodation is available for school meals it should be possible to make it more appealing.
The LEA budget cannot match the sort of investment that the fast food marketing chains make but, in promoting healthy eating, we can copy the best of their relatively inexpensive marketing and presentation techniques and use them to our advantage.
Time could be usefully spent with the dining hall supervisor and the cook to talk about the sorts of food children like.
A peek in the waste containers at the end of the lunch break is a good indicator of what shouldn't appear on the menu in future.
It's very easy to organise some investigative work by children on school meals provision.
We had anticipated that children would want ‘chips with everything’ and were surprised that their concern focussed on food not being warm enough, queues and size of helpings.
The children wanted sensible traditional meals and the contractors were faced with the problem of responding to demands in improvement in quality of delivery and organisation rather than an assumed change in taste for junk foods.
At one school where children had a choice of meal there was an attractive menu on display and the food was put in heated containers so that the children could indicate what they wanted.
There were two problems, the youngest children's reading wasn't good enough to manage the menu and most were too short to actually see over the tops of the containers on the heated cabinet to make their choice, because of this when they reached the counter they asked to have the same as the child in front making a nonsense of the notion of choice.
There are a great number of myths that constantly need to be laid about school dinners.
Children still sing skipping songs about soggy semolina though I can't remember semolina being served for over twenty years.
One way of putting the record straight about school meals is to invite parents of new children for a free meal with their child so that they can not only taste the food but see the way in which it is presented and the way in which the children are supervised.
Contractors will often use their promotional budget to cover costs.
Encouraging school governors to sample a school meal with the children and inviting the contractor to send a representative to talk about the meals service at the next governors' meeting will also lead to positive action to improve the system.
Lunch time supervisors are important members of the staff team and they need careful selection and training if they are to carry out their jobs properly.
A useful training booklet for ‘dinner ladies’ is Lunch time supervision published by OPTIS (1987).
Toilets
Many children and even staff have almost a phobia about school toilets and try to avoid using them if at all possible.
In some schools these places can be smelly, scruffy and in cold damp weather used by some children as an extension of the playground.
How many times a day are the toilets in your school inspected for cleanliness and for an adequate supply of toilet paper in each cubicle?
Does a senior member of staff check at least daily to see that there is fresh soap at every sink and that the sinks are clean?
Is there a check that the windows are open and air freshener blocks in place?
One of the lasting memories that some parents have of their primary school is the smell!
In some schools the children's toilets are included in the conducted tour for potential new parents.
After hours
Extra-curricular activities including sports, drama, music, chess and gym clubs provide further opportunities for children to gain new successes so boosting their self-confidence.
A wide provision of extra-curricular activities also helps enhance the school's reputation.
Changes in curriculum and the monitoring of pupil progress have placed tremendous demands on teacher time and supervising out of school hours clubs and teams may feature low on priorities.
It is possible to provide a wide range of activities involving parents who  will enthusiastically organise these under the watchful eye of a member of staff.
Enthusiastic parents and even grandparents will run the football training sessions and volunteers can be roped in to help with recorders and other music making activities.
The key factor in enhancing children's progress in reading is adult attention, most schools encourage children to take reading books home so that parents can have the opportunity to give help and encouragement.
Though parents are usually eager to help they are often unclear of what is required of them.
Unless there is regular guidance given to parents through workshops and school produced booklets the arrival home of the reading book will be seen as little more than an opportunity to check when the teacher last heard their child read and a chance to rush their child to the next stage on the reading scheme.
Both activities providing a source of potential conflict between teacher and parent.
Much has been written on opening up a dialogue and creating collaboration on reading between home and school.
Griffiths' and Hamilton's work on PACT (Parents, Children and Teachers) the Bellfield Project and the Harringay Project all reported in Bloom's Partnership with Parents in Reading (1987) are examples of schemes of parent listening, Keith Topping and Sheila Wolfendale in Parental involvement in Children's Reading (1985) give advice on setting up schemes of ‘paired reading’.
Another form of attractive homework involving children and their parents has been developed by the IMPACT (Inventing Maths for Parents Children and Teachers) Project reported by Ruth Merttens and Jeff Vass in Sharing Maths Cultures .
The project has developed many successful ways of establishing and maintaining effective parental involvement in the teaching and learning of mathematics.
meeting people — parents, governors and community
No opportunity should be lost to emphasise the benefits of sending children to your school
School's open
An open school is one where parents are encouraged to visit and participate, where they are perceived not as a problem but more as a solution to problems.
Parents need to know that they are welcome and valued visitors.
Does an open school mean totally free access to teachers, class rooms and corridors at all times?
Is a heaving scrum of pushchairs, children, mums, grandads and dogs in the cloakroom at five to nine on a wet Monday morning the best way to start the week?
There does need to be some organisation and structure, teachers do need time to organise their classrooms before the start of school and no one really wants to engage in long discussions when there are children to be settled and registers to be marked.
If teachers and the head are in the playground for five minutes or so before the bell and if parents know that they will be welcome in classrooms for ten minutes or so at the end of both morning and afternoon sessions then good routines will be established and easily maintained.
During the time in the playground the teachers and head need to be listening to  parents and children, spreading irresistible enthusiasm and showing interest in peoples as individuals.
An open school is characterised by open minds as well as open doors.
It's a place where the opinions of parents are taken seriously and they are not simply placed in a passive role operating only on the school's terms.
First impressions
The secret of long term satisfaction is a cumulative memory of little events connected with the school.
The first visit by prospective parents is important as it creates a lasting impression.
Take a stroll around the grounds and through the buildings and try to put yourself in their position.
Even the mat can say welcome
It's amazing how difficult it is for strangers to find the main entrance to many schools, particularly when the school is a modern flat roofed single storey building.
If there can be difficulties in finding the main entrance then make the erection of helpful direction signs a priority.
These signs need to be in languages other than English if appropriate.
Years of cut backs in expenditure may mean that the exterior of the school presents a drab and neglected appearance.
Even under local management of schools there may be little that you can do about restoring peeling paint work and cleaning grimy windows, but it is possible to keep litter under control and flower beds and grassed areas looking attractive.
Schools are often the target for petty acts of vandalism and urban schools in particular sometimes suffer from graffiti attacks.
The graffiti gives an idea of the strength of support for the local football club, a guide to the local teenage love pairings, and sometimes a frank unsolicited appraisal of a member of staff.
There are products available that will remove the most stubborn of paint sprays and it's likely that the local Public Works Depot will have a graffiti removal squad that can be called into action to remove any offensive spray paint.
Displays for decoration or information?
The entrance hall should be a warm, welcoming area.
Some schools have a display board featuring named photographs of the staff including the secretary and the caretaker.
If you have a commercial photographer who visits the school annually then the firm can probably be persuaded to photograph staff individually on a complimentary basis.
The captions ‘welcome to our school’ and ‘we are  here to help you’give a clear mission statement.
Signs giving directions to the headteacher's and secretary's rooms are vital.
Visitors will not only know where they are going but will be able to recognise and name the person they are seeking.
The entrance hall gives visitors an insight into the priorities and values of the school.
Empty milk bottles, the algae lined fish tank and faded children's work all have a message!
Order, cleanliness, and fresh, well mounted pictures and pieces of writing have a positive impact.
Newly cut flowers, plants and attractive drapes add to the caring and cared for impression that you wish to create.
Window dressing isn't visual deceit if the window display accurately represents what the school is about.
Asking the children to explain why their work is placed on display always produces interesting responses.
That you are proud of their work and that you want others to share in your pleasure is rarely mentioned.
If the display contains a short written piece by the teacher giving a little background about its purpose and merits then attention of visitors and others has a focus and they can join in fully with the celebration.
Decisions will need to be made about the criteria for display.
Will it just be the material produced by the neatest and cleverest or will an attempt be made to ensure that in turn every child will have a piece of work exhibited?
It isn't always possible for a headteacher to be instantly available when an unexpected visitor calls, but finding time to see parents must be a top priority.
Some comfortable chairs grouped around a coffee table outside the head's office will help visitors to relax and take the strain out of waiting.
A favourable impression is likely to be created if the table contains a range of attractive booklets produced by the children and some informative literature about the school through which the visitor can browse.
If the staff can be encouraged to take lots of photographs of children doing interesting things then an album of recent photographs will favourably attract the attention of visitors.
A notice apologising for keeping visitors waiting and inviting them to look at the booklets adds the finishing touch.
It is possible to overdo the effect and for the appearance of the reception area to become something of an ‘ego trip’ for the head teacher.
Keeping the baby busy
Often parents bring their children with them when they come to visit for the first time.
Young children become quickly bored by adult conversation and look for attention or distractions.
A box of toys stored in the headteacher's room for such occasions will keep children happily occupied whilst the head and parents talk.
Show your interest
If the parents have brought their children with them do find time to make a fuss of them.
If the children have attended another school ask them what is was like, what they enjoyed most and, in all cases, reassure them that they are going to make lots of friends, learn a great deal of interesting things and enjoy themselves at your school.
Make sure that there is a map of the area on the wall showing local bus routes to assist those parents who live outside the immediate school area.
If you don't know the frequency of services and current fares make sure that this information is easily available.
Details of clothing grants, free school meals and community contacts should also be at hand.
An offer of coffee or tea and a glass of squash for the child are added indicators to those essential elements of marketing — attention to people and thoughtfulness.
Use the first visit to take visitors on a tour of the school to introduce them to people and, most importantly, to show them children at work.
The head needn't take the role of guide, a child can often do the job far better than an adult.
Let the children in the classes do the talking, let them tell about those aspects of the school that they like best.
Encourage the visitors to ask questions, if they are newcomers to the neighbourhood conversation about whether they have settled in and met the neighbours and general chat about shops, buses, doctors and dentists again show that you are human and interested in them as people.
Introduce the visitors to any parents who may be doing voluntary work in the school, give the parent helpers opportunity to talk about their perceptions of the school.
Give the visitors opportunity to talk and do listen carefully to what they have to say.
It's important to know parents' expectations of the school, to know of their dreams and ambitions for their children.
Let them have a prospectus to take away with them and if they have already decided to bring their child to your school take the minimum of details at this stage.
There are schools that give parents detailed questionnaires to complete on their first visit.
At least one of these has the question ‘Please list your child's defects’, this is hardly an example of the most tactful use of language!
You may well have a copy of a video of a typical school day that you use at induction meetings.
It's a good idea to let those parents of children joining mid-year borrow the tape to run through at home.
Induction meetings
Looking after parents and children who have chosen your school is a prime marketing task.
Towards the end of the Summer term it's  common practice in most schools to invite the parents of the new intake of children to visit the school to explain the routines and organisation, to give them a chance to meet the teachers and also to provide an opportunity for them to share any concerns they might have.
Giving people time and confidence to ask questions at this meeting is important.
Splitting the group up into small parties, each led by a parent who already has children at the school is a useful idea.
The guides will naturally point out such things as where children hang their coats and where children are collected at the end of the day.
If you have produced a promotional video which includes footage of the children and staff at work and emphasises the strengths of the school then it would be well worth showing it at this meeting.
Alternatively, slides can be shown.
Parents will be interested to know of the sort of records that will be kept on their children.
A genuine invitation to parents to contribute to their child's assessment record with samples of pre-school drawings, photos and even possibly of tapes of the child talking at home emphasises the way that the school sees teaching and learning as an equal partnership.
Presenting the parents with an information pack at the conclusion of the meeting is always appreciated.
One school's induction meeting information pack included:
1.
a prospectus;
2.
a school produced booklet about helping children with reading;
3.
a sheet giving a breakdown of activities in a typical week — PE days, swimming days etc;
4.
a leaflet about helping children with letter formation and early handwriting skills;
5.
dates for the term;
6.
a personal letter for each child giving a welcome to the school to be shared by the parent with the child.
General meetings for parents
Schools frequently hold meetings to talk with parents about changes in the curriculum or the ways that help can be given at home to help children's learning.
I should think that all of us have had the unfortunate experience at some time or other of sitting on a plastic interlocking chair in a draughty hall listening to some old wind bag droning on endlessly to screens of projected OHP transparencies that no one can clearly see.
The lasting memory of the meeting being that you didn't enjoy it and have no intention of ever attending a similar event.
If we want parents to enjoy meetings so much that they will want to repeat the experience then a number of basic issues need to be addressed:
How do you find out what parents really want and need to know?
How can you make the subject interesting?
Producing intriguing publicity may be one way.
‘Come to our science workshop for parents and bring a teapot’ is an approach that catches the imagination.
The challenge to the parents to find the best teapot will, with any luck, lead to practical work on heat retention, ease of pouring, capacity, weight, etc.
What's the best time to hold a meeting?
How can you avoid clashes with popular TV programmes and local events?
How do you give people opportunity to talk?
One way of starting the ball rolling is to use questions like ‘What have you found to be the best way to get your child to read at home?’
How can you prevent the discussion from becoming dominated by just one or two people?
What assumptions are made about the audience's understanding of educational shorthand/jargon and their grasp of basic skills?
Are people made to feel inadequate?
Can your audience be given something practical to do?
‘Divide into groups of four and make the best paper aeroplane’.
‘Make the tallest tower that you can out of newspaper’ or ‘list ten things that a good teacher does’are approaches of engaging your audience and making the meeting more lively.
If you intend using an OHP make sure that the screen can be clearly seen by all.
Don't use too many transparencies and do talk to the audience and not to the screen.
Remember that adults shouldn't be treated in the same way as you would treat children.
What opportunities will you give for people to ask questions?
How will you go about lavishly praising people for giving up their time to attend the meeting?
Celebrating together — assemblies
Many schools regularly invite parents to share in a family service where children make the major input.
This is usually a very popular event as parents want to see their own children involved in something special.
The event also provides a good time for parents to see evidence of the caring nature of the school and gain a flavour  of the ethos and quality of relationships.
When the service is based on some project that the children have undertaken parents have an opportunity to appreciate their children's work in context.
Sometimes, particularly when older children are involved, attendance may be a bit patchy.
Personal handwritten invitations by the class involved to their own parents will pull in a few more adults.
Grandparents too appreciate an invitation.
Parents turn up to see their own children doing something so attendance is bound to fall off if the major parts in the service are always taken by the same one or two children.
Following the family service is the major bonus of a chance to talk to parents informally over coffee and biscuits.
The class teacher and the head can use the opportunity to talk to the parents about a particular aspect of school life or single out individual parents to discuss progress and developments and, of course, thank parents for their support.
A family service guaranteed to pack the school hall is a mothers' day assembly particularly if mums, including teachers, receive a gift of a small posy of spring flowers.
Care needs to be taken that those mums who are unable to attend have their flowers sent home with their children.
Dads that are bringing up families single handedly shouldn't be forgotten either.
Calling the event ‘care givers’ or ‘carers’assembly is probably a much better idea.
The harvest service is usually a major event in the calendar for most schools with parents contributing produce for an attractive display.
What do you do with the harvest produce?
Some schools auction off the gifts at the end of the service but if the bid for the produce doesn't equal the cost price parents can become upset when other, possibly more prosperous, families are buying their gifts at a discount!
The social services department is often willing to help in identifying the most needy senior citizens in the immediate neighbourhood who would appreciate a parcel of produce.
Other schools ask the children to bring in the name of a senior citizen that they know who would appreciate a gift, by acts such as these the school's status is again increased in the locality.
Concerts, plays and school productions
There are fundamental questions that need to be addressed early in the planning stage of any production.
Are parents going to be invited to see talented children involved in a theatrical performance or are they coming just to see their child ‘doing something’ on the stage with all the other children in the school?
If you intend using a small cast will it consist of the most fluent readers — those with the strongest voices — the best dancers — the top recorder group?
Will  the principal roles be taken by the same group of children who starred in previous years?
If so, be prepared for a small audience and accusations of favouritism.
If all the children are to be involved, is the production strong enough to support a large cast in worthwhile roles?
(A headteacher friend was aghast to discover that his infant child had spent a fortnight rehearsing to be a road!)
How are you going to advertise the performance?
Posters, leaflets, a special newsletter?
Are you going to prepare programmes listing all the children's names?
Who will check it to see that no one has been missed?
Is the cover going to be illustrated by one of the children?
Is the press going to be invited in to take photographs at the dress rehearsal?
Is the performance to be videoed without an audience at a final rehearsal?
Or is it to be videoed in front of a live audience with the risk of loosing some of the dialogue?
A whole school concert is always popular but there may be problems in that the demand for tickets may well outweigh the supply.
Organising a fair distribution of tickets by perhaps initially limiting the number allocated to each family or, alternatively, putting on an extra performance will go a long way to solving the problem.
Celebrating together — parents' evening or consultation meetings?
Parents' evenings are a bit of a misnomer, in some schools these traditional semi-formal meetings are staggered throughout the day to give shift workers opportunity to attend.
Parents' evenings/interviews have become such a strong tradition in primary schools that their purpose, content and structure are rarely challenged.
Many people's experience of parents' evenings seems to be unsatisfactory with parents attending through almost a sense of obligation and duty rather than that of pleasure.
The headteacher's concern may well be focussed on percentage turn out, a figure that can be used in the report to governors to indicate the strength of parental interest and support.
The classroom teacher may be concerned with the parents that don't turn up — those parents that the teacher particularly wanted to ‘have a go at’ because of their child's poor behaviour, lack of effort, continual lateness or some other failure to conform.
Children may be in fear or worried about what teacher or parent might say.
Parents' evenings should be events that emphasise the value of sending children to your school.
They are not times for conflict and confrontation but opportunities for co-operation and celebration.
Weeks before a parents' evening is held the staff need to get together to discuss and plan the whole event.
Planning the parents' evening interview
Feedback from parents on the arrangements of previous parent's evenings needs to be considered as well as suggestions from staff for improvements.
Ideally joint guidelines should be developed for parents' evenings.
Whatever arrangements are made they ought to be convenient for the parents and not just for the school.
A date needs to be decided.
A parents' evening in late September or early October gives time for the class to settle and for the teacher to get to know something about the child.
The teacher can talk about the way the child is responding to the new setting and listen to any concerns or worries that the parents might have.
Targets can be set where parents and teachers jointly agree about ways they can work together to enhance the child's learning.
A parents' evening in late February or early March allows progress to be reviewed half way through the school year with an opportunity to find ways of developing strengths and eliminating weaknesses.
A meeting at the end of the Summer term provides an opportunity to sum up progress over the year and to talk parents through school reports particularly in terms of National Curriculum attainment levels and programmes of study.
A decision needs to be reached about the best time in the day to hold the event.
If parents are to be given a reasonable amount of time to talk with the teacher and some choice in the timing of the appointment then it may be best to spread the event over two days.
There are advantages in having one set of meetings starting just after school ends and the other set later on another evening so that shift workers have an opportunity to attend.
Decisions should also be reached as to whether appointment lists should be displayed in the school and parents invited to come in to choose a discussion time or whether staff will decide and write to parents informing them of an allocated time.
The amount of advance notice given to the parents will also have to be agreed.
What will parents gain from the interview?
The purpose of the meeting with the parents is a matter for discussion amongst the staff.
Should it be primarily about celebration of success and ways of ensuring further successes or is it a time for grizzling at parents?
If Johnny isn't working hard in class then does the responsibility belong to the teacher and not the parent?
Is it the teacher's job to motivate the child at school?
Are parents really in a very strong position to influence their child's performance in the classroom?
Particular sensitivity needs to be shown when meeting  parents of children with special educational needs, unless tact and diplomacy are used the parents feel that they are being blamed.
What parents are shown is also important.
At a too typical parents' evening Mr and Mrs Bloggs are directed to a folded card bearing Fred's name resting on a slightly dog-eared pile of exercise books.
Mr and Mrs Bloggs are expected to sit thumbing through the books whilst the teacher, seated at the front of the classroom, rapidly lectures another anxious parent.
I'm not sure what Mr and Mrs Bloggs are supposed to gain from the pages of ticked sums and the often half finished pieces of writing.
Do the pages of ticks mean that Fred is a genius or that the work was set at too low a standard?
Exactly what was the input to the piece of writing and is it a first or fourth draft?
There is lots of interesting work on display around the classroom and on the walls but why isn't there any work bearing Fred's name?
When Mr and Mrs Bloggs are eventually summoned to the teacher's desk they are asked what they thought of the work.
What can they say?
What sorts of judgements and comparisons can they really make?
The staff need to find ways of making interviews with parents an equal dialogue avoiding questions or statements that are too open or by drowning parents under a deluge of attainment target levels and SAT results.
Asking Mr and Mrs Bloggs if they had seen the improvement in specific aspects of Fred's work and then showing examples to back up statements made is one way of opening up discussion to avoid teacher domination of the meeting.
Thought should also be given about the comfort of parents at the meetings.
A new sense of harmony is unlikely to be developed if bored parents have to wait endlessly in long queues to see teachers.
Would a notice on the blackboard ‘sorry to keep you waiting, interviews in Miss Smith's class are running about ten minutes late.
Do come to the hall for a cup of coffee or tea while you are waiting’ help to maintain a positive atmosphere when timing goes awry?
That parents feel physically comfortable when they eventually get into classrooms is important too.
Often parents sit on pupils' chairs facing the teacher across the teacher's desk, a situation which gives clear messages of status and power.
Two or three lounge chairs borrowed from the staff room and arranged in a neutral corner of the classroom in an informal way for the interviews provides a much more relaxed atmosphere for an exchange of views and information.
Parents' evening check list
1.
Parents' evenings are opportunities to share good news about children's progress.
2.
Take full credit for the school and your self for improvements in children's performance.
3.
You are responsible for the child at school and not the parents so don't be tempted to pass the buck.
4.
Produce evidence to support statements —‘Let me show you the improvement in Fred's writing, maths, art etc.’
5.
Make sure that each child has a piece of work on the wall.
Make sure that the work is well mounted and bears the child's name.
6.
Make sure that children's personal folders are available.
7.
Each child's desk should be tidy and have a place card.
8.
Be positive, honest and optimistic in your comments.
9.
Encourage parental involvement in learning.
10.
Enjoy meeting the parents.
Information across phases
On parents' evening/parents' consultation sessions it's a good idea to invite neighbouring schools serving other phases to send displays of photographs, children's work, brochures, prospectuses etc to be arranged for the parents to view as they pass through the school during the evening.
This emphasises to parents that you take continuity seriously and that you encourage and value good working relationships with other schools.
Local junior schools usually willingly accept invitations to run a stall at infant school events and secondary schools are usually eager to provide very professional looking displays at primary school parents' meetings.
These invitations provide schools with an opportunity to spell out clearly to parents the values that they hold dearly and provide an accurate picture of their schools as centres of learning and excellence.
Experience has shown that unless careful thought is given to the display then what often appears is an unco-ordinated collection of ‘cute’ photographs of children with false red noses on Comic Relief Day, on a school trip to Rhyl, feeding the old folk at a tea party, at school camps etc, but few photographs of children reading, writing or doing maths, science or any of the arts.
There is no justification in attempting to emphasise the superficially attractive at the expense of those things that form the core of our work.
We should not be trying to create an image that school is little more than some form of elaborate and expensive ‘Trivial pursuit’(Sullivan 1988).
We, as professionals, need to stand up for that in which we believe.
The message should be that schools are about education and learning and that worthwhile learning is hard work and we in good schools try to make this work as pleasurable as possible.
Making parents aware of the virtues of the school, the buildings, the playing fields, the swimming pool etc isn't necessarily related to providing  quality education.
We should be vigorously selling the exciting worthwhile quality service that we have rather than selling the packaging.
Parent helpers in school
There is an accepted wisdom that having parents in school during the working day is a worthwhile and attractive thing to do; the extra pairs of adult hands are always useful.
The range of activities in which parents become involved range from repairing curtains, with little contact with children, to active involvement in the teaching and supervision of children in small group work.
It's easy to drift into a system of parental involvement by accident, a system that just seems to grow and be a part of the school which is never reviewed or challenged.
After all who in their right mind would reject enthusiastic and cost-free labour?
On the other hand if the strategies of parental involvement aren't thoroughly and frequently reviewed then the scene is set for all sorts of problems to arise.
The parents who are not involved in school can harbour suspicions that favouritism exists and that those involved in and around the school are a clique that exerts power in obtaining preferential treatment for their own children to the disadvantage of others.
Those parents helping in school can sometimes feel that their goodwill is being abused and that they are little more than washers of paint pots and menders of broken books.
Unless there is an agreed clear policy staff too can be negative, taking the view that there is enough to do in the school without having pushy parents under foot.
Some of the following issues need to be considered in a review of parent help at school.
What can be gained from parent helpers at school?
Creating a greater understanding of what the school is about?
Freeing teachers from time consuming domestic tasks such as tidying, cleaning and repairing equipment?
Extra pairs of hands for supervision of small work group?
Expert instruction for children in specific skill areas such as cookery, craft, sport?
Extra ears to listen to children read?
How should helpers  by chosen?
By invitation from the head?
By invitation from individual teachers?
By an appeal for volunteers addressed to all parents?
What steps are taken to insure the involvement of a cross-section of parents from the community the school serves?
Should all offers of help be accepted?
How can you check on suitability?
There have been cases, fortunately rare, where children have been indecently assaulted at school by parent helpers.
Has the LEA or the school any way of checking that parent helpers have no criminal record involving child abuse?
Family and employment pressures make it impossible for many parents to offer help and their feelings and attitudes need careful consideration.
Where should helpers work?
In the classroom alongside the teacher?
In the corridor outside the classroom just listening to readers?
(The good readers?
The poor ones?
What sort of help?
What sort of feedback to the teacher?)
In an area of the school that is not overlooked by a member of staff?
Should the parents choose the class that they will help?
Should the teacher have the opportunity to choose or decline the offer of help from a parent?
Should parent helpers work with their own children in classrooms?
Do some children need a little freedom from their over anxious/ambitious parents?
when should helpers work?
When they feel like popping into school?
Should they follow a fixed timetable?
What should happen to helpers at break times?
Should they have their break times in the staff rooms or is this an intrusion into staff freedom?
Should they have their break with the head?
Should they be abandoned to fend for themselves?
Should they be asked to make a contribution to the tea fund?
Working with governors
Governors have an increasing responsibility for schools they serve, very much like a board of directors of a public company but, unlike company directors, they may have little specialist knowledge or previous experience of management.
The governors have power and responsibility, with just a little encouragement they can also become a most enthusiastic supporters club.
The governors are an interested group of lay people who bring with them a range of new perspectives on the school.
They are also likely to include members who have a high profile in the community and their enthusiasm for the school, or lack of it, may be very influential on others.
The school that doesn't appreciate the potential value of its governors in management and marketing wastes a valuable asset.
Engaging the whole hearted commitment and support of the governors is vital.
Keeping them at  arms length guarantees that they will be lukewarm or confused in their support and their potential as marketers of the school will lie untapped.
If governors are actively involved as a dynamic, lively group and feel that their contribution to decisions and actions is not only valued but essential, then enthusiasm and commitment snowballs.
They need to know that you appreciate their efforts, your task is to spread irresistible enthusiasm.
Most LEAs are engaging in programmes of governor training, this is often aimed at a limited number of governors on the assumption that this will cascade through to the remainder.
In practice this rarely seems to work and the school needs to take responsibility for much of the incidental training.
There should be discussion between governors and the head about the best ways in which they can work together to complement each other 's efforts.
Is there a clear understanding and sharing between governors and staff of both general and specific aims?
Is there a clear understanding of joint and individual areas of responsibility of headteacher and governors?
Are governors fully engaged in the preparation of the school plan?
How well do the governors know the school?
How often do governors visit the school during the working day?
Do governors automatically receive copies of all newsletters for parents and an invitation to school events?
Encouraging each governor to adopt a class and giving them an opportunity to report back on their visits helps governors to have a  sense of purpose and enables them to frame general reports and LEA/DES regulations in the context of their adopted classes and children.
A close involvement with a class of children helps governors make sense of what otherwise might be controversial issues at governors' meetings.
The amount of time given to the development of the basics, the school's approach to equal opportunities, special needs work, sex education, multi-cultural and anti-racist education and pupil assessment will be seen in action.
Governors will have a clearer picture of what actually takes place in school.
They will be more able to develop consensus views based on direct observation and will be able to enthuse to others in the community about what they have seen.
ACE/AGIT recommend that one of the governors undertakes to look after the interests of the children with special educational needs.
Some governing bodies adopt a system where each governor in turn becomes ‘governor of the month’.
The commitment and involvement during the month is intense but this system enables governors to have substantial periods when demands on their time are less heavy.
The choice of co-opted members to the governing body provides, opportunities to make statements about the direction that the school intends to take.
Co-opting a sports or stage celebrity guarantees that they, or one of their famous friends, are likely to be available to open the summer fair, attend the leaving presentations and sports day and generally add glamour to all the events that benefit from maximum publicity.
The co-option of an academic may well be a statement about the way in which the school values intellectual development.
The co-option of an industrialist or businessman may be a statement about school being a place for training the future work force or just an attempt to involve someone with business acumen to sort out the LMS accounts.
If you are lucky enough to lure a governor from Sainsbury's the governor will not only get three days paid leave per year for meetings and training, but also receive £200 for school funds.
Headteacher's report to governors
Too often headteacher's reports are made up of the dry dust of lists of attendance figures, class visits, building repairs, pupil numbers and details of resignations and appointments.
The opportunity to celebrate real success is often missed.
How often is a child singled out for special praise at governors' meetings?
Yet every day in every school at least one child succeeds in the face of some formidable handicap to achieve almost unbelievable success.
The headteacher's report is an opportunity to celebrate heroes, to show passion for the  school, to show persistence and above all consistency.
Quality can only be achieved through passion and pride.
Governors are increasingly provided with data on pupil performance, these results need to be placed in a context which reflects the socio-economic background of the pupils and other factors which effect pupil performance.
There are dangers in over emphasising a particular set of test scores in that the results may not be replicated in future years and all sorts of qualifiers will need to be introduced.
Governors' meetings
It does seem strange that in many schools governors' meetings are not open to the public.
A system of open management encourages confidence and trust in the institution.
There may be items on the agenda relating to individual members of staff or children that are confidential and visitors to the governors' meeting should naturally be asked to withdraw during discussion of these, but most items can be dealt with in open session.
Governors are drawn from a cross-section of those that have an interest in the school and in many ways act as a market research test panel.
New ideas can be bounced around in the comparative safety of the governors' meeting and reactions gauged.
Without governors' support ideas need to be implemented with extreme caution or best not proceeded with at all.
Parent governors have particular strengths to bring to the school in that they can share their own and their children's perceptions at governors' meetings.
Though they serve as parent representatives they are unlikely to be representative parents typical of the average parent at the school so they need to be encouraged to become involved in as many of the schools activities as possible, not only to gauge parental feelings and attitudes but energetically to engage in identifying ways of improving the school's performance.
Does the governors' report to parents ever pick up elements of dissatisfaction and ways in which this was addressed?
Though staff and parent governors don't serve in a shop steward capacity to relay complaints and grumbles, they shouldn't miss the opportunity of raising problem issues at the meetings as open discussion often provides a springboard towards a solution.
Governor's serve in a voluntary capacity and are unlikely to turn up at meetings if they are dull events where they are expected to contribute nothing except approval and applause.
Are there refreshments laid on particularly for those governors coming straight from work?
Is the meeting held in the informal comfort of the staff room or is the setting a more formal arrangement?
Are there displays of children's work placed around the room and is the attention of governors drawn to them in a meaningful way?
Are photographs of children at work shown or even videos used to illustrate points made in reports?
Are reports prepared by the school written in straightforward English?
Are they short, positive and to the point?
Is there a governors' book shelf stocked with books, pamphlets and circulars including those from the National Curriculum Council, SEAC, Advisory Centre for Education (ACE), the National Association of Governors and Managers and Action for Governors' Information and Training (AGIT)?
parents' Associations
The advantages of having a formal PTA, parents' association or friends of the school group are many.
There are officers with defined responsibilities, a committee and a set of rules.
Everyone knows what is expected of them and routines and traditions are able to be established.
There are further opportunities for parents to provide active support to the school and for greater informal contact between parents, governors and staff.
A well run association will take under its wing the organisation of the bulk of meetings, fund raising and social events leaving the staff to concentrate on curriculum related matters.
There are potential pitfalls, the association may become dominated by an unrepresentative majority that could attempt to bring undue pressure on school policies.
The group may become self-perpetuating and exclusive, failing to encourage the involvement of the majority of parents; or be badly led by a bunch of incompetents who cause chaos and disaster with every move they make.
In practice parents' associations are incredibly supportive and these problems are a rare occurrence.
The National Confederation of Parent Teacher Associations offer a useful leaflet on setting up a new group and will also provide a draft constitution.
This is particularly helpful if your school's organisation seeks to register as a charity at a later date.
Affiliation to the National Confederation will provide your group with access to a network of services and expertise.
Some cautious headteacher's insist that a headteacher's right to veto and a headteacher's right to dissolve the association is written into the constitution.
Both powers in practice  are as useful as a parachute in a space ship — reassuring but not very practical.
What does it look like in practice?
Once the momentum of marketing is established the ideas and actions become almost self-generating and weave themselves through the normal contacts and business of the day.
Diaries soon begin to look like this:
Attracting the attention of press and TV
Gaining good publicity for the school through establishing a high profile is an important aspect of marketing.
Though the reputation of schools is mainly established by personal recommendations positive reinforcement of the schools image can be achieved through regular exposure in the press or TV and radio.
In an article in the TES (14/9/90) Mary Castle claimed that there are fourteen local authorities that insist their schools should have no direct contact with journalists, so one needs to be clear about the LEA regulations before giving a story about the school to the press.
Even when news stories need to be cleared by County Hall the effort still pays dividends.
If possible it's well worth getting to know local journalists on a first name basis and to establish trust and confidence in each other.
There is always a risk in involving the media in any school story.
The reporter will not necessarily present the information in the same manner as the press release or letter.
It's the job of the reporter to interpret facts and schools cannot expect them to be mere mouthpieces.
An enterprise as vast as the education service is bound to turn up horror stories daily.
If something happens at the school or to someone associated with it which may reflect badly give facts but no opinions.
The local press, particularly the weeklies, aren't usually engaged in sensational journalism.
Their bread and butter is reporting local events and local people and in a small community they aren't out to offend readers or cause major upset through distortion or misrepresentation.
‘ Freedy Starr ate my hamster’ might do wonders for the circulation of the Sun but ‘Caretaker ate school hamster’will be unlikely to do the same for your local weekly.
Part of the school's work with the press may well be to break down unfair stereotypes about shortages of equipment, dilapidation, neglect and poor levels of morale, though these are serious concerns there are still an overwhelming number of positive aspects to primary education that are worth celebrating and sharing.
Some schools go as far as appointing a press officer from amongst the staff or the governors.
The person appointed having the responsibility of keeping check on newsworthy events within the school and checking that the press are informed.
It's a good idea to keep  a press cuttings album and leave it on permanent display in the staff room or school reception area.
There are limits to the sort of events that deserve attention.
There is a lunatic fringe of schools that will do almost anything to gain publicity — the head in the stocks and throw the wet sponge for 10p brigade do little to enhance their personal status or that of their schools.
No one wants to project an image of schools as humourless places, a balance needs to be kept between frivolous and serious stories.
Often the local press are looking more for a photo opportunity than a story.
This will give coverage to an activity taking place at the school but may only feature one or two children.
Parents are not concerned about other children but their own and the photo may well stir up some resentment which can best be countered by inviting the press in on a regular basis and ensuring that as many children as possible get their picture in the paper.
Do keep the press informed of events which provide photo opportunities — Easter bonnet parade, pancake race, the school's celebration of its 50th birthday etc.
Sending the editor a copy of parents' newsletters as a regular routine will sometimes create interest in events at school which you will not have considered as having any press appeal.
‘What's on’ leaflets by the local town hall publicity dept will also provide free coverage of events.
Professional journals such as The Times Educational Supplement, Child Education and Junior Education will carry photographs and features on innovative work taking place at the school, these can be reproduced for parents to reinforce the message that their children's school is a leader.
The local paper achieves greatest penetration of the school's target audience and so should be the focus of your efforts.
According to the Target Group Index 92 per cent of all adults regularly read a local paper, 28 per cent listen to the independent local radio station, compared to 11 per cent for Radio 4 and 9 per cent for BBC local radio.
It's more difficult to capture the interest of TV and radio but they will pick up an unusual event or a visit to the school by a celebrity.
Often academics in higher education are contacted by TV and radio for the names of good schools where work matches topical public issues.
Some regional TV news programmes run a weather picture from a school in the region to accompany the weather forecast at the end of their broadcast.
Making a stock of suitable pictures and then sending them in at a steady trickle to the news editor throughout the year gives your children's work a good chance of being chosen.
Keeping in touch with a wide range of people interested in primary education has many benefits including helping to ensure that your school receives the publicity that it deserves.
Links with industry
The aim of industry and commerce is to make money for shareholders and not the distribution of money to worthy causes.
There needs to be a recognition that appeals for aid must also have spin-off for the company concerned if the appeal is likely to succeed.
Links with industry may well involve sponsorship.
A local firm can be persuaded to dip deep into its pockets for a football or netball strip bearing the firm's logo, one school successfully persuaded firms to pay to have their logos on team shirts.
The selling point point being an improved image of community service and cheap advertising.
There is a narrow line between harness fund raising and commercial exploitation and within the thin financial margins that schools operate there may be a temptation to fudge issues and associate with producers and distributors of products that conflict with the school's or parents' values.
There is a need for parents, teachers and governors to be vigilant in ensuring that there is no warping of our education service in the pursuit of financial support.
Cash may be hard to come by from firms but time involvement may be much more forthcoming.
Companies will often provide staff to come and talk to children, bring samples of their company's products and arrange accompanied visits to their premises.
They will sometimes also provide a member of their management team as a co-opted member for the governing body, allowing the manager time to visit during the normal school day so as to develop the strongest possible links.
Companies justify the cost in employee time in terms of improved public relations and eventually recruiting a better trained work force.
National and local competitions
There are a great number of competitions aimed at schools ranging from major awards for curriculum quality and innovation to colouring in photocopied drawings for a five pound prize from the garage down the road.
Often the prizes can run to several hundred pounds' worth of equipment for the school plus valuable cash prizes for children.
Some competitions yield better results than others, particularly worthwhile are environmental projects and also some of the prestigious art competitions.
Not only does the successful school gain a valuable prize but also, through a skilfully handled press release, it gains a great deal of publicity and prestige.
It's a good idea for details of competitions to be brought to the attention of staff and children on a regular basis and for entries to be shared and enjoyed within the school before submission to the judges.
A display in the entrance hall headed ‘These are our absolutely wonderful entries to the Cadbury's children's art competition’ will boost children's morale and self-esteem whatever judges in distant places may think.
It's well worth submitting entries to minor competitions as they often attract very few entrants giving high chances of success.
Complaints wanted
complain loudly and complain here!
For every complaint that you have there may be 20 dissatisfied people that haven't actually come up to the school to make their feelings known — they don't even tell you that they are upset.
Some of the ill-feeling may dissipate but there is a cumulative memory of minor and major dissatisfactions that build up.
How do you deal with complaints?
Are they like heavy colds — something unpleasant but best ignored as they will soon go away?
Are they seen as disloyal and personal attacks on you and the school, or are they seen as growth points for development and marketing?
Complaints are valuable feedback on the effectiveness of the organisation of the school and as a means of identifying where improvements can be made.
Major firms such as IBM talk of ‘the joy of complaints’.
They rake through customer complaints for ideas for improving their products or service.
In the same way schools can use complaints from parents and pupils as a means of improving the quality of teaching, learning and care that is offered.
Even in the best run schools there are times when children, staff, parents and neighbours don't receive the quality of service that they feel they deserve.
Grumbles gathered from parents at the school gate, from the child that doesn't want to come to school or from teachers blowing off steam in the staff room will, if properly used, help in the forestalling of trouble and give indications about ways in which the school can be improved.
Showing a genuine interest in collecting and dealing with complaints and extending an invitation for ideas about improving the service that the school offers pays dividends.
Being receptive and responding rapidly even to minor complaints is an indicator that the school cares.
Being out of touch with what others are thinking is bad news.
When you have good avenues of communication there is less chance of being surprised or ambushed by events.
Incidents such as five year olds showing ‘bottoms’ to each other in the playground or playhouse comer can, unless prompt action is taken, snowball into reports of almost sex orgy proportion rather than remaining in the league of innocent childish curiosity.
Parent governors and those parents that help around the school are well motivated and are often a great source of feedback on how well the school is doing in the eyes of its adult audience.
Counting to ten and not shouting back at yet another unreasoning and unreasonable parent is difficult.
There are over protective parents and there are those that will defend the indefensible as far as their children are concerned.
The only sane response to a complaint in some circumstances is a firm ‘no’ but it is important that the complaint is seen to have been given serious consideration and that those that have complained are not made to feel foolish.
There are some adults who seem to take a perverse pleasure in causing trouble.
Far better to draw them into the school to nip things in the bud than leave them to ferment discontent.
The headteacher who is in the playground in the morning to greet children and parents and also there in the afternoon to see the children safely away is in a strong position to encourage casual chatter about learning, teaching and the parents' perceptions of the school.
How often does the school say sorry?
There are times when mistakes are made in school and things go wrong: children blamed for things they didn't do, events may be cancelled at short notice, cardigans and coats lost or, even worse, end up in the toilet bowl.
The way that the school deals with these situations is not only a matter of effective communications but one of marketing.
Where the school is in the wrong then full and generous apologies and expressions of concern are far more effective in maintaining good relationships than attempts to justify unjustifiable action.
Desperate attempts to find wriggle room to justify or excuse bad decisions are a waste of time and creative energy.
There may well be all sorts of contributory factors which need stating but these ought to come after the full apology.
Excuses are only of interest to the competition, problems and difficulties need facing and resolving.
Failure and weaknesses should provide a growth point for future action.
When mistakes are made a full apology is often less damaging than a grudging admission that events have not gone as planned.
Develop an ‘overkill’ response to complaints.
Parents visit the school in anticipation that action will be taken.
Show your concern, offer reassurances but most of all promise immediate action and follow it through.
On rare occasions complaints may be made to the school which could lead to court action.
A meeting in which you say ‘if what you tell me happened in the way you describe then we owe you an apology’ would seem to offer no admission of liability or guilt in situations where legal action results.
How do you encourage people to complain?
We have all felt the frustration of dealing with institutions and bureaucracy — receiving the institutional brush off, the failure to generate a spark of interest or concern, knowing that nothing will be done and nothing change in response to your grievance.
What action do you take to bring about changes as a result of complaints?
Take the last five complaints that have been received by the school and analyse the way in which they were handled.
Track back on the people involved, parents, teachers and pupils to get the feel of any frustration or dissatisfaction.
No teacher or school has ever won an argument with a parent.
No one willingly accepts that they are in the wrong and parents will certainly harbour resentment and be unlikely to positively support the school following a dispute where they are made to lose.
If the parents feel badly treated, or even worse, humiliated then they will quite likely broadcast their version of events in a way which the school will find difficult to counter.
How are complaints relayed to staff?
Those that are at the sharp end of developments should get immediate feedback when criticisms arise but the relaying of complaints ought not to be an exercise in apportionment of blame.
Intellectual risk takers are the life blood of our school system and provide the vision which we so much need.
Redirecting complaints
There are complaints and requests made to schools that really need to be directed elsewhere.
Inadequate pre-school provision in the neighbourhood, poor play facilities for children in the evenings and holidays, the poor state of fencing on local stretches of railway or canal are things which, although vital to parents and children, are issues which are beyond the control of the school.
Although the school may not be responsible for resolving these problems there are likely to be active councillors amongst the governors who, given suitable encouragement, would whip up a crusade for effective  action.
One councillor governor champion co-ordinated a petition from children and parents and even had the full council in chamber addressed by a group of young children in successful campaigns for a new swimming baths for the area and for greater access by children to school playing fields outside school hours.
The school, through knowing someone that could get things done, gained credit for being the focus of care, concern and action.
The problem with encouraging the creation of pressure groups is that the pressure might be applied against you!
Surveys by children of matters of local concern such as the problem of litter or the poor state of playgrounds in the area can well be of interest to the local press and merit a special feature.
There are problems that just can't be solved at school or even at LEA levels.
In may parts of the country supply teachers are in short supply.
When schools can't find replacement teachers when staff are absent the anger of parents at the disruption of their children's education can be severe.
In situations like this the school's efforts to overcome the problem deserve emphasising and the anger deflected to national policies that have brought about the situation.
Demarcation issues
There is a fuzzy line between parents' and school responsibilities where conflict sometimes occurs.
Is it the teacher's job or is it the responsibility of the parents to instruct children in good manners, acceptable standards of behaviour, dress and the difference between right and wrong?
There is unlikely to be a consensus view amongst the parents or even in the staff room about standards in these matters.
There needs to be a certain amount of mutual toleration, sensitivity and good humour shown.
The school does need to be seen to be taking a sensible and fairly consistent line or doubts will be raised about the strength of school management and accusations of double standards will fly.
Controversial changes
Occasionally problems arise which are of common concern to a large group of parents within the school.
Reorganisation of classes so that they contain children of more than one age range, changes in swimming or peripatetic music provision are typical of matters which can generate a great deal of heat.
Keeping your fingers crossed and plunging on is one way of dealing with tricky situations which may gain a reputation for the  school that it has firm and strong management but it can have costs in the loss of a number of unhappy families.
A much more marketing-orientated approach is to take people into the school's confidence at the earliest possible stage.
If there are to be changes which are likely to generate controversy it's a good idea to consult the LEA inspector who has pastoral responsibility for the school.
If problems develop later and there are representations to the education office the administrators will have at least been forewarned.
Once a variety of opinions have been considered including parent governors and staff and the implications of various alternatives have been explored parents need to be informed of the plans that have been made.
One successful way of going about it is to invite parents into school one class at a time to hear of the plans that the school has made.
Careful preparation for the meeting is particularly vital.
It's important to achieve a non-confrontation setting — with refreshments available, seating arranged in a circular pattern so as to avoid grouping staff and governors in a defensive posture behind a line of tables, or even worse, sheltering on the school stage.
The situation needs to be explained to parents in terms of:
We have a problem because….
There are a number of ways of solving this such as….
A lot of time and thought has been given to this and it looks like the best way of dealing with it is…because….
By adopting this policy there will be gains and losses and these are….
We intend looking at the situation again in…
Any dissent or misunderstandings can be dealt with there and then in a battle fought on your ground, at your choice of time and to your agenda.
Attempting to duck the consequences of hard decisions by leaving them to the last possible minute or by creating distance through solely informing parents by letter places the initiative in the hands of others.
This leaves the school in the weak position of reacting to opinion rather than acting as an opinion former.
Making hard decisions
There will always be one or more families that will not identify with the aims, policies and the practice of the school.
The dynamic tension that these families create, and the challenges that they offer, helps to keep all in the school on their toes.
There are conflicting demands made on schools and good marketing isn't about taking up every, or any half-baked, idea in the pursuit of popularism.
Marketing is about responding, but there must be times when the response will be in the negative.
In education no single customer is always right, people aren't all looking for the same things.
The balance between self and majority interests sometimes conflict and a balance must be maintained even if this means sacrificing the opportunity to attract or retain some families.
Write on — written communications
Face to face meetings with parents and others is usually the best way to communicate but meeting two hundred or so parents on an individual basis to tell them the date of sports day isn't a practical or worthwhile activity.
At least when face-to-face contact is made you are fairly certain that the message gets through.
The trouble with notes and letters is that you are never sure that each child receives a copy, that the copy makes it to the pocket or the school bag, survives the journey home, is actually discovered by the parent and the message understood.
Identity
Can parents instantly recognise letters from school?
Do you have a strong logo and make consistent use of a particular style of print for the headings for all school correspondence?
Are newsletters always printed on paper of a distinctive colour?
There has been a revolution in printing techniques, and stationery with well designed bold letter headings is inexpensive to purchase, gives identity, creates impact, reinforcing the message of quality and care.
Figure 7.1 shows the type of stationery that can be used.
Letters are for reading
White space is important.
It is tempting to try to cram as much information as possible on to the page, a solid mass of print is unattractive to the eye and is unlikely to be read.
Plan the layout so that the page is broken up into short paragraphs with sub-headings and highlighting through the use of emphasised test and underlining   giving the message impact and more chance of getting through.
The inclusion of a joke, suitably disguised pupil howler or cartoon on a regular basis breaks down any heaviness in the letter.
Newsletters provide a tremendously powerful means of publicly celebrating the successes of children and the school.
Their purpose is to keep people interested and informed.
Unfortunately they are frequently little more than begging letters for money, tombola prizes and jumble or grumbles about late dinner money and parking too near the school entrances.
Fund raising is important but if newsletters are dominated by appeals for funds or materials a curious picture is created of staff priorities and interests.
There are times when we want to target specific individual or groups of parents because of minor problems which the school is encountering such as persistent lateness, regular late arrival of dinner money, unreturned reading books or even irregular attendance.
One way of dealing with these problems is to run off a standard pro-forma, to fill in the blank spaces and send them off to parents.
This may well seem to be the most efficient way of utilising office time but when it comes to weighing up effectiveness the pro-forma is a non-starter as parents are antagonised by this bureaucratic and impersonal style of communication.
Far better to catch the parent in the playground or corridor and ask them to spare five minutes when it's convenient just to pop in to have a quiet little chat.
If it's not possible to buttonhole the parent in this way then a note in friendly terms saying that ‘we have a problem and could we meet to discuss ways that the school may be able to help?’ is an approach that is likely to bring about a positive response.
There may be all sorts of social and economic difficulties affecting the family of which the school is unaware.
An authoritarian bureaucratic approach may not in fact solve the problem but just add to those that the family already have.
If the problem persists and the parents don't take the opportunity to visit the school to discuss the issues with the head or another member of staff then a home visit either by the head, home school liaison teacher or a sympathetic educational welfare officer may well be appropriate.
Watch your language
Letters from school are often written in a style half way between a leader in the Sunday Telegraph and a Government Statutory Order on the National Curriculum.
Not all the parents will have a reading age of 17+, be candidates for MENSA and be up to date with the latest educational jargon.
Remember that 10 per cent of the population have a reading problem and just look at the low demands made in reading skills by the popular tabloid press.
The emphasis needs to be positive, focussed on successes and delivered through bright, clean, fresh, enthusiastic language.
Reading your final draft out loud reveals areas that need changes in punctuation and vocabulary.
Ask at least one other person to read and comment on your final draft too!
Reinforcing the message
A major problem with newsletters to parents is that they frequently don't get to their destination.
Many of those mysterious, unread, shredded, soggy paper messes found at the bottom of washing machines started life as vital and witty communications from school to home.
One way of getting letters home is to include a picture to be completed, a ‘find the differences’ competition or a word search.
Enlarging newsletters to A3 on the photo copier and displaying the enlargements in school windows and on the playground notice board is an easy way to reinforce the message.
It's amazing how many schools that front busy roads have name boards but no notice boards.
A strong board with notices covered with cling film to make them waterproof catch people's attention.
The local shop might well be persuaded to regularly display the newsletter.
Do all the Governors automatically receive copies of newsletters?
Do mid-day supervisors, cooks, cleaners, caretaker and crossing patrol receive copies?
Publishing newsletters at regular fixed intervals creates anticipation by parents and they will be searching children's bags and pockets on printing day.
The problem is that information and events worth bringing to parent's attention don't always occur at regular fixed intervals so the newsletters may frequently have nothing to say and need to be supplemented by successions of ‘flyers’ announcing special events.
Written reports to parents
The introduction of the National Curriculum re-establishes the traditional style of written report from school to home.
Reporting development in the child's meeting of attainment targets and achievements in SATs introduces a new range of jargon that will mystify many parents.
There have even been parents disappointed that their children in KS1 tests have achieved level 3 on the mistaken assumption that level 1 equated with 1st class.
Reporting on the progress of five-year-olds in foundation subjects such as history and geography in a meaningful way taxes most teachers.
If the report is seen and used as a reminder note of discussions that took place during the consultation meeting rather than a stand alone document then the task of report writing becomes significantly easier.
There is always the problem of maintaining an encouraging tone to written reports.
Emphasising the positive and then adding qualifies seems a sensible course of action to take.
The school prospectus is your publicity brochure
Every school is required by law (Education [School Information]Regulations 1981 and Education Reform Act 1988, Circular 1988, Circular 14/89) to produce a prospectus which must contain at least the following information:
1.
the name, address and telephone number of the school and the names of the headteacher and chair of governors;
2.
the classification of the school as:
a county, controlled, aided or special school;
a primary, middle or secondary school;
a comprehensive or grammar school;
a co-educational or single sex school;
a day or boarding school or school taking both day and boarding pupils;
all affiliations, if any, of the school with a particular religious denomination;
3.
details of how the school organises the teaching of children of different ages and abilities, together or in separate groups (either generally or in particular subjects) and requirements regarding homework;
4.
where there are specific arrangements for parents considering sending their child to the school to visit it, particulars of those arrangements must be stated;
5.
a summary of the governing body's statement of curriculum aims;
6.
a summary of the content and organisation of that part of the curriculum relating to sex education (where it is offered);
7.
the hours spent on teaching during the normal school week, including religious education, but excluding the statutory daily act of collective worship, registration and breaks;
8.
the dates of school terms and half-terms for the next school year;
9.
information about how to make a complaint according to arrangements established under section 23 of the ERA;,
10.
how to see and, where appropriate acquire documents relating to the school including schemes of work, HMI reports, a full copy of the arrangements for consideration of complaints and DES circulars including statutory orders.
Even the most gifted editor would have problems turning much of the obligatory information into riveting reading.
It's fortunate that the requirements are that only details of regulations need be published making it possible to summarise the regulations and translate them into a more user friendly language yet still comply with the law.
The prospectus is almost a written specification of what you have on offer at school and its preparation deserves a great deal of careful thought.
It's a public statement and, if attractive enough and widely distributed, will win additional pupils to the school.
The prospectus needs to transmit the ethos of the school: child centred, church school, traditional values, family atmosphere etc and this message needs to run consistently through the text.
It makes economic sense, particularly if the prospectus is printed commercially, to run off a substantial number at one time.
The snag is that the prospectus must contain pieces of information which rapidly become dated.
A way around this problem is to plan the prospectus so that the information that changes regularly is kept apart from the main body of the text and printed on separate sheets.
These sheets can be inserted in a pocket in the prospectus and when out of date replaced at little cost.
This might be slightly bending the letter of the law in that the prospectus should be a single document but it makes good economic sense.
Many prospectuses are very wordy making them unattractive to the casual browser, some are over 8000 words long!
A readability test applied to a random sample gave almost under graduate levels of difficulty.
The sample, drawn from a number of LEAs across the country also had few photographs.
None had a simple map showing the location of the school and details of bus routes that passed nearby.
The most attractive of the prospectuses made good use of photographs.
The best showed children, in groups of two or three at work around the school.
Care had been taken to avoid sex stereotyping by showing both boys and girls at computer keyboards, leading practical science activities, engaged in cooking and also in ‘home corner’ play.
In the best examples children from ethnic minorities were well featured.
Stressing the individuality of the school is vital, particularly now that the National Curriculum gives a uniformity to curriculum content.
Remember attracting just one additional child from outside the area will, under LMS, more than repay the entire costs of printing the prospectus.
Figures 7.2 and 7.3 are examples from a prospectus printed on A3 good quality sheet card which tries to combine visual appeal, meet legal requirements and at less than 20p per copy has relatively low cost.
It's well worthwhile collecting copies of prospectuses from other schools in the area including prep.
schools.
Examination of these will show their strengths and areas where your school appears much stronger.
Producing ‘knocking copy’ isn't being suggested but emphasising your school's uniqueness and particular strengths in your prospectus is important.
It's not good keeping the prospectuses piled up in the office just in case a casual visitor asks for one, they need to be where people with young children regularly gather.
Three or four placed in the Neighbourhood Office, Citizen's Advice Bureaux, the dentist's and doctor's surgeries, hairdressers, creche, nursery schools and playgroups will attract attention.
Let ministers of local churches have copies as a good exercise in public relations and also just in case they have new members of their flock inquiring about schools in the area.
If there are new housing developments in the neighbourhood contact the builder to see if copies can be on display in show homes.
Estate agents too might welcome copies.
Regularly visit the places where you have prospectuses on display to check on stock levels and replenish if necessary.
Make sure that the new prospectus goes to existing families in the school as well as to the families of prospective new entrants.
This helps to keep families up to date with the thinking of the school and strengthens the sense of identity.
Closing the school at short notice
How do you inform parents that the overnight heavy snow storm or a broken boiler is going to unexpectedly close the school for the day?
Does the school and/or the LEA have a policy of using a local radio station to broadcast news of the closure?
Do parents know the school will use that particular radio station when the school is to be closed at short notice?
As winter approaches it makes sense to include details of the school's procedures for short notice closures with a reassurance that young children will never be sent off to an empty home.
The parents association of one school funds the commercial printing of calendars on A3 sheets of quality card.
The calendar, with dates of school holidays clearly marked, takes up the central panel of the sheet, around the edge are further panels containing information about staff, governors, PTA, emergency contacts, useful phone numbers and how long children should be kept off school for mumps, measles and other common childhood illnesses.
With any luck the calendar finds a place on the kitchen wall and serves as a useful reference throughout the year.
Marketing costs
There are hardly enough hours in the day to cram in all the lesson preparation, background reading, meetings and classroom work necessary to be an effective teacher.
Taking on board yet another set of demands and perspectives entailed in marketing may seem a daunting task.
Good marketing means that time will have to be found to listen and respond to what others have to say, time and attention will need to be diverted from other activities.
Does good marketing mean playing safe and staying traditional?
There is a risk that people will become over cautious unwilling to rock the boat and upset others by taking on new ideas.
Parents will be more interested in the school and may ask awkward questions about their children's learning, particularly when new approaches to teaching and learning are introduced.
Volunteers will want to know where the string, sellotape and gun tackers are kept and will need organising.
It does mean that there will be more newsletters, posters, notice boards and more use of the school in out of school hours.
There will be increased printing costs and greater use of school facilities; but these burdens will be more than offset by the extra revenue generated by parent support.
The increased demands both in time and energy are far outweighed by the long-term benefits as the job of teaching actually becomes easier and more enjoyable when everyone, including parents and children, share the same sense of purpose and direction.
The school that markets seriously knows what it and others want and is skilled at reducing tensions and focussing effort in achieving common goals.
Professional relationships
It is important that professional relationships with other schools are not damaged by aggressive marketing.
Activities need to be kept  within the bounds of fair competition and care needs to be taken that there is no overstepping into open conflict.
Through sharing projects with other schools economies of scale are made.
Fitzharrys, John Mason and Larkmead secondary schools in Abingdon pooled their resources to produce a full colour joint prospectus, and plan shared events to ensure that energies are not misdirected in aggressive competition to attract children and parents.
In the far more competitive world of private education there is a great deal of collaborative effort including the setting up and running of the Independent Schools Information Service which produces publicity pamphlets and booklets.
The Conference of Avon Secondary Heads use the public relations firm MPR Leedex to advise them on marketing and public relations techniques.
Through working together the schools are able to buy in expertise and share the costs of producing high quality materials.
There are also benefits to be gained from schools working together on ‘education weeks’ where displays of art, craft and project work are put on in the town hall or community centre.
Raising the image of the whole educational system is of benefit to all schools.
A useful activity is to pull together the governors of several neighbouring schools for training and updating on topical issues.
Where this is done the funding of a visiting speaker can be shared.
Often the volume of urgent management business at a governors' meeting is so great that the welfare of children in a caring environment can become a marginal issue.
Joint training sessions give an opportunity to focus on fundamentals away from an unyielding agenda and an opportunity to develop a variety of skills such as interviewing or meeting management.
Activities drawing together staff and governors from several schools reduce the tendency for cut throat competition and encourages collaboration in joint policies and alliances to bring pressure on resource providers for a better service.
Changing expectations
Parents have expectations of the school based on previous knowledge — a more responsive school is also a more demanding school.
The school will want more of parents' time, attention and money.
Some sleeping dogs prefer to lie and will be reluctant supporters seeing the increasing claims as an intrusion or even unreasonable.
There will be others who will interpret listening and responding as an indication that the school is going ‘soft’ through weakening its authority and discipline.
There is also a great danger that the school will create unrealistic expectations, for example, raising money for an additional computer will not substantially increase the ‘hands on’ experience for every child.
A school's claim of achieving excellent standards in sports or instrumental music may seem very hollow to parents of children that don't have an opportunity to take up an instrument or to play for the school team.
Encouraging parents to take a more active part in their children's learning is persuading the customer to do more work.
McIver (1987) describes that in retailing customers were persuaded to forgo the service provided by the friendly corner store and take on the labour of pushing trolleys around supermarkets because they made gains through cheaper prices and a wider choice of goods.
Parents will need to see gains in their children's learning in return for the extra efforts that they are expected to make.
Is it worthwhile?
It is fairly easy to quantify many of the costs of marketing in both human and financial terms, the extra meetings, the extra bits of Paper are identifiable in terms of time and cash.
On the other hand the gains from marketing are often more in terms of quality than of quantity.
There may be a gain in the number of children at the school but this could well have happened through factors such as population change or a new housing development that are totally unconnected to the work on raising the school's visibility and image.
The rewards will be improvements in the quality of relationships and in the effectiveness of the school, measuring how the school has become a nicer place for all, calls for changes to be shown across a range of measures:
Indicators of effective marketing
greater pride in the school by all;
greater parental involvement in pupils' learning;
increase in pupil numbers;
decreases in staff and pupil absences;
improved turnout to parents' evenings/consultations;
greater financial support from parents and community;
greater range of opportunities for children to succeed;
more celebrations of success;
reduction of incidents involving friction and aggression;
improved community awareness of the work of the school.
Relationships with other phases of education and support agencies
In general, through the development of the National Curriculum, links across the primary secondary phase have strengthened to ensure curriculum continuity and consistency, joint working parties on teaching and record keeping are common place.
Secondary schools are also keen to establish positive relationships with neighbouring primary schools so that their school becomes the automatic choice of child and parent for the next phase of education.
The enthusiasm for partnership by individual secondary schools can be of great advantage to primary schools and their pupils.
With just a little encouragement secondary schools will share their swimming pool, their mini-bus, laboratories and workshops and allow the primary school to tap into specialist knowledge and expertise.
The ethics of a primary school developing an exclusive relationship with just one secondary school are dubious but most of these schools are happy to share facilities on a ‘no strings attached’ basis.
Of no value at all are offers of ‘fun days’ and ‘fun activities’to take place during the school day.
The sole purpose of the events seems to be to boost recruitment and improve the public relations image of the secondary school.
These offers should be avoided like the plague as the mounting of recruitment drives under the guise of educational activities is nothing less than taking unfair advantage.
They also show little awareness that primary schools are busy places where children are actively and totally engaged in programmes of purposeful learning with no time to waste.
Inviting secondary schools to mount a stall in the primary school hall or corridors during parents' evenings gives them a good opportunity to inform parents of what they have to offer children.
Secondary schools tend to have much more community use and their community notice board could support a copy of your prospectus and their community newsletter carry details of your school's events too!
Equally important as the links with the secondary sector are the links with pre-school and support services.
Getting to know the organisers of pre-school playgroups in the area and offering them assistance with publicity through your newsletter are steps in the right direction.
Encourage the organisers to visit you.
They will then be able to offer advice and first hand experience when parents inquire about good local schools.
Support services visitors ranging from educational psychologists to peripatetic music teachers develop insights into your school and often unofficially share their views about you throughout the LEA.
Revenue generation
In the school, efficient management of the budget is vital; yet a great school is never characterised by the remark ‘it has a good budget’.
The superb school is superb only by virtue of its success in developing its ultimate customer: the pupil.
Peters and Austin (1986).
Why raise money?
The vast proportion of funding for any LEA financed school is generated through the LMS system and therefore directly driven by pupil numbers.
Maintaining or increasing the number of pupils is crucially important in providing the ‘bread and butter’ finance for the school.
Money raising by the school for its own purposes or for charity is peripheral to the main business of teaching and learning.
Even a relatively small additional sum of money can enable the purchase of additional equipment which will make the difference between being poorly and adequately resourced.
Another reason for the boom in fund raising activities is an increasing awareness of the school's place in the community.
If the focus is that the school is a good place for all, that it gives as well as takes, then it can gain a great deal of positive publicity.
Even though glowing reports of fund raising efforts will have some public relations spin-off they are unlikely to overcome any serious doubts the local community might have about the school.
Traditionally parents, through direct appeals or through a parents' organisation have provided additional funds for ‘extras’ for the children and the school.
The distinction between essential services and desirable extras is no longer clear and voluntary raised funds are frequently used to buy basic materials including, at one school at least, soft toilet paper.
Items such as computers and video recorders and cameras were until recently in the non-essential category.
The introduction of the National Curriculum has changed  the status of this equipment.
A video camera is almost an essential tool in recording evidence of work undertaken in various subject areas and of children's development.
In a way, current legislation and political attitudes are pushing in opposing directions simultaneously.
Schools are prevented by law from charging for the curriculum, including charging pupils and their parents directly for school trips and visits, yet on the other hand schools are encouraged to generate as much revenue as they possibly can.
Fund raising by schools is now big business.
According to Anne Mountfield of the Directory of Social Change (Mountfield 1991) schools received up to £100 million from parents and charities with an equal amount being donated in funds and services by industry.
In some LEAs school budgets contain a notional element of funding which the school ought to generate through hire of the premises, the school that is unable or unwilling to generate lettings is in effect financially penalised.
There is a dilemma about schools taking on fund raising responsibilities.
The more that parents and industry provide the greater grows the temptation for government to provide less.
Schools in ‘well off’ areas can expect to raise more money in direct appeals and in fund raising activities than schools serving poorer communities.
They are also more likely to have parents in management posts in industry and commerce.
These parents are the decision makers and have the power to tap into the resources of their companies to provide schools with additional funds, materials and use of resources such as company mini-buses etc.
Knight (1990) identified three key questions to be raised when establishing a fund raising campaign:
Why do you want to raise funds?
In addition to providing a much needed resource you want to enhance the school's reputation, gain publicity, strengthen the school's identity or link parents more closely to the school.
How much do you need to raise?
A low target may be easily attainable, raise it and people may well respond to a greater challenge.
Who are the possible donors ?
The extended school family includes: parents, the PTA, former parents, former pupils, staff both teaching and non-teaching, former  staff, suppliers of goods and services to the school, friends and neighbours of the school.
Parents naturally want the best for their children.
When parents come to judge a school their first impressions will be a major factor.
A school that can show parents that it is well resourced is at a tremendous advantage.
Joint fund raising activities
One way of ensuring a fairer distribution of additional resources is for schools to work together on joint fund raising.
It is not uncommon for schools on the same campus serving different age ranges to share raffles, prize draws and seasonal fairs.
What is unusual is for a number of neighbouring schools to pull together to set up what Anne Mountfield describes as an ‘education innovation trust’.
One example is six secondary schools in Letchworth combining together in the creation of Education 2000, a trust to raise money from industry.
It would be just as easy for a group of primary schools to pool their efforts and resources in spearheading a joint campaign aimed at both local and national industry.
The costs of producing attractive, attention grabbing materials and postage being shared between schools.
A marketing budget?
Marketing deserves its place in the school development plan and the costing of parents' newsletters, the prospectus, governors' reports, basic materials for fund raising and curriculum workshops for parents need to be identified.
Leaving these expenses under the general heading of administration in the schools accounts gives governors and staff a distorted picture of expenditure.
The allocation in the budget of an annual sum for marketing helps in the setting of targets and provides greater control for all.
Good marketing should permeate all the activities undertaken within the school.
Improving written communications and running effective home — school relationships will have costs in time and money but smiling a lot and being nice to people doesn't knock a hole in the school budget.
Working with publishers and book distributors
Almost as an off-shoot to lending children good books from their libraries many schools are now acting as agents in selling popular titles.
Book distributors such as Puffin and Scholastic have seized  the opportunity to encourage schools to run book fairs and savings clubs, providing the school with stock and sales leaflets and offering the school a good rate of commission on sales.
Normally the sale of books is confined to the sale of fiction and factual books not directly related to any course of study.
There are worrying signs of a new development by publishers to encourage the selling of supplementary materials to textbooks that are used in the school.
An example is  Hienemann who produce their ‘Skittles’ series to supplement SPMG.
Skittles is specifically aimed at parents with the intended point of sale being the school.
Does engaging in the selling of materials directly related to the curriculum conflict with the principle of a free education service at the point of delivery?
Use of tapes
Videotapes of school activities are a useful means of communicating about work undertaken at school.
A promotional video can be prepared for showing at induction meetings for parents of new children.
The video would show activities undertaken during a typical school day, including lunch times and break times, the routines for meeting children at the end of the day, introduce the staff and the chair of governors and the chair of the parents' association.
The video can be used at induction meetings and loaned to parents who may be considering sending children to your school.
Videos of sports activities, concerts and visits always find a ready market amongst parents and staff.
With a little imagination the quality and interest value of videos can be enhanced greatly.
In the making of videos of school matches a panel of ‘experts’ giving their opinions before the match, at half-time, and interviews with star players and the manager at the end of play will add to the attraction.
Introductions and commentaries by children on videos of school plays are also very effective.
Audio tapes are much easier and cheaper to produce and use than video.
The production of tapes for parents on subjects such as helping children at home with reading, maths and science are well worth considering.
The added advantage for parents is that they can listen to audio tapes in the car on their way to work or as a background while they are busy doing other things around the house.
Planning fund raising activities
There needs to be an action plan for raising money.
Obviously the first criteria is to make a profit and in the wave of enthusiasm for  a new scheme a balance of potential profit against input of effort needs to be made.
Parents and staff shouldn't be seen as an endless source of free labour as even voluntary labour has a cost in time and goodwill.
‘Fund raising fatigue’ soon builds up so the target is best seen in maximum returns for minimum expenditure of energy.
Parents and others are usually less willing to contribute money just to swell school funds, they are much more responsive when there are clear targets at which to aim, such as an extra computer, video recorder, camera or curtains for the school hall.
There is likely to be unease if the target is for essentials such as basic stock or textbooks, the LEA has a responsibility to ensure that even under LMS there is enough money provided from central funds to staff and equip a school.
Doubts will be created about management and good housekeeping at the school if there appears to be a shortage of basic equipment.
Planning needs to take account of the worst possible disaster.
Events which demand a substantial outlay that can't be recovered in the event of cancellation, bad weather or some other cause need to be avoided.
There can be no greater cause of friction than a fund raising event losing money and having to be rescued by hard earned funds from other sources.
Keeping down the overheads is also vitally important, buying in materials and services is very expensive and when these are extracted from the takings they can leave a very big hole in the balance sheet.
Keep it short!
Fund raising campaigns are simpler to organise and sustain when they are short term sprints aimed at quickly achievable goals.
The ambitious long term campaign is always susceptible to a whole range of upsets.
Changes in membership of the fund raising committee often means a different outlook and a change in priorities.
Taking over someone else's project when it's half complete is never easy, there is little attraction for new blood to slog away at fulfilling the ambitious plans of others.
There is a great natural temptation for new members to cast doubts on the worth of pursuing an existing project and to want to push off in new directions.
Many a swimming pool fund has run into choppy water and adventure playground appeals turned into assault courses!
The long term campaign will not only have to face changes in the fund raising committee but is also likely to face changes in the school staff and the governing body.
These too might want to alter priorities and wish to change the aims of the fund raising campaign.
To ensure a sense of achievement it's best to:
(a)
restrict the length of any fund raising project to less than one year so that it is completed within the period of office of a committee;
(b)
ensure that staff, governors and fund raising committee are fully committed to the project from the outset.
Putting the fun into fund raising
Fund raising activities should be fun — people should not only feel virtuous at parting with their money but should gain pleasure and enjoyment too.
If the activity isn't enjoyable for those taking part and also those that are asked to part with their money then it's not worth doing.
When asking people to contribute money or time the question ‘what's in it for them?’ always needs to be raised.
Sending out letters for donations or goods are never as productive as appeals which actually give a return through entertainment, social activity or a chance of winning a prize.
Care needs to be taken to space out fund raising events or it will appear that the school cares for nothing but money.
We need to be reasonable in our demands as parents are also under pressure to dig in their pockets for spare cash to support brownies, cubs, clubs, churches and a whole range of other worthy causes.
Finding volunteers
There is always a hard core of trusty stalwarts on which we can depend but most people are not by nature volunteers.
If the school is already well on the way to successful marketing then relationships with parents as a group and on an individual basis will be or good quality and it will be fairly straightforward to contact people directly to ask them to undertake specific responsibilities.
Even the busiest of us can be persuaded to give of our time and our expertise when we know that the task we are undertaking will take a pre-specified and limited time.
‘Will you help run the lucky dip stall at the summer fayre from 1 pm until 3.30pm?’ is more likely to get a positive answer than a general plea for help with the summer fayre.
Handling money
Accurate and detailed accounts need to be kept and these should be open for inspection at any time by governors and members of the  organising committee with a financial statement presented at an annual meeting.
At events such as fayres and jumble sales things become very hectic and there can be fairly large sums of cash floating around.
Strict rules about the handling of money should be agreed before the event with the emphasis placed on protecting those involved from any possible accusation of mismanagement rather than doubts about the level of honesty of individuals!
Volunteers are naturally eager to know how well the event has done so it's best that the cash is totalled before they leave then either banked straight away or placed in the safe keeping of the headteacher or the deputy until the bank opens on the following day.
Even though the PTA or parents' association may have their own management structure including a treasurer there needs to be inbuilt into the system a means of close financial supervision by the school.
Unfortunately there have been a number of cases where monies raised by voluntary activities have gone missing and, because the school is linked by name to the parents' organisation, the schools' reputation has suffered.
The tuck shop
There is some irony in the fact that many schools are on the one hand educating children about healthy eating and on the other selling at break time nothing less than junk foods such as crisps, chewy fruit sweets and chocolate bars.
The attractions of these products are that they store well, are easily obtained and offer a high profit margin.
Fresh fruit and raw carrots are an alternative and represent healthier eating but they are perishable, less profitable and need some preparation before sale.
The response to the dilemma by a growing number of schools is to completely abandon the sale of food at breaks and to look to other means to generate funds.
The selling of sugar free squash at break times provides a service appreciated by children and also generates a regular income.
A group of mums working on a one day per week rota can look after the arrangements for this.
Image and not caricature
An easy way of raising money is through the sponsored event.
This is an activity that doesn't bear repeating often as sponsors sometimes discover that they have pledged themselves to give much more than they had intended and that, unlike the purchase of a raffle ticket or a ticket to a school event, there is no chance of personal gain.
What sort of image is created by the sponsored spell, the sponsored tables test, the sponsored silence and the sponsored matchbox cram?
Do they conjure up the impression that children are engaged in some form of pre-Victorian drudgery at school?
One successful type of sponsorship that not only creates a more accurate impression of modern teaching methods but also gives parents something back in the way of entertainment is the sponsored Krypton Factor type event.
Children are given a list of intellectual challenges to master and are also given an obstacle/assault type course to complete.
The parents will enjoy watching their children having fun completing the obstacle course particularly if there are a number of novelty items.
A rather grand certificate marking the successful completion of all the tasks also adds to the attraction.
A personal handwritten letter of thanks to each of the families that raise above a particular sum is important.
Raffles and prize draws
There is a financial outlay involved in running a traditional prize draw.
A licence needs to be purchased from the local authority and printing of tickets also adds to the costs.
Convincing shopkeepers and local firms that donating prizes is a very inexpensive form of advertising is usually a relatively easy task.
Even the most unlikely avenues are worth exploring.
Birches Green Infant School in Birmingham approached the undertaker and betting office for support and received a bottle of whisky and some new ties for their efforts.
It's also worth writing to the branches of chain stores in the area for support.
Finding the name of the branch manager and addressing the request at a personal level creates a much greater chance of a positive response.
The company's head office will probably have strict guide lines on the types of appeals that can be supported.
Some firms have strong links with particular areas of the country, Littlewood's Stores, for example, favours appeals from the Liverpool area.
It's worth gathering as many prizes as possible for a raffle or draw.
A great number of small prizes rather than just one or two big prizes gives more winners and more satisfaction.
A ‘200 club’ where the school takes a percentage of the weekly takings is also a steady income earner.
Bulk buy clubs
Some schools organise ‘bulk buy clubs’ where a member with a van  or large car buys in bulk a variety of goods from a discount warehouse — items such as nappy liners and toilet rolls seem to be quite common in these schemes.
The bulk pack being broken down into smaller units for re-sale to other parents with the school taking a percentage of the discount.
An enterprising parents' association at one primary school took on the short term lease of a shop in the local High Street in the pre-Christmas period and made a substantial profit by buying in stock from discount warehouses and retailing in competition with other traders.
Through staffing the shop with unpaid parent volunteers a good profit was guaranteed.
Charity status?
Profits made by a parents' association are liable to taxation, registration with the Charity Commissioners enables the association to escape tax liability.
Meeting the requirements of the Charity Commissioners is a straightforward task and well within the capabilities of any school, the Commissioners requiring a completed questionnaire and two copies of a draft governing document.
An LEA school may not become a charity in its own right as the school is a means by which the LEA meets its statutory obligations to provide education.
The school's PTA or similar organisation supporting the school which is working towards ‘the advancement of education’ would be recognised.
The adoption of the model constitution of the National Confederation of Parent Teacher Associations will satisfy both the Charity Commission and Inland Revenue that your association is a bona fide charity.
Other advantages for registration as a charity are that those parents and friends who can be persuaded to make covenants to the association will be able to gain tax relief and companies that give donations will find it easier to convince the tax man that their gift was entirely for charitable purposes.
The Charity Commissioners can be contacted at St. Alban's House, 57–60 Haymarket, London SW1Y 4QX.
Hiring out accommodation
Lettings of halls and classrooms to clubs and classes are useful ways of generating additional funding.
Few primary schools are likely to match the example of Meadowfield Comprehensive School in Sheffield that raised £80,000 by accommodating conferences for the City's Area Health Authority and its Training and Enterprise  Council but it's an example of the sort of thing that can be done with imagination and energy.
On busy Saturdays particularly near Christmas the playground can turn into a playground if the school is situated near a popular shopping centre or major football ground.
Charging to park on the playground can be a lucrative source of funds.
Finding helpers willing to act as car park attendants may be difficult if you intend to do this on a regular basis.
Parkers need to be clearly warned that they park their vehicles entirely at their own risk.
At least one school has leased a redundant playground to a local factory for off-street day time parking.
Professional advice needs to be taken to check that the foundations under the playground are strong enough to serve as a vehicle park.
The cost of resurfacing a damaged playground is enormous.
Christmas cards
Schools are often approached by firms such as Webb Ivory to sell Christmas cards on a commission basis and this can be a good boost to funds.
A number of schools take the idea further and produce their own Christmas cards based around a design created by one of the children.
This can be financially successful particularly if a parent or friend can persuade a printer to run them off in colour at a discount.
Choosing the final design needs not only care to ensure that the end product will be commercially attractive but that a number of people are involved in the selection to avoid accusations of favouritism.
There is a financial risk in producing your own cards and there is little chance of selling old stock in future years.
Fund raising evenings
Discos and Games
Social activities such as dances and games evenings are useful ways of generating extra cash and getting the local community involved in the school.
Parents' discos and family discos are always popular particularly when they have a fancy dress theme and ‘spot prizes’.
The addition of a bar will increase profits and add to the attraction.
The local pub may well be interested in running the bar for you.
They will take on the responsibility for providing stock and glasses, experienced staff and will also obtain the necessary licence for the event.
Do make sure that you retain the right to sell soft drinks and refreshments, these are far easier to manage and provide a good ratio of profit to outlay.
If you have a spare classroom or an afternoon when the school hall is not being used then parents may well be persuaded to run a weekly bingo session.
A profit of £30–50 a session is a reasonable expectation.
General knowledge quizzes of the trivial pursuit type are useful money raisers but are so popular that they are beginning to be dominated by teams that take an almost professional approach to the game.
These teams may take part in several competitions in the area each week acquiring a great deal of knowledge and expertise as well as the prizes.
One way of ensuring that locals have a reasonable chance of winning is to slightly bias just a few of the questions.
Not too many outsiders will be able to name the caretaker's dog or know when the school was built.
Darts and snakes and ladders championships organised a bit like the ‘world cup’ ensures everyone of more than one game and can be a pleasant way of making a small profit.
Coffee mornings
These too can be useful occasions for raising money as well as giving parents' an opportunity to get together.
The local Tupperware representative will be more than happy to lay on a display, the electricity showroom will often arrange a microwave cookery demonstration, and local clothes shops a fashion display.
The county museum and antique dealers can sometimes be persuaded to provide expert knowledge at an ‘Antique Roadshow’ held at the school.
The local paper may well have a ‘What's On’ column and will publicise details of your fund raising and social events free.
Defensive marketing
The purpose of a business is to make and hold a customer.
Peter Drucker (1968).
Encouraging visitors and making visits
Through the network of INSET courses, inspectors, advisory teachers and personal contacts hunt out the names of schools where outstanding work is taking place or schools that have a reputation for being generally good.
By hook or by crook make sure that two members of staff make visits during the working day.
I've yet to come across a school anywhere in the country that hasn't welcomed the opportunity to play host to a pair of teachers.
Try to look at schools outside your LEA, the variations across the country in patterns of INSET support and funding results in a variety of solutions to similar problems.
Make sure that there is a briefing before the visit — that people know why they are going and on what they should concentrate their attention.
Examples of tasks are:
1.
Find two ideas that we could develop over the long term.
2.
Disregard things that we do better.
The visit isn't to disparage others.
3.
Take photographs, make notes and make sure that at the next staff meeting everyone gets feedback about the visit.
You will want to add others to the list.
Encourage others to visit your school.
Use the visits to tap into their experience.
‘What works particularly well at your school?,
‘How do you do…?’
‘What do you do about…?’
Don't waste time re-inventing the wheel, take ideas from others and make those ideas even better.
Exploit every opportunity to improve your school.
Parents notice board
Maintaining confidence and support depends on the thousand little things that are done around the school.
Naturally most are related to teaching and learning, the major business of the school; the other activities reinforce the messages of respecting and caring for others.
It is by acts of thoughtfulness that the school ethos is reinforced.
A useful example is the erection in a prominent place of a parents' notice board where details of sales, wants, baby sitters, child minders, community activities, thank you letters, etc are displayed.
It might be tempting to make a small charge for this but it may be even more advantageous to offer this as a free service with the profit being goodwill.
Do neighbouring schools do better?
Weighing up the competition is an important part of marketing.
It's surprising how little most teachers know about neighbouring schools.
There is nothing wrong in seeking an invitation to go and look around a neighbouring school to explore possibilities of working together.
There may be ways in which, for example, the cost of hiring a coach for an educational visit can be shared, or some joint sports activities can be planned.
The visit will provide opportunities to see the school in action and enable good ideas to be recognised, applauded and noted.
It would, of course, be rather unnatural if weaknesses within the school weren't quietly noted and stored away for future reference.
Pupil leakage isn't about those puddles occasionally found under infant children it's about losing children to neighbours — it's not so wet but equally unpleasant.
If you are losing children do spend time with the dissatisfied parents to explore not just the event that has brought the situation to a head but dig deep for other areas of dissatisfaction, hostility or conflict.
You may not be able to reconcile differences but you will have gained further insights into the perceptions that others have of the school and maintained the personal caring touch; and the discussion may well encourage you to take another look at your policy for encouraging complaints.
Taking in dirty washing?
There will also be parents who are dissatisfied with the school which their children currently attend and will be looking for an alternative.
There is a need on the part of the school to ensure that this is not a hasty decision, that it is in the best interest of the child and that it will not be a decision that parents will either want to reverse or repeat when any problem or difficulty arises.
It does seem fair to contact the child's existing school before any decision is made so that the school can make some attempt to reconcile differences with the parent and also to avoid the accusation of pupil poaching.
When parents visit your school to seek to transfer a child from your neighbour it's a chance to casually inquire about the relative strengths and attractions of the schools.
One parent of a seven year old said that even though the family were moving house and there were several schools that would be nearer she would continue to send her son to the school because he enjoyed the after-school football training.
We operate in an unfair world where all sorts of unsuspected criteria influence people's choices.
Defensive marketing check list
Have you copies of the prospectuses of neighbouring schools including those in the private sector?
Have you compared them with yours?
Does your nearest neighbour have a higher profile in the area?
If so, how is this achieved?
Do your neighbours achieve higher standards?
Have you obtained and studied copies of HMI reports on neighbouring schools and on similar schools to yours from other parts of the country?
Doing conventional things well has always met with parental approval.
How conventional is your school?
How conventional are your neighbours?
With knowledge of the successes and claims of others you have targets to match and to beat.
Without the knowledge complacency, fatalism and despondency creeps in.
A negative view of marketing is the ‘dog eat dog’ view where the school can only gain by putting another school at a disadvantage or loss.
On the other hand if marketing is seen and pursued as a facet of good communications and as a faster and better response to needs then everyone can be a winner.
The competition is to provide a  better service for all — children, parents, school staff and community.
A sense of direction
Customer loyalty depends very much on long term customer satisfaction and belief that the school is providing quality education.
To achieve this energy needs to be directed to the presentation of a professional and polished approach.
Teaching and learning is a messy, emotional and unpredictable business but day to day relationships and basic administration should be straightforward, comprehensive and simple.
Changes in staff, changes in curriculum and increasing external demands making planning a chancy business.
Rigid planning means that unforeseen opportunities are lost and flexible response is built out of the system.
A loose weave enables new directions and unforeseen short cuts taken to achieve long term goals.
We need not only to be able to swim in a sea of uncertainty but also to resist panic when we get out of our depth.
Whether the planning is for greater parental involvement, producing the school prospectus or fund raising there needs to be structure and a sense of priorities.
Establishing priorities
Checklist:
Those things that must be done
Those things that should be done
Those things that might be done
Planning needs to incorporate frequent and systematic reviews that take on board the perceptions of staff, parents and children.
Market orientated schools barter with their customers so that the maximum support, time and interest is exchanged and developed.
Hard nosed marketing
The Institute of Marketing defines marketing as ‘the management process responsible for identifying, anticipating and satisfying customer requirements profitably’.
One of the functions of the marketing expert in commerce and industry is to develop a clear idea of the target market and also to identify and axe both unprofitable product lines and unprofitable customers.
The management of schools is changing and decisions have to be  made in the context of a financial framework.
There are children and families who take up a great deal of teacher time and attention.
The tolerance and willingness of schools to take on disruptive or time consuming pupils will change in the new climate of LMS.
Schools in the private sector seem to respond quickly when there are difficulties with children and if the school's reputation is threatened appear to have no hesitation in asking parents to place their children elsewhere.
In order to weed out potential problems private schools usually give children some form of interview and pre-entry test before a place is offered.
In the harder nosed environment that we are now facing there will be times when schools in the public sector have to balance the needs of an individual disruptive child against the effects that the child is creating amongst other children and their parents.
Neighbouring schools may actively encourage difficult and demanding families to seek somewhere else for the education of their children.
When approaches are made a little probing may well encourage you to suggest that the parents reconcile their differences with the child's present school.
Educating pupils with special educational needs can be an expensive activity and being caring, compassionate and tolerant has little to do with being cost effective.
Do you know the cost of the provision that you make for children with special educational needs, particularly the employment of specialist teachers and ancillaries?
Staffing the curriculum and matching the needs of pupils have resource implications and these need to be taken into account when developing a marketing policy.
A neighbouring school may decide to cut back on special needs provision or transport to the swimming baths or some other expensive provision and an influx of recruits from that school may be looking to you to pick up the bills.
Looking gift horses in the mouth
Firms that have particular local difficulties, through perhaps having a plant that is environmentally unfriendly, may offer generous school industry links to boost the firm's image in the community.
Support may also be offered by firms whose products may in some ways be harmful to children.
Will any amount of ‘free’ pencils, clipboards or folders make up for the likely storm of protest that inevitably follows these type of links?
No compromise — no surrender
There are issues where the school needs to take a firm line and where no compromises can be tolerated.
Particularly on matters concerning  equal opportunity — racial harassment, bullying, physical handicap or sexism a no-nonsense  unequivical approach must be adopted.
It s vital that the school has an agreed policy on equal opportunities and that it carries the wholehearted support of both governors and staff.
There may be isolated incidents which severely test the policy.
One primary school in particular ran into both open and covert hostility from parents when it encouraged children from a nearby traveller site to enrol.
The school took a determined line in support of its belief in a right to education for all and eventually convinced parents that ‘standards’ were far from suffering and ‘those traveller/gipsy children’gradually became known and valued as individuals and opposition virtually faded away.
A reputation for being fair, just, reasonable and courageous is worth winning even if it does mean occasionally upsetting some people.
Aggressive marketing
There are four basic ways of increasing the number of pupils at the school, extend the catchment area, attract the children of new families that move into the neighbourhood, shore up the leakage of children to other schools and, lastly, pick up those that are dissatisfied with their present school.
Pushing back the boundaries
The traditional boundaries of a catchment area were frequently established by the LEA as homes within a fixed radius of the school.
This looked fine and fair on the wall map down at the Town or County Hall but didn't reflect the real world where convenience of travel isn't always based on distance.
Avoiding the crossing of a busy road, climbing a steep hill, or passing the shops can be much more important to parents than having to walk an extra few hundred yards.
Old habits and traditions die hard and work will be needed to be undertaken to convince some parents that they now have a tree choice of school.
Breaking down the traditional expectations of where parents send their children could include leaflet drops encouraging families to use the facilities of the school.
The message needs to be that the school serves their community and accepts children from their area.
The techniques described earlier for giving the school a more prominent profile should be used; these include placing promotional material in health clinics, neighbourhood offices, libraries, fish and chip shops, building society offices and wherever else people gather.
This extends the policy put forward in earlier chapters of keeping a high profile.
The leaflets also need distributing to families that already use the school as a reminder of  the facilities on offer.
Figure 11.1 shows an example of a flyer giving basic details of the school, further flyers can focus on particular aspects of expertise or community provision.
Maintaining a high profile in the community is important.
There are many shops that are quite happy to accept posters advertising school events and there are others that are willing to display children's work for a limited period.
Building society offices will   often provide a great deal of window space to a display of children's work as part of their community service.
Supermarkets and libraries too are usually willing to give over part of their foyer for a limited time for exhibitions of children's work.
Work left on unattended open display needs to be visited regularly to check on wear and tear or even sabotage by children loyal to another school!
Make sure that there are details on display explaining the purpose of the work and the ages of the children who produced it.
The work need to be carefully mounted and double checked for spelling or other errors.
Saturday morning performances in the town market or at the supermarket entrance by the recorder group or school band can also bring favourable attention.
It is important that there are eye catching banners or posters on display that identify the school.
Catching the newcomers
Don't forget that estate agent offices are good places to have your school prospectus on open display.
Parents that move into a new area will often ask estate agents about schools in the neighbourhood.
You will be doing everyone a service by making sure that at these times a copy of your prospectus is at hand.
If the prospectus, the preliminary visit and efforts to build the school's reputation in the neighbourhood are effective then the parents are almost preselected.
They are bringing their children to a school about which they already know a great amount and have decided that it meets their needs.
Plugging the leaks
No school can hope to match the needs of all the parents in its neighbourhood.
There will be those who seek schools serving particular religious denominations and those who seek a school near granny so that mum can go back to work.
Also no school can please all its parents all the time.
There are almost bound to be some children who are withdrawn from the school because of parental dissatisfaction.
There is a danger that some schools may be so busy fishing for pupils in other people's ponds that they forget to guard their own.
Listening to parents in the playground and at more formal events such as parents' evenings should alert staff to early stages of parental disquiet.
Responding quickly and sympathetically with common sense action and positive advice is often all that is needed to resolve the situation.
When the school doesn't take complaint gathering seriously and parents are ill at ease in approaching the school then  the stage is set for crisis.
If parents don't appear until boiling point is reached then relationships may well be beyond repair.
At that time all that is left to do is swing with the punches and part with as little bad feeling as possible.
Buying advertising space
Television and radio advertising is a possibility.
St George's CE Comprehensive School in Newtown, Birmingham was the first non-fee paying school in Britain to purchase TV time with eight 20 second slots in February 1990.
John Mansfield Comprehensive School, Peterborough was the first school to sell itself on local radio.
In Northumberland, Ponteland County High School took space in the local paper to advertise its success with pupils achieving 91 per cent passes in A levels.
Free gifts and discounts
Manor Park Comprehensive School, Nuneaton showed enterprise in a different direction in their attempt to attract pupils.
Their booklet directed at parents of prospective pupils said;
The shrewd parent now gets our free starter pack for their son or daughter when they take up a place at Manor Park.
And as a little extra, the whole family is remembered through the generosity of the school's industrial ‘twin’— Triton plc, Britain's leading shower manufacturer — which offers £10 cash back for every Triton shower purchased at Payless DIY, Nuneaton when your child takes up a place at Manor Park.
The starter pack included a free school tie, stationery set and complimentary sports insurance.
The booklet also emphasised the educational benefits of sending children to the school.
One primary head makes an annual visit to local playgroups to present each child with a balloon, a colouring book, some crayons and a school prospectus.
It was reported in the Times Educational Supplement that Ferndale Comprehensive School in Mid-Glamorgan issued all of its first year pupils with free uniform and sports clothing.
The paper reported that the school claimed to have saved £40,000 by buying in bulk but that ‘The National Union of Teachers has criticised the move as a misuse of the school's low-income clothing allowance which smacked of marketing’.
Whether Ferndale Comprehensive has been over enthusiastic or not it does seem that one union at least seems to think that marketing is one of the deadliest of sins!
The NUT isn't the only union to be alarmed by the fact that some schools are attempting to influence parental choice through ‘free gifts’ on enrolment.
The National Association of Head Teachers Code of Conduct instructs members to:
avoid the practice of giving gifts or commercial incentives to prospective pupils or their parents with the intention of inducing them to enrol and to take account of the possible damage to pupils in other educational establishments as a result of marketing activities.
Keeping track of competition
Not only are primary schools in the neighbourhood competing for children but prep schools may also be attracting pupils out of the area too.
Popping along to open days and public events to see what's on offer and collecting a few prospectuses will give some data to think about.
Talking to parents who send their children to other schools is useful too.
The aim of the game being to find out ways in which they do things better than you do rather than the other way around.
Taking ideas and improving them is much more valuable than mere imitation.
Prep schools have no secure catchment area, they have always depended on the forces of the market place for their survival.
Many have poor accommodation, are poorly resourced and, a number when inspected by HMI, are found to give inadequate standards of education — yet parents are willing to pay quite substantial fees to send their children to these schools.
Where the attraction is bound up with notions of privilege and status then there is little that LEA funded schools can do to compete.
Very generous pupil — teacher ratios is a feature that prep schools use as a strong selling point to parents.
Under LMS it is theoretically possible for primary schools to improve PTR by diverting money which has in the past been used for building maintenance and classroom materials to employing additional teachers.
Most schools are in such poor physical condition and are so poorly equipped that this is unlikely to be a viable option.
Although prep schools are likely to be fiercely competitive they co-operate together through ISIS for joint marketing and public relations exercises.
One of the effects is that a survey of a range of prep school publicity material revealed nothing in the way of knocking copy aimed at other schools within or outside the private sector.
Often a councillor will serve as a governor of a number of primary schools and, given the slightest encouragement, be more than willing  to discuss how the other schools are tackling specific problems and their plans for the future.
It will be difficult to avoid noticing the work of primary schools that are effectively marketing themselves, their reputation will be well known and their efforts highly publicised.