

The Salzburg Years 1756–1871
Birth and early years
Leopold Mozart,Versuch einer Gründlichen Violinschule ,(Augsburg, 1756)[The British Library: Music Library — d.2.a., frontis]
2 Leopold Mozart,Versuch einer gründlichen Violinschule ,(Augsburg, 1756)[The British Library: Music Library — d.2.a., title-page]
Even without his son, Leopold Mozart (1719–1787)(1 ) would have been guaranteed a place in the history books.
He was a gifted musician, and in 1756, the year of Mozart's birth, was a violinist in the private orchestra at the court of the ruling Prince-Archbishop of Salzburg, Siegmund Christoph, Count of Schrattenbach.
He had come to Salzburg from his parental home in Augsburg in 1737 to study at the University with the intention of becoming a priest, but his love of music had led him instead to take up an appointment initially with the Canon of Salzburg before joining the Archbishop's household.
At the time of Mozart's birth Leopold was working on his Versuch einer gründlichen Violinschule [Treatise on the fundamentals of violin-playing], a highly important theoretical and practical treatise, published later that year (2 ); it remained the standard violin method for a considerable time, both in the original German and in various translations.
An early review of the Violinschule gives a contemporary evaluation of Leopold's abilities as a teacher:
A work of this kind has long been wished for…
Those who are most adept at wielding the bow are not always in control of the pen, and the few who possess equal facility in both often lack the will to write.
How much the greater, then, is our obligation towards the author of the present work.
The thorough and accomplished virtuoso, the reasonable and methodical teacher, the learned musician — these characteristics…are all here revealed in one…for many of those, too, who profess the violin will here find instruction, and will do well to profit by this great master's teaching, so as no longer to spoil their pupils with bad precepts.
This ‘methodical teacher’ was blessed with two musically gifted children — Maria Anna, named after her mother but known as ‘Nannerl’(born 30/31 July 1751)— and Wolfgang Amadeus, as he is now known,(born 27 January 1756).
Mozart's place in history is due in part to the fact that his father recognised and nurtured his talent from an early age, virtually giving over his life in order to assist in the advancement of his son.
Moreover, the fact that we know so much about Mozart's early years is due entirely to Leopold's desire to record the events in his son's life.
Early evidence of the musical progress of the two children survives in the form of a small music book (3 ) prepared by Leopold, initially for Nannerl's use, but subsequently used also to indicate the works learnt by the four-year-old Mozart and to record his earliest compositions, K.1a-d.
Some are entered in Leopold's hand and some by Mozart.
The Archbishop encouraged the musicians at his court to travel to Italy to study.
Support of this kind was to enable Leopold to take his two young children on long musical tours throughout their formative years, tours which exposed them to a variety of European cultures and styles and which were consequently to direct the course of Mozart's development as a musician.
Their first trip was to Munich (12 January 1762 for three weeks).
Little is known of the visit other than that Mozart appeared before the Bavarian Elector Maximilian III Joseph.
Later, on 18 September 1762, the whole family went to Vienna.
Details of this visit survive largely in the form of Leopold's letters to his landlord and banker in Salzburg, Johann Lorenz Hagenauer (1712–1792), as well as newspaper reports.
They were invited to court to perform for the Empress Maria Theresa and Emperor Francis I.
Their Majesties received us with such extraordinary graciousness that, when I shall tell  it, people will declare that I have made it up.
Suffice it is to say that Woferl jumped up on the Empress's lap, put his arms round her neck and kissed her heartily.
(16 October 1762)
3 Mozart's earliest compositions — K.1a-d.
Two leaves extracted from Nannerl's ‘Notenbuch’.
Both in Leopold's handwriting.
First leaf contains diagrams of musical intervals with their Latin and German descriptions.
The other side of this leaf contains Mozart's earliest surviving compositions, again in his father's hand.
These works date from 1761.
A substantial portion of the ‘Notenbuch’ survives, though some of the leaves were detached (probably after Mozart's death): two of these came to light in 1954 and are now in The Pierpont Morgan Library.
[The Pierpont Morgan Library: Mary Flagler Cary Music Collection]
The grand European Tour — to England and back 1763–1766
In June 1763 Leopold was given leave to travel with his family and a coachman to the principal musical centres of Europe.
Travel was a hazardous business in the eighteenth century: two days after they set off Leopold wrote:
That was a snail's journey…
Two hours outside Wasserburg a back wheel broke in pieces and there we were stranded.
(11 June 1763) The family had to wait about two days for the wheel to be fixed (involving expenditure on housing, and feeding the horses and the driver).
During the wait Mozart was given the chance of trying an organ in the local church (something he was to do in many of the towns that the family later visited):
I explained to Woferl the use of the pedal.
Whereupon he tried it stante pede , shoved the stool away and played standing at the organ, at the same time working the pedal, and doing it all as if he had been practising it for several months.
Everyone was amazed.
Indeed this is a fresh act of God's grace, which many a one only receives after much labour.
(11 June 1763)
Their journey took them to Munich, where Mozart and Nannerl played again for Elector Maximilian III Joseph of Bavaria and Clemens, Duke of Bavaria.
At Ludwigsburg Leopold suspected that his attempts to gain an audience with Karl Eugen, Duke of Wurtemberg were being thwarted by the intervention of Niccolò Jommelli (court Kapellmeister at Stuttgart) who was attempting to prevent Germans from appearing before the Duke.
Even when they were secured, performances at court did not always bring the rewards Leopold hoped for:
If the kisses which she [Princess Amalia at Aachen]gave to my children, and to Wolfgang especially, had been all new louis d'or, we should be quite happy; but neither the innkeeper nor the postmaster are paid in kisses…
Little Wolfgang has been given two magnificent swords…
My little girl has received Dutch lace…cloaks, coats and so forth.
With snuff-boxes and étuis and such stuff we shall soon be able to rig out a stall
(17 October 1763)
After stopping at Wasserburg, Munich, Augsburg, Mainz, Frankfurt, Coblenz, Bonn, Cologne, Aachen, Liège, and Brussels the family finally arrived in Paris in November 1763.
The city was in mourning for Marie-Thérèse de Bourbon (first wife of the Dauphin Louis) and it was some time before the prospect of playing at court arose.
Shortly after their arrival the Mozarts met Friedrich Melchior Grimm, an influential diplomat and secretary to the Duke of Orleans.
Grimm was extremely impressed with the two children:
True prodigies are sufficiently rare to be worth speaking of…
A Kapellmeister of Salzburg,[Leopold had been appointed Vice-Kapellmeister in February 1763]Mozart by name, has just arrived here with two children…
His daughter, eleven years of age, plays the harpsichord in the most brilliant manner; she performs the longest and most difficult pieces with an astonishing precision.
Her brother, who will be seven years old next February, is such an extraordinary phenomenon that one is hard put to believe what one sees with one's eyes and hears with one's ears.
It means little for this child to perform with the greatest precision the most difficult pieces, with hands that can hardly stretch a sixth; but what is really incredible is to see him improvise for an hour on end and in doing so give rein to the inspiration of his genius and to a mass of enchanting  ideas…
The most consummate Kapellmeister could not be more profound than he in the science of harmony and of modulations…
He has such great familiarity with the keyboard that when it is hidden for him by a cloth spread over it, he plays on this cloth with the same speed and the same precision.
To read at sight whatever is submitted to him is child's play…he makes me realize that it is difficult to guard against madness on seeing prodigies.
4 Versailles from Nouveau Plan de Paris , 1766.
[The British Library: Map Library -Maps.K.64.34.]
Just before Christmas the family went to Versailles (4), staying there for two weeks.
Leopold described the visit to his landlord's wife:
I heard good and bad music there.
Everything sung by individual voices and supposed to resemble an aria was empty, frozen and wretched—in a word, French; but the choruses are good and even excellent.
So every day I have been with my little man to see the Mass in the Royal Chapel, to hear the choir in the motet, which is always performed there.
(1 February 1764) In the same letter he outlined musical life in Paris:
There is a perpetual war here between the Italian and the French music.
The whole of French music is not worth a sou…
The Germans are taking the lead in the publication  of their compositions…
Schobert, Eckardt, Le Grand and Hochbrucker have all brought us their engraved sonatas and presented them to my children.
At present four sonatas of M. Wolfgang Mozart are being engraved.
Picture to yourself the furore which they will make in the world when people read on the title-page that they have been composed by a seven-year-old child; and when the sceptics are challenged to test him, as he already has been, imagine the sensation when he asks someone to write down a minuet or some tune or other and then immediately and without touching the clavier writes in the bass and, if it is wanted, the second violin part…every day God performs fresh miracles through this child.
By the time we reach home, God willing, he will be able to contribute to the court music.
He frequently accompanies in public concerts.
He even, when accompanying, transposes a prima vista; and everywhere Italian or French works are put before him, which he plays off at sight.
The compositions were sonatas for keyboard and violin K.6 and K.7 (published as op.
I,(5)) and K.8 and K.9 (published as op.II).
5 Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart Sonates pour le clavecin …
(Paris, 1764) K.6&7.
Mozart's first works to appear in print.
Two sonatas for keyboard and violin in C and D major, These are dedicated to Madame Victoire, second daughter of Louis XV.
[The British Library: Music Library — Hirsch IV.
1, title-page]
In April 1764 the Mozarts left for London, having been urged to do so by their contacts in Paris.
Altogether they were to spend 15 months in the English capital and late in April they made the first of three visits (the others were in May and October) to the court of King George III and Queen Charlotte.
On April 27th we were with the King and Queen in the Queen's Palace in St. James's Park…
The present was only twenty-four guineas, which we received immediately on leaving the King's apartment, but the graciousness with which both His Majesty the King and Her Majesty the Queen received us cannot be described.
In short, their easy manner and friendly ways made us forget that they were the King and Queen of England.
At all courts up to the present we have been received with extraordinary courtesy.
But the welcome which we have been given here exceeds all others.
(28 May 1764) Young Mozart's abilities were continually being tested with demands that he should sight-read, improvise, compose melodies to pre-set bass lines, accompany other performers etc., and this occasion was no exception:
The King placed before him not only works of Wagenseil, but those of [Johann Christian]Bach, Abel and Handel and he played off everything prima vista …
Then he accompanied the Queen in an aria which she sang, and also a flautist who played a solo.
Finally he took the bass part of some airs of Handel…and played the most beautiful melody on it and in such a manner that everyone was amazed.
In short, what he knew when we left Salzburg is a mere shadow compared with what he knows now.
It exceeds all that one can imagine…
He has now continually in his head an opera which he wants to produce there [Salzburg]with several young people.
(28 May 1764)
After giving a successful benefit concert (they gave several while in the country —(6 )), the Mozarts had planned to visit Kent, though unfortunately Leopold fell ill.
The family retired to Chelsea, then about two miles outside London:
It has one of the most beautiful views in the world.
Wherever I turn my eyes, I only see gardens and in the distance the finest castles…
(13 September 1764) Leopold was in fact suffering from a severe cold:
In England there is a kind of native complaint, which is called a ‘cold’.
..[which]in the case of people who are not constitutionally sound becomes so dangerous that in many cases it develops into a ‘consumption’…and the wisest course for such people to adopt is to leave England and cross the sea.
While Leopold recovered the family had to live without income, though it seems likely that Mozart made use of the interlude to compose his first symphonies.
These works were referred to by Leopold in a letter of 8 February 1765:
The symphonies in the concert will all be by Wolfgang Mozart.
I must copy them myself, unless I want to pay one shilling for each sheet.
Copying music is a very profitable business here.
Meanwhile Queen Charlotte had asked to be the dedicatee of some of Mozart's works which Leopold duly had engraved at his own expense (K.10–15, sonatas for keyboard and violin or flute and 'cello, published as op.III).
6 Public Advertiser (London 9 May 1764).
An advertisement for one of the concerts given in London.
[The British Library: General Library — Burney collection]
7 God is our refuge by Wolfgang, written out with the help of his father and presented to the British Museum in June 1765.
[The British Library: Music Library -K. I O.a.17. (3.)]
Towards the end of their stay in London the Mozarts visited the British Museum (in its original home in Montagu House on the site of the present building—(PLATE II)).
Nannerl, in an undated entry in her travel diary, relates her visit to ‘the library, the antiquities, birds of all kinds, fishes, insects, fruits.
.. a rattlesnake’.
Children were not normally admitted, so Nannerl and Mozart were privileged.
They presented the Museum with copies of the publications of his op.I and op.II sonatas (K.6–9), a copy of J. B. Delafosse's engraving of the watercolour of Leopold and his children by Louis Carrogis de Carmontelle (see PLATE I) and the manuscript of Mozart's specially composed four-part vocal composition ‘God is our Refuge’, K.20, written out with the help of his father (7).
This was to remain his only setting of English words.
On another visit, it seems, Leopold gave the Museum a copy of Mozart's op.III (K.10–15).
The Mozarts left England in August 1765, travelling by way of Canterbury, to Dover, across the channel to Calais and then to The Hague where they had  been invited to perform before Princess Caroline of Nassau-Weilburg.
Their journey was severely delayed owing to Leopold, Nannerl and Mozart suffering illnesses.
Eventually they reached Paris in May 1766, travelling then through Switzerland and Germany and finally arriving home in Salzburg in late November.
Mozart's reputation preceded him on the return trip, and the family were frequently detained so that he could give performances and display his talents.
The young boy's skills are summed up in an account published in October 1766:
You will have seen, with as much surprise as pleasure, a child of nine play the harpsichord like the great masters; & what will have astonished you even more was to hear from trustworthy persons that he already played it in a superior manner three years ago; to know that almost everything he plays is of his own composition; to have found in all his pieces, and even in his improvisations, that character of force which is the stamp of genius, that variety which proclaims the fire of imagination & that charm which proves an assured taste; and lastly, to have seen him perform the most difficult pieces with an ease and a facility that would be surprising even in a musician of thirty….
It may be predicted with confidence that he will one day be one of the greatest masters of his art.
8 Cadenza to the first movement of one of Mozart's ‘pastiche’ keyboard concertos, K.40.
[The British Library: Department of Manuscripts — Add.
MS 47861A, f.10 r ]
Salzburg 1766
After his return Mozart's compositions included experiments with keyboard concerto writing in the form of arrangements of sonata movements of works by some of the composers he had met on his journeys (Honnauer, Eckard etc)(8 ).
This afforded the opportunity for him both to become familiar with other music, and to come to grips with concerto movement forms unhampered by the need to create the thematic and harmonic material as well.
During this period he also wrote the first act of the ‘sacred Singspiel’Die Schuldigkeit des ersten Gebots (9 ) the remaining acts being written by Michael Haydn (l737–l806 then Konzertmeister to the Archbishop of Salzburg) and Anton Adlgasser (1729–1777, court and cathedral organist in Salzburg).
The first performance took place on 12 March 1767 as part of the traditional annual performance by the students of the Gymnasium.
On one occasion Mozart was locked in a room to compose in order to convince the Archbishop of Salzburg of his abilities as a composer.
Duly satisfied, the Archbishop continued in his support of the  family, giving them leave to travel and even advancing them sums of money to help them to do so.
9 First part of cantata Die Schuldigkeit des ersten Gebots , K.35.
The secco recitative section for the Spirits of Mercy, Justice and Christ from the second aria of the work.
Mozart has shortened the passage, by deleting the end.
[Windsor Castle, Royal Library.
© Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II]
Vienna 1767–1769 — La finta semplice
The Mozarts' second visit to Vienna began in September 1767, coinciding with the planned festivities for the marriage of the Archduchess Maria Josepha to King Ferdinand of Naples.
Sadly the Archduchess died during a smallpox epidemic before the wedding took place.
The period of mourning brought court activities to an end, leaving the Mozarts no chance to perform.
These circumstances, along with the health risk, convinced Leopold of the need to leave the city for a while.
The family travelled to Brno and to Olomouc, but nevertheless both Mozart and his sister suffered mild attacks of smallpox.
It is clear from Leopold's letters to Hagenauer that Mozart had by then written a substantial number of pieces, many of them commissions.
On their return to Vienna they appeared before the Emperor who failed to reward them, and Leopold became convinced that members of the aristocracy were deliberately avoiding Mozart so that they could dismiss his talents as
humbug and foolishness; that it was all prearranged; that he was given music which he  already knew; that it was ridiculous to think that he could compose, and so forth.
(30 January–3 February 1768) Leopold contrived a situation where one of these sceptics, another composer, was to hear Mozart perform a
most extraordinarily difficult concerto…
So we turned up and the fellow had the opportunity, therefore, of hearing his concerto played off by little Wolfgang as if he knew it by heart…
Finally he declared: All I can say as an honest person is that this boy is the greatest man now living in the world.
It was impossible to believe it.
But in order to convince the public of what it really amounts to, I decided to do something entirely out of the ordinary, that is, to get Wolfgang to write an opera for the theatre.
(30 January -3 February 1768) Leopold went on to report that the Emperor had in fact suggested that Mozart write an opera:
What do you think?
Is not the reputation of having written an opera for the Viennese theatre the best way to enhance one's credit not only in Germany but also in Italy?
The opera was La finta semplice , but growing opposition to the project within the musical establishment ultimately prevented it from being performed.
In  May, after receiving from the Emperor introductions to the various states in Italy, Leopold wrote to Hagenauer
Or should I perhaps sit down in Salzburg with the empty hope of some better fortune, let Wolfgang grow up, and allow myself and my children to be made fools of until I reach the age which prevents me from travelling and until he attains the age and physical appearance which no longer attract admiration for his merits?
Is my child to have taken the first step with this opera for nothing….
(11 May 1768) In July he expressed his anger more strongly:
All sensible people must with shame agree that it is a disgrace to our nation that we Germans are trying to suppress a German, to whom foreign countries have done justice by their great admiration and even by public acknowledgments in writing.
(30 July 1768) And in September — over a year after they had left Salzburg — he wrote:
As for Wolfgang's opera all I can tell you is that, to put it shortly, the whole hell of musicians has arisen to prevent the display of a child's ability.
I cannot even press for its performance, since a conspiracy has been formed to produce it, if it must be produced, extremely badly and thus ruin it.
I have to await the arrival of the Emperor.
(14 September)
10 Leopold's Petition about La Finta Semplice .
This is apparently a draft of the petition sent to Joseph II.
[Glasgow University Library, MS Farmer 271/8.
By permission of the Librarian]
PLATE I Leopold Mozart with his children.
Watercolour by Louis Carrogis de Carmontelle [The British Museum: Department of Prints and Drawings — BM 1972 U.653]
PLATE II British Museum courtyard.
Watercolour by Wykeham Archer.
[The British Museum: Department of Prints and Drawings — 1914–2–23]
PLATE III Thomas Linley the Younger.
Oil painting by Thomas Gainsborough probably painted ca .
1773/4.
[Dulwich Picture Gallery: No.331 By permission of the Governors of Dulwich Picture Gallery]
11 Leopold's list of Mozart's works — page 1 which shows earliest publications [Paris, Bibliothèque du Conservatoire, MS 263]
On 28 September Leopold sent a petition (10 ) to Emperor Joseph II detailing the events surrounding the composition and non-performance of the opera:
…
A learned paper from Paris has confirmed this opinion by declaring, after an exhaustive description of my son's genius, that there was no doubt that this child would at the age of twelve write an opera for one or the other of the Italian theatres; but everybody thought that a German should reserve such glory for his own country alone.
I was unanimously encouraged therein…
He concluded by saying:
I humbly and obediently beg for a close examination of the musical powers of my child, above all for the sake of his honour.
Also about this time Leopold compiled a list entitled ‘Verzeichniss alles desjenigen was dieser 12jährige Knab seit seinem 7tem Jahre componiert, und in originali kann aufgezeiget werden’—[List of everything that this 12-year old boy has composed since his 7th year, and can be exhibited in the originals](11 ), and this may be a draft or copy of a document which accompanied the petition to Emperor Joseph II.
Although La finta semplice was not performed in Vienna, Mozart's one act German Singspiel Bastien und Bastienne , composed the same year, was given a  private performance, and on 7 December Mozart both conducted and performed in his own music presented at the consecration of a new church at the Orphanage on the Rennweg in the presence of Empress Maria Theresa.
Salzburg 1769 — honorary appointment at court
The family returned to Salzburg on 5 January 1769, shortly before Mozart's 13th birthday, and finally (on 1 May) heard his opera La finta semplice performed in the city.
During the summer months various compositions by Mozart were performed at Salzburg, including a Mass and some music for the end of the University term.
Meanwhile plans were made for a visit to Italy.
The Mozarts were not only granted leave, but on this occasion presented with money by the Prince Archbishop.
On 27 November, just before their departure, Mozart was granted the title of Concert Master — an honorary appointment which was to become a paid post on his return from Italy: now he had not only a title, but also a position, in Salzburg.
Three Italian Journeys 1769–1773
FIRST VISIT — 1769–1771
Italy was in many ways at the heart of musical activities during the eighteenth century; composers came from other countries to study at the various centres and Italian music was exported the world over.
Leopold probably hoped that if his son won favour in Italy his future would be secure both there and elsewhere.
In all, father and son made three trips there, and details of their experiences were related back to Maria Anna and Nannerl by Leopold, with occasional postscripts by Mozart.
The earliest of these postscripts to survive dates from the day after their departure on the first trip (12 ).
Although the highlights of the visits were to be commissions to write for the stage, the bulk of Mozart's time was taken up writing and performing instrumental works for private performances.
Leopold realised very early on in the first visit that their money would not be made by giving public performances,
for everybody goes in free…in Mantua the nobles, the military class and the eminent citizens may all attend them, because they are subsidised by Her Majesty the Empress.
(26 January 1770) Their schedule during the first visit was a punishing one: they visited Rovereto, Verona, Mantua, Cremona, Milan, Lodi, Bologna, Rome, Florence and Naples in the space of six months.
Throughout this time the fourteen-year-old Mozart was writing and performing music, hearing other music performed and seeing the local sights.
In March 1770 Mozart received a commission to write the first opera for the following carnival season in Milan.
As the season did not begin until Christmas, this meant that they would be away considerably longer than originally intended, and so permission for additional leave of absence was sought from the Archbishop.
Mozart was to send the recitatives to Milan by October, and was instructed to arrive by 1 November to write the remaining music.
In June his mother enquired about progress only to be told ‘Why, he is not even thinking of it…so far we know nothing either about the cast or about the libretto’.
(30 June 1770)
Before returning to Milan they travelled first to Bologna and Leopold wrote to his wife:
What especially pleases me is that we are extraordinarily popular and that Wolfgang is admired here even more than he has been in all the other towns of Italy; the reason is that Bologna is the centre and dwelling-place of many masters, artists and scholars.
Here too he has been most thoroughly tested, and the fact that Padre Martini, the idol of the Italians, speaks of him with great admiration and has himself set him all the tests, has increased his reputation all over Italy.
We have visited him twice and each time Wolfgang has worked out a fugue…
(27 March 1770) Then in Florence they met and befriended a young violinist, Thomas Linley (1756–1778)(PLATE III)
who plays most beautifully and who is the same age and the same size as Wolfgang…
The two boys performed one after the other throughout the whole evening…
On the following day the little Englishman…had his violin brought to our rooms and played the whole afternoon, Wolfgang accompanying on his own.
(21 April 1770)
12 Mozart's earliest surviving letter, a postscript to his father's letter of 14 December 1769.
This letter was written the day after father and son set off for Italy.
Wolfgang's postscript, to his mother, is in German; another, to his sister, is in Italian.
‘My heart is completely enchanted with all these pleasures, because it is so jolly on this journey, because it is so warm in the carriage and because our coachman is a fine fellow who, when the road gives him the slightest chance, drives so fast.
Papa will have already described the journey to Mamma.
The reason I am writing to Mamma is to show her that I know my duty and that I am with the deepest respect her devoted son.’
Earlier letters of Wolfgang survive only in copies.
[The Pierpont Morgan Library: Morgan MA 836]
From Rome Leopold related the now famous story of how his son wrote out Allegri's Miserere , having heard it just once in the Sistine Chapel; on 8 July Pope Clement XIV conferred upon Mozart the Order of the Golden Spur.
Mozart finally received details of the libretto he was to set,Mitridate, Re di Ponto (13), and the names of the singers on 28 July.
Returning through Bologna he passed various tests for membership of the Accademia Filarmonica and was awarded a diploma, the conditions of entry, stipulating that members must be over the age of 20, having been waived on this occasion.
13 Late 18th-century copy of Mitridate, Rè di ponto , K.87/74a, showing the florid beginning of Aspasia's first aria ‘Al destin, che la minaccia’.
The part was originally written for Antonia Bernasconi who had earlier appeared in Vienna in Gluck's Alceste in 1767.
On 17 November Leopold wrote ‘The prima donna is infinitely pleased with her arias’.
Apparently on the first night of the opera, contrary to the usual customs, the audience insisted on hearing one of Bernasconi's arias repeated, and many arias were applauded.
The management became worried that if the calls for encores were to continue the opera, with its three ballets, lasting six hours, would be so long that the nobility would not be home in time for supper.
The solution was to cut the length of the ballets.
[The British Library: Department of Manuscripts — Add.
MS 16058, f 21 v ]
Mozart could not begin composing the arias to his opera before reaching Milan because they had to be written to suit each singer's voice.
Despite the fact that he was unable to begin the part of Sifare until 1 December when the singer arrived in Milan — only 25 days before the first scheduled performance — the première nevertheless took place, as planned, on 26 December, and the opera received another 21 performances that season.
On 15 December Leopold had reported that:
The copyist is absolutely delighted, which is a good omen in Italy, where, if the music is a success, the copyist by selling the arias sometimes makes more money than the Kapellmeister does by his composition.
SECOND VISIT 1771 — COMMISSION FROM THE EMPRESS
The second visit, to Milan, from August to September 1771, was occasioned by a commission from Empress Maria Theresa to compose a work for the marriage  of her son, Archduke Ferdinand, to Princess Maria Beatrice Ricciarda of Modena — Ascanio in Alba, a dramatic serenata.
The text of the work had to be submitted to Vienna for approval and by 24 August it had still not arrived for Mozart to set (the wedding was to take place in October).
On arrival in Milan Mozart wryly remarked on his fellow lodgers:
Upstairs we have a violinist, downstairs another one, in the next room a singing-master who gives lessons, and in the other room opposite ours an oboist.
That is good fun when you are composing!
It gives you plenty of ideas.
(24 August 1771)
Mozart wrote several symphonies during the Italian visits, some displaying Italian influences such as first movements with little or no development sections, or linked first and second movements.
Others, such as the substantial four-movement symphony in F major, K.112 (14 ), display German, rather than Italian influence, most obviously in the inclusion of a minuet and trio, which was unusual in Italian symphonies of the period.
Mozart and his father returned to Salzburg in December 1771.
By this time Mozart had been commissioned to write the first opera for the carnival in Milan the following year.
In February 1772 Leopold wrote to the publisher J. G. I. Breitkopf in Leipzig offering some of his son's compositions for publication.
As my son has again won great honour by his composition of the dramatic serenata, he has been asked to write the first opera for the coming carnival in Milan and immediately afterwards the second opera for the Teatro San Benedetto in Venice [this second commission was never, in fact, carried out]…
Should you wish to print any of my sons compositions, this intervening period would be the best time to order them.
(7 February 1772)
The interval between the second and third Italian trips coincided with the death of Archbishop Schrattenbach.
The interference of the Imperial court in Vienna in the election of the new ruler resulted in the appointment of Hieronymus, Count of Colloredo, Prince-Bishop of Gurk and son of the imperial vice-chancellor.
Colloredo, who seems to have been unpopular from the start, set about modernising the archdiocese in line with the reforms being undertaken by Joseph II (Holy Roman Emperor and, with his mother, Maria Theresa, co-regent of the Habsburg Empire since the death of his father, Francis Stephen in 1765).
These reforms were ultimately to cause the falling off in the composition of orchestrally accompanied church music as such accompaniments would only be required for special feast days and there would be no place for it in everyday circumstances.
Nevertheless, under Colloredo Mozart's honorary appointment as Konzertmeister was confirmed and he was formally appointed to the post with a salary of 150 florins/gulden per annum in August 1772.
THIRD VISIT 1772–1773 — OPERATIC COMMISSION
The trip to Milan was made in order to write the first opera,Lucio Silla , for the 1772–1773 carnival season there.
Mozart received the libretto in advance and composed some of the recitatives in Salzburg.
However the librettist, Giovanni De Gamerra (1743–1803), had also sent the libretto to Pietro Metastasio in Vienna who subsequently made various suggestions for improvement, including the addition of a scene in the second act, so Mozart had to rewrite some of his music.
Again Mozart's composition of the arias was delayed through the very late arrival of some of the principal singers:
These blessed theatrical people leave everything to the very last minute.
(12 December 1772) The opera went ahead as planned, though not without some mishaps, recounted by Leopold:
The opera was a great success, although on the first evening several very distressing incidents took place.
The first hitch was that the performance…started three hours late…
Thus it did not finish until two o'clock in the morning…
Picture to yourself the whole theatre which by half past five was so full that not another soul could get in.
On the first evening the singers are always very nervous at having to perform before such a distinguished audience.
But for three hours singers, orchestra and audience (many of the latter  stading ) had to wait impatiently in the overheated atmosphere until the opera should begin.
Next, the tenor, who was engaged as a stop-gap, is a church singer from Lodi who has never before acted on such a big stage, who has only taken the part of the primo tenore a couple of times, and who moreover was only engaged a week before the performance.
At the point where in her first aria the prima donna expected from him an angry gesture, he exaggerated his anger so much that he looked as if he was about  to box her ears and strike her on the nose with his fist.
This made the audience laugh.
Signora De Amicis, carried along by her own enthusiasm, did not realise why they were laughing, and, being thus taken aback, did not sing well for the rest of the evening.
(2 January 1773) Despite these first-night upsets Lucio Silla (15 ) succeeded to such an extent that the second opera, which was to have begun on 23 January, was put back in order to allow for additional performances (26 in all).
14 Symphony m F major, K.112, showing the end of the Andante in Mozart's hand and the beginning of the minuet in Leopold's.
Composed Milan 2 November 1771.
The minuet is thought possibly to have originated as a dance movement (one indication of which is that the violas double the bass line rather than having independent parts as was customary in Mozart's symphonic works).
Additionally, the fact that this part of the movement was written out by Leopold suggests that Mozart may have been working on another part of the symphony while his father was copying the part that already existed.
[The Pierpont Morgan Library: Dannie and Hettie Heineman Collection]
Mozart returned to Salzburg for four months.
The four symphonies written during this time reflect Italian influences in their design and content.
The E flat major work, K.184/161a, in particular, with its three movements proceeding without a break, much in the manner of an Italian overture, uses, in its slow movement, a sighing figure reminiscent of a tragic Italian aria (16 ).
Vienna 1773—in hope of an appointment at court?
In July 1773, following the three highly successful Italian visits, Mozart and his  father again travelled to Vienna.
The reasons for the visit are not entirely clear and Leopold's letters to his wife do not elaborate on his aims, their success or otherwise, since he was constantly concerned that the Salzburg censors were reading his mail.
Plans for the first of the Italian journeys had been hatched in Vienna, and Leopold had obtained letters of recommendation from the Emperor, among others.
So with his son's reputation now unequivocally established Leopold may have regarded the time as propitious to secure a position for Mozart at the Viennese court.
15 Late 18th-century copy of Lucio Silla , K.135.
Giunia's aria, ‘Parto m'affretto’, No.16, sung in the first performance by Anna de Amicis-Buonsollazzi, of whom Leopold wrote: ‘De Amacis is our best friend.
She sings and acts like an angel and is extremely pleased because Wolfgang has served her extraordinarily well.’
(26 December 1772).
[The British Library: Department of Manuscripts — Add.
MS 16057, f.200 r ]
16 Symphony in E flat, K.184/161a, showing the opening of the second movement in Mozart's hand; the end of the first movement is in the hand of a copyist.
[From The Robert Owen Lehman Collection, on deposit in The Pierpont Morgan Library]
On 5 August 1773 Mozart was received by the Empress.
Leopold wrote:
Her Majesty the Empress was very gracious to us, but that was all.
I am saving up a full account until our return, for it is impossible for me to give it in writing.
(12 August 1773) Later, having been given an extension to his leave by Colloredo, who was himself in Vienna in August, he again wrote:
But there are many matters about which one cannot write…
We do not know ourselves when we shall leave.
It may be soon but there may be some delay.
It depends on circumstances which I may not enumerate
.
(21 August 1773)
During this time Mozart composed a cycle of string quartets, K.168-K.173.
It is likely that these works were influenced by Haydn's quartets op.17 and op.20, composed in 1771 and 1772.
Like Haydn's works, Mozart's quartets are each in four movements and K.173 has a fugal finale, a device adopted by Haydn in three of his op.20 (17 18 ).
Salzburg 1773–1774
The period immediately following Mozart's return from Vienna in 1773 was marked by the composition of a large number of symphonies.
Mozart seems to have begun to refine his style of composition, and two of them at least stand well with the very popular symphonies of the next decade—the Symphony in G Minor, K.183/173dB, written in October 1773 just after his return from Vienna, and the Symphony in A major, K.201/186a, written in April the following year (see PLATE IV and 19 & 20 ).
In 1773 Mozart also wrote his first wholly original piano concerto.
The early training, founded on earlier arrangements of pre-existing sonata movements by other composers, was rewarded — the D major Concerto, K.175 remaining a favourite for about ten years.
Mozart was often able to report performances of it back to his father.
Smaller works from this period include a Sonata for clavier duet in B flat, K.358/186c, written in the spring of 1774 (21 ).
The keyboard duet had only recently become a viable medium, since the restricted compass of earlier instruments made it difficult to seat two players at one keyboard.
Mozart used works of this type both for performance with his sister, and with his pupils.
Munich 1774–1775 — La finta giardiniera
Having been commissioned to write an opera buffa for the 1774–75 carnival season in Munich, Mozart, again accompanied by his father, set off in order to complete the composition,La finta giardiniera .
On this occasion Mozart's sister was to join them later.
Once in Munich Leopold set about making arrangements for somewhere for Nannerl to stay.
Her journey had already been fixed, as she was to travel with two of their Salzburg friends.
Leopold's letters to his wife reveal much about what could be expected on the journey and from them one gains the impression that he did most of the planning for these trips:
Nannerl must certainly have a fur rug for the journey, or she will not be able to stand the cold in a half-open coach.
She must wrap up her head well and she must protect her feet with something more than her felt shoes…
She ought therefore to slip on the fur boots…put a little hay in the bottom of the coach…
She must try to pack everything in one box, for she will not need many clothes for twelve days; and she will probably have to bring a hat-box, though indeed the latter will be a little inconvenient.
However, one advantage is that women's clothes can be folded into a very small space.
(21 December 1774)
17 Draft of the fugal finale for the string quartet in D Minor, K.173.
[The British Library: Department of Manuscripts — Zweig 52, f.l r ]
18 Quartet in B flat K.172, showing the end of first movement where Mozart has had to cancel one bar and cram the rewritten version onto handwritten staves at the end of the page.
Otherwise the score is remarkably clear, indicating that it may possibly be a fair copy.
[The British Library: Department of Manuscripts — Add 31749 f.7 r ]
19 Symphony, K.183/173dB in G minor, opening of first movement.
This work has come to be called the ‘little g minor’, linking it in power and mood to the Symphony in the same key, K.550 of 1788.
[From The Robert Owen Lehman Collection, on deposit in The Pierpont Morgan Library]
20 Symphony, K.201/186a in A major, opening of first movement.
[From The Robert Owen Lehman Collection, on deposit in The Pierpont Morgan Library]
21 Sonata in B flat for clavier duet, K.358/186c.
Opening of the first movement.
[The British Library: Department of Manuscripts — Add.
MS 14396 f.22 v –23 r ]
Unlike the Milan carnival seasons the opera performances in Munich were attended by a paying audience.
So, instead of a long run of one opera followed by a long run of another, operas would only be performed perhaps twice in succession and then not again for two or three weeks, during which other works would be given.
Thus the singers know the parts of at least twenty operas which are performed in turn, and at the same time they study a new one.
(14 December 1774) Plans for the performance went well, but to do the work justice, the date of the first performance was delayed,
in order that the singers may learn their parts more thoroughly and thus, knowing the music perfectly, may act with greater confidence and not spoil the opera.
To have got it ready by December 29th would have meant a fearful rush.
As a musical composition it is indeed amazingly popular, and everything now depends on the stage production…
(28 December 1774)
The postponement of the opera (it eventually opened on 13 January) meant that Nannerl, who reached Munich on 4 January 1775, was able to hear the first performance.
Mozart wrote of its success to his mother:
Thank God!
My opera was performed yesterday, the 13th, for the first time and was such a success…the whole theatre was so packed that a great many people were turned away…
After the opera was over and during the pause when there is usually silence until the ballet begins, people kept on clapping all the time and shouting ‘Bravo’; now stopping, now beginning again and so on…
I fear that we cannot return to Salzburg very soon and mamma must not wish it, for she knows how much good it is doing me to be able to breathe freely.
We shall come home soon enough.
One very urgent and necessary reason for our absence is that next Friday my opera is being performed again and it is most essential that I should be present.
Otherwise my work would be quite unrecognizable—for very strange things happen here.
(14 January 1775) This letter gives us an indication that Mozart felt stifled by-life in Salzburg, particularly in the employ of Archbishop Colloredo.
The  Archbishop arrived in Munich between performances of La finta giardiniera , and although he was not to hear the work himself, he learnt about it from the Elector and his family:
Picture to yourself the embarrassment of His Grace the Archbishop at hearing the opera praised by the whole family of the Elector and by all the nobles, and at receiving the enthusiastic congratulations which they all expressed to him.
Why, he was so embarrassed.
(18 January 1775) The Mozarts eventually left Munich and arrived back in Salzburg on 7 March 1775, Mozart's opera having been performed only three times (the last of which had had to be cut as the seconda donna was ill).
Salzburg 1775–1777 — dissatisfaction with Colloredo
The period after the return from Munich was one of remarkable creativity during which Mozart composed a number of keyboard and violin concertos, the dramatic work Il Rè pastore , concert arias, serenades, divertimenti, masses, the Litaniae de venerabili altaris sacramento , and chamber works.
One of the keyboard concertos, K.246 in C major, was for the 26-year-old Countess Antonia Lutzow who, judging by the intricacy of the work, must have been a talented performer.
Mozart later took the work with him to Mannheim and Paris, using it as a teaching piece.
Three sets of cadenzas survive, the first for the Countess, another for Mozart's own use (22 ), and a third written after his move to Vienna in the 1780s.
Despite all this creative activity Mozart composed no original symphonies until his trip to Paris in 1778.
The only symphonies from this period are based on already existing works —La finta giardiniera , to which a finale was added, a multi-movement serenade written for the end of the summer university term in Salzburg in 1777, and the overture to the Serenata Il Rè pastore again to which a finale was added.
These years in Salzburg were also marked by Mozart's increasing frustration with life under Colloredo.
Leopold had evidently requested leave of absence to travel again with his son on at least one occasion, and finally in August 1777 Mozart wrote to the Archbishop:
I will not presume to trouble Your Grace with a full description of our unhappy circumstances, which my father has set forth most accurately in his very humble petition…
Later my father again applied for leave of absence, which Your Grace refused to grant, though you permitted me, who am in any case only a half-time servant, to travel alone.
Our situation is pressing and my father has therefore decided to let me go alone.
My conscience tells me that I owe it to God to be grateful to my father, who has spent his time unwearyingly upon my education, so that I may lighten his burden, look after myself and later on be able to support my sister…
Your Grace will therefore be so good as to allow me to ask you most humbly for my discharge…seeing that when I asked you for permission to travel to Vienna three years ago you graciously declared that I had nothing to hope for in Salzburg and would do better to seek my fortune elsewhere.
(1 August 1777) The Archbishop's response was to release both Mozart and his father.
However Leopold remained.
Second grand European Tour 1777–1779
Having extricated himself from the Archbishop's service Mozart, this time accompanied by his mother, set off in search of an appointment elsewhere.
Leopold and Nannerl were clearly quite distraught at being parted from Mozart and his mother: ‘…that sad day which I never thought I should have to face…’ wrote Leopold (25 September 1777).
This was the first time that father and son had been separated and it is apparent that Leopold undertook much of the organisation for the visit, advising Mozart and his mother of places to stay, even giving the costs of meals as they made their way through the German states.
He also urged his son to secure letters of introduction at all stages.
22 Cadenzas for the first and second movements of the C major keyboard concerto, K.246 1b & 2b.
[The British Library: Department of Manuscripts — Add.
MS 61905 f.1 r ]
In Munich Mozart established contact with acquaintances and began to try to secure an audience with the Elector, Maximilian III Joseph.
Mozart met Count Seeau who advised him to seek an audience with the Elector at once, and, if that were not possible, to write to him.
Even at this early stage in the visit Mozart's relief at being away from Salzburg is apparent:
I am always in my very best spirits, for my heart has been as light as a feather ever since I got away from all that humbug; and, what is more, I have become fatter.
(26 September 1777) In his first letter to his father Mozart referred to Colloredo as ‘an idiot’, a remark which was not looked upon favourably by Leopold since he was constantly concerned that his letters were being opened and read before he received them.
Mozart's hopes were set back at an early stage for on 29 September he reported a conversation with Prince Zeill who said the Elector had told him:
It is too early yet.
He [Mozart]ought to go off, travel to Italy and make a name for himself.
I am not refusing him, but it is too soon.
(29–30 September 1777) This comment clearly exasperated Mozart:
Most of these great lords are downright infatuated with Italy.
(29–30 September 1777) Having decided that he would like to remain in Munich Mozart reported a plan to Leopold which he thought might enable him to do so.
The scheme involved ten patrons paying one ducat a month (roughly 600 gulden per year).
Mozart also hoped that Count Seeau would be prepared to pay him 200 gulden per year.
Now what does Papa think of this idea?…
For if we have to live in Salzburg on 504 gulden, surely we could manage in Munich on 600 or 800.
(29–30 September 1777) On 30 September Mozart finally had a chance to speak with the Elector, only to be told that there was no vacancy at court.
But he remained convinced that if only the Elector could hear him he would change his mind:
As it is he knows nothing whatever about me.
He has no idea what I can do…
I am willing to submit to a test.
Let him get together all the composers in Munich, let him even summon a few from Italy, France, Germany, England and Spain.
I undertake to compete with any of them in composition.
(2 October 1777)
Realising that his son had little chance of success in Munich Leopold began trying to encourage him to lay other plans and Nannerl joined in the plea saying:
It would not do you any credit to stay on in Munich without an appointment.
It would do us far more honour if you could succeed in obtaining a post under some other great lord.
You will surely find one.
(5/6 October 1777) Nannerl also asked Mozart for
a short preambulum…so that I may gradually learn it by heart.
(29 September 1777) Mozart duly obliged and on 11 October wrote to his father:
I enclose four praeambula (23 ) for her.
She will see and hear for herself into what keys they lead.
Mozart was anxious to receive another commission to write an opera; he knew that there was a possibility that he might be asked to write one of the operas for the Naples carnival season, but as yet had had no confirmation.
I have an inexpressible longing to write another opera…and once I have composed for Naples I shall be in demand everywhere…
I am happier when I have something to compose, for that, after all is my sole delight and passion…
For I have only to hear an opera discussed, I have only to sit in a theatre, hear the orchestra tuning their instruments—oh, I am quite beside myself at once.
(11 October 1777)
The travellers proceeded to Augsburg, Leopold's home town, and it was on this visit that Mozart met his cousin, Maria Anna Thekla Mozart, two years his junior.
They became friends and under the nick-name ‘Basle’ she later received some of Mozart's most notorious letters (24).
While there Mozart attempted to arrange a concert, though his plans were delayed by one week.
Meanwhile instructions continued to flow from Salzburg:
You should try to find a copyist…wherever you stay for any length of time.
For you must really endeavour to get ahead with your composition, and that you can do if you have in readiness copies of symphonies and divertimenti to present to a Prince or to some other patron…the divertimenti can be copied very quickly, even though it is true that yours have a number of parts and are rather long…
For you must not lose sight of  your main object, which is to make money.
All your endeavours should thus be directed to earning money, and you should be very careful to spend as little as possible, or you will not be able to travel in an honourable fashion…
(15 October 1777) Mozart took the opportunity of trying out one of the new pianofortes by the Augsburg maker Johann Andreas Stein.
Until this visit he had preferred the instruments of Franz Jakob Späth, but he now acknowledged the superiority of the Stein instruments saying that the escapement action meant that the damping of the keys was so much cleaner.
The cost of one of Stein's instruments was 300 gulden, twice the annual salary Mozart had been paid in the service of Colloredo.
Finally Mozart was able to report to his father that he had given a concert, and that his takings, before expenses, were 90 gulden.
After expenses, and having paid off some debts, Mozart and his mother were 26/27 gulden out of pocket which Mozart felt was ‘not too bad’(25 October 1777).
PLATE IV Leopold's contents page to a volume containing nine of Mozart's Salzburg symphonies composed between 1773 and 1774.
The list gives the key of each of the symphonies, the orchestration and a musical incipit for each work.
In addition to the G minor and A major symphony, the volume contained Symphonies in E flat major, K.184/161a, G major, K.199/161b, C major, K.162, and D major, K.181 /162b composed before Mozart's visit to Vienna, and Symphonies in B flat major, K.182/173dA, C major, K.200/189k and D major, K.202/186b.
[From The Robert Owen Lehman Collection, on deposit in The Pierpont Morgan Library]
PLATE V Gavotte for orchestra, K.300.
[The Pierpont Morgan Library: Koch 139, f.l r ]
23 Two of the four preludes, K.284a & equals K.396/300g (‘praeambula’) written for Nannerl, which, until recently, were thought not to have survived.
[The Pierpont Morgan Library: Mary Flagler Cary Music Collection]
The Mozarts then set off for Mannheim, which, under the music-loving Elector Carl Theodor, had one of the finest orchestras in Europe; and since 1742 the Electoral palace had also included an opera house in the west wing.
Mozart had every reason to suspect that he would be able to gain some sort of appointment there.
Leopold, however, doubted the likelihood of success:
I very much doubt whether Wolfgang will find there all those things which he has  imagined and the great advantages which several people may perhaps have described to him.
That long journey from Augsburg to Mannheim will have made heavy inroads on your purse and Mannheim will hardly fill it again.
(6 November 1777)
24 Mozart's Letter of 10 May 1779 to his cousin, Maria Anna.
[The British Library: Department of Manuscripts — Zweig 67]
Mozart soon met, and became friends with, the violinist Christian Cannabich, director of instrumental music in Mannheim.
After waiting around for some considerable time to see if there was any chance that Elector Carl Theodor would offer him even a temporary appointment, Mozart was informed that it was not to be.
He eventually managed to secure some work in the form of a commission from a surgeon with the Dutch East India Company at Mannheim, an amateur flautist, to compose ‘three short, simple concertos and a couple of quartets for the flute’(10 December 1777), for which he was to be paid 200 gulden.
In addition he and his mother were able to obtain free lodgings at the house of the Privy Court Councillor, Serrarius, in return for lessons for his 15-year old daughter.
We can't get up before eight o'clock, for until half past eight there is no daylight in our room…
I dress in haste and at ten I sit down to compose until about twelve or half past twelve.
Then I go to Wendling's, where I again compose a little until half past one, when we have lunch.
Thus the time passes until three, when I go…to a Dutch officer to give him a lesson in galanterie and thoroughbass, for which I receive…four ducats for twelve lessons.
At four I must be home again to instruct the daughter of the house…
At six I go to Cannabichs and give Mlle Rosa her lesson.
I stay there to supper, after which we talk or occasionally someone plays.
(20 December 1777) So instead of moving on to Paris before the winter set in, the Mozarts remained in Mannheim.
Leopold, meanwhile, became frustrated that his wife and son were taking their journeys lightly:
The object of your journey, the very necessary object was and is and must be, to obtain an appointment or to make money.
So far I see little prospect of one or the other.
(27 November 1777) Among his complaints were that Mozart and his mother had stayed too long in Munich and Augsburg using up their money on lodging expenses without having any means of earning money, that Mozart was not keeping him fully apprised of exactly where his plans lay, how he was proposing to get from one place to another and by which route and when, that he was not keeping up with his composition, nor arranging to have existing works copied so that he could present them to an influential Prince or noble, and that he had not taken the right sorts of composition with him — too many symphonies and not enough church music.
Mozart finally made plans to travel to Paris in the spring with Johann Baptist Wendling, a flautist at the Mannheim court orchestra, and the oboist Friedrich Ramm, but nevertheless Leopold's letters show him becoming increasingly exasperated, above all at being in debt as a result of his son's activities.
He informed Mozart of his debt on more than one occasion—over 400 gulden on 20 November and ‘more than 600 gulden’ by 11 December.
In February the following year he wrote:
I am now in very deep waters.
As you know, I am now in debt to the extent of about 700 gulden and haven't the faintest idea how I am going to support myself, Mamma and your sister on my monthly salary…this is the first time I have got into debt.
(5 February 1778)
Meanwhile the court organist at Salzburg, Adlgasser, had died suddenly in December 1777 and it was suggested to Leopold that Mozart's name might be  put  foward for the post.
At the same time the Elector Maximilian III of Bavaria was gravely ill.
‘The Elector is dying of smallpox…
This is bound to upset things a bit’ wrote Mozart lightheartedly to his father on 27 December 1777.
In fact Mozart did not fully appreciate the gravity of the situation.
Maximilian had no heirs; on his death Carl Theodor of Mannheim became lawful heir to the Bavarian states and his claim to this position was to result in the War of the Bavarian Succession.
More immediately though, Carl Theodor moved to Munich, where members of his court were eventually to follow him, and Mannheim was plunged into a state of mourning with all concert, theatre and opera performances cancelled, and a considerable impact on the local economy.
Mozart, with plans made for his departure to Paris and his mother's return to Salzburg, became attached to a young singer, Aloysia Weber, daughter of Fridolin Weber, a violinist, singer and copyist at the Mannheim court.
Declaring that he had actually never really trusted Wendling anyway, Mozart resolved that he would accompany Aloysia to Italy where they would both make their fortune, before going on to Paris.
This was the last straw as far as Leopold was concerned:
You are fully acquainted with our difficulties in Salzburg — you know my wretched income, why I kept my promise to let you go away, and all my various troubles.
The purpose of your journey was twofold — either to get a good permanent appointment, or, if this should fail, to go off to some big city where large sums of money can be earned.
Both plans were designed to assist your parents and to help on your dear sister, but above all to build up your own name and reputation in the world.
The latter was partly accomplished in your childhood and boyhood; and it now depends on you alone to raise yourself gradually to a position of eminence, such as no musician has ever obtained.
You owe that to the extraordinary talents which you have received from a beneficent God; and now it depends solely on your good sense and your way of life whether you die as an ordinary musician, utterly forgotten by the world, or as a famous Kapellmeister, of whom posterity will read…
Off with you to Paris!
(11–12 February 1778) as if to add insult to injury, Leopold received Mozart's letter telling him that he had not yet finished his commissions for the Dutchman:
It is not surprising that I have not been able to finish them, for I never have a single quiet hour here.
I can only compose at night, so that I can't get up early as well; besides, one is not always in the mood for working.
I could, to be sure, scribble off things the whole day long, but a composition of this kind goes out into the world, and naturally I do not want to have cause to be ashamed of my name on the title-page.
Moreover, you know that I become quite powerless whenever I am obliged to write for an instrument which I cannot bear [the flute].
Hence as a diversion I compose something else, such as duets for clavier and violin.
(14 February 1778)
Paris 1778 — tragedy
On his father's instruction Mozart and his mother set off for Paris in March 1778.
Leopold anticipated their arrival there by sending a letter to their former contact, Baron Grimm, explaining the circumstances surrounding Mozart's departure from the Salzburg court and asking that the Baron assist Mozart in any way appropriate on his arrival in Paris.
Additionally Mozart's Mannheim friends, Wendling and Ramm, had spread the news of his impending visit and his mother wrote of this to her husband:
Words fail to tell you how famous and popular is our Wolfgang.
Long before we arrived, Herr Wendling had made a great reputation for him and has now introduced him to all his friends.
(5 April 1778) Their prospects looked promising.
Mozart was immediately engaged to write some additional choruses for a Miserere by the Mannheim Kapellmeister, Ignaz Holzbauer, for performance at the Concert Spirituel, because:
…the choruses at Mannheim are weak and poor, whereas in Paris they are powerful and excellent, the choruses he [Holzbauer]has composed would not be effective.
(5 April 1778) Mozart evidently did not find this type of work rewarding:
I may say that I am very glad to have finished that hack-work.
(5 April 1778)
He also informed his father that he was to compose a two-act opera entitled Alexandre et Roxane as well as a sinfonia concertante for his Mannheim friends.
His father, in return, continued to offer advice on ways of earning some money:
Do some work occasionally for the theatre, the Concert Spirituel and the Concert des Amateurs, and now and then have something engraved par souscription.
(6 April 1778) On how to go about writing his opera:
I implore you, before you write for the French stage, to listen to their operas and find out what above all pleases them.
Well, you will now become a thorough Frenchman and you will endeavour, I hope, to acquire the correct accent.
(20 April 1778) And about getting works published:
If you compose something which is to be engraved, make it easy, suitable for amateurs and rather popular.
Don't write in a hurry!
Strike out what doesn't satisfy you.
Don't do anything gratis; be sure and get paid for everything.
(6 May 1778)
Plans for the opera continued for some time:
I must write a grand opera or none at all; if I write a small one, I shall get very little for it (for everything is taxed here).
And should it have the misfortune not to please these stupid Frenchmen, all would be over — I should never get another commission to compose…the devil himself must certainly have invented the language of these people —and I fully realize the difficulties with which all composers have had to contend.
But in spite of this I feel I am as well able to overcome them as anyone else.
(31 July 1778) Later, at the beginning of September, Mozart again outlined risks of composing operas in Paris:
When the opera is finished, it is rehearsed and if these stupid Frenchmen do not like it, it is not performed — and the composer has had all his trouble for nothing.
If they think it is good, it is produced and paid for in proportion to its success with the public.
There is no certainty whatever.
(11 September 1778)
In the event the opera came to nothing, although Mozart did write some of the music for a ballet entitled Les Petits Riens .
Ballets were often performed as separate entertainments during an operatic evening.
Les Petits Riens survives only in a copyist's score, making the identification of Mozart's contribution problematic.
However, what is thought to have been a discarded movement, a Gavotte in B flat major, K.300, survives in autograph (PLATE V).
In addition to this and other commissions, Mozart also took some pupils, including the daughter of the Count of Guines, to whom he was attempting to teach composition.
She has no ideas whatever — nothing comes.
I have tried her in every possible way.
Among other things I hit on the idea of writing down a very simple minuet, in order to see whether she could not compose a variation on it.
It was useless.
‘Well’, I thought, ‘she probably does not know how she ought to begin.’
So I started to write a variation on the first bar and told her to go on in the same way and to keep to the idea.
In the end it went fairly well.
(14 May 1778) In the same letter Mozart informed his father that he had unofficially been offered the post of organist at Versailles which, if he were to accept, would mean spending six months of the year in Versailles and the remaining six months wherever he liked.
He was reluctant to take the post for two reasons: he felt that the salary was not high enough, and he did not like the idea of being confined to one place even for six months of the year.
Leopold's response was to urge Mozart not to dismiss the idea so lightly given that the appointment, though not the grandest in itself, might ultimately lead to one of the posts of Kapellmeister there.
Leopold continued to keep Mozart and his mother apprised of all that was going on in Salzburg, including accounts of performances of Mozart's compositions.
He indicated that he still hoped that Mozart would be offered the post of organist there and hinted at some of the intrigue surrounding the appointment.
The salary would be small and there was little hope that the person appointed would be able to supplement the income with teaching:
for there are very few pupils to be had.
I have most of them already and besides I enjoy the reputation of being the best teacher.
(29 June 1778)
Unknown to Leopold, his son now faced one of the most serious crises of his life: Maria Anna had become dangerously ill and, after a fortnight, died on 3 July.
Mozart, knowing that his father would be devastated by the news, sought to prepare him as gently as possible for it by writing to him that she was gravely ill and at the same time writing to their close friend, Bullinger, telling him the whole story, in the hope that Bullinger could support and comfort his father and sister when he finally broke the news to them, which he was intending to do in a second letter to his father.
To his father he wrote:
I have very sad and distressing news to give you…
My dear mother is very ill…
They give me hope — but I have not much.
I have resigned myself wholly to the will of God — and trust that you and my dear sister will do the same…for He does nothing without a cause.
(3 July 1778) And to Bullinger:
Mourn with me, my friend!
This has been the saddest day of my life…
I have to tell you that my mother, my dear mother, is no more!
God has called her to Himself…
Only think of all my anxiety, the fears and sorrows I have had to endure for the last fortnight…
All I ask of you at present is to act the part of a true friend, by preparing my poor father very gently for this sad news…
May God give him strength and courage!…
Go to them both at once, I implore you…
(3 July 1778)
Leopold's response is preserved, since he wrote a letter in three stages.
The first wished his wife happiness on her approaching name-day:
Would you have thought a year ago that you would be spending your next name-day in Paris?
He continued on 13 July having received his son's initial letter:
You can imagine what we are both feeling like…
My dear son!
Though I am resigning myself as far as possible to the will of God, you will surely find it quite human and natural that my tears almost prevent me from writing…
I have complete confidence in your filial love, and know that you have taken all possible care of your devoted mother…
But if all our hopes are in vain!
If we have lost her!
Later that afternoon, after he had talked with Bullinger, he continued:
Bullinger stayed with me, and asked me quietly whether I thought that there was any hope for her…
I replied that I was convinced not only that she was now dead but that  she had died on the day you wrote to me…
Whereupon he said: ‘Yes, she is dead’…
It is mysteriously sad when death severs a very happy marriage—you have to experience it before you can realize it…
Great God!
To think that I shall have to go to Paris to see her grave!
(13 July 1778)
It is perhaps not coincidental that this period of turmoil was to result in a work described as a ‘landmark in Mozart's earlier keyboard works, only paralleled in pathos and intensity by the Fantasy and Sonata in C minor’(K.457 and K.475).
The Sonata in A minor K.310/300d (25 ) was written in the summer of 1778, following his mother's death and at a time when he was parted from Aloysia Weber.
Any hopes of good prospects in Paris were diminishing and Leopold was anxious that his son should return to Salzburg.
The appointment of court organist there was finally offered to Mozart, with the indication that he might one day become Kapellmeister.
Leopold related the news, and the Archbishop's excuse for not having allowed father and son to travel the previous year: ‘he said that he could not tolerate people going about the world begging’(31 August 1778).
Meanwhile the Elector Carl Theodor had taken up residence in Munich, and had invited the members of his court to join him there (though they could stay on at Mannheim and retain their salaries if they wished).
Leopold had already written to Padre Martini urging him to send a letter of recommendation to the Elector and, since Munich was on Mozart's route from Paris to Salzburg, he suggested that his son intimate to the Elector, or to a close associate, that he had been offered a post at Salzburg with a salary of 700 or 800 gulden (the actual salary was only 450) in the hope that a more rewarding appointment might be offered.
He also told his son that the only reason that he had remained in Salzburg was to ensure that his wife had a pension after his death:
Well, that is all over now, the pension is no longer needed, and so we shall not stand any tyranny but be up and away.
(3 September 1778) Mozart made it quite clear to his father that the only reason he was returning to Salzburg was to be with him:
There is one place where I can say I am at home, where I can live in peace and quiet with my most beloved father and my dearest sister, where I can do as I like, where apart from the duties of my appointment I am my own master, and where I have a permanent income and yet can go off when I like, and travel every second year…
For I assure you that people who do not travel (I mean those who cultivate the arts and learning) are indeed miserable creatures; and I protest that unless the Archbishop allows me to travel every second year, I can't possibly accept the engagement.
A fellow of mediocre talent will remain a mediocrity, whether he travels or not; but one of superior talent (which without impiety I cannot deny that I possess) will go to seed, if he always remains in the same place.
If the Archbishop would only trust me, I should soon make his orchestra famous.
(11 September 1778)
The sequence of events following Mozart's hurried departure from Paris on 26 September 1778 nearly drove Leopold to distraction.
The journey, arranged and paid for by Baron Grimm, was by the slowest means necessitating lengthy stops, where Mozart had to pay living expenses.
He decided to abandon this mode of travel.
Taking the opportunity of arranging three subscription concerts in Strasburg he got stranded there because of serious flooding.
Against all his father's advice and pleading he then proceeded to Mannheim.
By this time Leopold was practically beside himself with anger:
Really, I don't know what to say to you.
I shall go mad or die of a decline.
The very recollection of all the projects which since your departure from Salzburg you have formed and communicated to me is enough to drive me crazy…
I could not possibly entertain the mad supposition that you would stay at Mannheim, where there is no longer a court…
Your whole intention seems to be to ruin me, simply in order to go on building your castles in the air.
(19 November 1778) In this letter Leopold gave exact details of their financial position finishing with the news that Mozart had ‘plunged’ him into debt to the extent of 863 gulden (Leopold's salary at the time was little over 500 gulden).
On 23 November Leopold tried another tack, using his knowledge of his son's love for Aloysia Weber, who had gone to Munich with the court:
By entering the Archbishop's service you will have the advantage of being nearer Munich, which you can reach in eighteen hours, where we can hear about everything…and whence Herr Weber and his daughter can visit us and even stay with us.
This letter had the desired effect.
Mozart wrote:
I have received your last letter of November 23rd.
I am setting off next Wednesday…
Ah, if only we had clarinets too!
You cannot imagine the glorious effect of a symphony with flutes, oboes and clarinets.
I shall have much that is new to tell the Archbishop at my first audience and I shall make some suggestions as well.
Ah, how much finer and better our orchestra might be, if only the Archbishop desired it.
Probably the chief reason why it is not better is because there are far too many performances.
(3 December 1778)
25 Sonata for piano, K.310 in A minor, opening showing the end of the first movement and the beginning of the Andante.
[
From of the Robert Owen Lehman Collection, on deposit in The Pierpont Morgan Library]
Having fully expected his son to return without making any additional stops, Leopold was again let down.
With the impending publication of his Violin Sonatas (K.301-K.306 — his first mature works to be printed) which were dedicated to the Electress, Mozart was keen to stop at Munich in order to present them to her himself.
Leopold's fear, on the other hand, was that Mozart might lose the appointment in Salzburg and with it the chance to begin paying off the debts.
Mozart then wrote asking if he could bring his cousin, Maria Thekla, with him (she has joined him in Munich) but realising that this would necessitate another delay whilst the ‘Basle’ waited for permission from her father in Augsburg, Leopold insisted that his son travel on ahead, and that his niece should follow.
Mozart arrived back in Salzburg in mid-January and his certificate of appointment was finally signed on the 17th of that month.
During the next twenty months Mozart composed a substantial amount of music, including three symphonies and what was to be his last complete mass setting, K.337 (an incomplete one survives, K.427/417a from 1782, and the Requiem was unfinished at the time of his death).
Munich 1780 — a major operatic commission — Idomeneo
In 1780 Mozart at last received a commission to write an opera seria for the carnival in Munich.
His knowledge of some of the singers, from previous visits to Munich and Mannheim, enabled him to commence work on the opera whilst still in Salzburg.
He left the city on 5 November, little knowing that he would return again only as a visitor.
The libretto for the opera,Idomeneo , was based on a French text by Antoine Danchet which had been performed in Paris in 1712 with music by Andre Campra.
Mozart asked Abbate Varesco, Court Chaplain in Salzburg, to provide an Italian text for him.
This was not quite ready when Mozart set off for Munich and so Mozart's letters to his father, who acted as intermediary between him  and the librettist, reveal a great deal of the process of writing.
Not only was the libretto itself being written in Salzburg, but a translation into German was also undertaken there.
Mozart, sometimes for dramatic reasons, sometimes at the request of the designer, Lorenzo Quaglio, or one of the singers, frequently asked for alterations to be made in the text which were often strongly resisted by the librettist.
Fatherly advice on the composition was offered:
I advise you when composing to consider not only the musical, but also the unmusical public.
You must remember that to every ten real connoisseurs there are a hundred ignoramuses.
So do not neglect the so-called popular style, which tickles long ears.
(11 December 1780) One of Mozart's worries was the castrato who was to sing the part of Idamante:
When the castrato comes, I have to sing with him, for I have to teach him his whole part as if he were a child.
He has not got a farthing's worth of method.
(22 November 1780) The tenor, Anton Raaff, who was singing the title role, caused difficulties for different reasons — he was 65 at the time and his voice was past its best:
Well — the man is old and can no longer show off in such an aria as that in Act II —‘Fuor del mar ho un mar nel seno’.
(15 November 1780) Meanwhile, Leopold continued to convey Varesco's alterations to the text, so that his son could enter them in his own copy which he was using while writing the music.
He also questioned some of the proposed cuts:
In this way the recitative will be shortened by a minute, yes, in puncto, by a whole minute.
Great gain, forsooth!…
The question is whether it is worth while to make an alteration by which you will gain at most two and a half minutes…
It is true that at a rehearsal where the eye has nothing to engage it, a recitative immediately becomes boring; but at the performance, where between the stage and the audience there are so many objects to entertain the eye, a recitative like this is over before the listeners are aware of it.
(22 December 1780) Despite these worries, the rehearsals went well and reports of them reached Salzburg, much to the delight of Leopold:
I have no doubt whatever…provided the production is good, I mean provided there are good people to perform it — and that is the case in Munich…but when your music is performed by a mediocre orchestra, it will always be the loser, because it is composed with so much discernment for the various instruments and is far from being commonplace, as, on the whole, Italian music is.
(4 December 1780) The death of Empress Maria Theresa on 29 November could have meant the cancellation of the opera.
However Mozart was able to allay his father's fears:
The death of the Empress does not affect my opera in the least, for none of the theatres have been closed and plays are being performed as usual.
Mozart's father and sister travelled to Munich early in 1781 in order to hear the first performance of the opera on 29 January.
In all it received three performances, though because father and son were together at the time their own account of its success was not preserved.
On 12 March Mozart left Munich for Vienna, having been summoned there by Colloredo.