

NCT Birmingham Central Branch Autumn 1989
Hello again from your new newsletter team!
This is our first effort at a full newsletter and we now really appreciate how much effort Lynn has put in over the last few years.
Thank you Lynn for all your hard work.
You've certainly set us a hard act to follow!
We have decided to start with the basics.
We hope you all have received your Summer update.
Please let any of us know if you have found anyone who didn't.
This time we have remembered to put our contact numbers below.
We are interested to know what you want from your newsletter so please find the questionnaire on pages 14 & 15, fill it in, return it to us.
Let us know your views.
As many of our readers are non-members we have included a page ‘What is the NCT’.
We hope you all find it informative.
You will find details of our social events and coffee mornings in this newsletter.
Do try to support these events as this not only encourages the organisers but also we are sure you will enjoy them.
As you will see from the Who's who page we have two vacant posts on the committee.
If you think you might be interested please turn to page 5 for the ‘job descriptions’ and decide whether you would enjoy either of the jobs.
Thank you Kate for all your work as Information Officer.
Thank you to all our contributors for being so prompt with all your articles.
It has meant we have been able to bring out this newsletter in double quick time.
Any contributions for the next edition please send/give them to any of us.
The views expressed in this Newsletter are those of the individuals concerned and not necessarily those of the NCT as an organisation.
What is NCT?
The National Childbirth Trust, formed in 1956, is Britain's foremost charity concerned with education for parenthood.
The NCT aims to help parents experience greater confidence in and fuller enjoyment of pregnancy, childbirth and the early years of parenthood.
There are 14,500 national members belonging to 343 branches, which have an additional 21,000 branch members.
Each branch operates a postnatal support network of one-to-one friendship.
Birmingham Central Branch covers B5 B10 B11 B12 B13 B14 B25.
Friendly support is offered by small groups of mothers and children meeting regularly in the daytime in each others houses.
We welcome any parents-to-be and any parents and their children.
New Mums group is aimed at mums with young babies and mums-to-be.
Many women do not know any other mothers locally when they have their first baby and this is an ideal group for finding support and friendship.
Mobile Mums group is aimed at mums and mobile babies in need of fireguards, etc. and more active toys.
Open Houses are for any mums and their children the majority of whom are obviously of pre-school age.
Feel free to come to any of these groups.
There are also evening Mothers in Employment meetings held monthly in homes and larger, fundraising Coffee Mornings on the last Thursday of each month.
Details of all these groups are in this newsletter.
MAVA Sales offer a comprehensive range of maternity ware and baby equipment with profits going to NCT.
Their nursing bras are recognised as the best!
From the Chairperson
Hello…and goodbye
Welcome to Diane Fletcher, Penny Burnham and Louise Dyke our new and dynamic editorial team.
Many thanks to them from all our branch members for taking on the job of producing our newsletter which is such a vital link and source of information for the membership.
Thanks also to Lynn Inglis and her team for the many newsletters they produced to such a high standard.
A Healthier Birmingham…?
Onto a very serious subject — the future of the health service in Birmingham.
You may have read in the press or seen on T.V. the proposed Regional Health Authority (R.H.A.) plans for ‘improving’ our health service, which include the closure of several of our local hospitals including ‘The Sorrento’.
If the plans were to be implemented as they stand it would mean a significant deterioration in Maternity services.
In response to the R.H.A. plans our branch has held a very well attended open meeting at which local obstetricians and a member of the Community Health Councils spoke.
We have submitted a response to the R.H.A. requesting reconsideration of the various proposals and requested that we be involved in the next stage of negotiation.
If any member wishes to see a copy of the R.H.A. plans or the branches' report or would like to be involved in any way please contact myself of Lynn Inglis.
Continuing on the subject of getting involved, the committee are always delighted to hear from anyone wishing to help in any way (half an hour once a year on a stall or helping at an open coffee morning would be tremendous).
You will see from the many articles in this Newsletter the activities of the NCT are wide ranging and that much is involved and much fundraising and many hands are needed throughout the year.
I look forward to hearing from you.
Vacancies Job Descriptions
Post of Vice Chairperson
Involves: 1) Chairing committee meetings in the absence of the chairperson.
(This occurs very infrequently.)
2) Being a contact for the secretary and any other members of the committee who may need information, if they are unable to contact the chairperson.
3) Being aware of the role of the NCT.
This is not an onerous post (mostly giving the chair moral support) and would be an excellent way of getting to know people and being part of an active and friendly committee.
Don't all rush out at once but for further information please contact  
Post of Information Officer
This committee post involves being available to assist in the advertisement of functions and fund raising activities for the branch and any general ‘information’ on NCT that is needed, for example exhibitions etc.
Posters and leaflets are generally available from Headquarters.
If anyone is interested in taking on such a position or helping out, please contact:
HQ news
1) is writing a book on ‘the psychic world of children’.
She is interested in the ‘almost sixth sense that seems to exist between mothers and small babies’.
She would like to hear from mothers about experiences, such as predicting their babies needs or knowing of their babies feelings without being present.
2) the Campaign for freedom of Information is trying to promote a bill which would give patients the right to see their own medical records.
As you know under the Data Protection act we do have limited access, however the Campaign feels this is inadequate.
To help their case, they are looking for case histories of people who have been affected because of the lack of access to their files.
The are willing to describe cases anonymously, though it would be more helpful if people were prepared to be named.
If you feel you have suffered please write ASAP to HQ or directly to  
Back to Work
I am a solicitor in a busy city centre practice and this time last year I was your typical workaholic — at my desk from 7 am to 7 pm Monday to Friday, and occasionally Saturday as well.
I'd never even held a tiny baby let alone changed a nappy or supervised bath time.
And then it happened, the event to change all this, I became pregnant.
My feeling towards the pregnancy was one of absolute delight and excitement, but having worked 8 years since leaving school to get where I was it was a major concern to me that my work or my position within the firm should not suffer.
I also felt, as I'm sure everybody does, that the office would fall apart when I left and that nobody would be able to take over my cases, and I worried about what state they would be in when I came back.
In readiness for the event I made all the arrangements I possibly could before the baby was born to make my return to work as smooth as possible, including hiring a nanny, and I thought that this was going to be easy…
That was my first major mistake.
I took 2 days off work before my baby was born, and on the third day my life suddenly changed and it seemed that all of my well laid plans would go to waste.
I had an easy 2 hour labour and there I suddenly was, holding my beautiful baby daughter Danielle in my arms and the last thing on my mind from that moment on was work.
It was love at first sight for me and Danielle, and as the weeks went by I became more and more besotted.
My days revolved inevitably around bathtime, nappy changes, feeds and my ‘mothers meetings’ as they became known in our household.
I was really enjoying my new status as a mother and being at home and caring for Danielle and watching her grow and learn was all I wanted to do for the rest of my life.
But the weeks went by and the 5 months I had off work which at first seemed an eternity soon became 5 weeks and then 5 days.
At first the thought of going back to work made me shudder because I couldn't stand the thought of leaving Danielle for an hour let alone a whole day, but once my husband Dave and I had left Danielle with a babysitter a couple of times, I realised that she would still be there when I came back and that she would be fine.
My other main concern was that I really felt that I would not be able to do my job any more once I went back.
I had visions of myself repeating everything 3 times to my clients in a high squeaky voice as we mums tend to do!
I seriously felt that I had lost my ‘commercial sense’ that I had before, and that I would never remember the intricacies of the High Court Rules, how to draft Court Pleadings or even how to write a sensible letter.
All I had to think about for 5 months had been which was the best brand of nappies or how many poos Danielle had done that day.
I couldn't see myself thinking any differently.
The day came for me to go back to work.
Danielle was all smiles in the arms of her beloved nanny and much to my distress did not have the good grace to shed a single tear as I walked out of the door and out of her life…for a whole day.
Within an hour of sitting down at my old desk, reading through my old files and shouting at my not so old secretary I felt as if I'd been away from work for maybe just a week's holiday.
i was amazed at how quickly and easily I fell back into the old routine, and my fears that I had become brain-dead during my months at home turned out to be unfounded.
It is now my opinion that the main things to remember if you're going back to work after having a baby are that as long as you find someone you're happy with to look after your baby while you're at work, you'll be happy and so will your baby, and that you will be able to do the job when you go back, even if the thought of it scares you to death in the months leading up to your return.
Since I've been back at work, life has been just great.
I can now speak from experience and say that it's much easier to spend a day at the office than it is to spend a day at home, and you have the benefit of spending ‘quality time’ with your baby at evenings and weekends.
I think there are many advantages to returning to work in addition to the fact that the time you spend with your child is so much more special and pleasurable.
You have more of the ‘good times’ and less of the routine day to day jobs when your child can get bored and irritable — I think it does a child good to get to know and trust somebody different, such as a childminder or a nanny, rather than depending on his or her mother entirely for everything.
i find that the time I spend with Danielle now is action packed and full of play, kisses and cuddles and more stimulating for us both than it was previously.
Obviously there is also the money element, and by returning to work you can perhaps give your child other benefits you might not otherwise be able to afford such as foreign holidays or maybe a private education.
Danielle is a very happy and contented baby and I am a very happy and contented full time working mum — and as far as I'm concerned that's the best recommendation I can give to those of you who are in the same boat as I was of dreading re-entering the working world!
Kiddiswop
What?
A sale of second hand baby/  children's clothes, toys and equipment.
(Also maternity or associated items.)
Why?
You clear your clutter and get some cash.
We charge you a commission so we raise badly needed funds too!
Where?
Kings Heath Community Centre.
Heathfield Road.
when?
Thursday September 28th 10.00 — 12.00 a.m.
Who?
YOU.
You can sell your items and you can help!
Please contact me Diane Fletcher (address and telephone number below.)
I am organising this event.
We will need help before, during and after the sale.
An hour of your time would be appreciated.
How?
Please feel free to bring items to my house anytime between now and then.
Though I suggest you ring first.
In fact I can probably collect too if you have transport difficulties.
Obviously I would appreciate as much notice as possible please.
If an address in Moseley would be easier Lynn has already suggested taking items to her house (or Julia's next door) during the week prior to the sale.
If you want to leave it to the last minute you can also bring your items to the Community Centre on the morning.
Label each item carefully.
(Any items that have lost their labels will not be sold!)
I can supply some pre-printed sticky labels if you want them.
Put on each label — 1) a description of the article including size etc 2) the selling price.
(You will receive 80% of this.
NCT will receive 20% commission) and 3) your name and address.
If you prefer not to put your name and address on then call me and I will issue you a number to put on instead so only I will have your address.
Fill in the form opposite with the same details as on the label.
We will endeavour to sell your items for you.
Please contact me as soon as you can after the sale to collect your money and any unsold items.
Anything not collected with one month will be considered donations to NCT.
If you wish to donate your goods to the NCT anyway just write NCT on the labels.
Please try to support this event; tell anyone you think might be interested and bring a friend (or 2?)
It is the first of this kind of thing that I have organised and I would like it to be a success.
If it is, maybe it will be the first of many.
New Mums
I have been unable to book any more New, new mums groups as our group has recently got quite small as many of our members have returned to work.
We do therefore need more new mums OR MUMS-TO-BE to strengthen our group again.
Please do pass on the message.
Most women who have come, either as mums or as mums-to-be, have found the group useful for social & emotional support and also for practical swapping of ideas and solutions for the minor and not so minor problems we all have as new mums.
Mobile Mums
Mobile mums groups are for mums with ‘mobile’ toddlers who need toddler-proof houses but who are maybe not ready yet for the rough and tumble of Open houses.
All New Mums (New and Mobile) groups are held between 2.00 p.m. and 4 p.m.
For further details of any of these groups please contact  on .
What do you want from the Mothers in Employment Group???
This informal group was started up by an NCT member in 1986 to give some support to mums who were at work, or thinking about going back.
The group can provide…
•information on local childcare options with practical experience from group members (we produced a ‘What to ask when interviewing childminders/nannies’ guide)
•the possibility of setting up shared arrangements through personal contacts (always worth giving me a call, I can be a communications link)
•friendship/ ‘group therapy’ to help cope with the guilt/family attitude/tiredness/attitude of work colleagues/stress
•contact with the London based organisation/lobby group ‘Working Mothers Association’
•interesting discussions on a variety of topics with a visiting ‘expert’(eg Reflexology, Speech Therapy, Colour Analysis, Chiropractic, Music for Children, Assertiveness, Wills)
I have  benefited from all of this at some time; so have others.
However I want to get opinions from any of you on how to go on from here.
The numbers coming to meetings can vary from 4 to 24 which is uncomfortable if a speaker is booked and I do not know how many will come.
It may be that like the other NCT groups people do not feel the need to attend for more than a few months (can't stay a New Mum for ever!!!) and at the moment no one needs the MiE group I do not know and I would like to find out.
We could become more active and take an interest in Work Place Nurseries.
After School projects in order to benefit the whole community…
PLEASE tell me what you think, come to the meeting on Friday 6th October to input your ideas and opinions.
Newsletter Questionnaire
As we have said we are a new newsletter team and feel we could print a newsletter containing what we wanted or what we thought ought to be there.
However we felt that we wanted some feedback from the local membership about what you wanted.
We decided the best way to do that was to put in this questionnaire.
We have tried to make the questions simple but comprehensive so that it won't take many minutes to fill in but your answers will give us a good idea of what is wanted and what is not.
Please fill in the questionnaire and return it to any of us.
The more of you who do, the more informed our choice of articles etc will be!
Please remember when filling in the questionnaire that only about half to two thirds of the newsletters printed go to members; the others all are given away at clinics, shows, etc. possibly to people who have no idea what NCT is.
So as well as keeping you informed we are trying to encourage in NEW MEMBERS.
Newsletter Questionnaire
Name
1) How often should we issue the newsletter?
More Often a) every month? b) once every two months?
Much as it is now — c) Once every three months?
2) Do you feel the newsletter should have a theme? a) Completely — No articles at all except relevant to the theme? b) Half and half — Have a theme but be flexible about articles that can go in too? c) No — just do anything that seems of interest?
(Examples of a previous theme — breastfeeding)
3) These are the things WE feel are absolutely essential to a local newsletter and would want to continue.
Do you agree? a) Dates of open houses, new mums and mothers in employment.
b) Social events organised for NCT families/couples. c) Other events organised by our branch e.g. coffee mornings at Kings Heath Community Centre? d) Membership details including form.
e) who's Who, our committee f) Adverts from commercial businesses.
(To cover costs) g) New arrivals.
Do we want more information?
Date.
Weight, names of other children etc. h) New members.
4) Which of the following news items would you like to continue: a) news items sent to us by NCT Headquarters? b) Local news items e.g. Sorrento closure issue? c) National news items culled from newspapers etc? d) Your legal rights e.g. Child Benefit etc?
5) Which of the following local members reports would you like to continue? a) Birth reports?
Every issue?
(Births and mothers willing!) b) Study day reports? c) Reports/write ups of visits and meetings? d) What it meant to me.
How it happened to me.
How it went for me!! i.e. A personal experience.
6) Ideas we think we could do with more of.
Do you agree? a) small ads available to NCT members and their families.
b) Information about NCT — National aims, activities etc
Local NCT aims.
Local NCT activities.
Local NCT people (committee) Local NCT people (members etc)
7) Would you like us to start: a) A problem solved?
(Like the eating article in this issue) b) Printing the minutes of the committee meetings; Completely?
Highlights only?
8) Some of the ideas in 7) are magazine-type ideas rather than‘quality’ newsletter ideas.
Which direction do you think is the better.
Newsletter/Magazine
9) At present the newsletter does not quite cover its costs.
Do you think it should?
Particularly if you feel it should come out more often how do you feel we should cover the (extra) expenses? a) Extra on the membership fee? b) Extra Fund raising?
If yes are you willing to help? c) Start a small ads page in the newsletter and charge? d) Lower printing costs by having a smaller newsletter? e) Get more commercial advertising?
If yes can you suggest anyone we could contact?
10) What other suggestions do you have?
Coffee mornings
Thursday September 28th — Nearly new sale/Kiddiswap (See details on page 9)
Thursday October 26th — Usborne Book Sale
Usborne describe their books as brilliantly colourful, packed with pictures and full of information or stories.
The Guardian has said ‘In a class of their own…they manage to convey an astonishing amount of information.’
Thursday November 30th — Christmas Sale Come and buy all your Christmas presents.
If you haven't already bought Usborne books for everyone!
Please bring a friend (or 2) and help publicise these meetings at your clinic/toddler group/playgroup/nursery/school) Phone  for more details, especially if you'd like to help.
A Social Event
The most relaxing way to spend an evening is up to your neck in salt water, honest!!
Especially if the water is as hot as a bath, and you can pop into the sauna, have a shower, then a cool drink wrapped in your personal towelling robe whilst lounging on comfy chairs watching other people getting pickled.
If you haven't already been put off, come on the outing to;
Droitwich Spa Baths
I have booked 20 places for Monday 20th November at 7.00p.m.
We need to leave Kings Heath at 6.15 to get there in time without breaking too many speed limits.
The cost per head will be £5.00 (which allows for a contribution to NCT funds if enough of us go) and its obviously sensible to arrange for us to share 4–5 cars.
I must know by the middle of October who wants to come, phone  on  evening only.
More Social Events
Many thanks to the energetic Sue Sandys for organising a successful day trip to Ashend House Farm.
(Editors note — See Katie's day at the farm page 21).
So many people enjoyed it that we are thinking of something similar for the Christmas holidays.
Please contact me with any bright ideas for a venue.
The response to the CBSO concerts was luke warm so I decided to postpone booking tickets until later in the year — let me know if you'd be interested.
I'm glad to say that tickets for the rock and roll evening are going well although there are still a few left for late bookers
Don't be put off by the fact that you can't rock and roll — nor can I — full tuition at beginner standard is included.
Also included for £6.00 per head is dinner, hot punch, and a riotous evening!
If you want wine with your meal you'll have to bring your own as the premises are not licensed.
Dressing up as a 50's teenager is encouraged but by no means compulsory and any man dusting off his dad's winkle pickers gets an award for merit!
For more details phone me on .
Inverted Nipples — Any Volunteers?
The NCT has been asked to help with a trial of treatment designed to show what is the best way of coping with the possible problems of inverted nipples for the breastfeeding mother.
WE are trying to contact as many pregnant women as possible who have this condition to see if they will help by taking part.
the trial will take place over the next 12–18 months and there will be four different, simple treatments available.
As this is a scientifically ‘controlled’ trial, these treatments will be randomly allocated to eligible women.
We do not know which, if any, of these treatments is effective at the moment, although they are all in current use and variously recommended by health professionals.
So the results of this trial will be of enormous benefit to mothers as in future they will be offered a treatment which has been shown to be effective.
To take part in the trial, you need to be between the 25th and 34th week of pregnancy and to have inverted or non-projectile nipples.
That is nipples which are turned in like a crater, or which do not stick up by at least half a centimetre when gently pinched between thumb and forefinger from just beyond the base.
If one, or both, nipples are affected you are eligible to take part in the trial.
Please contact   for more information.
Education Update
As two newly appointed Education Co-ordinators, Parry and I feel we have made a small positive contribution to the  children's syllabus in two local secondary schools.
As a result of our involvement, however, it would appear that the NCT is little known at either a national or local level.
An integral part of our talks therefore has outlined the valuable role of the organisation both ante and post-natally within the support network generally offered to women and their partners.
Our approach is informal and lighthearted (including active participation from our toddlers!) hopefully without detracting from the many responsibilities, rewards and demands made by ‘offspring’.
Ultimately, our aim is to establish regular contact with both primary and secondary schools within our area and, in effect, to become and accessible reference point.
To this end we welcome the support of any interested NCT members who wish to be involved in some way.
Post Natal Support
The post natal support scheme aims to introduce new mothers to other mothers who live within pram pushing distance and who can provide friendship, support and practical help.
We usually manage to provide every new member or new mum with a contact who can introduce her to the NCT and chat over any everyday difficulties.
I'd be glad to hear from anyone who feels they would like to be a volunteer and I can promise many rewards from doing such a worthwhile job.
If you've recently joined the NCT, or you have a new baby then let me know and I'll put you in contact with another member who lives nearby.
You don't have to have a new baby to need someone to talk to and if that is the case, I can still find you a sympathetic ear.
A ‘Red Nose’ Baby
4.00 a.m.
Quick, get to the loo — ooh, my back aches — 6.00 a.m.
Again!
What's this pain in my back?
7.00 a.m.
Perhaps I'll have a bath to see if that helps this backache — oh no not again — I'll never get dry in time —
7.30 a.m.
‘Tim, it could be happening at last although the pain seems in the wrong place.’
He thinks I should phone the hospital and discuss it while he has his breakfast.
Hospital thinks we should go in.
9.00 a.m.
What a relief to be settled in the delivery suite — I can concentrate on breathing correctly now.
The breathing exercises really work!
I now feel as if I'm in control and the intensity of the contraction seems to die away more quickly than the monitor suggests it should be.
9.30 a.m.
Debbie the student midwife looking after me is lovely — kind and efficient.
She's found me the T.N.S. equipment and we're just attaching it.
10.30 My first and only attempt at inhaling gas and air.
I hate it.
It stops me concentrating on breathing properly and makes me feel as if I've lost control of the situation.
10.45 a.m.
Tim tries massaging my lower back during the contraction and it feels great — he won't be at a loose end from now on!
11.00 a.m.
Message from my mother-in-law.
Her school are sponsoring me to have the baby that day — Comic Relief day — providing we have photos taken of me and (later) the baby with red noses on.
11.30 a.m.
A porter's found a red nose.
Sufficiently long gap between contractions for me to smile for the camera.
12.30 a.m.
Tim's sent off to the canteen — Debbie thinks HE needs sustenance!
2.00 p.m.
We're changing the tape — we should have made more than one ‘labour compilation’ tape!
But it's great to have music in the background.
3.00 p.m.
Another examination.
Hurray!
Fully dilated.
Debbie should be going off duty but decides to stay and see it through.
5.00 p.m.
I'm told I'm looking transitional — hope this means it's not much longer.
5.30 p.m.
Now I'm in second stage.
Can't get in a comfortable position for pushing.
Trying everything — squatting, birthing chairs, all fours — but give up and lie down.
This isn't what I wanted but it feels right.
6.00 p.m.
Another examination.
The baby's still posterial.
The doctor turns it manually.
7.00 p.m.
Still pushing in vain.
People keep coming in and telling me I'm doing wonderfully — but where's the baby?
8.00 p.m.
Debate going on at my feet — sounds as if they're going to take over.
I'm sure if I give just a few more pushes —
8.15 p.m.
No.
It's out of my hands.
I'm being given an epidural.
Tim's dressed in gowns.
The epidural starts taking effect and I suddenly understand the meaning of the word ‘relief’ in the name given to this day!
8.20 p.m.
In theatre, forceps hold the baby in position, one final push — and here he is!
8.20 p.m.
They're putting him on my tummy — he's red all over (not just his nose!) and completely bald.
At this momentous occasion all I can say is ‘but he's got no eyelashes’
We can't believe this is our wet screaming baby on my tummy.
I don't know how I feel — pleased it's a boy.
Delighted he's being given the O.K., unsure what we're meant to be doing now, and HUNGRY!
Small Ads
WANTED
Wooden playpen and safety fireguards.
Tel:
FOR SALE
Detached, three bed., traditional house.
Large garden.
Excellent location for young family — opposite King's Heath Park, five minutes pram push to King's Heath shopping centre.
Further details contact  
Labels PRINTED to order, various sizes, styles and sizes of print.
See your newsletter envelope for one example.
Contact  
WANTED — a cleaner.
Can anyone recommend somebody who would like a few hours a week domestic cleaning (and maybe occasional catering work?)
Contact  
We have prepared this page of small ads.
To give you an example of the type of ad you might like to place in future editions of the Newsletter.
These are, however all genuine wants and sales!
Problem — feeding
NCT mums solutions:
1)‘I've given up worrying if my toddler doesn't eat breakfast or lunch because I know she'll eat almost as much as her dad for tea.
That's obviously the time when she's hungry!’
2)‘I used raisins as a reward because I didn't want my child eating sweets.
They are sweet of course, but its natural sugar.’
3)‘I found a leaflet entitled ‘Weaning Your Baby with wholefoods.
(From the Wholefood Cookery School.
) It was 30p.
Very useful.’
4)‘My toddler sits in his highchair and demands more of everything in sight so we have to clear the table as quickly as possible after our meals — and out of sight appears to be out of mind!’
5)‘my little girl was just starting potty training when she became almost overnight chronically loose.
I became so worried that we went to our G.P. and after several visits he suggested an allergy to cows milk: so we tried a milk free diet (its harder than you think once you start looking at contents labels).
The potty training restarted and then after 6 months she was re-established on cows milk starting with plain yogurt (just as she had been during weaning.)’
6) My baby at about 3 to 4 months was fully breastfed when he started a feeding for a couple of minutes and then screaming still obviously hungry but still screaming if offered the breast again.
The only answer seemed to be to feed a couple of minutes every half hour or so.
Neither he nor I found this satisfactory.
I discovered he was teething — the sucking made his gums sore so he could only do it for a short time.
Teething gel (I hadn't heard of the homeopathic granules then) just before a feed established normal feeding again.
Seat Belt Law
Over 60 children were killed and over 7,000 injured while travelling UNRESTRAINED in the rear of cars last year and on 1 September the Motor Vehicles (Wearing of Seat Belts by Children in Rear Seats) Regulations 1989 became law.
It is now the driver's responsibility to ensure that all 4–14 year olds wear rear seat belts if they are fitted and that under 4s use appropriate restraints if they are available.
For further information contact your local police station or obtain the Dept. of transport leaflet from your library.
N.B. Kwik-fit Child Safety Centres will supply and fit a child seat for £28.50 and give a full refund on its return when it has been outgrown.
Local Membership
Membership costs £6.00 per year and runs from January to January.
Please work out how much you should pay from the table below and after completing the form sent it to:
NCT Birmingham Central Branch
Winter 1989
Merry Christmas
Happy Christmas to everyone!
Christmas is a very social time and we've tried to make this a social newsletter.
There is an account of the rock and roll evening last month, and Sarah invites us to participate in a Xmas trip on the ‘Santa Special’.
Do respond quickly to this invitation as there's not much time left!
We couldn't have a social issue without reference to the regular social side of our NCT branch and have therefore emphasised the purpose of these meetings in this issue.
For the children, Penny has put in a tremendous amount of time, effort, and shoe leather to produce a really useful booklet of activities to go to locally with under 5's.
(See page 14) Is your child having a problem socialising?
See our problem page maybe one of our NCT mums has had to handle a similar problem.
Thank you to all our contributors.
We haven't go the space here to thank everybody individually but do feel Lynn deserves a special mention for the comprehensive weaning article in this issue.
Thanks also, Lynn for organising this season's coffee mornings and all your other efforts for the NCT.
Our newsletter would take a large slice of the membership fees if we did not have our advertisers.
Mary Anne who has been managing this side of things for us is leaving Birmingham and we are looking for a new manager (see job description on page 6).
Thanks to Mary Anne for her willingness and efficiency.
We are sorry to lose her.
We are very pleased to say our newsletter team has had two extra members this time.
Thank you to Elke and Lauren for your time and typing!
Please note that the committee have decided not to print surnames when telephone numbers or addresses are shown.
We hope you don't find this too confusing.
As only a few questionnaires were returned we assume you are giving us carte blanche to handle the newsletter as we feel fit!
If you do have strong opinions about any aspect of the newsletter, please fill in your questionnaire and send it to us ASAP.
We will be very pleased to receive articles from anyone out there.
Remember that the NCT is about parenting and we'd be delighted to hear from any fathers who'd like to give us another viewpoint of parenthood?
Our closing date for copy for the next issue is: 14th February.
What is NCT?
The National Childbirth Trust, formed in 1956, is Britain's foremost charity concerned with education for parenthood.
The NCT aims to help parents experience greater confidence in and fuller enjoyment of pregnancy, childbirth and the early years of parenthood.
There are 14,500 national members belonging to 343 branches, which have an additional 21,000 branch members.
Each branch operates a postnatal support network of one-to-one friendship.
Birmingham Central Branch covers B5 B10 B11 B12 B13 B14 B25.
Friendly support is offered by small groups of mothers and children meeting regularly in the daytime in each others houses.
We welcome any parents-to-be and any parents and their children.
New Mums group is aimed at mums with young babies and mums-to-be.
Many women do not know any other mothers locally when they have their first baby and this is an ideal group for finding support and friendship.
Mobile Mums group is aimed at mums and mobile babies in need of fireguards, etc. and more active toys.
Open Houses are for any mums and their children the majority of whom are obviously of pre-school age.
Feel free to come to any of these groups.
There are also evening Mothers in Employment meetings held monthly in homes and larger, fundraising Coffee Mornings on the last Thursday of each month.
Details of all these groups are in this newsletter.
FEEDING HELP is available from NCT Breastfeeding Counsellors who are mothers who have breastfed a baby and received training to give mother-to-mother non-medical support.
MAVA Sales offer a comprehensive range of maternity ware and baby equipment with profits going to NCT.
Their nursing bras are recognised as the best!
Christmas is coming…
does the thought fill you with dread or delight?
For most parents probably a mixture of both.
Anyway, when it all gets too much and you can't bear the thought of writing another Christmas card or eating another mince pie just sit down and have a quiet read of your NCT newsletter!
NCT Ante-Natal care in Central Branch
We have some hopeful news regarding the training of a new ante-natal teacher for our area.
is very interested in undertaking the task and if everything falls into place and there are no  unforeseen hitches, hopes to start training in the near future.
So for all you prospective parents out there help may be at hand in around two years time.
Unfortunately our present ante-natal teacher  is unable to continue due to work and family commitments, but is more than happy to answer any ante-natal queries via the telephone.
I would like to thank  for the enthusiasm and commitment she has given to her ante-natal classes and I know that past ‘students’ will have been greatly reassured during their pregnancies by , appreciated her teaching and enjoyed her sense of humour.
The Meeting Places
Over the years our local support groups — Open Houses, New Mums, Mobile Mums and Mothers in Employment, have evolved according to different needs at different times of parents and children.
Although it is not possible to arrange times, dates and venues that are convenient to all people at all times, the various groups aim to do their best.
If however it is felt that some of our members aren't being catered for at the present time please let the group organisers know so that, if possible, adjustments may be made.
Although visiting a new group may initially be daunting, the support and friendship they offer can be a real life line for parents of small children.
Their value should not be underestimated.
Thank you to all whose involved in their organising.
I would like to wish you all a very Happy Christmas and lets hope that this year it won't start before 5.00 am!!!
The views expressed in this newsletter are those of the individuals concerned and not necessarily those of the NCT as an organisation.
Vacancies Job Descriptions
Post of Information Officer
This committee post involves being available to assist in the advertisement of functions and fund raising activities for the branch and any general ‘information’ on NCT that is needed, for example exhibitions etc.
Posters and leaflets are generally available from Headquarters.
If anyone is interested in taking on such a position or helping out, please contact   for more details.
New Mums Organiser
this committee post involves organising venues for the New Mums groups.
(This is not too difficult and usually only has to be done about every three months, when the newsletter is due.)
Welcoming newcomers.
Going to the committee meetings once a month and then keeping the new mums informed of anything going on within the Central Branch.
Please contact  (retiring only because Alex is getting too mobile to be safe for the new babies) on  for further details.
Advertising Manager for the Newsletter
This post involves ringing our regular advertisers and some new ones to sell our advertising space in the newsletter.
As most of this is regular no real hard sell is needed, though diplomacy would of course help.
HQ News
Are you (and your baby) interested in taking part in some research?
1) Aluminium — Your baby must be approximately one year old and been fed for at least six months on soya infant formula or have been breastfed and received no soya products.
Further details phone  
2) Post-Natal Depression — Kings College and Dulwich Hospitals are about to start a double blind placebo controlled trial.
Only women who are not breastfeeding and not taking the contraceptive pill are eligible.
Age of the baby is not crucial.
For details contact  on .
CHILDCARE NOW!
The Childcare Now! campaign is asking for just what it says.
If you are concerned about this issue write to .
The NCT is not a member of the campaign.
Supporting and Supported NCT Mums.
Two Personal Experiences.
The Post Natal Supporters Story…
By the time that  was five months old, I felt that we had achieved a bit of organisation in our lives and that I was in a position to offer ‘something back’ to the NCT.
I decided to contact , then Post Natal Support Co-ordinator for information about the role of the Post-Natal Supporter.
She explained the sort of things that might be expected e.g. from practical help with the baby, shopping etc, to introducing the new mum to appropriate support groups.
Also offering advice if we felt qualified to do so but referring to the relevant health services or back to her if not.
I felt quite nervous undertaking this role in case I became ‘out of my depth’ and couldn't provide the new mother with the support that she needed, either emotionally or physically, but on balance decided that the only way to find out was to give it a whirl!
Shortly after volunteering my services  contacted me to see if I would act as supporter for  who had recently had a little girl called .
I was supplied with her phone number and advised to contact  if any problems arose.
My first problem was contacting , she was never in!
I decided that she either had friends or family nearby or was pacing the streets in desperation!
Thankfully the former was the case.
When I eventually did contact her things seemed to be going quite well due to supportive family but she felt isolated from other mothers in the same situation as herself.
We arranged to meet at the next new mum's group at my house the following week.
It is always nice to be introduced to these meetings because although we are all in the same boat, it's still a bit daunting walking into a strangers house.
It was a busy new mums with two other new people with babies of a similar age to  and the usual crowd of increasingly mobile babies.
I didn't get much opportunity to talk to  for any length of time but she managed to arrange to meet with the others with young babies and we planned to get together again later that week.
At our next meeting we were able to have a long chat, I found  very frank and easy to talk to and felt very much that a two way supportive relationship developed quite quickly, as opposed to supporter-supportee (does this word exist?). is now 14 months old and we have contrived to get together on a regular basis.
We have covered weaning, feeding, sleeping and childcare and am sure will continue with anything from potty training to boyfriends.
The Post-Natal Supported story…
was about 4 weeks old when  phoned me.
I think that I still felt rather disorientated.
The next New Mums group was at her house (she lived less than a mile away) and she had phone me to encourage me to go.
I was quite apprehensive about the whole NCT ‘scene’.
I can remember feeling so raw, both physically and emotionally, that I wasn't sure how I would feel with a group of new people.
offered to call round if I couldn't go to the meeting.
I said that I thought I could just about get my act together sufficiently to come.
There seemed so much to remember to take when you first take a baby out!
I arrived early, not intentionally but definitely to be recommended.
I found being introduced to people individually, as they arrived, much easier than going into a room full of new babies and it was good to share experiences.
I was offered post-natal support having been to some NCT ante-natal classes.
I wasn't sure what I was letting myself in for!
I had no idea what life with a baby would be like and no idea how well or badly I would I would cope.
The reality seemed to be adapting to being a mother felt like starting a new job without any training.
There were lots of small things which I felt unsure about and since my previous knowledge of, and contact with, babies was virtually nil, I was please to have someone to turn to when needed.
I have seen  frequently over the last year and I have been very grateful for her friendship, not to mention the clothes she has lent me which her daughter has outgrown.
I think that having somebody in pram pushing distance, who has recently had a baby can be of great value and at least it means there is help at hand if you need it.
From  — Post Natal Support Co-ordinator — If you feel you would like to offer support, or if you would like someone to support you, phone me on .
Kiddiswap
The last kiddiswap was very successful.
We raised about £100 after expenses of the hall etc.
We learnt a few lessons on how we could have improved it but we felt very pleased with it as our first attempt.
Thank you to all those who sent in goods for sale especially for those donated to NCT.
I hope you were pleased with how much we sold.
(On average we sold about half of each person's goods.)
Thank you very much to those who volunteered, or who were volunteered to help, especially to  who worked as hard as I did to get the whole thing set up.
We were there at 8.30a.m.!
There is always more work than you expect isn't there?
At the end people were asking when is the next one?
As it was so successful I have agreed I will do another one in April.
Next Kiddiswap
Some of the lessons we learnt that will make the next one better, for you as well as us are;
1) Labelling the clothes will have to be much easier! 2) It will be easier for the volunteers if people can bring the stuff earlier than the previous day if possible.
So start to get your stuff together now!!
We are planning to get another newsletter out before the next one to give you all the details but if you want to know how to label the stuff before than give me a ring  
RUBELLA
Everyone planning to start a baby should check with their doctor that they are still protected against German Measles.
A small percentage of women have found that their immunity has worn off with disastrous results.
POLIO VACCINATION
Did you know that when your baby has a polio vaccination, it is possible for a live polio virus to pass through the digestive system and be excreted?
The Dept. of Health warns that if you have not had a vaccination, you should either have the polio vaccination yourself or avoid changing nappies when your baby is vaccinated.
The good news is that if you have already had the vaccine, you don't need a booster.
Just be careful about hand washing and disposing of soiled nappies.
Small Ads
Laura Ashley Boys Sailor Suit.
Age 4.
Blue with white trim.
Worn twice.
To hire, £1.50 per time.
Proceeds to NCT funds.
Contact  
Quantity (somewhere between 10 and 20) Large Jigsaws.
Mostly 1000 pieces plus.
One of 5000 pieces.
most are complete though some do have 1 or 2 pieces missing £10 the lot.
Contact  
Labels PRINTED to order, various sizes, styles and sizes of print.
See your newsletter envelope for one example.
Contact  
Maths Tuition offered up to GCSE level £5.00 per hour.
Contact  
Anyone expecting a baby around the end of April and going to the Sorrento who would like to share the hire of a specialised birthing tank to use in labour?
Phone   for discussion.
Would you like a copy of ‘Birmingham for the under fives’ for £1.50 instead of the £3 published price?
Phone   (£1.50 includes a small donation to NCT)
Anyone wishing to advertise in this newsletter either a small ad such as these or a full ad (full page or half page) please contact any one of the newsletter team.
We are hoping to bring out 3 or 4 issues a year.
Our next issue is due out mid-March.
Copydate 14th February 1990.
Coffee Mornings
These have been fun and useful fundraisers, but now especially well attended.
The Xmas sale raised over £40.
The main problem has been lack of support, both in attendance and especially help.
Perhaps they need to be better publicised or at different times/days.
Maybe we don't need them, what with Open Houses, New mums etc.
So the Christmas Coffee Morning, which was to be on Dec. 28th has been cancelled.
There are no plans for future coffee mornings, although if there is a demand — and more help — I'd be pleased to continue.
Many thanks to whose who have helped, especially 
Alternative Post-Natal Exercise?
I had read about the proposed rock 'n' roll evening in the newsletter and thought ‘that would be a laugh, wonder if I could persuade  to go?’
However I forgot to mention it and when I remembered again I thought the tickets had probably all been sold.
So when  mentioned that she still had 4 tickets left, I took the plunge and said yes we would be interested.
(I used the royal ‘we’ as I had not asked  yet!)
Fortunately  was interested and immediately delved into his record collection and started to play some old rock 'n' roll LP's to get us in the mood.
However when I enthusiastically told friends and acquaintances about the planned evening they did not share my enthusiasm.
(I put it down to envy)
In fact the evening surpassed my expectations.
I had thought it would be fun, but I had not expected to be able to rock 'n' roll by the end of the evening.
First of all we were given a demonstration.
Then our dance teacher began to teach us the basic steps.
It was very hard work!
By the end of the first half all of us had sweat pouring down our faces.
I certainly had to take a couple of unofficial breaks and we were very glad when we stopped for food and drink.
Once we were fed and watered it was back onto the dance floor to practise what we had learnt and add, would you believe, a small jump to our repertoire.
Nothing spectacular but what do you expect from beginners?!!!
It was by now that  and I wondered whether chilli had been a good choice for a hot meal.
Mind you any food in our stomach was going to get well and truly shaken up.
Towards the end of the evening they had a competition.
and I surprisingly made the final four.
Not bad for complete novices who had never danced a rock 'n' roll step before.
However we were helped a lot by good teaching.
All in all it had been very enjoyable.
We enjoyed it so much we are now going to the rock 'n' roll class on Wednesday evenings at .
A big thanks goes to  for organising the evening.
From  — Thank you to every one who came to the rock 'n' roll evening at the end of October.
I certainly had a good time and judging by the sweat on everyone's brow as they worked to perfect their routines I think it was generally thought to be enjoyable and worthwhile.
Social Report
Many thanks to  for organising the trip to Droitwich Spa baths.
Everyone who went found it most relaxing!
Future Events
Ash End House Farm was such a success for parents and children that I have organised another day out for the Christmas Holidays.
I have booked 12 tickets for the very popular Severn Valley Railway ‘Santa Special’.
The trip has an excellent reputation and includes a present from Santa, a hot punch for parents and a ride in a beautifully restored Steam Train!
Children and adults should enjoy themselves and the trip costs £4,59 per head.
The day I have requested is the first day of the school holidays — Thursday 21st December at 10.45 am.
We can leave in a convoy from my house to ensure that everyone gets transport.
Warm clothes are advised.
Please phone me on  if you are interested.
‘What can I do today?’
For NCT under 5's and their parents
‘Lets have an article updating the one by an NCT toddler about what to do with yourself through a week,’ I said.
I wrote all I knew and all that people at Open Houses, Playgroup and Nursery knew, and it all fitted nicely on a double page.
BUT all the activities centred on Mosely and King's Heath and we all know that our Birmingham Central Branch covers B5, B10–14 and B25!
So Tom, the A to Z and I set out on ‘a voyage of discovery into the vast unknown’…
We have lived in Birmingham for 18 months and been totally absorbed in familiarising ourselves with our own local environment, and all I knew of Highgate, Sparkhill, Sparkbrook and Small Heath was where they are on a map.
I knew I could find all the Playgroups in the area easily (apart from stopping  wrecking branch libraries!) because all Playgroups must register with the Social Services and Social Service Resource Directories for each ward are kept in their local branch library.
We visited all 4 libraries in our area, and copied the lists.
Playgroup problem solved!
Now how to find all the Parent and Toddler Groups?
N.B. I call all these groups PARENT and Toddler even if the organisers don't!
I had been to Balsall Heath Health Centre on Edward Rd. with the NCT so we went there and all the other H.C.s and asked the Health Visitors.
This was a success as most H.V.s keep lists of groups to tell their new mums about.
Then to find all the OTHER under-5 activities we called at all the Sports Centres and Community centres in the area, and finally we also looked at ANY noticeboard ANY where!
The results of these Monday afternoon treks (is at Nursery and I am not at work only Monday and Friday afternoon and Friday afternoon is not a good time to go bothering people!) were now covering rather more than a double page and indeed was too much for a single newsletter article.
So if you want all the information gathered you can either follow in the  footsteps and have your own expedition or you can buy the general leaflet for 10p from any News team member or NCT event including Open Houses, etc.
Our Social/Support Groups
NEW MUMS
For mums to be and new mums.
Most women who have come, either as new mums or as mums to be, have found the group useful for social & emotional support and also for practical swapping of ideas and solutions for the minor and not so minor problems we all have as new mums.
As the babies grow more mobile, the mums become ready to move on (for the safety of the new little babies).
MOBILE MUMS
Mobile mums is a group that started about six months ago.
It was created for a group of mums who felt their babies were too old for new mums but not yet ready for the rough and tumble of open houses.
OPEN HOUSES
This group is exactly as its title, the hostess opens her house to any parents or parents to be, who wish to meet with others.
Everyone is welcome regardless of the age of your child(ren).
MOTHERS IN EMPLOYMENT
This group was started by some mothers who worked who felt that they would like to meet other working mums, who have their own additional set of problems.
It meets in the evening so that any mothers who are in employment who want to meet others, can.
We feel it is important to point out that none of these groups are in any way closed.
Any parent, mum or dad, is welcome to any (or all!) of them.
Toddlers comes to new mums and mobile mums,(though we do ask mums to make sure that the toddlers take special care of the littler ones).
Also non-working mums go to mothers in employment.
If you need support, advice or even just company go to whichever group is most convenient for you and your child(ren).
If you feel you would like to go to a group but feel uneasy about going to the first one alone contact me and I will arrange for someone to take you and introduce you.
Weaning — Avoiding Allergy
As part of my training to become a breastfeeding counsellor I recently attended a Study Day on weaning, organized by NCT Rugby branch.
The main point made was the great importance of not weaning too soon, as late weaning can help prevent allergies occurring, or at least delay their onset and severity.
The ideas outlined here may seem a bit odd, cranky even, and certainly inconvenient and impractical.
Yet I think that in fact they can make life easier for mother and baby.
By starting later and doing it gradually you get a few extra weeks without the fuss and worry of having to give solids at all.
And by waiting till the baby is older you don't have to think so much about lumps and what ‘stage’ dinners to use.
Accepting that milk remains as vital part of the diet makes the whole process of weaning more relaxed for both mother and baby.
Ideas about baby feeding and weaning are constantly changing and actual practice can have a profound effect on child health.
For example, twenty years ago  Coeliac Disease (intolerance to wheat) was an illness which began during infancy or early childhood in almost 100% of cases.
Nowadays it is much less common and only 25% of new cases are found in children, ie the onset of the disease has been greatly delayed.
This is due to the fact that we are no longer told to add crushed rusks to our babies' bottles at just a few weeks old.
It was this early exposure to wheat protein which led to the allergy.
These days the official recommendation is that babies should have only milk up to at least three months, preferably four, and that weaning can begin  any time between four and six months.
However it isn't easy to get reliable information on what to give, and when.
Most people end up relying upon the colourful packets, tins and jars of commercial baby foods, which at least promise lots of vitamins and no longer have added salt, sugar, colours or artificial flavours.
The babyfood market is worth many tens of millions of pounds a year and so the manufacturers have a great vested interest in when babies begin solids and what they eat.
The hidden pressure to get your baby eating three meals a day, at normal meal times, as soon as possible, is not to be underestimated.
The advice to delay the introduction of solids and to expand the baby's diet only gradually was emphasised at the study day.
Complex proteins, such as dairy, meat and grains are the major triggers of allergies and should not be introduced at all before six months.
Babies have very immature immune systems and rely upon breast milk to make up for this deficiency as it contains protective factors.
These are in fact forms of protein, which are not digested by the baby's stomach (this would deactivate them) but pass unchanged through the lining of the gut directly into the blood stream.
It is this early easy permeability of the stomach which makes a young baby so vulnerable to allergies, as allergy is the reaction of the body to foreign protein.
Proteins from foods can also pass through the stomach during the first few months, and so lead to problems.
This permeability of the gut gradually decreases as the baby gets older, and consequently so do the risks of allergy, although this varies and can take a year or longer.
Although breast milk is the best choice, modern baby formulas are specially processed to make the proteins less troublesome.
The most modified milks are the whey-based formulas such as SMA Gold Cap, Aptamil, Osterfeed and Cow & Gate Premium and these are less likely to lead to allergy.
Soya based formulas should only be used with medical advice when a baby is known to be allergic to cow's milk formula, as soya protein is just as allergenic as cow's milk.
So, although breast feeding is protective against allergies, late gradual weaning is probably just as important, if not more so, especially for bottle fed babies.
It is vital though, that gradual, later weaning should be done along with continued full breast or bottle feeding, with no rush to drop feeds.
Milk is still an important main part of a baby's diet throughout the first year, particularly with this way of weaning.
Health Visitors suggest that all babies under one need a pint of milk per day in addition to other foods.
If you are breastfeeding this means at least four to five feeds.
But don't feel pressurized to cut down or give up if you are feeding more often.
With bottle feeding you have some choices after six months; to go on with the original formula, use a follow-on formula or start boiled cow's milk.
Formulas are less allergenic, the follow-on milks have more calories and iron.
When starting solids begin with tiny amounts, such as a teaspoonful and introduce new foods singly, one at a time, every four days or so.
Avoiding mixtures is a good idea at first as it enables you to identify any foods which disagree with your baby to try again later.
Cooking such small amounts of food can be fiddly and time consuming so try freezing baby-sized portions in ice cube trays.
Don't worry if your baby rejects something, just try it again later.
Signs of food intolerance to look out for include skin rashes and loose watery stools.
Here is the weaning schedule suggested by St George's Hospital.
Although it was especially developed for babies at risk of allergy, many nutritionists believe that it would benefit all babies to follow a similar, gradual pattern of weaning, If your family is not allergy prone, you can adapt it to suit your needs, circumstances and baby.
1.
Milk-free baby rice, mixed with water, expressed breastmilk or formula.
2.
Pureed root vegs — potatoes, carrots, parsnip, swede.
3.
Pureed fruits — apple, pear, banana, but NO CITRUS FRUIT before 9 months.
4.
Other vegs — peas, beans, lentils, broccoli, etc.
5.
Cereals can be introduced in the following order:
•Rice, Millet, Barley, Oats, Wheat — after 8 months, Buckwheat, Rye
6.
Lamb, turkey than other meats.
7.
Fish, but not until 10 months.
8.
Dairy products — start with plain yoghurt, boiled cow's milk, if these are tolerated introduce butter cheese etc.
9.
Eggs — not before 1 year.
Problem — socialisation
NCT mums solutions.
1)‘All, or at least almost all, children are going to display some anti-social behaviour e.g. biting, kicking, snatching toys etc.
It is vital to be consistent!
You must tell them off every time they do something you don't want them too.’
‘If it is another child showing this sort of behaviour towards yours, be diplomatic!’
2)‘At about 18 or 19 months my son became very clingy.
I went to more and more places where he had the chance to socialise, e.g. Mother and Toddlers etc.
Gradually he settled and grew out of it.
My advice to other mums, though, is start as early as possible going to groups, like NCT New Mums, so he learns to socialise much earlier than my son did.’
3)‘When the babies are very young leave them to come to terms with others at their own pace.’
4)‘My daughter met any other child at playgroup with a resounding thump if they touched ‘her toy’(because I think her older brother was still treating her to this type of jealousy at home).
I felt awful as other children were upset and their mums looked horrified so I had to go and explain to each mum individually why I thought she did it and say that they were to feel free to stop her themselves and explain.
After this concerted effort by all adults, it was really only a few weeks before she learnt not to smack other children.
At home, her brother also learnt not to smack her and we are all a big happy family now.’
The relevant comment I have heard most often at NCT meetings is that on-one minds a child displaying anti-social behaviour as long as we can see mum is doing something about it!
Next issue; Problem will be the minor (?!!) ailments of pregnancy and how to ease them.
If you had a problem and solved it, let us know and pass on your solution to other mums.
(N.B. Copydate is 14th February 1990)
Following  article in the last issue on ‘returning to work’ felt that there was another side to the coin and felt she had to put pen to paper to balance out various viewpoints.
Being a single mum
I returned to the UK before  was born after working in Spain for the previous five years.
Birmingham had changed, friends moved and the city suddenly seemed a very large, cold, unfriendly place.
Thanks to the Birmingham Central NCT.
I was able to enjoy and cope with  when he was very tiny.
Being a single mum is not very easy and it was important that there was lots of people to contact to encourage you in difficult times.
I met some now very loyal friends who have seen me through these last three and a half years.
I did not return to work until  was 18 months so I was able to see him cut his first tooth, take his first step and many other monumental firsts.
At that time it was not a case of wanting to return to work but having to.
Yes, it was nice to sit and eat my lunch in peace, with no-one to interrupt me but it is not nice every morning to ‘bye’ and leave him in someone else's care.
I also found that being on my own, in my middle 30's, I was considered a risk!
Would I be able to concentrate on my job all day or would my thoughts be constantly on ?
Would I be away at any time, when  was ill or needed his mummy?
When I changed my job recently I was appalled to discover that the attitude in the business world was still relatively unchanged towards women.
Some prospective employers were more concerned with my nursery arrangements than with my qualifications.
Perhaps I should have asked them if they were intending to introduce creche facilities or anything to help the working mum?
Both my life and my salary now have to be really well planned.
There isn't much (if anything) left at the end of each month for any luxuries — like a night out or any new items of clothes — will always come first to make sure that he doesn't miss out on anything.
Perhaps, I have digressed a little from my original plan but to all mums who do not have to work, please spare a thought for those who do.
Enjoy all your days, they are all too often gone in a short time.
Remember in the evening when your ‘little horror’ goes off to sleep that tomorrow you will be with them through all the trials and tribulations and can be there to soothe their pains and congratulate their achievements.
As a little afterthought, if anyone one would like to know what is on my Christmas list — please tell  that Mummy would like a LIE-IN!
If anybody else has a ‘working as a mum’ experience they'd like to share please feel free to write to us.
Please remember when reading individuals articles that all views expressed are individuals views.
Edit.
Bottoms Down
I first discovered I had a breech baby at 30 weeks and by 36 weeks it was obvious she had a mind of her own and was going to stay that way.
I was disappointed especially once the obstetrician began talking Caesareans and epidurals.
However an X-ray at 38 weeks revealed I had an enormous pelvis so a relatively normal birth was on the cards.
‘See you in two weeks then’ said the consultant.
Some hours later, after a torrential thunderstorm, the wriggling foot, that had been kicking in very strange places, finally broke through and I soke at five in the morning with a warm, wet feeling.
blinked at me blearily as I told him we had better ring the hospital.
We arrived at the hospital at 6.00 a.m., me still leaking away and waited for something to happen.
Three hours later I had had three whole contractions, still had a long thin cervix and the medics moved in.
I had a drip to get things going and the registrar wanted me to move off my nice comfy bed and climb onto the couch to have an epidural.
I had agreed to this in case I had to have a Caesarian.
I told him I wanted to know what labour felt like first.
He seemed rather surprised and told me it was painful, but gave in.
Once the drip was up and the monitor was on I was much less mobile but as I gained confidence I learnt how to put the monitor back on if it stopped working when I moved.
The anaesthetist put the epidural in a while later when I was ready.
I was suddenly really upset as I thought I may never feel the baby moving inside me any more.
However he just put in a test dose to see if it was in the right place.
After a few minutes I felt pins and needles in my behind, my blood pressure was fine and I was allowed to sit up again.
Every so often the drip was turned up and the pains began to come more often.
offered to massage me, but as all the pain was at the bottom of my tummy and I was sitting up, this was a little on the difficult side!
I just closed my eyes and breathed through the contractions.
I even managed to sit in a chair for a while, not too easy with all the wires though.
By 2.00 though the pains were every one and a half minutes and I was only 2cms dilated.  was sitting eating sandwiches and I was starving hungry.
At this low point I gave in and had my epidural topped up.
May as well use it I thought.
It was brilliant.
I could feel everything but had no pain.
We sat and watched the Wimbledon semi-finals!
The next top up wasn't so good as it only worked on one side and all the pain was concentrated in one place.
However by this time things suddenly hotted up.
At 6 p.m.
I had another examination and found I was 8cms dilated and the midwife would feel the buttocks and a foot!
I spent what I assume was transition with an almost continuous pain in my left side and feeling sick as well.
At this point the anaesthetist topped it up fully.
The relief was superb but I couldn't move at all.
I could wriggle my legs but not use them.
Somehow I sat up a bit.
I was determined to keep control and do as much as I could to help things on.
The consultant arrived and said not to push as he had to get changed.
Suddenly the room was full of people.
I lay on my back with my legs in the air and pushed.
It was a bit difficult as I couldn't feel what I was doing, but I concentrated on pushing the top of my uterus down through my bottom.
A few pushes and everyone including  crowded round the end of the bed to look at the foot.
A bit frustrating being the only person who couldn't see it.
The obstetrician pulled out the feet, then the bottom, then suddenly i had this huge sinking feeling as my bump disappeared and most of the baby shot out and landed on my tummy.
The head was delivered with forceps, a few minutes later and at 7 minutes past 8, was born.
She was beautiful, wide awake and hardly marked, just a bruised bottom.
She was nuzzling around, sucking everything in sight quite indiscriminately.
There were a few tears even the obstetrician seemed a bit overcome and kept shaking my hand.
We had ages together before I was taken off to the ward.
I felt so proud of myself it wasn't true.
Despite all the hi-tech it really had been my birth — and  and  of course.
Vaginal Birth After Caesarian Section
is the subject of a one off NCT class to be held on January 24th.
Aimed at parents who would like a normal delivery after caesarian.
Phone  on  for details.
Study Day on Home Birth
in early March (3rd or 10th) to be run by Birmingham West Branch.
Sheila Kitzinger has been invited.
our secretary, will have details.
The Sponsored Push
It was one of the medical records clerks who first mentioned the sponsored walk to me when I had visited the hospital to give a lecture to some of the nursing staff shortly after I had started my maternity leave.
The Eye Hospital was entering a team for the 10-mile ‘fun run’ to be held on 24th September and all monies raised were to be given to the Guide Dogs for the Blind Association.
At that time, September was a long way away, in fact I wasn't really thinking beyond the date that my baby was due, the 6th of April.
During the summer, and I called into the hospital on several occasions and I was reminded that I had agreed to participate in the ‘fun run’ and I decided it would be a good publicity gimmick and improve my chances of sponsorship if I took  along and pushed him around the 10 mile course.
However, I nearly didn't make it as I neglected to register my willingness to take part with the organiser of the hospital team until all 32 places had been filled.
Luckily, one of the participants had to withdraw at the last moment and taking her place on the team, I went off in search of sponsors.
As expected, many people were willing to support my sponsored ‘push’ and I soon filled both sides of my sponsorship form.
on collecting my T-shirt and participants instructions a few days before the event, I was rather alarmed to discover that we were expected to meet at Alexander Stadium at 7.45 a.m. on the Sunday morning, a time that I didn't really know existed even before my maternity leave!
To add to my anxieties about the early start, my husband and I were due to attend a charity casino evening in Kenilworth on the Saturday night, an event which I knew would continue into the early hours.
However I did manage to get out of bed at about 6.30 a.m., feed  and myself and get us both to the stadium at the appointed time for the team photo call.
It was a beautiful sunny day, if anything it would be too hot for the marathon runners who set off before the fun runners, fun walkers and fun pusher!
I'm pretty sure that I was the only mother & baby entrant as I struggled on sometimes running, sometimes walking around the 10 mile course encouraged by the smiles and cheers of the many people who lined the route.
I don't know whether  enjoyed it as he was sound asleep for the first 8 miles, but he certainly wasn't complaining either — a merciful relief!
I hadn't taken part in a sponsored walk for many years and had forgotten the exhilaration of crossing the long awaited finishing line.
it was exhilarating, rewarding, good fun and most of all, worthwhile.
and had raised £43.50 for the Guide Dogs, while the whole hospital team had raised over £1,800.
Many thanks to all the NCT new mums for their generous sponsorship.
Who knows, I might be asking you again next year!
POB on a RAG
Are you interested in the ante-natal care provided for expectant mothers in the West Midlands?
Would you like to represent the NCT and voice our member's opinions and needs on an official body concerned with promoting good ante-natal care?
Can you spare a couple of hours on a Tuesday morning six times a year?
If so you could become a POB on a RAG.
A POB is an NCT Person on an Outside Body.
And a RAG is a Health Authority's Regional Advisory Group.
The current NCT representative on the (wait for it) West Midlands Regional Health Authority's Health Promotion Group's Ante-Natal Care Action Group (what a mouthful) is about to retire and is looking for someone to take over.
The Ante-Natal Care Action Group is made up of people from the Health Authority, midwives, doctors, health visitors and the NCT.
It aims to monitor the standards and progress of ante-natal care health promotion and to advise the Regional and District Authorities on this subject.
Its latest project has been the publication of an ante-natal care learning pack for midwives.
Anyone who thinks they might be able to take on this interesting role should contact , our current POB, on  for more information, as soon as possible.
To ALL members
Please not that the membership fee of £6.00 is required by all members in January.
Please, use the form below and could you make every effort to pay your fee by January 14th 1990.
If you miss this date we will have to use part of the fees by sending out reminder notices.
perhaps you could post it today with a post-dated cheque?
Thanks everyone for your co-operation.
NCT Birmingham Central Branch
Summer 1990
 Summer's coming!
We are rushing out this newsletter in time for the first summer festival, at Kings Heath Park.
If you could spare an hour or so at any of these events please see the Volunteers page (page 9.)
Talking of volunteering, this is  's last newsletter as she is moving (has moved!) to Cofton Hackett.
The rest of the team is going to miss her and  and we'd like to thank her for all her hard work (including proof-reading!) and now we need a volunteer to join us!
The centre pages are designed as a pull-out diary for the whole summer, which combines all the various NCT groups with other events.
We hope you find this new format helpful, especially when planning your summer!
We would also like to thank our two male contributors and to say again that we welcome any article from anyone at anytime.
Thanks for the bumper size of this newsletter must go to  who has done a marvellous job at retaining our loyal advertising supporters and encouraged new people to start to advertise with us.
The size of all newsletters depends on the amount of advertising revenue so if you'd like future newsletters to be this size perhaps you could help  by supporting our advertisers.
Copy date for the next issue 14th August 1990.
The views expressed in this newsletter are those of the individuals concerned and not necessarily those of the NCT as an organisation.
WHAT IS NCT?
The National Childbirth Trust, formed in 1956, is Britain's foremost charity concerned with education for parenthood.
The NCT aims to help parents experience greater confidence in and fuller enjoyment of pregnancy, childbirth and the early years of parenthood.
There are 14,500 national members belonging to 343 branches, which have an additional 21,000 branch members.
Each branch operates a postnatal support network of one-to-one friendship.
Birmingham Central Branch covers B5 B10 B11 B12 B13 B14 B25.
Friendly support is offered by small groups of mothers and children meeting regularly in the daytime in each others houses.
We welcome any parents-to-be and any parents and their children.
New Mums group is aimed at mums with young babies and mums-to-be.
Many women do not know any other mothers locally when they have their first baby and this is an ideal group for finding support and friendship.
Mobile Mums group is aimed at mums and mobile babies in need of fireguards, etc. and more active toys.
Open Houses are for any mums and their children the majority of whom are obviously of pre-school age.
Feel free to come to any of these groups.
There are also evening Mothers in Employment meetings held monthly in homes and larger, fundraising Coffee Mornings on the last Thursday of each month.
Details of all these groups are in this newsletter.
FEEDING HELP is available from NCT Breastfeeding Counsellors who are mothers who have breastfed a baby and received training to give mother-to-mother non-medical support.
MAVA Sales offer a comprehensive range of maternity ware and baby equipment with profits going to NCT.
Their nursing bras are recognised as the best!
Here we go again
It's time to gird your loins, bake your cakes and man/woman the NCT stall at the local summer festivals.
We already have two successful fund-raising events behind us this year — the ‘kiddi-sale’(see page…) and the car boot sale.
Despite fierce competition from 3 other car boot sales we managed to raise around £100.
Thanks to all those involved with the planning of these events and for helping ‘on the day’.
Future dates to note are Saturday June 16th, the Kings Heath Festival.
Please contact   if you are able to offer time on the day or goods to sell.
Why does the branch need to raise the funds?
I am pleased to be able to let you know that our branch has sent £250 to HQ in response to its request for help in its dire financial situation.
NO HQ = NO LOCAL NCT NETWORK
I am also delighted to be able to tell you that two of our branch members are hoping to train as much needed ante-natal teachers.
They will require substantial financial support during their 2 year training.
Meanwhile it's back to the kitchen to bake another batch of cakes!
I look forward to seeing you at the festival.
NCT ANNUAL LOTTERY
Last year in 1989 the NCT had hoped to raise £90,000 from the lottery: they hoped everyone would sell 2 books of tickets.
However only £35,000 was raised meaning that the annual fundraising income was actually lower than in 1988.
This obviously contributed to the financial crisis at HQ (see last issue)
This year it is therefore EXTREMELY IMPORTANT that we all sell our 2 books and as an incentive HQ say that each branch returning their block of completed lottery ticket stubs with a single branch cheque can keep 20%.
I am therefore expecting everyone's 10 stubs and £2.00 back by 31st July.
So I can send them back to HQ.
PLEASE What's in it for you????
A chance to win £1500!
HQ News
1.
Nappies for handicapped children:
Contact a Family have found that there is a move amongst Health Authorities to increase the age at which they provide free nappies for children with special needs because they argue that children without special needs use nappies at night until they are 4 or 5.
Contact a Family want to amass independent evidence that children are usually clean and dry at night younger than this so that they can put the case for more generous help for handicapped children.
2.
Parents against Tobacco 1990: This campaign aims to
1) enforce existing law to ensure that tobacco products are NOT sold to under 16's 2) control the promotion of tobacco products to children 3) undertake an educational programme involving children and young people.
PaT hope to do this partly by a Private Members Bill in the autumn which will:
1) establish who is responsible for reinforcing the existing law on sale of tobacco products to children 2) increase fines for retailers 3) restrict vending machines to over-18s premises 4) seek to phase out tobacco-sponsored sports coverage over the next 5 years 5) increase the amount spent by the tobacco industry on prevention (currently 1%)
NCT has joined the campaign in view of the risks caused by smoking particularly during pregnancy.
3.
Breastfeeding IS best!
A recent article in the Lancet states that a Dundee Medical School team headed by Prof. Peter Howie (Obstetrics) have found that babies who are breastfed for 13 weeks or longer suffer only a third of the stomach infections experienced by bottlefed babies, and have fewer respiratory infections.
‘Mothers should be told without ambivalence that breastfeeding offers a clear advantage to their babies…breastfeeding for at least 3 months offers a natural protection against infection that can last up to a year.’
4.
Listeriosis:
The Commons Social Services Select Committee have recently reported on this and they want all known cases reported to health authorities, and they say SOFT CHEESES SHOULD BE AVOIDED BY WOMEN EVEN CONTEMPLATING HAVING A BABY.
The Times 12.1.90 reported that public health labs have found that up to 60% of all uncooked chickens in shops are contaminated by Salmonella and Listeria.
In addition Listeria also infects 12% of pre-cooked chickens, 16% of salami-type sausages, 50% of raw pork sausages and 10% of soft cheeses.
5.
The Women's National Commission:
NCT has been invited to join as an associate member and , our President, is our rep. on this advisory body to the government whose terms of references are ‘to ensure by all possible means that the informed opinions of women are given their due weight in the deliberations of government.’
She would be pleased to hear from members about issues they fell should be brought to the government's attention!! 6.
Guide to Labour for Expectant Parents:
This leaflet is one of several published by the NCT and is particularly useful to have with them to boost their confidence during labour.
It explains how a woman may feel and what she and her partner can do about it!
Available from HQ at 75p inc. p&p.
7.
Royal College of Midwives 1990 Baby Campaign:
The RCM have lost a campaign to improve the maternity and health services with a view to reducing baby deaths.
They have produced a leaflet ‘Agenda for action of the Maternity Services’ for health administrators to use as a guide to improving services.
We can help by asking these bodies to discuss the items raised at their meetings.
RCM have also produced 2 new leaflets for women on healthy eating and on smoking, alcohol and drugs which NCT members can help distribute to playgroups, libraries, health centres, etc.
Copies available from RCM, and local RCM contacts at maternity units.
Volunteers needed!
Here are some ways for you to help.
Some are quite a major commitment, some a small but regular commitment, others no more than an hour or even a few minutes of your time.
Please remember local branches of NCT can only continue with voluntary support, please try to help!
New Mums Organiser and Open House Organiser
These committee posts involves organising venues for the New Mums and Open House groups.
(This is not too difficult and usually only has to be done about every three months, when the newsletter is due.)
Welcoming newcomers.
Going to the committee meetings once a month and then keeping the groups informed of anything going on within the Central Branch.
Newsletter team member
is leaving us!
The post involves every three months sharing the duties of the team i.e. reminding committee members of necessary articles, putting in ideas for articles, typing and printing on word processor (training given if necessary) collating and posting completed newsletters.
Contact any newsletter person.
Cakes, Clothes and/or an hour of your time
We are holding a stall including nappy changing facilities at two summer festivals.
We need toys, clothes, cakes and plants top sell.
We also need volunteers to man/woman these stalls.
If you can help at the Kings Heath Festival on June 16th please contact  
If you can help at the Moseley Festival on June 30th please contact  
NCT Leaflet Drop
We are joining B'ham West in their distribution of leaflets to newly delivered mums in Q.E.
and starting our own drop at Sorrento.
Help us encourage new members (we always need new members) by joining the rota to do an occasional drop.
See page 14.
Post Natal Supporters
Post Natal supporters are needed regularly.
If you feel you could offer support, to a new mum, please contact  on 
Fundraiser
This committee post involves arranging fundraising and promoting the NCT at various events.
For further details, see last newsletter and/or contact any committee member.
Sorrento Milk Bank
needs more milk.
See Page 14.
If having read this you feel you would like to offer time etc but none of these are what you are looking for then please ring either The Chairperson or Secretary who I am sure will be only too willing to discuss with you any further possibilities.
Post natal support
As a branch we try to offer every new mum support from another mum who lives locally.
They type of support offered depends very much on the people involved but the supporter is often a listen ear who may also be able to give some practical help with the new baby.
if you are a new mum who would like to be put in touch with another mum or feel you can offer some support 'phone me on 
Kiddiswap
The April kiddiswap was very successful.
Again we raised about £100 after expenses of the hall etc.
We felt that it could have been better still if the weather had been kinder to us.
But we felt better organised this time and again we felt very pleased with it as still only our second attempt.
Thank you to all those who sent in goods for sale especially for those donated to NCT.
I hope you were pleased with how much we sold.
(On average we sold about half of each persons goods.)
I was panicking a bit about a week before the sale as stuff was not coming in very quickly but thanks to Nursery Needs and all those who did last minute searches we had a good amount of stuff to sell in the end.
Thanks very much to those who volunteered.
We were much better ‘staffed’ this time so I think we were more efficient and our pilfering/loss rate which I felt had not been bad last time was down to only two items this time, even better.
Thanks especially to  who seemed to be everywhere with me loading, unloading, sorting, labelling, selling, loading, unloading…!
Thanks also to everyone who helped the kitchen to do so well.
They raised £18 of the £100 alone.
Thanks to all those who cooked cakes and to  and  for working so hard in there.
As £100 means a lot to our funds I am sure it was worth all our efforts!
Maybe we will do it all again in another six months???
Hospital Leaflets
How did you hear about NCT?
Did you know that NCT had so much to offer after the birth (breastfeeding counselling, post natal support and a network of other mums) before you got involved?
If you had your baby at BMH, you may well have had a leaflet left on your bed by Birmingham West branch.
We have now agreed to produce a joint leaflet and hope to distribute it to BMH and Sorrento, reaching mothers we haven't reached before.
Now we get to the nitty gritty.
We need help!
We need volunteers to go to Sorrento and/or BMH once every two/three months and put a leaflet on each bed.
Sorrento Milk Bank
The Milk Bank at Sorrento Maternity Hospital in Mosely provides a life-saving service to premature and sick babies who are too weak to feed directly from the breast.
Breast milk, the best milk for such babies or for those who have had to undergo an operation during the first few days or weeks of life, is collected from mothers of healthy babies who have more than enough to satisfy their needs.
A mother who has surplus milk and would like to donate her milk to help a sick baby should contact the Milk Bank at Sorrento.
A nurse will visit in your own home, explain exactly how to collect and store the surplus milk and provide you with a kit.
You will then be visited about every five days by a nurse who collects the milk and leaves you with a fresh supply of bottles.
All the milk is pasteurised and frozen until needed.
Sorrento Milk Bank supplies all the other hospitals in the West Midlands which require milk and occasionally, hospitals in other parts of the country.
Breast milk is extremely valuable.
There is always a shortage and the Milk Bank always needs new donors.
If you would like more information about becoming a donor please ring the Milk Bank on 
Birmingham Childbirth Seminars
Birmingham Childbirth Seminars has been established by two NCT Antenatal teachers to provide good quality seminars/workshops for Childbirth Educators and Health Professionals.
The issues addressed are those which are to the fore in the care and education of couples during pregnancy, childbirth and the neonatal period.
The invited speakers are either themselves practising in the clinical area or currently speaking or writing about childbirth matters.
The venue is in Edgbaston.
two study days are planned, costing £25 each.
Active birth and water birth; Thursday, 7th June.
Counselling and relaxation techniques, Sat, 7 July.
Pregnancy Problems
Several members of our branch have recently suffered pregnancy problems.
We wish them all well and speedy recoveries — both mentally and physically.
Its always difficult to know how to help when friends suffer such experiences.
Whether to say anything at all, what to say, how to give practical help — all are tricky questions to address.
's Thank you below gives us an insight into what she personally appreciated and might help others in the future.
If you have any views about ways in which we could help each other in such situations perhaps you'd like to jot them down for the next newsletter.
Thank you NCT
Whilst in America on holiday I had an emergency admission to hospital with a (full) mole pregnancy.
This is a pregnancy where the placenta instead of feeding the fertilised egg (or later the foetus when it is a partial mole) feeds itself and grows all out of proportion and has to be removed.
In effect a miscarriage of a pregnancy that was never a real pregnancy.
There are possible complications of a curable cancer and I shall have to be monitored regularly by Charing Cross Hospital (because moles are so rare it is centralised) until my hormone levels return to normal (This could be for up to two years).
(The medical/technical descriptions are what I understood the doctors to say not text-book definitions).
I wanted to write these lines in the newsletter as I wanted to say a general Thank you to the NCT and to individuals too.
Thank you for the notes and letters that were waiting for me when I did arrive home.
Thank you for the bouquet of flowers sent to me on behalf of all our local branch AND Thank you for my other flowers later, ‘when maybe I needed them even more!’
Thank you all those who said something.
If someone doesn't say anything you don't know if they don't know what's happened, if they don't know what to say or just don't care.
Thank you for all the phone calls and cards that came acknowledging my loss, offering emotional support and practical help.
Thank you for doing a talk I did not feel up to.
Thank you for the little thoughts of avoiding the things that might upset me.
(These were varied but always touching).
Thank you for looking after  on those really black days when even he seemed too much to cope with.
One day I rang Charing Cross for my results and she said my levels were elevated.
I thought I had cancer.
After a terrible 15 minutes I managed to talk again to the same doctor and she explained that elevated meant they were not nought, not as I had thought, that they were going up.
Thank you to the person who arrived unknowingly on my doorstep and gave me a really sympathetic cuddle while I cried for 10 minutes (?) in relief that I had misunderstood the doctor.
I have not named names because there are so many individuals but you all know who you are.
Thank you NCT for being there.
Surprise Delivery
I had hoped to be writing a birth report about how wonderful it is to use a large pool of warm water in labour.
Unfortunately all our well laid plans went out of the window on March 19th when our second child decided to arrive six weeks early.
It was 1.30 that Sunday night, I'd just gone to bed feeling rather worn out after a busy week and sociable weekend.
joined me and we began discussing the forthcoming birth and what it would be like to have two children.
As I turned over in bed everything was suddenly very wet and I felt a ripple of shock as I realised what had happened.
For the next half an hour or so I felt very panicky and unready to have this baby.
We phoned  a good, dear friend who as a midwife had gone to much trouble and arranged to deliver the baby.
No answer.
She and  had obviously gone away for the weekend.
Even  's parents were away in America having their pre-grandchild holiday.
So we were on our own, no pool, no personal midwife, no family and a premature baby about to arrive.
Panic seemed attractive but pointless, this baby was going to have to be born within 24 hours now that the waters had gone, and the sooner we accepted this and welcomed the baby, the better.
I had a warm bath while  packed a bag.
In the end the birth went very smoothly, with the greatest of care from two sensitive, skilled and kind midwives at the Sorrento.
It was a normal delivery, with only a little entonox at the end — something I felt really happy about as our daughter had been breech and delivered by caesarean section after a horrid, induced labour.
Happily the baby — a boy, quickly named  — seemed fine.
He weighed 4lbs 14oz, a good size for 34 weeks gestation, was awarded Apgar scores of 9 and 10, and fed well within three-quarters of an hour.
We went up to the ward, by which time he was making very odd, rasping sounds as he breathed.
The sister did not like this at all and called the paediatrician, who examined  and decided that he ought to go down to the special care baby unit after all.
In many ways I was greatly relieved as it had become obvious to me that he wasn't well.
The rasping noise was quite upsetting but when he didn't make it I gently shook him to make him breathe again and I didn't feel that I could relax, let alone sleep, for one minute.
Babies put on a lot of fat in the last few weeks before they are born, so  looked a poor little skinny scrap of a thing.
His nose, hands and feet seemed large in relation to his thin face and limbs, somehow making him look older than a newborn.
Seeing him lying in an incubator for the first time was a uniquely distressing experience.
Again I felt fear and panic well up inside me, but again decided that this could not help in any way and would simply be a waste of the valuable energy which I would need to get through this difficult time.
I became even more thankful that I'd had a normal birth as it would have been so hard to cope after a repeat section.
An X-ray showed that  's lungs hadn't fully matured and that he was suffering respiratory distress syndrome.
The consultant explained that the lungs mature at around 36 weeks when a substance called surfactant is produced.
This allows the lungs to remain inflated after a breath is taken, without it the lung does not expand adequately and the baby had to work much harder to breathe — rather like blowing up a new balloon as opposed to one with some air already in it.
The treatment for RDS is oxygen and this was piped into his incubator.
The amount of carbon dioxide in his blood was monitored, as were his hart rate and breathing, and he had an I/V drip to provide glucose, water and anti-biotics.
Every time we went to see him he seemed to have yet more wires and tubes attached to his little body.
As he needed a fairly high percentage of oxygen he soon had a head box too — a clear perspex box placed over his head to concentrate the oxygen.
He was also jaundiced and so had to wear a hood to protect his eyes and lie naked under a constant bright light.
Although I knew that he was getting the care that he needed it was so hard not to be able to hold and feed him, but only to sit and look at him lying in this bright, plastic container.
I still constantly feared that he would die.
As a full stomach makes it even harder for a baby with RDS to breathe he wasn't able to feed for the first few days and relied on the drip.
later he was fed minute amounts of donor milk from the milk bank by a nasal-gastric tube, just 1ml an hour at first.
I was using a hand-pump, and then an electric pump to stimulate my milk supply, although at first I was too distressed and unmotivated to do it as often as necessary and consequently didn't produce anything when I did pump.
I felt very down, but once he began to need my milk it seemed worthwhile and I gradually began to produce a little more at each pumping.
As a trainee breastfeeding counsellor I turned to my tutor for reassurance, support and counselling and it was a valuable experience.
I stayed in hospital for six days and found the idea of going home without him very upsetting.
I also felt that I wanted to be apart from the routine of normal home life with the washing, cooking and  to think about.
I was leaving all that to  and concentrating on , who needed my love and attention more.
Eventually I accepted that I had to leave without my baby.
That first night was terrible, especially as I'd become engorged and full of milk.
I shook and panicked and wept for the fist time since he'd been born.
I couldn't really cope with this separation, despite that fact that we live only about a minute from the SCBU.
Two days later I was staying in the unit with  to establish feeding, as his breathing and heart rate were now normal, although he was still quite jaundiced.
I'd asked that he shouldn't be bottle fed with my expressed milk as it can be more difficult to establish breastfeeding if a baby is confused by a teat.
The staff on the SCBU were most supportive and sensitive to my needs, although it wasn't their normal practice.
Dealing with such tiny sick babies and distressed parents must be a very hard job, yet the Sorrento SCBU has an atmosphere of clam, loving care.
was one of the larger, more mature babies there.
Some were so tiny, having been born at under 30 weeks gestation and spent several months in incubators.
Breastfeeding went very smoothly and  was back to his birth weight after two days on the unit and one at home.
By the time he should have been born, a month later, he was almost 9lbs!
He's a very contented baby, a joy to his parents and big sister, and today at nine weeks old (40+3), he smiled at us for the first time.
As getting tiny clothes was a problem for us I've decided to put together a pre-term pack to loan out to NCT members who find themselves in need of them.
Many thanks to those of you have already donated things for it — does anyone else have any really small (under 8lbs) baby clothes to spare?
Small Ads
Laura Ashley Boys Sailor Suit.
Age 4.
Blue with white trim.
Worn twice.
To hire, £1.50 per time.
Proceeds to NCT funds.
Contact  
Quantity (somewhere between 10 and 20) Large Jigsaws.
Mostly 1000 pieces plus.
One of 5000 pieces.
most are complete though some do have 1 or 2 pieces missing £10 the lot.
Contact  
Furry Rocking Dog — Suit 1–3 year old.
£5 o.n.o.
Contact  
Labels PRINTED to order, various sizes, styles and sizes of print.
See your newsletter envelope for one example.
Contact  
Would you like a copy of ‘Birmingham for the under fives’ for £1.50 instead of the £3 published price?
Phone   (£1.50 includes a small donation to NCT)
Do you know that the NCT sell birth announcement cards?
They are very nice!!
They are at a reasonable cost of £1 for 6.
We have quite a few in stock and would like to clear a few at least!
You can get them from  or 
Have you got your copy of ‘What can I do today?’ and your ‘Local playgroups’list?
If not, I have some left…
Pram Seat — Could whoever it was who wanted one please contact me as I now know of one for sale.
Does anyone know of a signwriter who could paint me a decent menu board for my catering trailer?
(My handwriting is disgusting).
PLEASE.
Anyone wishing to advertise in this newsletter either a small ad such as these or a full ad (full page or half page) please contact any one of the newsletter team.
We are hoping to bring out 3 or 4 issues a year.
Our next issue is due out mid-September.
Copydate 14th August 1990.
MOTHERS IN EMPLOYMENT
A self-help support group which meets once a month in the evenings (usually the first Friday in the month) to talk informally, or to listen to a speaker.
Anyone is welcome and the topics chosen for speakers are usually of interest to all, employed or not.
I summarise below three meetings from the past year.
‘Children and Dentistry’ by Gill Cottam
Gill is a very user friendly orthodontist (special dentist—and gave and fascinating and gory illustrated talk on teeth.
Interesting messages:
•fluoride leads to fewer teeth falling out which leads to more overcrowding and so extractions are needed.
•concentrate on careful brushing, toothpaste alone will not do the job
•use disclosing tablets to see where brushing is inadequate
•some drugs affect the colour of teeth
•consider a special 180 degree X-ray (OPG) at 7 years old to assess the formation of the teeth and plan any corrections
I have alarmed my own dentist by asking him detailed questions based on the knowledge gained from Gill.
My 5-year-old is now a regular ‘discloser’: she loves using her black tablets — she strips to the skin first (couldn't find any to match the bathroom!)
‘Music for Children’ by Joyce Rothschild
Joyce is a music adviser for the local education authority.
She demonstrated a number of instruments from her large collection and talked about how to introduce children to music.
Interesting messages:
•introduce music, rhythm, sounds in the home; singing, poetry, expressive reading; make instruments
•if you buy, get good quality to ensure the child gets a good sound
•get books, tapes; lots of choice
•select creative, child oriented teachers
•allow the child to choose their instrument, try out a few
My daughter used to go to a lovely informal music group in a house in Northfield, and I believe there was a similar group in Moseley once.
Sadly both have now stopped functioning but if anyone knows of any similar groups I am sure there would be a lot of interest.
Joyce would be a super group leader but does not run any classes (YET!!!!!)
‘Acupuncture and the Family’ by Fabienne Alsing
Fabienne is a qualified Acupuncturist and an NCT member from Leamington Spa.
Leamington is a well known centre for Acupuncture with one of the country's leading training colleges.
Interesting messages:
•acupuncture is a holistic approach to prevention of ill health in mind and body
•treat the cause, not the symptoms, following careful and thorough diagnosis, using counselling and needles
•needling boosts or reduces energy in various areas of the body in order to get the body in balance
•Fabienne survived a complicated birth with only acupuncture in conjunction with homeopathy
•very interesting talk, very convincing
NEXT SEASON TOPICS
will hopefully include:
Tax and Married Women
Assertiveness
Out of School Clubs (Kids Club Network)
‘Alternative’ therapies eg aromatherapy
plus…suggestions welcome.
Attendance at meetings is very variable — I may start phoning round before a meeting to encourage people to come.
This is not meant to be harassment, just a gentle reminder.
Nannies & the Law, Insurances etc
AS a third part of a nanny share I have been looking at the law and the availability of Liability Insurance.
Please just take my comments as guidelines only but in summary…
Registration of Nannies
The Children's Bill will make it mandatory for nannies who look after children from several families (three or more I believe) to become registered as childminders.
This comes into effect next year I think.
Remember that this is aimed to protect children even if in your particular circumstance its a nuisance.
A nanny share as a business?
If you are involved in a nanny share, depending on the financial arrangements, l it may be viewed as a business even if it does not feel like one!
Liability Insurance
Liability Insurance is important if in the future there were an event in which you or your nanny could be accused of negligence resulting in injury to a child in her care or in your house.
Many house and contents insurance policies have provision for liability insurance for claims of negligence against you, it is worth checking.
Given the information I have gathered it will be impossible for a nanny without any recognised qualification to get any liability insurance for claims against her.
Remember too that a nanny, like the rest of us, is unlikely to have vast assets which can be used to satisfy a claim.
A qualified nanny (NNEB and equivalent) can…•join their professional association PANN which automatically gives high value cover (£2M I think) for low cost.
It has other benefits for the nanny too in terms of advice etc (not all employers are perfect like me).
•get separate cover through an insurance broker, only a handful in the country — name supplied if you want to know.
This gives much lower value cover (£100K) for higher cost.
Problem
Sibling Rivalry
NCT mum's solutions.
‘Before  was born, but when he showed, we read two books with  then 13–17 months both entitled ‘The New Baby’: one an Usborne book and the other a Camilla Jessel book.
was present in our bedroom until five minutes before  was born and then again about an hour later — absence was her choice as it was her teatime and her tea was ready!!
When I was feeding , used to sit on my knee too and we would read books around him.
Looking back there was no sibling rivalry problem and in our case ‘prevention may well have been better than cure’.’
‘My parents, when visiting to see the newborn, were always very careful to ignore, almost, the new baby and fuss the older one just as she was used to, and only after she had gone to sleep did they make a fuss of the new baby.
I think this is a good principle and we hope to continue it, to some degree for a long time yet.’
Next issue; Problem will be colds coughs etc. if you had a problem and solved it, let us know and pass on your solution to other mums.
(N.B. Copydate is 14th August 1990)
The New Baby.
How will your child react when you have another baby?
How is he going to feel?
The answer is quite simple.
He is, at first, going to hate the baby.
Missed it!
Four weeks before  was due I started a new job here in Birmingham leaving  and  in Yorkshire.
I went home every weekend for three nights and on Wednesday night, and believed I could blast up the motorway when summoned for the birth.
However a 55 minute delivery when I was already on the way home on a Wednesday afternoon, meant that I missed it.
As I walked in the door I was greeted by a new son and a strange emotional mixture of delight and disappointment at not having been there.
Despite staying for a week, spent mostly looking after  of course, I found that the close bond I experienced having witnessed  's birth took a lot longer to develop with .
It did however eventually become as strong over the next 9 months, especially after the family moved to Birmingham too.
I would strongly recommend that, whenever possible, fathers should be present at their baby's birth!!
Confessions of not quite the ‘new man’
I suppose it is quite trendy at the moment for fathers to take a non-traditional view of parental responsibilities.
The so called‘new man’ of the nineties has taken a conscious decision to split childcare with his working wife/partner.
It would be hypocritical to describe myself as this new creature as I did no make a conscious effort to share our son on a 50/50 basis.
Work circumstances happened to change coincidentally from full-time to part-time just after his birth.
Two years on, with a little help from our excellent childminder I look after him part-time during the week.
I couldn't imagine being a full-time ‘house-husband’(most men after all are allergic to house-work).
It is plain that staying home and looking after children is culturally and economically undervalued by our society.
Women have a hard enough time — being a ‘house-husband’ in most circumstances would be a struggle as the majority of men would be unable to find the support that women get amongst their peer group.
Working and looking after children part-time gives me the best of both worlds.
I can't say the juggling timetables with my partner is always easy, economically we earn the equivalent of one decent wage and find it difficult to save.
However, the rewards of spending a significant amount of time with your offspring brings great spiritual benefit.
He has taught me to relax and put adult inhibitions to one side.
Musical ‘jam sessions’(commonly known as making a row), singing nursery rhymes, silly dancing around the house is included as my favourite therapy.
Trips to the library, Cannon Hill Park and Malvern St. Farm add to life's rich tapestry.
playing with the hi-fi and the video recorder keeps me on my toes!
I never realised collecting stones could be interesting!
When I first took him to toddler group I must admit to feeling slightly uncomfortable about being (usually) the only man around.
now this does not bother me as my presence is usually taken for granted.
However, my worst experience (from breaking new ground point of view) was attending an NCT Mobile Mums group in someone's house.
Everyone was really kind, but I must admit to feeling out of place in this intimate all-female atmosphere.
It's much easier to hide in a church hall!
Seriously though, I am of the opinion that women need their own space to talk freely without the presence of men.
Just as men need space too.
Challenging traditional roles is not easy.
In our case I believe it has helped all three of us.  has been exposed to a greater variety of people and situations which may have contributed to his easy-going nature.
Both of us (usually) have more energy to give him as we are able to follow our careers without too much pressure on being sole bread-winner or sole childcarer.
Personally, I think being a parent can be great fun.
I can't really remember much B.K. (before ) and one thing is for sure; if I ever enter Mastermind, my specialist subject will be ‘the selected works of the Rev. W. Awdrey’.
NCT Birmingham Central Branch
Autumn 1990
It's the Editorial:
Unfortunately  has been unable to edit this issue as she has been in Charing Cross Hospital for treatment after her mole pregnancy earlier this year.
So we apologise for the standard of typing…
Penny's grandpa's old typewriter is a real character!!!
GET WELL SOON,.
This Autumn's Nearly New Sale is being organised by  (see pg 13…
PLEASE contact her if you can help at all and remember to display your poster.
We are holding a Grand Christmas Sale this year to raise funds, which Penny is organising (see back page)…again any offer of help is very welcome, and PLEASE come along to do your own Christmas shopping: there will be lots of goodies!
Our NCT Branch Year is outlined on page 22 and as you can see it is fairly busy.
Your committee could do with more help and would just like to get to know some of you better…so PLEASE complete and return the Questionnaire on page 24.
Copy date for the next issue 14 November 1990.
The views expressed in this newsletter are those of the individuals concerned and not necessarily those of the NCT as an organisation.
What is NCT?
The National Childbirth Trust, formed in 1956, is Britain's foremost charity concerned with education for parenthood.
The NCT aims to help parents experience greater confidence in and fuller enjoyment of pregnancy, childbirth and the early years of parenthood.
There are 14,500 national members belonging to 343 branches, which have an additional 21,000 branch members.
Each branch operates a postnatal support network of one-to-one friendship.
Birmingham Central Branch covers B5 B10 B11 B12 B13 B14 B25.
Friendly support is offered by small groups of mothers and children meeting regularly in the daytime in each others houses.
We welcome any parents-to-be and any parents and their children.
New Mums group is aimed at mums with young babies and mums-to-be.
Many women do not know any other mothers locally when they have their first baby and this is an ideal group for finding support and friendship.
Mobile Mums group is aimed at mums and mobile babies in need of fireguards, etc. and more active toys.
Open Houses are for any mums and their children the majority of whom are obviously of pre-school age.
Feel free to come to any of these groups.
There are also evening Mothers in Employment meetings held monthly in homes and larger, fundraising Coffee Mornings on the last Thursday of each month.
Details of all these groups are in this newsletter.
FEEDING HELP is available from NCT Breastfeeding Counsellors who are mothers who have breastfed a baby and received training to give mother-to-mother non-medical support.
MAVA Sales offer a comprehensive range of maternity ware and baby equipment with profits going to NCT.
Their nursing bras are recognised as the best!
Chairperson's report
SOS…
SOS…
SOS…
SOS…
SOS…
SOS…
YOUR COMMITTEE NEEDS YOU!
For various reasons several of our most active members will be unable to give their valuable support to your committee over the coming months.
we desperately need help in several areas (see pg 24).
In particular the post of Secretary has become vacant and we would love to hear from anyone who may be able to help out on a temporary or more regular basis…(see page 23).
I would like to take this opportunity to thank  for all her hard work as our efficient and conscientious secretary, and to wish her and her family every success in the future.
I would also like to thank everyone who helped at the summer festivals: they are a valuable way to promote our branch as well as raising funds.
NCT Annual Lottery 1990
Our branch has just short of 100 members all of whom received 2 books of lottery tickets to sell by the end of July.
So far about 25% of those ticket stubs have been returned with the appropriate £2.
The cash has been sent on to HQ where it is sorely needed (see our Spring issue).
Thank you to everyone who has sold their tickets, either to themselves or to others!
Remember that this is the only national fundraising that we are asked to do each year and that this year HQ are allowing us to keep 20% of the cash for our branch funds…so come along the other 75%, let's find those books of tickets and get the stubs (and the £2) to ,
•Urgent Please return your stubs and cash now•
HQ News
1.
Some hospitals now offer Meptid instead of Pethidine.
If you have personal experience of this drug, please write and tell NCT via ,.
2. the Health Educ.
Authority and the Dept. of Health have launched a new immunisation campaign whose theme is ‘childhood diseases haven't died, children have.’
It points out that unimmunised children run the risk of catching diseases which are far more dangerous than the injections might be.
3.
Over the next few months the government will be deciding whether to freeze Child Benefit for the 4th year running.
There is a real possibility that this payment could be limited in future or even means-tested.
If you care about Child Benefit, tell your MP.
4.
B'ham West Branch's recent ‘Home Birth’ study day was so over-subscribed that they now have an account of the day available from ,, price £1.
5.
The NCT Houseswap Register has been going 15 years now and raises over £500 annually.
For 1991 the fee is £10 to get your house in and receive a full Register to choose your swap from.
Write to  
6.
Education Resource books are now available from HQ at £5 which contain guidance and ideas on everything connected with NCT's role in schools and colleges.
If you want to be involved with your local school, let our Branch Educ.
Coordinators know.
7.
NCT is at present celebrating the Centenary of the birth of Grantly Dick-Read the first President of the National Childbirth Trust, whose classic book, ‘Childbirth Without Fear’ is £4.95 plus 15p p&p from HQ.
Those Birth Cranks!?
I am a member of the National Childbirth Trust, and such is the grim and distorted picture of myself which I see reflected in the media.
1.
Throughout pregnancy I shall  practise crouching on the dusty Axminster in my faded Laura Ashley smock while thinking of opening out like a flower.
2.
I shall go to antenatal classes where I shall nourish my obsession for natural childbirth.
3.
I shall learn to hyperventilate and expand my already canoe-like pelvis.
4.
I shall confirm my certainty that all forms of intervention and pain relief equal failure, and that bottle feeding is naughty, lazy and dangerous.
5.
I shall object to every aspect of care offered me, put everybody's backs up during labour, and deafen the entire ward with my rendering of ‘Ten Green Bottles’.
6.
My partner will prohibit any member of the medical or anaesthetic staff from crossing the threshold.
He will get a hernia from supporting me in a variety of undignified positions and I shall finally insist on delivering under water so that the midwife puts her back out and gets wet.
7.
Or I could decide to be supremely inconsiderate and have my baby at home.
8.
I shall spend the next several years drinking decaffeinated coffee and swapping babygros with other NCT mothers while my partner bores his colleagues to death with intestinal flora between games of squash.
9.
I shall take the odd break from coffee mornings to engage in militant breastfeeding in some prominent spot in a major department store.
10.
In short, I am an intolerant, overinformed middle-class crank.
I am one of a mere 60,000, a small proportion of the childbearing population.
The rest do not know, or do not want to know, the extent to which the NCT has influenced every aspect of obstetric care.
Who developed the idea that childbirth is much less frightening if you know what is going on?
Who maintains that pregnancy is not an illness?
Who is taking positive measures to prevent mothers in the third world feeding formula made with contaminated water to their babies?
Who got fathers into the labour wards?
Who is spearheading the  government's breastfeeding policy?
Who helped the Royal College of Midwives to write their textbook on breastfeeding?
Who is going into schools and colleges and making real sense of ‘sex’ education?
Who recognises the postnatal period as one of unique sensitivity, when peer group support is vital?
Whose research is improving sterile techniques on postnatal wards.
Who is constantly arguing for proper scientific evaluation of all the interventions which have become a matter of habit with many midwives and obstetricians, like artificial membrane rupture?
Who is asking why 70% is a good average for cut or torn perineums?
Who seeks to support and encourage midwives in their struggle for recognition as independent practitioners?
Who has the most comprehensive information in the country on every aspect of childbirth, breastfeeding and postnatal care, all of which is available to the public free of charge? who has comprehensive information for parents with disabilities?
Who is working at top levels within health authorities all over the country to improve maternity services for all those other mothers out there?
Who trains health professionals to give better antenatal and breastfeeding support as well as training and sustaining over a thousand of its own teachers and breastfeeding counsellors?
It is the National Childbirth Trust.
This is all a far cry from the cosy coffee morning, which is itself shorthand for a vast network of peer support groups in which women, who have ceased to be competitive for the first time in their lives, can find reassurance during a period of mindbending uncertainty.
The trouble is that you don't know about all this.
Our very limited resources are all tied up in getting on with the work.
There is nothing left either in womanpower or funds to devote to blowing our own trumpet, so we have been unable to impress you with the extent and importance of our work.
As charities go, you don't, frankly, think we are particularly deserving.
It is perhaps appropriate to remember that childbirth is not some minority interest.
Nearly half the population does it at least once.
If you count fathers as well, as of course you should, it begins to embrace most people.
Then add the 100% who have been babies.
We are all involved in this issue.
WE are going to stop apologising to ourselves for the fact that it takes money to run this organisation.
Yes, most people pay to come to NCT classes, and excellent value they are too, for the few thousand parents we manage to teach each year.
But nobody is paying for the increasingly large amount of work we do for the childbearing and professional public at large.
Like all other major charities, we are employing increasingly expert staff to implement and disseminate the product of expensive information technology.
It costs money to maintain and advantage your interests in the childbirth field.
Next time, you, your daughter, your grand-daughter or just a neighbour is pregnant, you could think of the thirty-odd years that the NCT has spent safeguarding the interests of parents and babies, and you could get out your cheque book.
An annual standing order would be even better.
After all, charity begins at home.
AMWAY and ANTENATAL TEACHING?
Thank you to everyone who has supported my NCT/Amway launch, which has raised £30 for branch funds.
I want to explain more about me and Amway and NCT…
I use Amway cleaning, laundry, personal care, etc. products myself because I feel that they are the BEST environmentally — friendly, cruelty-free products available.
All active ingredients are 98% biodegradable within 3 days of leaving your house, all products are concentrated so that 50–70% less packaging is used AND so that they are extremely economical.
They are in fact the original Green products having been around since 1959, and are so good that the company's turnover is about £1 billion.
I sell Amway products because the company operates only by direct selling (not through retail shops), and I saw being a distributor as a chance for me to raise funds for NCT (and my kids' playgroup!)
NCT has given me such a lot as I have moved twice when each of my children was 6 months, and as I attended really brilliant ante-natal classes before I had …and now that I am starting out on my ante-natal teacher training which will cost the branch £250 (This is actually the cheapest training offered by any charity e.g. a Relate counsellor costs £600 to train!),
I want to raise some of the money myself.
If some of you have had bad experiences with other ‘Amway people’ let me promise that I am not like that!
I'm only in it for the fund-raising!
SO next time you need washing powder, washing up liquid, shampoo, etc. don't buy it at the supermarket (they make enough profit already!) order it from me (I order on Sundays to deliver the next Friday) and LET NCT HAVE THE PROFITS…
PLEASE.
Nearly new ‘Kiddi’ Sale
What?
A sale of second hand baby/  children's clothes, toys and equipment.
(Also maternity or associated items.)
Why?
You clear your clutter and get some cash.
We charge you a commission so we raise badly needed funds too!
Where?
Kings Heath Community Centre.
Heathfield Road.
When?
Monday October 22nd. 10.00 — 11.30 a.m.
Who?
YOU.
You can sell your items and you can help!
How can I help? 1) Publicise it!
Tell your friends and put up the enclosed poster where it will be seen.
Mother and toddler groups, playgroups, shops etc etc etc.
2) Volunteer to help!
Please contact me,(address and telephone number below.)
I am organising this event.
We will need help before, during and after the sale.
As little as an hour of your time would be appreciated.
How do I sell?
Please feel free to bring items to my house anytime between now and Sunday 14 October.
Though I suggest you ring first.
In fact I can probably collect too if you have transport difficulties.
Obviously I would appreciate as much notice as possible please.
Label each item carefully.
(Any items that have lost their labels will not be sold!)
Put on each label — 1) a description of the article including size etc 2) the selling price.
(You will receive 80% of this.
NCT will receive 20% commission) and 3) A number.
Please ring me and I will explain which numbers you should use.
It will be like lot numbers at an auction: like last time.
Fill in the form on page 18 with the same details as on the label.
We will endeavour to sell your items for you.
Please contact me as soon as you can after the sale to collect your money and any unsold items.
Anything not collected within one month will be considered donations to NCT.
If you wish to donate your goods to the NCT anyway just write NCT on the labels.
Please try to support this event; tell anyone you think might be interested and bring a friend (or 2?)
The others were very successful and if they continue to be successful it would be nice to hold them regularly, wouldn't it?
Branch Noticeboard
We apologise for the lack of a birth report due to several wires becoming very crossed!
This year NCT has a gift and Christmas card catalogue out: please look out for copies at meetings and place your orders with committee members for us to send off in bulk.
We will also have a sales and ordering stall at the branch Christmas Sale on Nov. 16th.  has started her antenatal teacher training and hopes to be ‘registered’ by mid-December.
has returned to her breastfeeding counsellor training after her maternity leave.
Our branch books the ‘Soft Play Room’ at Monyhull Hall regularly: for dates and times see Open House noticeboard or contact  
NCT now has T shirts, sweatshirts, coffee mugs, pencils, keyrings, etc. on sale from HQ.
Details from   and at group meetings.
Several older NCT children have started school this year so we shan't be seeing them at Open Houses now…
Good Luck to all!
Getting To Know You
The committee would like to get to know YOU better and therefore be able to run our branch more efficiently…so could you PLEASE fill in and return this page to any committee member/any group notice board (see envelope provided) /by post to the branch membership sec.,
NAME
ADDRESS
TEL.
NO.
PARTNER'S NAME
 CHILDREN'S NAME (S) & DATES OF BIRTH
WHAT YOU DO e.g. F/T mum, P/T teacher, F/T solicitor etc.
WHAT YOUR PARTNER DOES
We hope that you enjoy some benefit from your NCT membership and that you might be prepared to give a little bit of time back to the branch occasionally.
If you can help PLEASE tick the jobs you feel you might like to be involved with:
Attend/host a Working Mums group evening meeting Type articles for newsletter (machine available) Be a postnatal supporter to a new mum nearby Host an Open House meeting (you provide refreshments) Host a Mobile Mums meeting host a New Mums meeting Give jumble kids' clothes for sale at events Sell outgrown stuff at Nearly New sales Bake cakes (frozen ones very acceptable) for events Help in the kitchen at events or ‘man’ the stalls
PROBLEM
Coughs and Colds
‘Expect your child to get up to 9 colds a year.
Colds do not respond to antibiotics.
Most coughs are viral in origin and do not require antibiotics.’
(from Toddler Taming by Dr Christopher Green)
NCT mums' solutions…
‘When my kids have colds I put a homeopathic remedy called Olbas Oil on their chests and pillows when they go to bed.
It really does seem to ease their breathing while they sleep.
I even used this when the were very young.’
‘We taught her how to blow her nose with confetti on a tray, and clearing her nose at bedtime helps stop her coughing at night.’
‘I put a thick book under the head end of the cot so that the baby's chest can clear.’
NCT Birmingham Central Branch
Winter 1990–91
Editorial
We have been without  this issue as she is still receiving the last of her treatment from Charing Cross Hospital.
We all hope that she will be all well again in the New Year.
Thank you to everyone who offered their help to the branch on the questionnaire in the last summer.
The committee found this information so  useful that it is now an optional part of the branch membership form.
Do fill it in when you return your subs for 1991 if you want to get more involved.
Talking of subscriptions…everyone's is due on January 1st, and local membership will cost £8 (See page 8).
This is the ‘quiet’ season for branch events, but the AGM and social at the Reddings on 26th February is an important occasion, so do try to go along.
We could like to wish you all a happy festive season and a good year in 1991.
The views expressed in this  newsletter are those of the individuals concerned and not necessarily those of the NCT as an organisation.
WHAT IS NCT?
The National Childbirth Trust, formed in 1956, is Britain's foremost charity concerned with education for parenthood.
The NCT aims to help parents experience greater confidence in and fuller enjoyment of pregnancy, childbirth and the early years of parenthood.
There are 14,500 national members belonging to 343 branches, which have an additional 21,000 branch members.
Each branch operates a postnatal support network of one-to-one friendship.
Birmingham Central Branch covers B5 B10 B11 B12 B13 B14 B25.
Friendly support is offered by small groups of mothers and children meeting regularly in the daytime in each others houses.
We welcome any parents-to-be and any parents and their children.
New Mums group is aimed at mums with young babies and mums-to-be.
Many women do not know any other mothers locally when they have their first baby and this is an ideal group for finding support and friendship.
Mobile Mums group is aimed at mums and mobile babies in need of fireguards, etc. and more active toys.
Open Houses are for any mums and their children the majority of whom are obviously of pre-school age.
Feel free to come to any of these groups.
There are also evening Mothers in Employment meetings held monthly in homes and larger, fundraising Coffee Mornings on the last Thursday of each month.
Details of all these groups are in this newsletter.
FEEDING HELP is available from NCT Breastfeeding Counsellors who are mothers who have breastfed a baby and received training to give mother-to-mother non-medical support.
MAVA Sales offer a comprehensive range of maternity ware and baby equipment with profits going to NCT.
Their nursing bras are recognised as the best!
CHAIRPERSON'S REPORT
ANY ROOM AT YOUR INN?
It has been proposed and agreed that Birmingham hosts the  Branch's forum in November 1991.
It is likely that Central Branch will have the responsibility for organising overnight accommodation for NCT members wishing to stay over.
We hope to compile a list of local Bed & Breakfast accommodation, but would also like to be able to offer hospitality in local members' homes.
If you feel able to help with this or any other aspect of organising the forum please contact any committee member.
Central Branch has recently held two very successful fund raising events — a ‘Kiddiswap’ and the Christmas Sale.
Many thanks to all involved for working so hard towards improving our bank balance.
Last, but definitely not least, I ask you to carefully read the ‘situation vacant’ list for the committee.
We desperately need ‘new blood’ if your branch is to continue.
Please try and come along to your AGM on 26th February at  to find out more and to give the committee your views and opinions.
YOUR BRANCH NEEDS YOU111
On behalf of myself and your Committee I would like to thank you and your families a wonderful Christmas and a very happy New Year.
HQ News
1.
Thanks to the sponsorship of Pampers, the NCT has been able to produce a video ‘Informed Choice’ which has generated a lot of interest in the Trust, including 36 local radio interviews around the Country.
Pampers are also sponsoring the national NCT magazine ‘New Generation’ for the next 3 years.
Our branch copy of the video is available from 
2.
The Voluntary Organisations  Liaison Council for Under Fives & Workplace Nurseries have produced a book giving simple relevant and practical advice on planning, managing & running a day nursery.
£3.50 from VOLCUF,
3.
Epoch (End Physical Punishment of Children) is having a National ‘No Smoking Week’ from 31st Dec — 9th Jan 1991 as a collaborative venture between parents & children.
Details from Epoch:
4. 9 councils in Yorkshire have been testing foods for Listeria and are encouraged that food handlers & manufacturers have been improving their hygiene practices.
However, 1 in 7 snack bar sandwiches do contain Listeria, with eggs the main worry.
5.
The National Council for Women's ‘Charter for Women's Health’ launched in September calls for the right to knowledge, participation in health-care decisions, opportunity for choice, provision for quality care, accessible health care & the right to a healthy lifestyle (All issues that the NCT has been working towards for a long time).
In their national survey they found that:
•over half the women surveyed wanted to know more about maternity issues.
•53% felt that they had insufficient information on natural childbirth & the use of anaesthetics.
•55% needed more information about induction.
•only 8% of women who had children in the last 5 years said they would prefer a hospital consultant to provide their antenatal care.
There was a clear call for antenatal care to be provided by G.P. (22%) or midwife (26%) or shared care (36%).
•41% wanted care at G.P. surgery, 34% in their own home and only 16% in hospital.
•79% wanted their baby at a local hospital and only 8% at home.
•47% preferred to remain in hospital for 3 days after with only 8% feeling a 6 hour stay was sufficient.
6.
The Department of Health has issued a caution to women who are, or are about to become pregnant that there is some evidence from abroad, in women taking huge supplementary doses, to suggest that high levels of Vit.
A may cause birth defects.
As a result of these worries, the Chief Medical Officer has suggested that these women should not eat liver or liver products.
Vitamin A is alternatively found in carrots, margarine, dairy products, eggs, green vegetables, tomatoes, etc. and iron intake can be maintained or increased by eating lean red meat, meat products, fortified breakfast cereals, bread and vegetables.
Vitamin supplements currently prescribed as part of antenatal care are considered to be safe — but discuss your worries with a health professional.
7.
The British Medical Journal (June '90) reports that Miss Pauline Bousquet, an Obstetrician who supports natural childbirth at St. Thomas' Hospital, London has won her 11 year battle to clear her name on charges of professional incompetence brought by male colleagues.
8.
A survey of women in Massachusetts has found the average length of a first healthy pregnancy to be 41 weeks and 1 day, with subsequent pregnancies at 40 weeks & 3 days; Black and Japanese women have shorter pregnancies.
9.
Several recent trials have shown that ventouse extraction in difficult labour is preferable for the mother to forceps. 12,000 women annually would be spared pain-killing injections, 10,000 would avoid pain and 5,000 would avoid severe tissue injury: from the British Journal of Obstetrics & Gynaecology 1990.
10.
NCT would like to thank ‘Practical Parenting’ magazine for their support by giving NCT Maternity Sales advertising space at very attractively-priced rates.
Local Subscriptions 1991
The annual subscription is going up to £8 for the year 1991, which may seem like a rather large increase to some of us.
However the subscription has not gone up for 2 years and it is only a 15p per week rise.
Of the £8, the branch has to send £4 to the National Childbirth Trust HQ to support the work of the national charity, so we only get the remainder to spend on  's breastfeeding counsellor training, Penny's antenatal teacher training, newsletter production & mailing, our post-natal support network, expenses for members who sit on the Birmingham Maternity Services Committee and the Community Health Council etc. etc…
This last year all these outgoings have meant that fundraising has been a real necessity and to try to relieve that pressure, the committee have decided to raise the subs.
We hope you agree with that decision.
If you are wondering whether to renew your subscription, perhaps you would like to read page 19 before deciding?
Birth Report
When the going gets tough, the tough go shopping…
I'm not sure whether 2nd births are viewed with more or less apprehension.
The insight or knowledge, or the memories best forgotten!
My first child arrived quite quickly on the due date.
I woke up having 5 minute contractions and thought I'd lost ‘my water’ on the loo, without really being sure (if only you could have a trial run — but then you might not go through with it if you did!)
In the light of this and a vivid description of an unexpected home delivery to my husband — we were taking no chances — and I was rushed to the Birmingham Maternity Hospital, with 5 minute contractions, the evening before the 2nd Estimated Day Delivery with what turned out to be a false alarm!
I was monitored, contractions every 5 minutes, but no real pain.
I reached the dizzy heights of contractions every 2 minutes (still no real pain) when every thing seemed to fade away.
5 days later, eating mother's home-made chicken soup, I felt a bit odd.
I asked for a bowl, there was an embarrassed silence when no one moved to my aid (thinking I felt sick!)— and my waters soaked the kitchen floor.
An hour later I was being monitored at the Birmingham Maternity Hospital — weak contractions confirmed in labour, I was sent to the ward in a wheelchair.
Just as well.
The painful contractions started before I reached the ward and by the time the ward nurse had brought me 2 paracetamol, I needed to go back to the delivery suite!
I found counting breaths in my head helped me through the pain — the intensity of which is a memory.
I think my husband's hand has now stopped being numb from my squeezing!
I was too late for an epidural, but found the gas and air did help making me feel quite Euphoric.
I needed a ventouse extraction with my first child — with the epidural and having now delivered without an epidural — I understand why.
The amount of, intensity and direction of pushing were all wrong with the epidural.
With two excellent midwives giving advice and encouragement, was born very fast and I seemed to recover almost immediately.
I remember being amazed at the size of the placenta, which resembled a football and the lack of discomfort which accompanied its arrival.
was given to me to cuddle and suckle straight away.
I remember feeling totally elated.
I did need a few stitches, but frequent use of the bidet helped fast healing.
I was very impressed by the care and attention I received in labour and the concerned approach of the consultant and all the junior staff to things that I felt wrong with my first delivery.
Travels with a breast pump
Knowing that I would be returning to work when  (my second baby) was three months old, I acquired a battery-operated breast pump, as this time I was determined to express at lunch time to keep my supply going.
Luckily, my sister had moved to within five minutes walking distance of my office so I had somewhere comfortable to go — which was a great help.
Every lunch time, I would trot off with my large plastic box, and return an hour later with a container of milk which I would put in the office fridge.
One afternoon, a colleague said to me, ‘Why is the milk kept in such funny containers?’
‘What funny container?’
I asked.
‘You know’ he said, ‘the one in the fridge with the purple lid.’
Silence.
‘Did you make your coffee with it?’
I asked.
‘Yes, why?’ he replied.
At that point I burst out laughing.
Luckily, when I explained the situation, he saw the funny side of it.
I then went on to use breastmilk storage bags to minimise confusion.
On another occasion, we could all hear a loud buzzing noise in the office and were frantically trying to track it down when I realised what it was.
There was much hilarity when I dived into my bag and turned off the offending breast pump.
Its amazing how loud they are.
Just before Christmas I moved jobs, and in the middle of January I went away for three days on a course.
So I packed my plastic box, and off I went.
All was fine, until the Customs man stopped me at Heathrow Airport.
Rummaging through my bag he pulled out ‘the box’ and cautiously opened it.
‘What is this?’ he asked.
‘A battery breast pump,’ I replied.
‘A what?’ came the reply.
‘A battery breast pump,’ I repeated.
He gave me an odd look as if I was telling strange stories.
During my second evening at the hotel there was a knock at the door.
When I answered it, the hotel manager was there and he asked if he could have a discreet word with me.
He suggested that we adjourn to the bar.
I thought this is a little strange, but I met him there.
He then went on to say that he had had a complaint from the men in the next room, that I was using what he could only describe as ‘a female sex aid device’ for long periods at night and first thing in the morning.
I was very amused at this, and insisted on showing the manager what it was.
What does worry me though, is that I think he still thought it was a ‘female sex aid device’!
First published in Guernsey Branch's newsletter,In Touch,March 1990 
DIARY
Thank you to all our hostesses
If you find you have a problem and cannot hostess your group meetings as arranged, PLEASE contact the organiser who will help you, if at all possible, to find another venue nearby to avoid frustration and disappointment for others.
The NCT is a Charity
The following article written by , the editor of the national journal of the NCT ‘New Generation’, struck a chord with the branch committee members, and we hope that you too will want to continue to be part of NCT for at least the year 1991!
When I joined the NCT, like most members, I did so because I wanted the best antenatal classes possible and it seemed that I would have the chance to meet new mothers and make new friends after the birth too.
I was right on both counts, but it did not really sink in for some time that I had joined a charity.
After all, I had paid class and membership fees, and my main interest was not the NCT, but my baby.
It seems that this remains true for many members and while they develop great loyalty to their branches and individual antenatal teachers or breastfeeding counsellors, the significance of the national organisation largely passes them by.
It might have continued like that for me too, if I had not needed a chat with my local breastfeeding counsellor and realised she had not asked for any payment.
Despite extensive training, administered nationally, her services were free to anyone who needed her.
What was more, the couple of times I had rung my antenatal teacher for reassurance in late pregnancy after a brief stay in hospital had been free too.
Gradually, it dawned on me that this was an organisation which would allow me to take and give.
I could benefit from its charity work and I could contribute to it too.
This was one reason why I became a postnatal supporter for a year and why I trained as a breastfeeding counsellor.
The more I did for the Trust, the more I learnt about pregnancy, birth, breastfeeding, motherhood and myself.
This was invaluable for my second pregnancy and birth.
Since then, despite the odd hiccough, I have continued to give my time and effort to the Trust.
It still gives a lot back to me, and I am still making new friends.
One day, in the dim and distant future, I expect that I shall want to move into different arenas, but I imagine that I shall continue as an NCT member, not just to receive my favourite journal,New Generation but also to carry on contributing to my favourite charity.
I'm Not Saying He's a Genius, but…
As no doubt everyone knows, I am lucky enough to be the mother of the most lovely baby boy in the whole world.
Not only is  the most handsome and good natured nine month old ever, but he's obviously MENSA material.
Well.
I mean, he knows the answers to all the questions in the Baby Trivia Quiz already.
Obviously he can't quite speak in complete sentences yet, and his pronunciation is a bit poor sometimes, but he's got a good grasp of the facts.
I'm not showing off or anything, but here's just a sample of the questions he can complete, totally unprompted.
Q. What noise does a sheep make?
A. Baa.
Q. Where do monks or nuns live?
A. Abbey.
Q. A polar what, lives at the north pole?
A. Bear.
Q. What are you?
A. Baba.
Q. Where can you buy drinks?
A. A bar.
Q. What insect has yellow and black stripes and goes ‘buzz’?
A. Bee.
Q. Complete this well-known phrase or saying: ‘She wouldn't say…to a goose?
A. Boo.
Q. Which Scandinavian pop group won the Eurovision Song Contest in the 1970s?
A. Abba.
See what I mean…?!
Nearly New Sale
A very big thank you to all of you who helped with the sale.
In particular to  who passed over her pearls of ‘wisdom’ which made the organisation much easier.
Also  and  who not only helped on the day but also promoted the sale outside the NCT ensuring that we had plenty to sell.
We managed to make about £90 profit which wasn't too bad considering that we couldn't have full use of the kitchen.
still managed to raise over £10 from your cakes.
So thank you all again.
The Christmas Sale
First of all THANK YOU to everyone who helped in any way with the sale.
It would have been impossible without you!
We raised about £280 (with a little more to come) which is a worthwhile figure.
Many people said that they had an enjoyable afternoon and made a significant dent in their Christmas shopping list; it was really nice to see so many members there.
We also achieved a few column inches in the Focus paper and brought the NCT to the attention of many people who had never heard of us before.
Raffle prizes went to ,, and  and there are a few Christmas Cards and boxes of crackers left if anyone would like to buy them!
Help Wanted Urgently
Is anyone interested in a nanny share with me?
I'm looking for someone to look after nine month old  for about two/three days per week.
As I work freelance from home my days/hours can be completely flexible.
If you have a part time nanny and would consider combining with me to employ someone full time, please telephone to discuss asap.
Mothers in Employment
This group was set up to support mums facing the challenges of their current of future employment outside the home and in fact now has links with the Working Mothers Association (I am the local contact with WMA).
However anyone is welcome to these meetings, we do discuss all sorts of things not just topics related to work.
Why not gather together with other NCT members without the children for a change!!!
Post Natal Support
As a branch we try to offer every new mum support from another mum who lives locally.
The type of support offered depends very much on the people involved but the supporter is often a listening ear who may also be able to give some practical help with the new baby.
if you are a new mum who would like to be put in touch with another mum, or you feel you can offer some support 'phone me on .
NCT Membership Options
You can become a National Member of the NCT for £15 a year.
You will then be supporting the work of the national charity directly and will receive the quarterly journal ‘New Generation’ as well as automatic membership of your local branch.
National membership forms are available from  and should be sent to:
NCT Headquarters Alexandra House Oldham Terrace Acton London W3 6NH
Or You can become a local branch member and receive a quarterly local newsletter.
Birmingham Central Branch Local Membership form is over the page.
Getting to know you so we are able to run our branch more efficiently…
WHAT YOU DO e.g. F/T mum, P/T teacher, F/T solicitor etc.
PARTNER's NAME
WHAT YOUR PARTNER DOES
We hope that you enjoy some benefit from your NCT membership and that you might be prepared to give a little bit of time back to the branch occasionally.
If you can help PLEASE tick the jobs you feel you might like to be involved with:
Attend/host a Working Mums group evening meeting Type articles for newsletter (machine available) Be a postnatal supporter to a new mum nearby Host an Open House meeting (you provide refreshments) Host a Mobile Mums meeting host a New Mums meeting Give jumble kids' clothes for sale at events Sell outgrown stuff at Nearly New sales Bake cakes (frozen ones very acceptable) for events Help in the kitchen at events or ‘man’ the stalls
Local Membership
Membership costs £8.00 per year and runs from January to January.
Please work out how much you should pay from the table below and after completing the form please send it to: