

CONTENTS
EDITORIAL
NEWS
GARDENER'S VIEW Archie Skinner on composting at Sheffield Park Garden
A NATIONAL TRUST SURVIVAL KIT Miles Kington gives some tips on visiting Trust properties
BERNARD SHAW AT HOME Michael Holroyd on Shaw at Shaw's Corner
SHADES OF HENRY JAMES Rumer Godden on living in Lamb's House
DEATH AND GLORY ON THE BROADS Christina Hardyment on Arthur Ransome's East Anglia
A HOUSE OF ONE'S OWN Jane Dunn on Virginia Woolf at Monk's House
THE VALLEY OF THE BLUE MIST Ray Hallett visits Thomas Hardy's Dorset
A ROOM WITH A VIEW The Marquess of Anglesey in his study at Plas Newydd
ROOM AT THE TOP Max Egremont in his garret at Petworth
HISTORY AND ALL THAT Sarah-Jane Forder treads the boards at Charlecote
A DAY IN THE LIFE OF HELEN BROTHERTON
EDITORIAL
It is not often recalled that one of the Trust's earliest acquisitions, in 1909, was the cottage at Nether Stowey where the poet Coleridge wrote ‘The Rime of the Ancient Mariner’ and began his visionary epic ‘Kubla Khan’.
Since then the homes of several well-known authors have come into the Trust's care.
Amongst the most celebrated are Beatrix Potter's Hill Top in the Lake District; Bateman's, Kipling's Jacobean house in East Sussex; Lamb House in Rye, beloved by Henry James, but immortalised by E.F.
Benson as Miss Mapp's look-out post; and Sissinghurst Castle in Kent, whose remarkable garden was laid out by Harold Nicolson and Vita Sackville-West.
There are houses and landscapes too whose significance has been augmented by their enduring connections with literary imagination.
One thinks of Orlando and Knole; Squirrel Nutkin scampering along the shores of Derwentwater; and the Dorset and Wiltshire countryside which forms such an emotive backdrop for the characters in Thomas Hardy's novels.
The Trust in all has much to offer the literary explorer.
This year many followers of Hardy will no doubt have been tempted, as a tribute linked with the 150th anniversary of the novelist's birth, to visit his cottage at Higher Bockhampton in Dorset.
In many respects Hardy's birthplace evokes a quintessential vision of the English country cottage, with its thatched roof, old-fashioned garden and secluded setting.
Its tranquil qualities are, however, fragile and, in common with the other small-scale buildings and rooms which served as peaceful havens for writers, vulnerable to visitor pressure.
In microcosm Hardy's Cottage mirrors the dilemma which confronts the Trust at certain properties whose popularity at times draws visitors in greater quantities than can be accommodated comfortably.
Striking the balance between conservation and access becomes ever more complex, both in the countryside and in historic houses and gardens.
In continuing to address the potential conflict between conservation and access, the Trust is able to draw upon its considerable management experience.
At the same time it needs to be increasingly alert and responsive to changing circumstances in not merely a local but a global context.
We have entered an era when ever greater numbers of people wish to travel and have the means at their disposal of doing so.
This places enormous pressure on famous monuments and landscapes, as is starkly illustrated by the severe erosion in parts of the Lake District, the Peak District and Snowdonia.
The impact of tourism is rightly a subject of growing international concern, and the surrounding debate is one in which the Trust is well placed to make an important and practical contribution.
One such opportunity presented itself earlier this year at a conference organised by the International Council on Monuments and Sites.
The Trust's recommendations for a code of practice designed to reconcile the interests of conservation and tourism were widely welcomed.
As an organisation the Trust owes much to the tourist industry and it welcomes the opportunity to work alongside the regional tourist boards and the travel trade.
The worries arise, and the paths diverge in places, over the consequences of an uncritical pursuit of growth in the volume of visitors.
This can threaten the best interests of conservation of both the natural and the built environment, undermine the quality of the visitor's experience and jeopardise the standard of life of the indigenous communities.
Unless there is a concerted effort on the part of government and responsible agencies, independent organisations and enterprises to lend their legislative and practical determination and financial support to finding solutions, the heritage on which tourism depends will be irreversibly degraded if not destroyed.
There are now encouraging signs that just such combined action is being taken.
The Countryside Commission has published useful guidelines for tourism in the countryside and in National Parks, and both national and regional tourist agencies are committed to enhancing the quality of opportunity for visitors.
Devon County Council, for example, has incorporated into its structure plan a policy for its coastline aimed at providing a consistent degree of protection among its five maritime District Councils.
The Trust is working closely with South Shields District Council and others on potential tourism development and protection of the coast.
Berwick Borough Council's initiative in sponsoring a sustainable tourism strategy, which includes the Cheviot Hills and the Farne Islands, is to be welcomed.
The Trust is also being consulted over the preparation of a tourism strategy for the North Norfolk coast.
Involvement with projects like these, and the engagement in regular discussions with national authorities such as the English and Wales Tourist Boards, the National Park Authorities and the Countryside Commission, means that the Trust can share its conservation expertise and at the same time encourage and learn from others in helping to develop more sophisticated techniques in caring for and educating visitors.
It is perhaps particularly appropriate to consider tourism in an issue of the magazine whose theme is writers.
For whether knowingly or unknowingly, through fact or fiction, their stories can influence the traveller's choice of destination.
The Trust will on occasion be faced with a Wordsworthian dilemma over the degree to which it should promote some of its more sensitive properties, but the commitment to providing welcoming access for its members and visitors is an unwavering one.
Angus Stirling, Director-General
NEWS
Patronage Preserved
Many of the greatest treasures in National Trust houses would have been sold abroad long ago if it had not been for the ‘in lieu’ system, which was established in 1956 and which enabled private owners to give works of art to the nation in lieu of capital taxes.
Since that date Christie's has played a key role in many of these negotiations, and the fruits of its success are evident in Patronage Preserved , an exhibition to be held at 8, King Street, London from 2–20th January 1991.
A rare display of masterpieces in every medium will be assembled for the show from country houses all over Britain — from Haddo House in the north of Scotland to Arundel Castle on the south coast.
The Trust itself will be lending Largillière's famous portrait of Sir Robert Throckmorton from Coughton Court, pictures by Batoni and Vernet from Uppark, and Nicholas Dall's views of Shugborough, as well as furniture from Knole, porcelain from Ascott and items from Lord Curzon's Indian Museum at Kedleston.
Designs for Kedleston by James ‘Athenian’ Stuart and Robert Adam will also be shown, and this is doubly appropriate as the proceeds of the exhibition will be given to the Trust and will be used to store and display the unique collection of architectural drawings at the house in ideal museum-room conditions.
Access for All
For many years the Trust's wardens and countryside staff have been concerned to provide access for everyone wanting to explore the Trust's countryside and coast.
Many coastal properties, such as Studland Bay in Dorset, now have boardwalks over shingle or sand which enable wheelchair users and infirm visitors (as well as parents with pushchairs) to reach the beach without difficulty.
Several nature reserves, such as Wicken Fen in Cambridgeshire, have also eased access for wheelchair users with extensive boardwalks and the introduction of birdhides.
In addition, an increasing number of countryside properties now offer the use of battery-operated cars for less able visitors, enabling them to get the most out of their visit.
Full details of these and many more provisions are given in the Trust's annual booklet Information for Visitors with Disabilities .
For your free copy please send a stamped addressed label to Valerie Wenham, Adviser on Facilities for Disabled Visitors, Dept.
NTM, The National Trust, 36, Queen Anne's Gate, London.
Bomb at West Green House
A bomb which exploded in the evening of 12 June caused structural damage to West Green House in Hampshire.
The small eighteenth-century house with a delightful garden had previously been occupied by Lord McAlpine, former Treasurer of the Conservative Party.
Lord McAlpine ended his tenancy in May, vacating the house before a two-day auction of his possessions at Sotheby's.
Fortunately the house was empty when the bomb exploded, no one was injured and no contents were damaged.
Responsibility for the bomb has been claimed by the IRA and the police have carried out a full investigation.
The National Trust is currently undertaking a structural survey which will reveal the full scale of the damage, but it is already known that extensive harm has been done to the brickwork, windows and terrace.
Repair costs for restoring the house will be covered by insurance.
The West Green House and garden were closed to the public in April so that work could begin on a two-year restoration programme of the garden.
Birthday Parade
National Trust members Jerry Hall, Susan Hampshire, Angela Thorne and Gavin Campbell were joined by Trust staff in a tribute to the charity's President, HM Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother, for her official birthday parade in June.
Angela Thorne, star of To the Manor Born and Two Up Two Down , represented Octavia Hill, the principal founder of the Trust.
Her co-founders, Sir Robert Hunter and Canon Rawnsley, were played by two of the Trust's lawyers.
It was appropriate that the Trust's Solicitor, David Pullen, should play Sir Robert Hunter, the solicitor who drafted the Trust's Act of Parliament in 1907.
Radox Eases Aches in the Lakes
In May this year David Trippier, Minister for the Environment and Countryside, visited a few of the many Trust projects currently under way in the Lake District.
At Ashness Bridge, one of the most frequented sites in the Lakes, he helped to launch a major programme to combat the erosion caused by the pounding of millions of visitors' feet over the years.
The increase of corporate involvement has helped greatly in achieving the Lake District's Appeal 1987–89 target of £2 million two years ahead of schedule.
David Trippier and Chris Bonnington, the President of the Appeal, warmly congratulated Radox for its presentation of a cheque for £60,000, the largest single sponsorship ever received by the National Trust for countryside maintenance.
This gift will help finance the Trust's seven-man forestry team in Borrowdale, where the Trust owns some of the most magnificent forests and woodlands in Europe.
Sudbury-by-the-Sea
Sudbury Hall in Derbyshire, which must be one of the National Trust properties furthest from the sea, brought a whiff of sea breeze to the land-locked Midlands on 22 May.
The seventeenth-century hall and its grounds were awash with budding pirates and their parents enjoying traditional seaside activities, all of whom took home the message that the coastline needs protecting through Enterprise Neptune.
Neptune Reception at Queen's House
A reception organised by the Kensington & Chelsea National Trust Association in aid of the Enterprise Neptune Silver Jubilee Appeal was held on 3 July at the Queen's House, Greenwich.
Set in the Royal Hunting Park, the Queen's House is one of the great surviving masterpieces of the seventeenth-century architect, Inigo Jones.
It has been restored by the National Maritime Museum over the past five years and was reopened in May.
Help the Herdwick
Probably the best-known champion of the Herdwick sheep — almost certainly indigenous to the Lake District — was Beatrix Potter.
She kept a pure Herdwick flock at Troutbeck Park near Windermere and today her land and flocks are protected by the National Trust.
The Herdwick is the hardiest of all breeds in the Lake District, and it is particularly suited to life in the fells.
Yet the Herdwick has its problems.
Living as it does at high level, it produces fewer lambs than other breeds.
Although its meat is delicious, there is no special demand for it, and the same goes for its hard-wearing wool.
The Herdwick farmers depend on the sales of animals and wool for their livelihood.
If they cannot make a living from the Herdwick the breed will disappear, which would be an irrevocable loss of an animal which is such an important part of the Lakeland landscape.
Several lines of enquiry are being pursued with the Meat Marketing Board and the Meat and Livestock Commission, and you can help by asking for Herdwick whenever you buy woollen garments or meat.
If your suppliers need any information they should contact the North West regional office.
Thumbs Up to Card Scheme
National Trust members and the general public have given an enthusiastic reception to the National Trust Visa card and savings account scheme launched with Midland Bank in April.
Over 16,000 people applied in the first two months alone.
The sum of £250,000 has already been allocated to a number of projects, ranging from the purchase of Porthor in North Wales to the restoration of Biddulph Grange Garden where BBC gardening expert Geoff Hamilton accepted a cheque for £20,000 in May.
In November Midland confidently expects to be handing over further substantial sums generated by the opening and usage of each Visa card account.
If you have not yet applied, leaflets are available in all National Trust shops and branches of Midland Bank.
Visit to Calke
On her first official visit to Derbyshire in fourteen years, Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother, President of the National Trust, received a royal welcome at Calke Abbey in May.
After lunch in the restaurant Her Majesty was given a guided tour of the house by Director-General Angus Stirling which included opportunities to meet the donor, Mr. Henry Harpur-Crewe.
Events
This Christmas there will be the customary range of festive events at National Trust properties.
Please contact your nearest regional office to find out what is going on in your area.
For anyone wishing to walk off the excesses of the festive season, the National Trust and the Ramblers' Association are once again organising a Week of Christmas Walks.
The walks will take place all over England and Wales between Boxing Day and New Year's Day, and each will be led by representatives of the Trust and the Ramblers' Association.
For full details of locations and dates, please send a stamped addressed envelope to Week of Christmas Walks, The National Trust, London.
Less energetic members may be interested to hear of two lecture series based in London this October and early next year.
The first is four lectures at the Royal Society of Arts to celebrate various anniversaries in the conservation world:In Search Of Neptune , Dr. John Harvey, Chief Adviser on Nature Conservation (8 October);The Landmark Experience , Robin Evans, Director of the Landmark Trust (15 October);Common Roots , Rodney Legg, Chairman of the Open Spaces Society (22 October); and Lochs, Lairds and Legends , Christopher Hartley (29 October).
The lectures will all be held at 7pm in the Great Room of the Royal Society of Arts, 8 John Adam Street, London.
Tickets at £4.50 each are available from Miss Sheila Coles, 13 Lennox Gardens, London.
Please make cheques payable to the National Trust and enclose a stamped addressed envelope.
The second is the National Trust London Lecture Series which is now in its nineteenth year.
The lectures will take place in the Purcell Room on the South Bank.
Next year is National Trust Gardens Year and the series is taking a suitably horticultural theme:English Garden Style , John Sales, Chief Gardens Adviser (14 January);Stourhead Garden — The English Arcadia , Dudley Dodd, Deputy Historic Buildings Secretary (21 January);Garden Plants from the High Himalaya , Tony Schilling, Deputy Curator of Wakehurst Place (28 January);Biddulph Grange — The Restoration of a Victorian Garden , Keith Goodway, garden historian and botanist (4 February);Restoring and Designing Garden Features , Paul Edwards, landscape architect, writer and journalist (11 February);The Victorian Walled Garden , Peter Thoday, presenter of the BBC's Victorian Garden series (18 February);Other People's Gardens , Norman Painting OBE, garden enthusiast and Phil Archer of the BBC's The Archers (25 February);Alec Clifton-Taylor Memorial Lecture: Four Centuries of Gardening at Chatsworth , The Duchess of Devonshire (4 March).
Tickets at £4 and £4.50 per lecture (season tickets at £24 and £28) are available from 20 November from the Royal Festival Hall box office, London.
There is room for one wheelchair in the Purcell Room; please apply through the Festival Hall box office.
Although correct at the time of going to press, the programme is subject to amendment.
A leaflet giving final details will be available in October from the Events Office, 36, Queen Anne's Gate, London (please enclose a stamped addressed envelope).
Walking for the Earth
On 22 April millions of people worldwide celebrated Earth Day.
In Cornwall the National Trust joined with the Nature Conservancy Council and Friends of the Earth to organise the Great Cornish Earth Walk on the Lizard Peninsula.
Along the two-mile self-guided route from Mullion Harbour to Predannack hundreds of walkers of all ages were kept amused by a variety of events, including displays of environmental art, music making and face painting.
Pictured here is National Trust warden Phil Dyke who was on hand to explain techniques to interested onlookers.
A Year at Saltram
A unique exhibition can be seen from 4–24 September at the Chapel Art Gallery at Saltram, near Plymouth.
A Year at Saltram portrays the enormous varieties of activities taking place at this eighteenth-century house, from concerts and cocktail parties to visitors admiring the statues (see below).
Artist Mary Jane Alexander spent 1989 sketching at Saltram in preparation for the exhibition.
A Year at Saltram will be on view on Sundays to Thursdays from 11am to 6pm.
Hardwick to Close Early
The major work which started at Hardwick Hall in Derbyshire last winter to improve the conservation environment has continued this year with the installation of the second phase of a new heating system.
In order to avoid disruption of visitor's enjoyment, the work will be completed during the winter months.
Hardwick Hall will therefore be ‘put to bed’ six weeks earlier than usual, and will be closed from 16 September.
The garden will be open as usual until the end of October.
Bring Out Your Valuables
If you think you may be harbouring a priceless heirloom in your attic, why not satisfy your curiosity and take it along to a special Valuation Evening at Claydon House, Buckinghamshire, on 28 September?
The event is being organised by the Kensington & Chelsea National Trust Association with the help of Phillips auctioneers to raise money for the Stowe Landscape Gardens Appeal.
The evening will begin at 6pm with drinks and a tour of the house before the valuations commence.
A few of the most interesting objects (with the owners' permission) will then be discussed by the experts for everyone's benefit before the evening is rounded off with a buffet supper.
Tickets at £15 each can be obtained from Miss Maunsell, Flat 7, 6 Collingham Gardens, London.
Please make cheques payable to Stowe Landscape Gardens Appeal and enclose a large stamped addressed envelope with your order.
Barrington Court
The lease of Barrington Court in Somerset has been put up for sale by the Trust's tenant, Mr. Andrew Lyle, along with his family's surrounding freehold farmland.
The Lyle family took out the lease in 1920 and spent their own money on the restoration of Barrington Court and the creation of the Gertrude Jekyll-inspired gardens, which are only partly on Trust owned land.
By agreement between Mr Lyle and the Trust, extra opening hours and free admission to the gardens have been enjoyed by Trust members for some years.
These privileges will now be subject to negotiation with the new tenant, so it will not be possible to include Barrington Court gardens in next year's Handbook .
Studland Bay
Studland Bay in Dorset, which sits on top of one of the UK's biggest oil fields, has the protection of being owned inalienably by the Trust.
BP and its partners, who have been licensed by the Government to drill for oil in the area, have consulted closely with the Trust and have ruled out the easiest and cheapest development option, which would have been a ten-acre onshore site at Studland.
Brief details of the Trust's position can be obtained by sending a stamped addressed envelope to Liz Roberts, Wessex Regional Office, Stourton, Warminster, Wilts.
BP will also send out its two booklets setting out the options on application to Barry Halton, BP Exploration, 20 New Quay Road, Poole, Dorset.
Travelling Fellowships
The Arkell Travelling Fellowship was established in 1985 to encourage young people with a proven interest in conservation and the environment to travel abroad for two or three weeks to study a subject of their choice.
This year's Fellowships have now been awarded, funded by the G.R.W. Fox legacy, and as in the past they reflect a wide variety of interests.
Stephen Gamble, aged twenty-seven, a glass-house foreman at Oxford University Botanic Garden, is travelling to the USA to study educational and interpretive techniques at gardens and botanical collections on the Eastern Seaboard; Fergus McCormick, a 28 year-old architect, will visit East Germany and Poland to examine the practical philosophy behind the restoration and reconstruction of historic buildings in the aftermath of the Second World War; and Peter Sturgess, aged twenty-three, a postgraduate student at Liverpool University, has chosen to look at management, educational and interpretive techniques in parts of the Algarve.
Applications for next year's Fellowships are invited from people aged eighteen to thirty.
For further details and an application form please write (enclosing a stamped addressed envelope) to the Volunteer Unit Manager, The National Trust, Westbury, Wiltshire.
The closing date for applications is 1 December 1990.
Curiosities
There was an overwhelming response to the Curiosities competition in the summer issue.
Many people were along the right lines in naming the object as a hairdressing or veterinary tool, and among the more exotic replies were a Victorian music-box, a portable printing set and a wig maintenance kit.
The winning entry came from Dr and Mrs J.D. Sayers of Nottingham, who receive a copy of The National Trust Guide for correctly identifying the item in the photograph as an Overbeck's Rejuvenator, patented in 1924 by the scientist Otto Overbeck.
He believed that it could cure ‘all illness…with the exception of malformation and germ diseases’.
In the Daily Graphic in 1925 Mr Overbeck claimed that ‘since completing my apparatus and using it on myself, I have practically renewed my youth.
My age is 64 years, but I feel more like a man of 30 and I am mentally more alert’.
The rejuvenator and several other of Mr Overbeck's inventions can be seen at Overbeck's Museum in South Devon.
If you can identify the item pictured here, please write your answer on the back of a postcard with your name and address and send it to Curiosities,The National Trust Magazine , 36, Queen Anne's Gate, London.
The first correct reply selected on 1 December will receive a free copy of In Search of Neptune: A Celebration of the National Trust's Coastline , published by the National Trust at £16.95.
The winner's name and a brief description of the object will appear in the Spring 1991 issue of the magazine.
The competition is not open to National Trust employees or their relatives.
Mountain Bikes in the Countryside
Cycling, like walking, is one of the best ways of seeing and enjoying the countryside, and mountain bikes have proved to be the latest and most popular method of ‘green’ transport: over 1 million of them were sold last year.
There are over 28,000 miles of public bridleways and 6,000 miles of byways in England and Wales where cyclists legally have a right of way, but there can be a conflict of interests if certain codes of conduct are not observed elsewhere in the countryside.
In Surrey, for example, mountain bikers have discovered the joys of Box Hill's seemingly endless chalk slopes — ideal for stunt riding but not, unfortunately, for some of the eroded chalk faces.
In order to guide mountain bikers, the Countryside Commission has produced a Mountain Bike Cod of Conduct, which gives information on rights of way, access and the Countryside Code.
It is available free from the Countryside Commission Publications, 19–23 Albert Street, Manchester.
Peter Rabbit goes to Japan
Beatrix Potter's Peter Rabbit is one of Japan's most famous characters: he is often the first Englishman encountered by young readers, and the miniature quality of Potter's stories and illustrations strikes some deep chord in the Japanese heart.
To tell the story behind The Tale of Peter Rabbit , an exhibition of Beatrix Potter's Lake District will open in Tokyo on 20 September in the presence of HRH the Princess Royal, before moving on to Osaka and Okayama and finishing on 16 October in Kyoto.
The exhibition has been mounted by NHK, Japan's national broadcasting company, who last year made a successful documentary on Beatrix Potter and the National Trust's conservation work in the Lake District.
Photographs, videos and models will be used to put across the feeling of the Cumbrian farming landscape, including a section devoted to the Trust's work, and the NHK will be making a donation of £50,000 towards the Trust's Lake District Appeal.
Neptune Gala
Elf Aquitaine UK is sponsoring the National Trust's maritime extravaganza gala night at London's Royal Festival Hall on Tuesday 23 October to celebrate the Silver Jubilee of Enterprise Neptune.
It is hoped that the event will raise £50,000 towards acquisition of a further stretch of threatened coastline.
Distinguished artists Benjamin Luxon (baritone), Linda Finnie (mezzo soprano), Robert Cohen (cello) and Sir Charles Groves (conductor) are generously giving their services free, and the programme with its maritime theme will include Elgar's Sea Pictures , Stanford's Songs of the Sea , Arne's Rule Britannia and a unique performance of Lord Berner's The Triumph of Neptune , from his famous ballet for the Diaghilev company.
The evening will end with a spectacular firework display over the Thames.
Tickets are available at £15, £25 and £50, and booking opens at the Royal Festival Hall box office on 4 September.
Members in the south-east will have received a gala leaflet in this mailing and copies are available from the Events Office.
Coasting Home
Seventy-year-old Robert Steel completed his 2,000-mile, 100 -day marathon walk around the coastline of England on 7 August.
He raised over £25,000 for Enterprise Neptune and wherever he went was cheered along his way by National Trust supporters, including Centres and Associations, Girl Guides and Brownies.
He was accompanied for short stretches of his route by National Trust wardens.
He was welcomed back to London by the Lord Mayor of Westminster, timing his return to 12,34 and 56 seconds in order to give a digital reading of 1234567890.
One of Robert Steel's principal sponsors was Country Walking magazine, which is continuing its support by giving £2 to Enterprise Neptune every time a National Trust member takes out a year's subscription.
Full details are obtainable from Paul Sloggett,Country Walking , EMAP Publications, Bretton Court, Bretton, Peterborough.
Clumber Park RAC Rally
A special stage of the Lombard RAC Rally will be held at Clumber Park, Nottinghamshire, on Sunday 30 November.
This exciting and popular event raises a considerable amount of money for conservation work at Clumber, but it does mean that the park will be closed that day to visitors (including National Trust members), except for those spectators purchasing tickets to watch the rally.
Tickets for the event will be available at spectator entrances on the day itself.
Water Power in the Carneddau
The Trust in North Wales has been undertaking an in-depth feasibility study into the possibility of harnessing the natural water power of the Ogwen Falls on the 18,000-acre Carneddau Estate in Snowdonia.
The Carneddau is divided from the Snowdon massif by the Llanberis Pass, and here the Trust owns 17,430 acres of superb hill country, most of which was acquired with Penrhyn Castle.
The Falls, which are almost 290 feet high, could produce up to 800 kilowatts of electrical power for sale to the National grid.
The expected production of 3.6 million units of electricity annually would create much-needed income for the maintenance of the estate.
The proposals, confirmed as viable by the newly privatised Merseyside and North West Electricity Board, involve diverting some of the water from two streams at the head of the Falls and piping it underground to a small stone and slate turbine house at the bottom of the valley.
Once the water has turned the generator, it will be discharged back into the river in exactly the same state and volume as abstracted.
An existing overhead electricity line runs just 50 yards away from the turbine and will be fed with the power through an underground cable.
Detailed studies have been made of the area from a natural-history point of view.
Furthermore, full discussions with the National Rivers Authority have ensured that the water taken will not detract from the overall beauty of the Falls, and neither will the mosses and other flora be affected.
Clearly, the Trust has to be satisfied on all these points before proceeding.
The turbine will run mainly during the winter months when the heavy rainfalls in the area ensure an abundance of fast flowing water, and it is hoped that electricity generation will start in 1991.
Broadening Horizons
The third of the Trust's Foundation for Art exhibitions is to be held from 3 October to 2 November at Thos.
Agnew & Sons Ltd, 43 Old Bond Street, London W1.
The Broad Horizon will comprise works of art acquired by the Foundation between 1988 and 1990, as well as pictures and prints on Trust subjects which will be for sale.
Themes will range from portraits and landscapes to the Great Storm of 1987 and the aftermath of the fire at Uppark.
Participating artists include Leonard Rosoman, Dennis Creffield, Len Tabner and John Ward; pictured here is Cliff Walkers near Portreath by Ray Atkins.
Nymans Pinetum Reborn
The Great Storm of October 1987 almost totally destroyed the eighty year old pinetum at Nymans Garden in Sussex.
Two giant redwoods — virtually the sole survivors — now overlook the new pinetum planted in April this year.
The planting scheme employed 147 varieties of conifer, many of which were grown from cuttings taken from trees lost in 1987.
In all, 255 young trees were planted, a huge task which was completed by the garden team at Nymans in ten days and which has already gone a good way towards restoring the diversity of colours, shapes and textures of conifers in their prime.
Chartwell Swings
GIs, Wrens, Waafs, splendidly moustachioed Flying Officers and even the odd Rear Admiral brought the 1940s back to Chartwell, Sir Winston Churchill's home in Kent, at the beginning of June when dancing to the Big Band sound of Syd Lawrence Orchestra continued into the early hours in a huge marquee decked out with the flags of the Allies.
To add to the atmosphere, chocolate rations were issued at midnight.
Ambridge Comes to Town
The biggest event organised by the Trust this year took place over the weekend of 23 and 24 June when the countryside was brought to Salford in Greater Manchester.
As well as demonstrations of country crafts, such as sheep shearing, hedge laying, stonewalling and spinning, there were opportunities for people to participate in activities ranging from bug-hunting to searching for gold.
Supported by the Countryside Commission, the Countryside Comes to Town was designed to help people enjoy and learn from first-hand experience about the Trust's work in the countryside.
There was an Education Day, special facilities for the disabled were laid on, and many other conservation bodies were also present, including Friends of the Earth, Greenpeace and the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds.
The Tidy Britain Group was busy most of the weekend recycling paper and glass brought along to the site by visitors.
Feeling very much at home among the farm animals were Colin Skipp and Patricia Gallimore, better known as organic farmers and yoghurt makers, Pat and Tony Archer from the long-running radio series,The Archers .
On the Sunday, Pat and Tony were joined by Kenton Archer, country antiques dealer and farmer's son.
He spent the day handing out details of the new Archers Addicts Fan Club for which, needless to say, there was a fast trade.
Carving at Claremont
A 184 year old cedar tree which was blown down in the January storms was the focus of an enterprising initiative in April at Claremont Landscape Garden, Surrey.
The Head Gardener, Andrew King, had arranged for a local woodcarver, Dave Meekes, to be on spot to craft the wood into bowls as the tree was sawn up by a team of tree surgeons.
The bowls were then sold to onlookers and by the end of the day over £1,000 had been raised for the storm appeal.
Claremont was not the only property to turn a loss into a gain.
At Ickworth in Suffolk, woodturners and craftspeople from around the country flocked to attend a weekend sale of timber from trees lost in this year's storms and in October 1987.
The many scarce varieties of wood, including box, yew, mulberry and walnut, created a great deal of interest.
More than £5,000 was raised, and this will be used for planting the garden and park surrounding Ickworth's rotunda.
Legacy Makes History
The National Trust has been left the largest bequest in its history by Mrs Helena Levy, the widow of leading philanthropist, Kenneth Levy.
The Levys had been keen supporters and benefactors of the Trust for many years and had given hundreds of thousands of pounds to various projects in their lifetime.
The generosity of this couple paid for the redecoration of Clarendon House, Surrey; the establishment of the Levy Textile Workroom at Hughenden Manor, Buckinghamshire; the restoration of the seventeenth-century garden at Ham House, Surrey; and the refurbishment of the Bath Assembly Rooms, Avon.
When Helena Levy died earlier this year the Trust was delighted to find that this generosity had extended to leaving seven-eighths of her estate to the Trust — a sum likely to amount to nearly £5 million.
It has yet to be decided exactly how this money will be spent but, as with all legacies, it will either be used for new acquisitions or for vital capital expenditure on properties.
Although a legacy of this size is obviously a rare occurrence, the Trust is remembered in many people's wills and these bequests form a vital part of its income.
If you would like to consider leaving a bequest to the Trust please contact the Legacies Unit, 36, Queen Anne's Gate, London.
Letters
Madam, Nearly two million of us belong to the National Trust because we believe in what it stands for, and because it offers us superb value for our annual subscription.
In general, we seem to be pleased with the way it goes about its work, and many like to feel that we can contribute ideas as well as money.
We are entitled to vote at Annual General Meetings and to elect a proportion of those members who form the Council of the Trust (that is, those not appointed by a number of interested organisations).
Not only can we write to the Trust telling it what we like or dislike, but any ten of us can propose Members' Resolutions at our AGM making recommendations to the Council on matters of concern.
However, we are not ‘shareholders’ and cannot instruct the Council what to do; and that is probably appropriate.
It all seems most democratic in this most democratic of countries.
But recently three issues have raised questions about how democratic the process really is.
A resolution to ban fox-hunting on Trust properties was ‘lost’ after discussion at the 1988 AGM by 433 to 402 votes — fairly even.
Prior to the AGM a postal ballot had voted against the resolution by approximately 46,000 to 29,000votes — a much larger proportion than one would expect.
Were the postal voters who did not hear the discussion, over-influenced by a statement of comment from the Council and by its recommendation that members should vote against the resolution?
Last year a resolution on nudist areas was accompanied by an explanatory statement form its proposers which was considered by many hundreds of naturist members of the Trust to be inaccurate and tendentious.
They had no opportunity to put their case until the AGM —after all the postal votes had already been counted.
Another widely supported resolution was unacceptable, as it stood, to the Council.
A spokesman explained that the Council could agree to make safeguarding areas threatened by water privatisation ‘a major priority’ but, understandably, not ‘the major priority’.
Yet it was quite impossible, constitutionally, for any amendment to be made which would allow the resolution to get almost unanimous support.
Does any of this really matter?
After all, we cannot tell the Council what to do.
Less than 0.05 per cent of us actually manage to attend the AGM.
Less than 4.25 per cent of Trust members seem to vote at all.
Is is worth the trouble of allowing members to propose resolutions?
How many notice the resolutions or ballot forms inserted in the autumn magazine, hidden among the Christmas card adverts?
Well,does it matter?
Should both sides of a case be heard before the postal ballot?
Should the Council advise members how to vote before the AGM?
Should there be wider discussion of these issues beforehand?
Can anyone think of a way of proposing amendments before the postal ballot without the wasted expense of additional mailings?
Or without extending the whole process so that it takes nearly a year to change anything?
I don't know the answer to all these questions.
But I do think they are important questions.
What do other members think?
Yours faithfully Malcolm Shifrin Leatherhead, Surrey.
Book News
Last year one of the greatest landscape gardens in Europe came under the care of the National Trust: the eighteenth-century gardens at Stowe, Buckinghamshire.
The major restoration programme has necessitated an appeal for £1 million.
So, to help with funds, the Trust is publishing Temples of Delight (£12.95) on 25 October, in association with George Philip.
Written by John Martin Robinson, it traces the progress of the Temple family, whose political ideas and ambitions are so clearly seen in the gardens and buildings they created at Stowe.
The text is magnificently illustrated with photographs by Jerry Harpur, specially commissioned by the National Trust.
Gervase Jackson-Stops has also come to the aid of Stowe, with An English Arcadia 1600–1990 , an exhibition of designs and watercolours of gardens in the care of the National Trust which opens in the USA next year.
He has compiled an illustrated catalogue to accompany the exhibition (£19.95 hardback, £12.95 paperback) which is published in the spring.
A second book by Gervase Jackson-Stops,The English Country House in Perspective is published on 17 September in association with pavilion (£25).
There has been a plethora of books on country houses over the last ten years, but author and illustrator Peter Morter and Brian Delf, have found a new and intriguing approach.
They literally remove the roof from a series if twelve buildings, all National Trust, to show the layout of each, and how they were lived in, in the household.
One household not included in the twelve, but unique in its own right, is Erddig, North Wales.
Here the Yorke family carefully documented the lives of their servants in poems, portraits and household accounts.
When the house came to the Trust it was so dilapidated that few could its potential.
One of the far-sighted was Merlin Waterson, who wrote an account of the squire's household,The Servants' Hall .
A new paperback edition brought up to date and published under the Trust's own imprint, is published on 20 September (£9.95).
The famous ‘spider woman’ of Erddig duly appears on the cover of The Servants' Hall , but most of the accounts are of the menservants.
All too often records of women, whether mistress of the house or maid servant, are lost or never existed in the first place.
Jan Marsh and Trevor Loomis have found seven National Trust houses where we do have a very clear idea of how women lived and thought.
The result is The Woman's Domain , published in association with Viking Penguin on 30 August (£16.99).
The voice of Bess of Hardwick can be heard ordering her household in Derby shire at the end of the sixteenth century, but less well-known women also make their appearance, including Mary-Ann, the dairymaid at Uppark in Sussex who captured the heart of Sir Harry Fetherstonhaugh, and Carolyn Workman, whose transfer from her father's parsonage in Norfolk to the grandeur of The Vyne in Hampshire bears more than a passing resemblance to Fanny Price's story in Jane Austen's Mansfield Park .
As well as great historic houses, it is important to remember that the Trust also owns over half a million acres of land and many vernacular buildings.
In Britain's Countryside Heritage Phil Colebourn and Bob Gibbons investigate the landscape and how the hand of man can be detected, even in some of the wildest areas.
Originally this book was published as Britain's Natural Heritage , but Blandford Press have now completely revised the text, introducing National Trust examples into the casebook studies, and will publish a paperback edition in October (£12.95).
Margaret Willes Publisher
Reviews
The Journal of Beatrix Potter 1881–1897, transcribed from her code writings by Leslie Linder (Frederick Warne, £25.00)
Beatrix Potter's journal for the years 1881–1897 spans her life between the ages of fifteen and thirty.
Originally written in cipher in a collection of paper and exercise books, the code was broken in 1958 by Leslie Linder; this is his first unabridged edition with a splendid new foreword by Judy Taylor.
Beautifully bound, the journal has discreet and informative footnotes, family trees and a chapter on the code itself.
Good quality black and white photos show the author and her family on holiday, while a number of her line drawings and watercolours datable to this period clearly illustrate her considerable artistic talent.
The daughter of rich and high-minded Victorians based in London, hers was a sometimes lonely but always privileged childhood of governesses, wonderful holidays in Britain attended by a retinue of servants, and family friends that included the talented and famous.
Externally conformist and controlled, her journal functions as the confidant she never had: ‘My head feels empty and I am nothing particular.
Will things never settle?
Is this being grown up?
’ Beatrix filled her teenage life with educative pastimes and pursuits — collections, art, photography, current affairs — while her interests broadened, as she moved into the adult world, to embrace geology and biology.
The last few months of her journal witness a severe crisis in her life when, having produced a scientific paper on lichen (nowadays considered ahead of its time), her researches were dismissed in a high-handed and sexist way by the Director of Kew Gardens to whom she presented her work.
This is a fascinating document which gives great insight into the formative years of an important children's writer who in later life emerged as a conservationist and landowner, endowing the National Trust with fifteen Lakeland farms and 4,000 acres.
Fran Doel
Shop Front
Included in this mailing is the National Trust catalogue for 1990–91 with its gift ideas for Christmas, birthdays and other special occasions.
Several new ranges are featured as well as many traditional favourites, such as the National Trust cake.
Many of the gifts in the catalogue are also available from the National Trust property shops, some of which are opening on selected days for Christmas shopping (see back of the catalogue for details).
The popular Country House selection appears in the catalogue, with many new items exclusive to the mail-order shopper.
For example, an earthenware tankard (£17.95) has been produced as a limited edition of 2,000 to commemorate the bequest of Blickling Hall and Estate in Norfolk to the Trust by the 11th Marquess of Lothian in 1942.
The Marquess of Lothian initiated the Country House Scheme, which has been central to the preservation of great houses and their contents.
Noreen Conwell, a talented young designer, has produced two crêpe de Chine scarves with a floral pattern inspired by the herbaceous borders at Anglesey Abbey, Cambridgeshire.
The scarves have been designed exclusively for the National Trust and cost £45 each.
This season's Floral range of toiletries (pictured here) is available in three specially blended traditional fragrances enhanced by natural oils and plant extracts: sweetpea with almond oil, rose with cucumber extract, and honeysuckle with peach kernel.
Please refer to the catalogue for the full range of products available.
After an extensive two-year project a new visitor complex has been opened on the Suffolk coast at Coastguards Cottages, Dunwich Heath.
New facilities include a tearoom, shop, three holiday flats and a look-out room.
The complex is ideal for disabled visitors: a chair-lift provides access to the look-out room, one of the flats has been adapted for disabled holidaymakers and a Batricar is available for trips on to the heath.
For further details about the National Trust catalogue, please write to National Trust (Enterprises) Ltd.
Melksham, Wiltshire.
Gardener's View
An essential element in improving garden soil is the regular incorporation of organic material or humus.
Humus is decayed animal and vegetable matter, which is vital to the physical condition of the soil, forming a vigorous, breathing, organic environment for the well-being of plants.
The addition of humus is of benefit to all soils, whether they are alkaline or acid, light and sandy or heavy clay.
A soil rich in humus will have a greater capacity for water retention, aeration will be improved with less leaching of nutrients, and heavier soils will become easier to work.
At Sheffield Park Garden we have always considered time spent in the production of good compost as time well spent.
No planting is undertaken without the addition of compost in the planting hole, and this is followed by a surface mulch.
Compost is always used when digging the beds for the division of perennials in the spring.
In the autumn, a time-consuming task is the raking up of leaves.
We have improved matters by cutting up the fallen leaves with a rotary grass-cutting machine which makes it easier for raking and collection for the compost heaps; the chopped leaves also rot down that much quicker.
During the raking, we push a considerable amount under the trees and shrubs thereby providing a mulch.
Sheffield Park is a large garden and we use a considerable amount of compost in a year, so our compost heaps are of ample proportions, each one being approximately 18′x 14′ x5′ high.
They are made up of chopped leaves and grass cuttings.
We have three separate heaps, side by side, so by the time we use the compost it is three years old, having been turned once each year.
We use no activator; the grass cuttings and regular turning promote decomposition.
The end product is of similar appearance to peat, rich and dark in colour and friable.
Although good compost can be produced more quickly, the above method fits in with our work schedule and our planting times.
In the smaller garden, compost is of increasing value — especially as there seems to be a distinct possibility of a reduction in the supply of peat to both gardens and commercial nurseries.
All kinds of vegetable refuse may be used from the garden and the house for the compost heap, but not woody material.
There are many types of bin sold to keep the compost area tidy and clean, or you can make your own.
An activator may be used to speed up the process but certain basic principles should be borne in mind.
First, the layers of plant refuse should be 6″to 12″ in depth; second, the heap should have some shelter if possible from sun and wind, to prevent drying-out and loss of heat; third, a supply of nitrogen can be incorporated in alternate layers.
If the compost is intended for your vegetable garden, you can use hydrated lime in the alternate layers, but beware of this if you plan to use the compost on rhododendrons, azaleas or other lime-hating plants.
If turned, two or three times, the heap will decompose without getting too hot or becoming mildewed.
Stacked for six months this will provide a useful ingredient to dig into the ground in the autumn, either forked in when planting or used as a mulch.
A National Trust SURVIVAL KIT
Miles Kington
After many years of National Trust-going, I have found that visits to historic properties are made much easier if you take the right equipment with you, and now I wouldn't dream of going anywhere without at least the following:
1 bag of nuts (to drive away National Trust squirrels)
1 bag of apples (to stave off starvation in the Chinese Bedroom on the fourth floor)
1 small spare carrier-bag (for apple cores — NT houses are low on modern waste-paper baskets, especially in Chinese Bedrooms)
2 oranges (one to eat, one for when children say: ‘What happened in an orangery?’ so that one can say; ‘They grew oranges — oh, look here's one!, taking it from a Greek statue's ear)
1 portable chair, collapsible (you have probably noticed that, at the very moment you feel like a quick sit-down in an old house, all the chairs suddenly develop signs saying NOT TO BE SAT UPON, and all the window-seats are occupied by NT helpers)
1 long hook on a stick (to retrieve children's toys, balls, etc., which roll way beyond red cordon which says DO NOT GO BEYOND THIS RED CORDON)
1 comb (for moment when you look into a magnificent eighteenth-century 18′ x 18′ mirror and suddenly realise you're letting the whole place down with your unkempt hair)
1 telescope (either for looking at wonderful views from Chinese Bedroom or more likely for reading the label on object ten feet beyond the red cordon — seldom as rewarding as it should be, as it usually says; Portrait of Unknown Lady by Anonymous Artist or Occasional Table in the style of Sheraton)
1 room-by-room guide to Chatsworth (bit cheeky, this, as it is simply to perplex guides and attendants who are not used to seeing people coming round their house with noses stuck in guide to a completely different mansion, though you'd be surprised how often it fits well anywhere)
1 small twentieth-century ornamental dinner plate with picture of Scarborough Beach (this is optional, actually, but I always find it adds spice to a tour of a house if, when interest is flagging, you quietly get it out and prop it up on a table and then say innocently to an attendant: ‘What's the story behind that plate?’ and then wait to see what sort of explanation is invented by someone who has never seen it in his or her life before)
1 torch (for looking under four-poster beds, up chimneys, down old dungeons, etc., at children's request)
1 teddy bear (for putting in bed in Chinese Bedroom)
6 assorted jars of chutney, unused (I don't know about you but I seem to accumulate chutney, pickles, lemon curd, etc., faster than I can demolish it and rather than throw it away when useless, I'd prefer to give it a good home — the best way of all is to sneak the jars into the National Trust shop at your local Hall or Towers and leave them among the chutneys already there)
1 National Trust membership card (sounds simple, but I have never yet remembered to take it)
In Pursuit of the PEAKS
ADVERTISEMENT FEATURE
We'd started out far too late, the weather was dreadful and the route unfamiliar.
Yet, as we turned off the Buxton Road into Ashford-in-the-Water, we found ourselves back on schedule and completely relaxed.
We were fortunate to have the loan of a new Citroën BX 4x4 Estate for our weekend trip, which, with its sure-footed permanent four-wheel drive, impeccable road manners and self-levelling suspension, had taken everything in its stride,— including, thanks to its optional electronic ABS braking system, stopping quickly and safely when we suddenly encountered a 5 mile tail back in a contra-flow on the M1.
Thus, safe and composed, we arrived in the very heart of Derbyshire's beautiful and historic Peak District, looking forward to our three day stay and in plenty of time for dinner.
Night One — On the banks of the Wye
After a meal which bore sumptuous witness to the Riverside Country House Hotel's reputation for reasonably priced and lovingly prepared local game and produce, we soaked in the charming 17th Century atmosphere and began to plan the first of our walks.
It was no easy task.
Ashford-in-the-Water sits precisely on the line which divides the limestone plateau of the so-called White Peak from the upland moors and valleys to the North.
With so much within easy reach, we were clearly spoilt for choice and decided to sleep on it.
Still undecided, we breakfasted early and, having packed our walking gear into the Citroën (though with up to 64 cubic feet of space accessed through a hatch that opens practically down to ankle level, packing is hardly the word), we drove off.
Day one — Heading for the heights
The day was fresh and clear and our first panoramic view over the Wye from Monsal Head was literally breathtaking.
The Derbyshire Dales are justly famous for their beauty.
Many feature spectacular limestone cliffs of the sort that rock climbers find irresistible.
Others nestle more gently around small meandering streams.
Alas, we couldn't visit them all.
So, after lunching at one of the excellent local inns, we contented ourselves with making a wide sweep South to the River Dove and back up to the Derwent,— stopping at Castleton which, with its show caves and fluorspar (Blue John stone) mines shouldn't be missed and at Eyam which was so badly ravaged by the pestilence of 1665/6 that it is still known as The Plague Village.
Finally we turned back past Haddon Hall, a magnificent mediaeval country house and reputedly the finest of its kind in Britain.
It was a wonderful drive on an afternoon balmy enough to warrant lowering the electric windows and we cruised along to Mahler's music playing on the six speaker sound system, through some of the most beautiful countryside we have ever seen.
Day 2 — Under sweeping skies
On the second day, as we set off to walk over one of the high gritstone moors towards Kinder Scout, a sudden squall made us pleased at our foresight in bringing our Sprayway Torridon jackets along.
Quite how the Gore-tex fabric manages to be completely waterproof and yet allows body moisture to escape, I simply can't fathom.
But it does very effectively, so we were smart and snug and weatherproof as we went on to enjoy the most exhilarating walk of the entire weekend.
Although much of the Dark Peak, as these Northerly uplands are called, is very exposed, it is also full of famous beauty spots.
So many, in fact, that even with our road hungry Citroën we couldn't possibly have sampled the complete menu in the available time.
But we saw enough to be grateful that so much is being done to protect and conserve this rich heritage and, driving on lead-free petrol, we felt comfortable knowing that we were doing our bit.
Remote though this area can be, even the minor roads are generally good, although we once had to switch the Citroën's self-levelling suspension to HIGH to increase ground clearance through a ford.
And soon afterwards we were grateful for its responsive power steering and generous reserves of torque (perfect for those 1:5 hills) to take the climb up Winnat's Pass with ease.
That evening we looked back on the day with our fellow guests whose interests — from birdwatching to archaeology, cave-exploring to gliding — reflected the enormous variety of activities catered for across the region.
Day three — A last look round and a temporary farewell
We had decided that our last day would be spent sampling one of the many activities which the hotel offered to arrange.
We had originally intended to try our hand at clay pigeon shooting or perhaps even gliding, but our time was running out and there was still so much we wanted to see.
So we went for a last look round.
We began at Bakewell, the central town of the Peaks, where we visited the 14th Century church to see its celebrated collection of mediaeval monuments, did some souvenir shopping and couldn't resist a genuine Bakewell Pudding before going to nearby Chatsworth, the ‘Palace of the Peak’.
The BX 4x4 Estate, yesterday a safari vehicle, became today a Grand Tourer as we made our farewell circuit through picturesque villages and bustling market towns until we arrived at the old spa resort of Buxton, said to be the highest town in England, where we had, reluctantly, to admit that it was time to head for home.
But we'll be back, and next time, after the impressive performance of this car, it will be in a Citroën BX 4x4 Estate of our own.
We set off to walk over one of the high gritstone moors towards Kinder Scout.
Once we had to switch the Citroën's self-levelling suspension to ‘high’ to increase ground clearance through a ford.
The BX 4x4 Estate, yesterday a safari vehicle, became a Grand Tourer as we made our farewell circuit.
We'll be back and next time after the impressive performance of this car, it will be in a Citroën BX 4x4 Estate of our own.
THE AWARD WINNING CITROËN BX RANGE
14 Saloon models including BX GTi 4x4 from £7,840 to £14,971.
6 Estate models from £10,243 to £13,428.
Wide range of engines including the 90hp Turbo Diesel and the 160hp 16 valve petrol engine.
Models available with catalytic convertor.
Up to 51.4 cubic feet of luggage space for Saloons and 64.0 cubic feet for Estates.
Bernard Shaw at Home
Michael Holroyd
‘We are in the agonies of househunting’, Bernard Shaw wrote to his friend H. G Wells in the spring of 1904.
He and his wife Charlotte had been in their early forties when they had married six years before.
They lived in a double-decker apartment in Adelphi Terrace that had been Charlotte's home before her marriage.
It was a pleasant place, overlooking the the Thames and Embankment Gardens, spacious and, except for the occasional hooting of the boats, quiet.
But Shaw had not been well and Charlotte felt he urgently needed to be revived with country air.
Like swimmers coming up to breathe, they regularly ventilated themselves outside London, sometimes renting cottages, sometimes staying in hotels, and sometimes whirling recklessly through the Continent.
It was an exhausting regime of rehabilitation.
Shaw longed for a settled home such as Wells had at Sandgate.
‘Now is the time,’ he implored him, ‘to produce an eligible country residence, if you have one handy.’
Eventually the Shaws came across the Rectory in the village of Ayot St Lawrence, three miles north-west of Welwyn in Hertfordshire.
It was a plain, dark-red villa, built in 1902, standing in a sloping two-acre plot with scraps of kitchen garden, orchard, lawn and a belt of conifers.
Besides the dining-room, study and a small drawing-room, there were eight bedrooms.
The Rector, who could not afford to keep up the grounds, had no need of such a large house himself, and Charlotte decided to rent it.
The Shaws moved in at the beginning of December 1906 with a married couple, Henry and Clara Higgs, to look after them.
Ayot St Lawrence was a twelfth-century village.
In the early twentieth-century it had two churches, one shop, no omnibus or train service, no gas or water supply and no electricity (the Rectory had a private generator).
According to G.B.S. the last thing of importance that had happened in this agricultural community was, perhaps, the Flood.
It seemed a strange place for a red-bearded revolutionary socialist to live.
Neither he nor Charlotte had intended to stay there long, But they continued renting the house for fourteen years, and after the First World War they bought it — after which it became known as Shaw's Corner.
‘People bother me,’ G.B.S. told his housekeeper near the end of his life.
‘I came here to get away from them’.
Shaw divided his weeks between London and Ayot, doing much of his writing on the train.
He soon became a familiar hazard with his dog Kim, ‘the village terror’, and his car in which he would career at fully twenty miles an hour down the narrow lanes.
‘The villagers all thought he was a rum one — a very rum one’, remembered one of his neighbours.
It was not until the famous Hertfordshire Blizzard of 1915, when Shaw went out and worked with the menfolk sawing up trees that lay blocking the roads, and the Zeppelin Raid the following year (which he incorporated into his play Heartbreak House ), when he offered his cellar as a shelter, that the villagers grew friendly with him.
Only one of his plays, the charming ‘comedietta for two voices in three conversations’ called Village Wooing , which featured the local postmistress, took its inspiration from Ayot.
But many of his comedies, romances and extravaganzas after The Doctor's Dilemma were partly written there.
He would write in the garden, steeping out from the verandah at the back of the house (‘my Riviera’) and hurrying past the flowers and trees to a small revolving hut, like a monk's cell with its desk and chair and bunk.
The author of Pygmalion and St Joan was to become the most famous playwright in the world.
But here, in what visitors mistook for a tool shed, he was conveniently out of the world's reach.
Having no children, Charlotte Shaw treated the servants at Ayot as a family.
Besides the Higgses, there were two maids, a cook, chauffeur and assistant gardener.
All of them agreed that Mrs Shaw who was ‘one of the best’, helped Mr Shaw tremendously with his plays.
The two gardeners often speculated over what they were talking about as Shaw and Charlotte circumnavigated the lawn together.
‘They had a special route round the garden which was just about a mile, and they put one stone down every time they passed it’, the assistant gardener Fred Drury observed.
Henry Higgs noticed these stones too and how they ‘used to take them off the windowsill on the way back one by one’.
In this way several balanced miles were measured out.
Such neatness was particularly characteristic of G.B.S. ‘He was very particular about his erectness and appearance — proud of his person and figure’, the Irish parlourmaid saw.
‘He always changed for the evening meal regardless of whether anyone was coming or not’.
Sometimes there were famous guests: heavyweight boxers, film actresses, war heroes, prime ministers.
Out of doors Shaw continued to look spry and active well into his eighties.
Chopping wood, making bonfires, sawing logs, collecting acorns, eyeing the strawberries while patrolling up and down with his special secateurs, he appeared to one neighbour ‘like a magic gardener in a fairy story’.
To everyone's relief he had given up driving in his eighties.
The last years had been alarming for his chauffeur.
He was often obliged to pull the wheel from his employer's hands or cry out ‘Brake, sir!’ and ‘Stop!
That will do, sir!’
As a pedestrian, however Shaw was still supremely noticeable as he sailed by in his knee breeches and Norfolk jacket for walks of up to six miles.
After Charlotte's death in 1943, the villagers all noticed how extraordinarily frail and sunken Shaw looked.
But he lived another seven years and continued working to the end.
After St Joan he had been awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature; after his film of Pygmalion he had been given an Oscar.
But his last work was a collection of endearingly blurred photographs and awful verses entitled Bernard Shaw's Rhyming Guide to Ayot St Lawrence .
Much of his energy over these last years had been devoted to alchemical experiments to find a new alphabet capable of spelling the English language.
After his death at the age of ninety-four on 2 November 1950, following a fall in his garden, his will was recognised to be a great public-spirited document.
He had left his estate, including his copyrights, to the British Museum, the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art, and the National Gallery of Ireland; and he had given Shaw's Corner to the National Trust.
To prepare for this he had moved many of his photographs, pictures, books and other possessions from London so that the house, though not looking exactly as it did when he was there, became a showplace bursting with Shaviana.
Here are his typewriter and weighing scales, ‘alfabetical’ and vegetarian postcards, the photographs of Ibsen, William Morris, Granville Barker Ghandi and even Stalin.
From all heights and angles the faces of G.B.S. confront you, from the bust done of him by Rodin in Paris to the painting of him by Augustus John in Galway.
And here too is Charlotte in the portrait G.A.
Sartorio painted in Rome.
In the garden Shaw's meagre writing hut still stands with all the innocent technology of his art — his toothbrush, thermometer, alarm clock, narrow bed.
Hidden from view upstairs in the house is the room where Lawrence of Arabia used to stay, with its photos, books and, now silently put away in a box, Shaw's dentures.
Michael Holroyd is the author of the authorised biography of Bernard Shaw, published in three volumes by Chatto and Windus.
The first two volumes,The Search for Love 1856–1898 and The Pursuit of Power 1898–1918 are available at £18 each.
The final volume The Lure of Fantasy 1918–1950 will be published in autumn next year..
‘To everyone's relief, Shaw had given up driving in his eighties.
The last years had been alarming for his chauffeur.
He was often obliged to pull the wheel from his employer's hands or cry out ‘brake, sir!’ and ‘Stop!
That will do, sir!’
Shades of Henry James
Rumer Godden
Lamb House, Rye, in East Sussex is one of the few National Trust houses that are let to private tenants.
The tenant has, of course, to undertake to open certain rooms and the garden to visitors on two afternoons a week, also to groups by appointment and occasionally to entertain for the Trust.
In 1968 my husband James Haynes-Dixon and I were offered a lease of Lamb House for seven years.
Rye is officially what is called an ‘Ancient Town’ attached to the Cinque Ports, those small ports along the coasts of Kent and East Sussex which were fortified against the French; so necessary were they to the Crown that, in 1278, they were given legal privileges: exemption from taxes, the right to rule themselves and appoint their own judges.
Rye Church, standing high on its hill, makes a landmark across the marshes; the high ground above the town walls is called the Citadel; if you live outside the walls your address is Rye Foreign.
Of the walls only the Ypres Tower and the Landgate are left but the cobbled streets, the intricate little lanes and twistings, the hidden courts, are still there.
The famous author Henry James lived in Lamb House from 1898 until shortly before his death in 1916.
It is the ‘big’ house of Rye, built in 1722 by a local man, James Lamb, taking in what used to be three smaller houses on the same site.
James Lamb was ambitious and Lamb House is elegant, with its brick mellowed to a soft red, its beautifully proportioned Georgian windows and fine canopied front door.
Inside, it is a curious house as, though the entrance hall is spacious, none of the rooms is large.
The oak parlour, panelled in pale oak, has one of the small fireplaces that were in all of the rooms, Dutch-tiled with Italian marble surrounds.
Above the parlour is the King's Bedroom because George 1, coming back from one of his constant visits to Hanover — he was a Hanoverian and spoke little English — was caught in a storm so violent that his ship was driven ashore on Camber Sands close by Rye.
James Lamb as Mayor — he was thirteen times Mayor of Rye — had with his jurors to ride out through the wild windy night to rescue his royal guest for whom he gave up his own bedroom.
It must have been inconvenient for everyone.
Poor Martha Lamb was having her fourth baby and was probably hustled up to the attic rooms on the floor above out of earshot; the child, a boy, was born during the night.
The King graciously stood godfather; the baby of course was named George and was given a silver bowl inscribed ‘The gift of His Majesty King George to his godson, George Lamb, Anno Dom 1725’ A story has grown up from this — for years I thought it was true — that Henry James saw this bowl — it had become by legend, golden — and the sight was the seed that led to his novel,The Golden Bowl .
In the summer Henry James used to work in the ‘Garden Room’ which had been built apart from the house as a banqueting room.
He had begun to dictate his books, having willingly accepted a lady secretary of whom Theodora Bosanquet was the last.
People passing in the street would hear his voice booming through the big  wisteria -hung window that looked down the hill.
In the winter the Green Study on the first floor was used; it was awesome for me following the master there — he was not fond of women novelists with the exception of Evelyn Wharton who had often come to stay at Lamb House.
The Green Study though was a perfect place for writing; again panelled, the panelling painted a celadon green, one of its windows looked over the garden and caught all the sun, the other over a side courtyard and away across the huddled roofs of Mermaid Street to Winchelsea, another ancient town.
The garden is so large because it had been a ‘deese’, meaning, in Sussex parlance, a drying ground for herring; dried they became bloaters for which Rye is famed.
A deese is common ground but James Lamb poached it, built high walls around it and made a garden, unexpectedly large in that congested town.
After Henry James's death no one thought of keeping his possessions.
They were sold at auction, his library dispersed, but many of his, books came back to Lamb House as gifts to the Henry James Room.
Once it had been the telephone room; in his day a telephone was sufficiently rare and important to have a room of its own.
Besides manuscripts, photographs, letters, books and a portrait of the Master by Burne-Jones, it contains James's French writing desk, two Chippendale chairs, a Sheraton side-table and, equally elegant, one of his silver-mounted walking sticks, a Georgian wine decanter, a gold cigar cutter and his gold fob watch.
Lamb House could be called a house of authors.
Henry James was followed by the Benson brothers, E. F. Benson the novelist and A. C, for years Master of Oxford's Magdalen College — I wonder if anyone has succeeded in editing the twenty-six volumes of autobiography he left.
As the brothers disliked one another, E. F. inhabited the house in term-time, then went abroad, leaving it to A. C. for the vacations.
E F. used Lamb House and Rye as the setting of his Mapp and Lucia novels:
I have seen the ladies of Rye doing their shopping in the High Street every morning, carrying large market baskets, and bumping into each other in narrow doorways, and talking in a very animated manner…
I vaguely began to meditate on some design.
I outlined an elderly atrocious spinster and established her in Lamb House.
She should be the centre of social life abhorred and dominant, and she should sit like a great spider behind the curtains of the Garden Room, spying on her friends, and I knew that her name must be Elizabeth Mapp.
Rye should furnish the topography, so that no one who knew Rye could possibly be in doubt where the scene was laid, and I would call it Tilling because Rye has its river, the Tillingham.
Montgomery Hyde followed in the 1960s.
Politician, historian and writer of many biographies, he was our immediate predecessor, yielding the Green Study to me.
Besides Henry James at Home , it was Montgomery Hyde who wrote the small guide,The Story of Lamb House , which, sadly, is no longer available.
In the summer of our second year in Rye my four grandchildren came to stay — Mark, Elizabeth, Emma, Charlotte — and I realised that for more than a hundred years there had not been a child at Lamb House.
James and Martha Lamb had had nine, including the small George of the King's silver bowl; their descendants must have had more but the last of the line, Augustus Lamb, was a celibate clergyman.
In 1897 Lamb House was leased to Henry James who was succeeded by the Bensons, all bachelors.
During the Second World War the house was empty until taken by an elderly lady, Mrs Fullerton, whose son was grown up.
Montgomery Hyde, the next tenant, was also elderly, as were James and I.
Now suddenly Lamb House was alive with those shrill, sometimes piercing child voices, scampering of feet, thumping of feet.
There was sliding down the banisters, toys left on the stairs, a new untidiness, a quickening of life and, sometimes, in the hurdy-gurdy I had a strange sense of ‘presences’, two other children, silent, well-behaved.
It was as if they were watching.
Soon I knew who they were: Miles and Flora.
I had always had the sense of a ‘presence’.
After my husband died I had to spend the winter of 1973–4 alone in Lamb House.
I was bereft of course, but strangely not lonely.
I remember a December night: I heard the church clock strike nine as I went down into the garden — it was warm enough to walk.
There were a few last roses glimmering the lights from the French windows.
No other flowers were in the garden, yet I seemed to smell the strong scent of nicotiana.
Nicotiana do not bloom in December but I smelled them, and with them another smell, a cigar, but James had not smoked cigars nor was there anyone near who did.
The scent came with me as I walked, and I sensed a companionship.
Rumer Godden is a writer, playwright and poet.
The paperback edition of her biography,A House With Four Rooms will be published by Transworld in December.
DEATH AND GLORY ON THE BROADS
CHRISTINA HARDYMENT
‘My next book is to be placed on the Broads’, Arthur Ransome wrote to his mother in 1934, ‘with all those rivers, and hiding places in the dykes and the little stretches of open water.
Really, a lovely setting, with the herons and bitterns, and fish, very wild, except just in the holiday months’.
In the four books which Ransome set in East Anglia, the geographical details are so specific that the books can be used as accurate guides to the appropriate parts of Norfolk, Suffolk and Essex.
From the moment that Coot Club opens, we are deep into technicalities of Broadland sailing, of tides and bridge diameters.
They turned through the narrow Kendal Dyke into a lovely wilderness of reeds and water, sailed from one to another of the posts that mark the channel, came to a signpost standing not on land but out in the middle of the Sounds, read ‘to Horsey’ on one side of it, reached away through Meadow Dyke, so narrow that they could easily have jumped ashore, and came at last to the open Mere.
When I read Coot Club and its sequel The Big Six as a child, I was a little disappointed.
I had never been to the Broads.
What was Wroxham to me or me to Wroxham?
The dullish Ds and the Death and Glories were all very well, but what of earnest John and anxious Susan, dreamy Titty and the irresistible Roger?
And where were the Amazon pirates?
A plot without Nancy is like chips without salt.
It was only when I actually visited the Broads that I became infected with the same enthusiasm which led Ransome to write the books.
‘It is the finest nursery for sailors in the world’, Ransome wrote, after a successful cruise with his wife Evgenia in a small una-rigged cabin yacht which they had hired from Herbert Wood's boatyard at Potter Heigham in 1931.
Similar yachts can still be hired there today:Teasel lookalikes with two or four bunks.
There are also still about a hundred racing dinghies of the same class as Port and Starboard's Flash : Yare and Bure one-designs which are always called after butterflies.
The splendid wherry Albion , kept on Womack Water off the River Thurne, revives memories of the stately Sir Garnet , with Jim Woodall's gnarled hands on the tiller, and old Simon's insistence on flabby bacon.
By 1935 the success of the children's books made it possible for Ransome to buy a sea-going boat once again.
He and Evgenia decided to move from the Lakes to Suffolk, where the East Coast rivers offered a paradise of variety for a coasting sailor and Ransome found that ‘there were always web-footed children to help with the rigging, or to drink ginger pop’.
In We Didn't Mean to Go To Sea , the Swallows return to the centre of the stage.
The story, the most technically brilliant of all the Ransome books, is a tribute to Ransome's best-loved boat, a thirty-foot-long, seven-ton cutter built by Hillyards of Littlehampton in 1931.
She was rechristened Nancy Blackett in honour of the redoubtable Amazon pirate who had, in a sense, paid for her.
Ransome kept her on the River Orwell just below Ipswich, at the peaceful little anchorage of Pin Mill where the National Trust has built up holdings of land.
Nancy is spar for spar the Goblin , the boat that the Swallows, pottering about at Pin Mill in a borrowed dinghy, see sailing towards them.
‘What's written on that buoy?’ said Titty.
‘Goblin ,’ said Roger.
‘Funny name for a boat.
I wonder where she is.’
‘There's a boat coming up the river now,’ said John, ‘but she may be going right up to Ipswich…’
‘Her sails are a lovely colour,’ said Titty.
A little white cutter with red sails was coming in towards the moored boats.
Someone was busy on the foredeck.
As they watched, they saw the tall red mainsail crumple and fall in great folds on the top of the cabin.
The Ransomes lived just across the river from Pin Mill at Broke Farm, Levington.
From the upper room in which he worked, Ransome could see the river and the mouth of Levington Creek, with Harwich Harbour beyond, and in the distance Landguard Point and the open sea.
It is easy to see how the plot of We Didn't Mean To Go To Sea hatched, as he looked out into the distance and remembered a time when as a young man his anchor had dragged, and he had found himself sailing out to sea at night.
He even test-sailed the course with a friend, allowing the Nancy to drift out to the Beach End buoy and make for Holland.
After spending all night, like John, at the tiller, he was relieved to find that ‘steering as the children in my story steered, we should indeed reach the Deurloo Channel, and so come to the mouth of Flushing harbour’.
Pin Mill itself is remarkably unspoilt.
Although Alma Cottage no longer serves the omelettes that Jim Brading (and Ransome) loved so much, it still survives; so too does the excellent Butt and Oyster Inn.
If you are lucky, you may even see Nancy Blackett at anchor among the little yachts and ancient barges and houseboats, although her present owner, Michael Rines, usually keeps her at Ipswich.
Look out there too for Peter Duck , another boat designed by Ransome, and built at Harry King's Pin Mill boatyard.
Her owners, Greg, Ann and Ned Palmer, took me for a sail down the Orwell and out beyond Beach End buoy.
But we weren't going foreign; instead we turned course southwards to a queer featureless world, flat and muddy, with a shifting landscape that can never be trusted (the water is either too shallow or too deep).
Our destination was the Walton Backwaters, the setting for Secret Water , the last of Ransome's East Coast books.
The Secret Water of the book's title is Hamford Water; Swallow Island is Horsey Island, and Goblin Creek Kirby Creek.
An extra-full crew of Swallows — Bridget is old enough to join in the adventures for the first time — and the two visiting Amazons turn surveyors, until they encounter those muddy indigenous savages, the Eels and the Mastodon, and the hostilities replace exploration.
The Red Sea, where the water rose so terrifyingly fast over the hurrying Egyptians, really exists.
It is Horsey Mere, and the causeway across it (the Wade) can only be crossed within two hours each way of low tide.
The water lapped about their feet, and they went back to the posts.
The water crept over the road.
The ruts were filled.
The middle of the road was a thin line that disappeared.
They were standing in water that stretched almost from the mainland to the island.
Roger suddenly began to struggle out of his wet shirt.
‘Not yet, Roger.
Not yet’, said Titty.
‘Signal of distress’, said Roger, wringing out the water.
They were saved, of course, by the Mastodon, ‘rowing as if in a race’, just in time for a grand battle between Swallows, Amazons and Eels, and a corroboree of triumph.
In 1940 the Ransome's East Coast era ended.
Air-raids began to make life at Levington uncomfortable.
When it seemed likely that cars would be prohibited, they decided to return to the Lakes.
‘One thing is certain’, Ransome wrote to his publisher, Wren Howard ‘it will mean a fresh lot of lake country Swallows and Amazons’.
East Anglia was forgotten in the next three novels.
But a tantalising fragment of a thirteenth Ransome novel envisages the three Death and Glory boys stowing away in a cruiser which is being sent by road to the Lake in the North.
Sadly, Ransome found it impossible to carry through.
All we are left with are a few opening chapters (published as Coots in the North , edited by Hugh Brogan), and notes towards an encounter between two sets of pirates, the Death and Glories and the Amazons, which promised to have been a battle royal.
‘Ow!’
Pete saw stars.
Something enormous hit him on the nose.
The next moment a head showed above water a yard or two from the boat.
‘Shiver my timbers!’ said an angry voice.
‘What are you playing at?
Tearing my hair out by the roots.
Hullo!
Did I get your nose?
Good!
Christina Hardyment has written a number of books, among them Arthur Ransome and Captain Flint's Trunk.
She is currently working on a new book for the Trust.
A HOUSE OF ONE'S OWN
Jane Dunn
As unmarried young women, Virginia and Vanessa Stephen rented a house together in Sussex for weekends and holidays.
At first it was a modest villa in Firle, then it was Asheham, a small Regency house east of Lewes.
The sisters married and, when Asheham was eventually relinquished, Virginia and Leonard Woolf had to find another country base.
First sight in 1919 of Monk's House had caught Virginias imagination.
An ‘unpretending’ cottage in Rodmell, in the Ouse valley south of Lewes, it had a terrible kitchen, no hot water, no bathroom and a primitive earth closet, which the vendors decided against showing her.
None of these details could dampen her enthusiasm; ‘a profound pleasure at the size & shape & fertility & wilderness of the garden’ and the beauty of the surrounding countryside decided them.
At auction it took five agonising minutes and £700 to secure the house.
In 1916 Vanessa had been lured back to Sussex by her sister's description of Charleston Farmhouse near Firle, and by her prophecy — which Vanessa was to fulfil —‘if you get Charleston you'll end up buying it forever.
If you lived there you could make it absolutely divine’.
In this way, the novelist Virginia Woolf and the painter Vanessa Bell, sisters at the heart and hearth of the Bloomsbury Group, had established the Sussex outposts which would prove a magnetic draw to friends and acquaintances for the next quarter of a century.
When she moved in Virginia Woolf was thirty-seven and had published her first novel The Voyage Out and had her second,Night and Day , accepted; all her other books were to be in part written at Monk's House.
Contented as she was with the house, Virginia was always to cast a glance over her shoulder at her sister, living just five miles away at Charleston.
Their relationship was passionate and rivalrous, and one of the areas of competition was the comparative merits of their houses.
Vanessa had the surest touch decoratively and domestically.
She was able to transform whatever house she acquired into something uniquely her own, the creative energy of the painters' work (hers and Duncan Grant's) being the motivating force.
Writing to her sister soon after the auction, Virginia was already depreciating her own aesthetic taste and attempted with a joke to pre-empt any criticism: ‘Monk's House will be perhaps the ugliest house in Sussex.’
In fact, she and Leonard over the years were to build on and improve the amenities, adding electricity, a bathroom, and a two-room extension of a bedroom for Virginia and an upstairs sitting-room.
By the summer of 1926, Virginia was writing in her diary, ‘Rodmell is a perfect triumph’.
Virginia and Leonard commissioned from Vanessa and Duncan Grant various pieces of furniture, paintings and decorations for their country and London houses.
Monk's House today is still full of the evidence of this collaboration.
The tiles around Virginia's bedroom fire-place, with the central motif of sailing boat and lighthouse, were designed especially by Vanessa, moved as she had been by her sister's novel,To the Lighthouse , which memorialised their childhood summers at St Ives in Cornwall.
The main room too, painted a sea-green which Virginia feared the Charlestonians would ridicule, is dominated by the painted dining table and chairs decorated by Vanessa with her distinctively organic circles, webs and waves.
Vanessa's drawings and paintings on the walls reflect intimate, domestic subjects: her own children, the Woolf's spaniel Sally, and a tender portrait of Virginia herself.
Monk's House was initially intended just for weekends and holidays and was never particularly comfortable or warm.
Even so, for Virginia it came to represent the ease and contentment of country life.
Virginia was an indefatigable walker, both in Sussex and London.
She would walk the ten-mile round trip over the Downs to Charleston without demur, striding out in an afternoon, often rapt in thought, puzzling over the next scene in the novel she had been writing all morning.
Her ‘lodge’, a wooden summerhouse at the bottom of the garden, was where she wrote most days she was there.
But a visit to Vanessa, ‘humming & booming & flourishing over the hill’ in a household of children, could make Virginia feel suddenly diminished, her life thin and pale by comparison, Monk's House poky and mean.
Then this mood would lift, and she could write appreciatively again: ‘We get snatches of divine loneliness here…why not stay here for ever and ever, enjoying this immortal rhythm in which both soul and eye are at rest?
So I said, and for once L. (Leonard) said: ‘You're not such a fool as you seem’.
The outbreak of the Second World War more or less confined Virginia and Leonard to Monk's House.
The Battle of Britain was fought over their heads; there were dog-fights in the Sussex summer skies, a  Messerschmitt shot down on the peaceful Downs.
Then, with the Blitz, German bombers droned overhead on their way to London, to devastate the city Virginia loved with a passion, and the windows of Monk's House rattled every time there was a heavy bombing raid those sixty-odd miles away.
Virginia dealt with this physical threat and destruction with her usual courage and matter-of-factness.
But her own internal stresses — her anxiety over Between the Acts which she had just finished, and the fear that she had lost the power to write — closed in on her as that unmitigable depression, her companion of old, took final hold.
Monk's House, the setting for so much creative life, was the setting too for Virginia's dignified and tragic end.
It was from there, on 28 March 1941, that she took her last walk down to the River Ouse and waded into the water.
Virginia's ashes were scattered under one of the two elms, which she had called Leonard and Virginia, by the pond.
Today the trees have gone but the lead cast of the Stephen Tomlin sculpture of her head stares out from the garden towards the marshes.
Monk's House is full of Virginia's presence, particularly in her small austere bedroom with its books and its simple narrow bed.
It is a house that in its paintings and decorations is full too of Vanessa.
(The garden belonged unarguably to Leonard.)
Here evidence of the sisters' bond lives on, and those drawn still to Monk's House, and then on the Charleston, can see something of their distinct but complementary natures.
Virginia, in her fifties, thinking of Vanessa at Charleston, wrote, ‘Do you think we have the same pair of eyes, only different spectacles?’
The answer still seems clear.
Jane Dunn's book , A Very Close Conspiracy: Vanessa Bell and Virginal Woolf,is to be published by Jonathan Cape in October.
Monk's House is owned by the National Trust; Charleston is owned by the Charleston Trust.
The sitting-room at Monk's House, painted sea-green which Virginia feared the Charlestonians would ridicule.
Virginia's bedroom showing the fire-place tiles decorated by Vanessa.
The Valley of the Blue Mist
Ray Hallett
Thomas Hardy's reputation at the beginning of the century as the greatest living English novelist coincided with a general awakening of interest in the English countryside.
This was brought about in no small degree by the invention in the 1890s of the safety bicycle which gave a wide cross-section of the population real mobility for the first time.
Had the Wessex novels been written earlier, when places off the beaten track were inaccessible, or nearer our own time, when we have become sated with effortless mobility, ‘Wessex’ might not have caught on in the way that it did.
As it happened, Hardy's ‘partly real, partly dream country’ left an indelible mark on the topography of Dorset; ‘Mellstock’and ‘Weatherbury’became almost as real in the popular imagination as Stinsford and Puddletown.
From then on no guidebook to the county was complete without its Hardy references, although they were not always reliable.
‘The topographers you mention as identifying the scene are guessers and are wrong’, wrote Hardy in reply to an enquiry about ‘Little Hintock’ in The Woodlanders .
On another occasion he described how he had ‘once spent several hours on a bicycle with a friend in a serious attempt to discover the real spot but the search ended in failure though tourists assure me positively that they found it without difficulty’.
Today's tourists naturally make for Dorchester and its surrounding villages.
Identifiable places are thick on the ground and are more than enough to satisfy those whose familiarity with the works of Thomas Hardy is sketchy to say the least.
Certainly one would visit the cottage at Higher Bockhampton where Hardy was born (now looked after by the National Trust) and Stinsford church where his heart is buried.
Hardy's study, reconstructed in the County Museum in Dorchester along with other memorabilia, loses none of its fascination after repeated visits, and the splendid High Street remains in its outline much as it was in Hardy's lifetime.
Yet modern Dorchester is a disappointment.
It has suffered in recent years from heavy traffic which the new by — pass will alleviate, but the old market town which I remember from forty-odd years ago is fast becoming yet a multiple retailers' outlet.
‘Like all provincial towns, it will lose its individuality,’ said Hardy when presented with the Freedom of the Borough in 1910, but he could not have foreseen the demise of the small local shops so intrinsic to the town's character, or the threat of a huge new shopping centre.
Ironically, as the modernisation gathers pace, words like ‘Henchard’ and ‘Casterbridge’increasingly crop up on shop signs and street names.
Max Gate, the house Hardy designed for himself on the edge of town, is stranded behind a new roundabout and it is difficult now to imagine him setting out from there to ride along the lanes with Kipling or H. G. Wells.
At Stinsford, which lies too near the A35 for comfort, a lorry park and a service area is proposed and, perhaps inevitably, there is talk of a Thomas Hardy Heritage Centre.
Fortunately, there is another part of Dorset which Hardy was particularly fond of and which has nothing to attract visitors en masse .
North of Cerne Abbas, crossing the county from east to west, is a line of chalk downs called the Dorset Heights.
Beyond lies a delectable hinterland, sometimes known as ‘the valley of the blue mist’.
A traveller reaching the edge of the escarpment is ‘surprised and delighted to behold, extended like a map beneath him, a country differing absolutely from that which he has passed through…
Here, in the valley, the world seems to be constructed on a smaller and more delicate scale; the fields are mere paddocks, so reduced that from this height their hedgerows appear a network of dark-green threads overspreading the paler green of the grass…such is the vale of Blackmoor.’
So it is described in Tess of the d'Urbervilles , yet, seen from the downs, it is The Woodlanders , Hardy's own favourite story, which first comes to mind.
Somewhere below, among orchards and woods, lay that sequestered spot which the topographers thought they had found all those years ago.
Even now, cycling idly along the lanes in the lee of the downs, it is possible to speculate about such things in a whimsical sort of way; a rare tranquility which pervades everything brings about that state of mind.
Hermitage with its tiny church dozes beneath High Stoy from where Grace Melbury watched her erring husband ride away on one of his visits to Mrs Charmond, and, a few miles to the west, Melbury Bubb is tucked beneath Bubb Down Hill, seemingly oblivious to the outside world.
Apple trees figure prominently in The Woodlanders , but today's farmers seem to have given up making their own cider and the orchards have gone.
Now we have to go to Normandy to get an idea of what those hamlets and farmsteads looked like in apple-blossom-time fifty years ago, and to see the profusion of wildflowers that once filled the hedgerows and verges.
A precipitous road climbs from Batcombe to the crest of the downs; the spectacular view from the top makes it worth the effort.
On a clear day it is possible to see both the English and Bristol Channels; the distant Quantocks and Mendips frame the Somerset Levels, with Glastonbury Tor rising mysteriously out of the mists.
In the middle distance can be seen Ham Hill, Montacute Tor, Alfred's Tower above Stourhead and the earthworks of Cadbury Castle which some romantics like to believe was King Arthur's Camelot.
The exposed and lonely road which runs along the ridge will always be associated with Tess and her hopeless journey to see Angel Clare's parents at ‘Emminster’.
On her way back to ‘Flintcomb Ash’, she was overtaken by Alec d'Urberville at Cross-in-Hand, a mysterious stone pillar by the roadside.
Several legends surround the origin of this stone, one of which is the subject of Hardy's poem, ‘The Lost Pyx’.
Another is the macabre tale of the torture, hanging and burial of the malefactor in ‘wuld’ times.
It can still be seen, looking innocent enough, though rather spoilt by a barbed-wire fence only inches away.
Inevitably, many places with Hardy connections will change with the passing of time and some will eventually become unrecognisable.
Yet, looking down today from these Wessex Heights, there seems to be no reason to fear for the future of this supremely beautiful landscape.
In a hundred years' time a solitary figure might well be seen on a lonely road gazing down into the valley, wondering about ‘Little Hintock’.
Beneath the downs between Hermitage and Melbury Bubb.
The church at Hermitage
Ray Hallett is Design Consultant to National Trust Enterprises.
A Room With a View
The Marquess of Anglesey.
As a boy, encouraged by my mother, I became fascinated by the mass of mostly unsorted papers lying in the cellars at Plas Newydd.
These had been thrown into the Muniment Room in the most higgledy-piggledy manner over at least two centuries.
The only muniments which had been catalogued were those dating from before about 1650.
A retired Keeper of Manuscripts at the British Museum had spent years on the task.
Anything post 1650 was anathema to him.
In boxes which contained such papers he always left a note saying, ‘These would burn nicely.’
It was with these modern pariahs that I began during school holidays to interest myself.
Among the early nineteenth-century material was a portable writing case.
In it I discovered a mass of letters written chiefly from Brussels between 1814 and 1817 by Lady Caroline Capel and her daughters to her mother, the Countess of Uxbridge.
After the war I edited these letters and in 1955 I sent a typescript off to the publisher Jonathan Cape, out of the blue.
Within a fortnight he himself replied.
He said that he would publish the book without a single alteration and that he would be obliged if I would kindly call him to discuss details.
Oh, what joy!
The first printing of my first book —The Capel Letters — was of 3,000 copies.
These were sold well before Christmas and the second printing was ready just after Christmas!
Most irritating!
The book's chief interest lies in the fact that Caroline Capel was a sister of the 1st Marquess of Anglesey and that she and her family, for financial reasons, were living in Brussels at the time of Waterloo.
At that Battle her brother commanded the Allied cavalry.
On the very day of that bloody contest, she wrote:
As to being in a state of great anxiety I do not deny it…
To an English ear unaccustomed to such things, the Cannonading of a Real Battle is Awful beyond description and to have one's friends walk out of one's Drawing room into Action…is a sensation beyond description.
When she learned that her brother, at the very end of the battle, had lost only a leg and not his life, the relief was great.
There followed an outpouring of letters from Caroline and her daughters telling of the behaviour and convalescence of ‘the most perfect Hero that ever breathed’.
Of that hero, my great-great-grandfather, I soon determined to write what had not been written before, a biography.
I knew little about him, except that when riding beside the Duke of Wellington his right knee was hit by one of the last shots fired that day.
I knew too that he was supposed to have exclaimed, ‘By God, sir, I've lost my leg!’ and that the Duke, momentarily removing the telescope from his eye, replied, ‘By God, sir, so you have!’immediately resuming his scrutiny of the Prussians and his own ‘infamous army’chasing Napoleon to his doom.
I had also been brought up on the story of the man who boasted that his ancestor had lost his leg at Waterloo, to which the response was ‘Which platform?’
(A further refinement of the joke I only heard later.
The person to whom it is retailed says, ‘as if it mattered which platform!’)
After much sorting and transcribing,One Leg; The Life and Letters of the First Marquess of Anglesey, 1768–1854 appeared in 1961.
It was favourably received and I felt that I had done my hitherto neglected ancestor proud.
Visitors to Plas Newydd find the house filled with his portraits and those of his family, as well as numerous relics, including the ‘Anglesey Leg’, one of the earliest articulated artificial limbs ever made.
He himself was one of thirteen children and his own offspring numbered eighteen!
Plas Newydd is dominated by his strong personality.
Soon after One-Leg 's publication I was lying in my bath in what is shown to visitors as Lord Anglesey's Bathroom, looking out on the incomparable view of the Menai Strait with the majesty of Snowdon beyond, when a bold idea occurred to me.
Would it be feasible, I asked myself, to fill what for some time I had thought was a serious gap in British military history, namely a socio-military chronicle of the last hundred years of the army's mounted arm?
For thirty years I've been trying to give an affirmative reply to that question.
A History of the British Cavalry 1816–1919 has become my ‘life's work’.
The first four volumes have been publishes and I am working on the final volume, covering chiefly the First World War.
Life has been made easier through these years of work by the excellence and space of my study.
It is the only room on the ground floor which is not required for showing to Trust visitors.
It has three large south-facing windows, copious bookshelves and three large desks.
At one of these I transact business other than book-writing; on another sits an old-fashioned Olympia large-type typewriter, and the third acts as a repository for the piles of documents relevant to my present work.
There are eight other tables in the room.
They all groan under the weight of books needed for the current volume.
A recently acquired photo-copier has proved a great time-saving boon for note taking.
Instead of having to transcribe I can now photocopy whole pages of books and documents.
The sight of a word processor so terrifies me that I've stuck rigidly to scissors and adhesive tape, while a genius of a lady in Twickenham makes sense of my appalling first drafts.
My study is the perfect place for an author, especially if he doesn't, as I don't, object to being occasionally peered at through the windows by curious visitors.
Lord Anglesey is the donor to the National Trust of Plas Newydd on the Isle of Anglesey.
He is also Chairman of the Historic Buildings Council for Wales and founder member of the National Heritage Memorial Fund.
Room at the top
Max Egremont
I write at the top of the house, in an attic that was once a housemaid's bedroom.
It is quiet and out of the way of too much bustle or activity because the rest of the family tends to gather on the ground floor.
My children still play in rooms near my attic but they know that usually I will be angry if I am disturbed.
At other times I may be delighted to see them, for if the writing is not going well the writer welcomes any excuse to lay down his pen or turn away from the typewriter.
What a temptation it is then to prolong an interruption, to ask precisely where a lost teddy was last seen before leading the child slowly through every room of this vast house until the creature is found.
One point about the attic is its peace; another is its position outside the atmosphere or decoration of most of the rooms at Petworth.
In the attic there are no carvings by Grinling Gibbons, no Turners or Van Dycks, no intriguing examples of the English baroque, not even a glimpse of the smallest figurine as evidence of the apparently unmatchable powers of some great artist of the past.
No, better by far to restrict the creative work to two examples of ‘Sequin Art’ made by my two elder daughters, aged eleven and nine.
One is of a parrot, the other of an elephant dancing on a drum alongside an enormous red heart, and they can be seen on the attic mantlepiece, next to the photograph of Arthur Balfour.
I have tried to establish my own territory in the attic, outside the country of my ancestors.
I am careful to have my desk angled towards the centre of the room so that I cannot see the view from the window across the park towards the lake and the western curve of the South Downs.
When in the grip of writer's block I might stand up and walk to the window and look out.
Often there are people on the grass between the house and the lake.
This gives me a strange feeling of relief.
To stare at an empty vastness would be dispiriting; perhaps also it would bring about too great a sense of isolation.
A writer needs solitude yet not too much of it.
He needs also to be in touch with people and the rest of the world so that he can watch, listen to conversations, spot physical characteristics, observe himself and others together, understand the way we think and live now.
He needs this, particularly if he sets out to be a novelist.
It is certainly no sadness for me that I live in a house that is open to the public.
The attic also provides an incidental history of my life as a writer.
The massed volumes that take up the wall next to the window are evidence of the research I did for my first and second books: one a dual biography of two late Victorian figures, the politician George Wyndham and the poet and political campaigner Wilfred Scawen Blunt; the other a life of the Edwardian Prime Minister Arthur Balfour.
The books on my shelves are mostly, although not exclusively, concerned with the early years of the twentieth-century: memoirs and diaries, Lives and Letters in the monumental style of those times, some secondary works by later historians.
When I write biographies, I sit at a large kitchen table with a wide surface on which books and papers can be laid, essential for checking quotations or references.
At the moment, I am working on a novel and the kitchen table has on it only the ancient German electric typewriter which I use to type out the second draft of what I have already written by hand.
For some years I have been thinking of buying a word processor but have not yet taken the plunge.
In any case, whatever machines are at my disposal, the simple movable table on which I am leaning in the photograph will still be where the first hand-written draft is composed.
The red chair where I sit has a long seat, comfortable for a tall person.
Petworth is cold in winter.
We keep the central heating off as long as possible and the thermostat is set low.
There are radiators in the attic but they do not give out much warmth.
In order not to freeze I installed a wood-burning stove.
The stove gives out a good heat, the mantelpiece and the fire bricks become warm and perhaps this has caused the photograph of Arthur Balfour to wilt and slip in its frame.
I regard this as an appropriate position for a man whose cool temperament and disdain for most of humanity I found chilling after two or three years study.
Balfour came to stay at Petworth between the wars and I read a letter to him from another guest saying that she was sure that what they would both remember most about the visit was the intense cold of the house.
To the right of the fireplace is yet another bookcase, bought from Habitat.
Beside it is a small round table on which can be seen a photograph of my wife and me with our three elder children; then there is an armchair also with a long seat and a dark-blue dog bed for our two spaniels beside another table with books and magazines.
I bought the green sofa-bed three years ago from a shop whose proprietor assured me it was the product of a reputable English firm; after its delivery I found a large label underneath which said ‘Made in Belgium’.
To the left of the sofa is yet another table with more papers, a small portable tape-recorder for the occasional piece of dictation and a bottle of Malvern which I take neat when thirsty.
I have a routine to which it is not always possible to keep: writing in the morning for about three hours, then the rest of the day for other business.
In the photograph, the sun is coming into the attic on an early summer's late afternoon, a time when I am seldom at work there.
During the winter months the room is quite dark at all times because the sun does not reach the west front of the house.
I need the artificial light of a large red anglepoise lamp on the writing table.
This is another advantage of the attic.
Too much sunlight might impress upon me the idea of how much more agreeable it would be out of doors rather than hunched over a sheet of almost blank paper.
Such thoughts can be destructive.
This, then, is the garret of my own making.
In a sense it reflects one of the themes of my novels: the mingling of the present and past and the ways the boundaries of time can seem strangely impermanent.
The rest of the house is ruled by the past.
Here I hope that I am in the present with the advantage of a long view back as well.
Lord Egremont's great-uncle, the 3rd Lord Leconfield, gave Petworth House in Sussex to the Trust in 1947.
His most recent novel , Painted Lives,will be published in paperback in December.
History and All That
Sarah-Jane Forder
‘Everyone loves dressing up, you know’, my ten year-old companion said to me as we walked together through Charlecote Park in Warwickshire down the long driveway to the sixteenth century gatehouse.
On this sunny afternoon in May, I was inclined to agree.
I'd found myself in the company of two groups of schoolchildren between the ages of seven and thirteen who'd come to take part in this year's Young National Trust Theatre production,Two Nations , an exploration of the divisions existing in Victorian society.
None of us knew what to expect; we all felt somewhat unsure of one another.
Indeed, we were a mixed bunch.
Around me were costumes of such finery and originality that I felt quite put to shame.
The white frilly aprons and mob caps clearly labelled those who had elected to become servants for the afternoon; less easily identifiable were the spiv I'd spotted earlier — with his slicked-back, Brylcreemed hair and sneer of a moustache — and the vampish creature dressed in black taffeta adorned with diamanté who had looked me up and down disdainfully.
(Both turned out to be philanthropists, which just goes to show that you never judge a book by its cover.)
I was far from sure about my own appearance.
My costume had been somewhat haphazardly thrown together, the result being a cross between Mary Poppins and Nurse Matilda.
The only touch I was remotely pleased with was an elegant, cane-handled parasol I'd borrowed from a colleague.
Uncertain how the children might react, I thought it would perhaps come in handy if I needed to defend myself.
At the gatehouse we were cordially welcomed by a rousing chorus of ‘Rule Britannia’ on the trumpet and some carefully choreographed flag-waving.
Already I could feel myself beginning to tense.
I need not have worried, however, for the plot was rapidly unfolding and we were being drawn into the action.
The year was 1887 and we were witnessing a double celebration: fifty years of Queen Victoria's reign and the return from India and Empire of Mr Charles Knightley, the heir to the great house.
At the new master's decree, today was to be a day of merrymaking: workers from his nearby shoe factory had been specially brought in by charabanc, and a syndicate of local industrialists had also gathered for the festivities.
Meanwhile, under the careful eye of the housekeeper, the servants were busily making preparations for the master's homecoming.
While waiting for Mr Knightley to arrive, the rest of us were invited to tour the grounds, and so it was that I and about ten others led off to the banks of the River Avon by a ruthlessly hearty philanthropist extraordinaire , Lady Patricia Rutherford.
As we walked along I was delighted to discover that there were some distinguished names among our number.
‘Who are you, sir?’
I heard Lady Rutherford ask a tiny figure dressed in top hat and tails with a flowery waistcoat.
He could have been no more than seven years-old.
‘William Morris’, he said, after some hesitation.
‘You must be very artistic, then.
Perhaps that waistcoat is one of your own designs?’ she enquired.
‘No, my mother made it for me’, he replied.
Then there was Octavia Hill (‘I've been in conservation for about two years’), Dr Barnardo, Florence Nightingale and Charles Dickens.
We were on our way to the river to photograph the landscape which, Lady Rutherford told us indignantly, would be ruined for ever if Mr Knightley allowed Mr Dinsdale and his industrialist friends to dig a quarry, part of which would be on common land.
As we ruminated, suddenly into our midst burst a young girl visibly in distress.
Lady Rutherford leapt with alacrity at the chance to do a good deed.
Violet Huel, it transpired, had returned from the city because her father was dying; she needed a job and she needed one quick.
Lady Rutherford was off to the kitchen like a steamship, with us trailing in her wake.
No housekeeper could have resisted such an impassioned deputation: Violet was duly taken on and had donned her skivvy's apron before you could say Octavia Hill.
A loud gong from the house summoned everyone to the driveway to greet the master.
Peering anxiously through the narrow archway of the gatehouse, I was fully expecting to see a horse and carriage approach, when suddenly a bright, shiny bicycle came hurtling past, complete with hooter and Union Jack on the handlebars.
Mr Knightley had arrived home in grand — if not entirely dignified — style, and luckily he was just in time to decide whether or not the quarry project should go ahead.
If we would come with him to the great hall, he would listen to all sides of the argument and then draw his conclusions.
It was here that the performance abandoned all semblance of script, but was nonetheless skilfully held together by the actors, who guided without being intrusive and did not for a moment step out of their roles.
The debate was fast and furious, with the city workers fighting for better conditions in the factories being strongly supported by the philanthropists, who themselves were trying to preserve the landscape.
On the other hand, the local servants wanted the jobs the quarry could provide, while the industrialists argued for progress.
Confronted by all four points of view, as well as many grey areas in between, the children were having to think and argue for themselves.
One of the city workers, who is undoubtedly destined for a successful career as a politician or an actor, had a gift for getting straight to he point: ‘What's the good of getting paid if you've had your fingers chopped off?’
Having been gently reminded by Lady Rutherford, ‘We are all philanthropists here; we do not need to put our hands up if we wish to speak’, William Morris completely forgot his shyness and at one stage became so carried away that he stood at the front of the room shaking hands with himself.
When I was foolish enough to laugh at a preposterous and provocative statement made by Mr Dinsdale — who had surely modelled himself on Dickens's character Mr Bounderby — he gave me a withering look and asked sarcastically: ‘Is this a reason to laugh?’
Like the children I had completely suspended my disbelief: nothing mattered more than Mr Knightley's decision about the future of the the threatened piece of land.
I was not the only one to have identified closely with my character.
A young industrialist stepped forward impatiently to make his case: ‘I don't see what you're all making such a fuss about.
I enjoy walking on the common land myself, but if I'm willing to make the sacrifice, why aren't you?’
There was a stunned silence.
‘Yes,’ one of the philanthropists chipped in, ‘but you'll be making money out of it,’to which his response was the chilling, ‘Yes,well ?’
Not everyone managed to overcome their inhibitions.
When called upon to tell us of the exemplary conditions in his new factories at Bournville, Mr Cadbury — his looks belying his years and status — refused to blow his own trumpet and blushingly declined to speak.
But all the children I questioned afterwards were emphatic that they would like to repeat the experience.
A few did not agree with Mr Knightley's decision to allow the quarry to go ahead, even with certain provisos, and they were prepared to say so and explain why.
This seemed to me the greatest achievement of the afternoon; some people don't even learn to think for themselves at university.
A member of Mr Dinsdale's syndicate was particularly keen to set the record straight.
‘I wanted to be a city worker, not an industrialist,’ he said, ‘but I was put in this group by my teacher.’
‘Never mind, I said, you were a very good industrialist.’
‘Yes’, he agreed, ‘and this hair gel is great.
I wouldn't have got to wear this if I'd been a factory worker.’
Two Nations was written and directed by Liz Rothschild.
The Young National Trust Theatre is a professional Theatre-in-Education company and is sponsored by Barclay's Bank plc.
For details of bookings for 1991, please contact Sally Woodhead, The National Trust, 36, Queen Anne's Gate, London.
City workers calling for improvements to conditions in the factories
Mr Knightley arrived home in grand — if not entirely dignified — style
A LIFE IN THE DAY OF Helen Brotherton
Helen Brotherton moved to Dorset after the end of the Second World War and has lived there ever since.
In the early 1960s she played a part in saving Brownsea Island from development: the island is now owned by the National Trust, and the Dorset Trust for Nature Conservation manages part as a nature reserve Helen Brotherton is the current Chairman of the latter organisation and, as well as serving on the National Trust's Council, Appointments Panel and Conservation Panel, she was Chairman of the Wessex Regional Committee for a number of years.
Now, in her seventies, she lives in Poole, overlooking the Harbour and Brownsea Island.
I wouldn't like to say I was born a naturalist, but I can remember collecting fossils when I was three.
It all began because my mother was a Londoner.
When she married she had to live in the country and, instead of bemoaning what she'd lost in the way of concerts and the theatre, she enjoyed what was on offer.
So I think my brother and I saw flowers, birds and insects through her eyes.
Most naturalists of my age just enjoyed wildlife of every kind and did not see the need for conservation until after the war when modern methods of farming made enormous changes in the countryside.
It was considered a very eccentric pursuit for a female; people used to commiserate with my mother for having such an awful daughter with such odd tastes.
Instead of going to parties, I'd be out at night looking at badgers, and I'd always be scheming to go off birdwatching or botanising.
Dorset after the war was a whole new field for me.
There were very few birdwatchers, about sixteen in the county, and it was quite different in those days — there was none of this rushing around the countryside, 2,000 people going to look at a rare bird.
The RSPB had about 3,000 members, and everybody knew everybody else.
Birdwatchers had always worried terribly about what would happen to Brownsea after the owner, Mrs Bonham-Christie, died.
She was a complete recluse, but one of us somehow got to know her so that he could come and count the nests in the heronry and explore the island.
In the end there was a tremendous battle because, although Mrs Christie expressed a wish in her will for the island to become a nature reserve, she left no money to carry it out.
So we thought, ‘We'll get the National Trust to take it,’ and we were flabbergasted when we found out that the Trust couldn't afford to take it without an endowment.
The County Council published a statement saying they would not look favourably on any development, Max Nicholson of the NCC entered the fray and we managed to raise the necessary endowment of £100,000 locally.
The endowment didn't go far.
As soon as the Trust got Brownsea the regulations about the discharge of sewage changes, they had endless trouble with the water supply, and now they're having to find £300,000 to repair the sea wall, so I feel that, instead of being praised for being associated with getting Brownsea, I probably ought to be cursed for putting the Trust to so much expense.
It's proving very difficult raising money for the sea wall because everybody likes to contribute towards buying something new but not so many like to repair something you have already got.
Mrs Christie thought that if you left things alone nature would triumph.
She was absolutely right about the salt-water lagoon, which is of European status as a bird refuge, but other, neglected parts of the island grew dense and dark with rhododendrons.
In the early years I spent every Sunday bashing rhododendrons — it was like being a nineteenth-century explorer.
We could only find the paths and drives by banging a crowbar on the ground: when it hit the gravel it rang.
Brownsea can be several degrees warmer than the mainland.
I remember in the terrible winter of 1962–63 we sat out eating a picnic lunch when everybody across the harbour was frozen to death.
Naturally we went to share our sandwiches with the robins, which were starving, but they were so unused to people they didn't seem to know what bread was.
Unfortunately, the Brownsea red squirrels are also nervous; generally they get behind a tree trunk when they hear people approach.
I never go round by myself without seeing one because I hear feet scrabbling on the bark or I see bits of fir cone floating down.
We lost roughly 1,000 trees in this year's gales, and we're worried that the squirrels may be short of fir cones; they say one red squirrel needs about six acres of woodland to survive.
I've been to the open-air theatre on the island every year since it opened, and I always tell people that you've never really seen Shakespeare until you've seen it on Brownsea.
I'm not a great fan, but I enjoyed the first one,The Tempest , enormously and the evening went in a flash.
When we did The Taming of the Shrew , every time Petruchio yelled — and he had a fine voice — all the peacocks answered, and on the opening night I could feel my neighbour shaking with laughter because the peacocks were all jostling for the best places to roost in the trees.
Over the years I suppose I've become known as a dotty naturalist but I try to be rational and I think it's a pity the Greens aren't more practical.
When you've had an industrialist as a father and you know how a business works, you can't expect farmers to ignore every business principle to be Green.
On the whole, I feel optimistic about the future of nature conservation because so many people are involved now.
My life would have been much poorer without Brownsea Island, and I always think that the National Trust was the best thing that ever happened to me.
Interview by Sarah-Jane Forder 