

Monday, January 13th, 1986.
Victor Wilcox lies awake, in the dark bedroom, waiting for his quartz alarm clock to bleep.
It is set to do this at 6.45.
How long he has to wait he doesn't know.
He could easily find out by groping for the clock, lifting it to his line of vision, and pressing the button that illuminates the digital display.
But he would rather not know.
Supposing it is only six o'clock?
Or even five?
It could be five.
Whatever it is, he won't be able to get to sleep again.
This has become a regular occurrence lately: lying awake in the dark, waiting for the alarm to bleep, worrying.
Worries streak towards him like enemy spaceships in one of Gary's video games.
He flinches, dodges, zaps them with instant solutions, but the assault is endless: the Avco account, the Rawlinson account, the price of pig-iron, the value of the pound, the competition from Foundrax, the incompetence of his Marketing Director, the persistent breakdowns of the core blowers, the vandalizing of the toilets in the fettling shop, the pressure from his divisional boss, last month's accounts, the quarterly forecast, the annual review…
In an effort to escape this bombardment, perhaps even to doze awhile, he twists on to his side, burrows into the warm plump body of his wife, and throws an arm round her waist.
Startled, but still asleep, drugged with Valium, Marjorie swivels to face him.
Their noses and foreheads bump against each other; there is a sudden flurry of limbs, an absurd pantomime struggle.
Marjorie puts up her fists like a pugilist, groans and pushes him away.
An object slides off the bed on her side and falls to the floor with a thump.
Vic knows what it is: a book entitled Enjoy Your Menopause , which one of Marjorie's friends at the Weight Watchers' club has lent her, and which she has been reading in bed, without much show of conviction, and falling asleep over, for the past week or two.
On retiring to bed Vic's last action is normally to detach a book from Marjorie's nerveless fingers, tuck her arms under the covers and turn out her bedside lamp, but he must have neglected the first of these chores last night, or perhaps Enjoy Your Menopause was concealed under the coverlet.
He rolls away from Marjorie, who, now lying on her back, begins to snore faintly.
He envies her that deep unconsciousness, but cannot afford to join her in it.
Once, desperate for a full night's sleep, he had accepted her offer of a Valium, sluicing it down with his usual nightcap, and moved about the next morning like a diver walking on the seabed.
He made a mistake of two percentage points in a price for steering-boxes for British Leyland before his head cleared.
You shouldn't have mixed it with whisky , Marjorie said.
You don't need both .
Then I'll stick to whisky, he said.
The Valium lasts longer , she said.
Too bloody long, if you ask me, he said.
I lost the firm five thousand pounds this morning, thanks to you.
Oh, it's my fault, is it?she said, and her lower lip began to tremble.
Then to stop her crying, anything to stop that, he had to buy her the set of antique-look brass fire-irons she had set her heart on for the lounge, to give an extra touch of authenticity to the rustic stone fireplace and the imitation-log gas fire.
Marjorie's snores become louder.
Vic gives her a rude, exasperated shove.
The snoring stops but, surprisingly, she does not wake.
In other rooms his three children are also asleep.
Outside, a winter gale blusters against the sides of the house and swishes the branches of trees to and fro.
He feels like the captain of a sleeping ship, alone at the helm, steering his oblivious crew through dangerous seas.
He feels as if he is the only man awake in the entire world.
The alarm clock cheeps.
Instantly, by some perverse chemistry of his body or nervous system, he feels tired and drowsy, reluctant to leave the warm bed.
He presses the snooze button on the clock with a practised finger and falls effortlessly asleep.
Five minutes later, the alarm wakes him again, cheeping insistently like a mechanical bird.
Vic sighs, hits the Off button on the clock, switches on his bedside lamp (its dimmer control turned low for Marjorie's sake), gets out of bed and paddles through the deep pile of the bedroom carpet to the en suite bathroom, making sure the connecting door is closed before he turns on the light inside.
Vic pees, a task requiring considerable care and accuracy since the toilet bowl is low-slung and tapered in shape.
He does not greatly care for the dark purplish bathroom suite (‘Damson’, the estate agent's brochure had called the shade) but it had been one of the things that attracted Marjorie when they bought the house two years ago — the bathroom, with its kidney-shaped handbasin and goldplated taps and sunken bath and streamlined loo and bidet.
And, above all, the fact that it was ‘en suite ’.
I've always wanted an en suite bathroom , she would say to visitors, to her friends on the phone, to, he wouldn't be surprised, tradesmen on the doorstep or strangers she accosted in the street.
You would think ‘en suite ’ was the most beautiful phrase in any language, the lengths Marjorie went to introduce it into her conversation.
If they made a perfume called En Suite , she would wear it.
Vic shakes the last drops from his penis, taking care not to sprinkle the shaggy pink nylon fitted carpet, and flushes the toilet.
The house has four toilets, a cause of concern to Vic's father.
FOUR toilets?he said, when first shown over the house.
Did I count right?
What's the matter, Dad?
Vic teased.
Afraid the water-table will go down if we flush them all at once?
No, but what if they start metering water, eh?
Then you'll be in trouble .
Vic tried to argue that it didn't make any difference how many toilets you had, it was the number of times you flushed them that mattered, but his father was convinced that having so many toilets was an incitement to unnecessary peeing, therefore to excessive flushing.
He could be right, at that.
At Gran's house, a back-to-back in Easton with an outside toilet, you didn't go unless you really had to, especially in the winter.
Their own house in those days, a step up the social ladder from Gran's, had its own indoor toilet, a dark narrow room off the half-landing that always niffed a bit, however much Sanilav and Dettol his mother poured into the bowl.
He remembered vividly that yellowish ceramic bowl with the trademark ‘Challenger’, the big varnished wooden seat that was always pleasantly warm to the bum, and a long chain dangling from the high cistern with a sponge-rubber ball, slightly perished, on the end of it.
He used to practise heading, flicking the ball from wall to wall, as he sat there, a constipated schoolboy.
His mother complained of the marks on the distemper.
Now he is the proud owner of four toilets — damson, avocado, sunflower and white, all centrally heated.
Probably as good an index of success as any.
He steps on to the bathroom scales.
Ten stone, two ounces.
Quite enough for a man only five feet, five and a half inches tall.
Some say — Vic has overheard them saying it — that he tries to compensate for his short stature by his aggressive manner.
Well, let them.
If it wasn't for a bit of aggression, he wouldn't be where he is now.
Though how long he will stay there is far from certain.
Vic frowns in the mirror above the handbasin, thinking again of last month's accounts, the quarterly forecast, the annual review…
He runs hot water into the dark purple bowl, lathers his face with shaving foam from an aerosol can, and begins to scrape his jaw with a safety razor, using a Wilkinson's Sword blade.
Vic believes fervently in buying British, and has frequent rows with his eldest son, Raymond, who favours a disposable plastic razor manufactured in France.
Not that this is the only bone of contention between them, no, not by a long chalk.
The principal constraint on the number of their disagreements is, indeed, the comparative rarity of their encounters, Raymond invariably being asleep when Vic leaves for work and out when he returns home.
Vic wipes the tidemark of foam from his cheeks and fingers the shaven flesh appraisingly.
Dark brown eyes stare back at him.
Who am I?
He grips the washbasin, leans forward on locked arms, and scans the square face, pale under a forelock of lank brown hair, flecked with grey, the two vertical furrows in the brow like a clip holding the blunt nose in place, the straight-ruled line of the mouth, the squared-off jaw.
You know who you are: it's all on file at Division.
Wilcox: Victor Eugene.
Date of Birth : 19 Oct. 1940.
Place of Birth : Easton, Rummidge, England.
Education : Endwell Road Primary School, Easton; Easton Grammar School for Boys; Rummidge College of Advanced Technology.
MI Mech.
Eng.
1964.
Marital Status : married (to Marjorie Florence Coleman, 1964).
Children : Raymond (b. 1966), Sandra (b. 1969), Gary (b. 1972).
Career : 1962–64, apprentice, Vanguard Engineering; 1964–66, Junior Production Engineer, Vanguard Engineering; 1966–70, Senior Engineer, Vanguard Engineering; 1970–74, Production Manager, Vanguard Engineering; 1974–78, Manufacturing Manager, Lewis & Arbuckle Ltd; 1978–80, Manufacturing Director, Rumcol Castings; 1980–85, Managing Director, Rumcol Castings.
Present Position : Managing Director, J. Pringle & Sons Casting and General Engineering.
That's who I am.
Vic grimaces at his own reflection, as if to say: come off it, no identity crises, please.
Somebody has to earn a living in this family.
He shrugs on his dressing-gown, which hangs from a hook on the bathroom door, switches off the light, and softly re-enters the dimly lit bedroom.
Marjorie has, however, been woken by the sound of plumbing.
‘Is that you?’ she says drowsily; then, without waiting for an answer, ‘I'll be down in a minute.’
‘Don't hurry,’ says Vic.
Don't bother would be more honest, for he prefers to have the kitchen to himself in the early morning, to prepare his own simple breakfast and enjoy the first cigarette of the day undisturbed.
Marjorie, however, feels that she must put in an appearance downstairs, however token, before he leaves for work, and there is a sense in which Vic understands and approves of this gesture.
His own mother was always first up in the mornings, to see husband and son off to work or college, and continued the habit almost till the day she died.
As Vic descends the stairs, a high-pitched electronic squeal rises from below.
The pressure of his foot on a wired pad under the stair-carpet has triggered the burglar alarm, which Raymond, amazingly, must have remembered to set after coming in at God knows what hour last night.
Vic goes to the console beside the front door and punches in the numerical code that disarms the apparatus.
He has fifteen seconds to do this, before the squeal turns into a screech and the alarm bell on the outside wall starts yammering.
All the houses in the neighbourhood have these alarms, and Vic admits that they are necessary, with burglaries increasing in frequency and boldness all the time, but the system they inherited from the previous owners of the house, with its magnetic contacts, infra-red scanners, pressure pads and panic buttons, is in his opinion over-elaborate.
It takes about five minutes to set it up before you retire to bed, and if you come back downstairs for something you have to cancel it and start all over again.
The sufferings of the rich , Raymond sneered when Vic was complaining of this one day — Raymond, who despises his parents' affluence while continuing to enjoy its comforts and conveniences, such as rent-free centrally heated accommodation, constant hot water, free laundry service, use of mother's car, use of TV, video recorder, stereo system, et cetera et cetera.
Vic feels his blood pressure rising at the thought of his eldest son, who dropped out of university four months ago and has not been usefully occupied since, now swaddled in a duvet upstairs, naked except for a single gold earring, sleeping off last night's booze.
Vic shakes his head irritably to rid his mind of the image.
He opens the inner front door that leads to the enclosed porch and glances at the doormat.
Empty.
The newspaper boy is late, or perhaps there is no paper today because of a strike.
An infra-red scanner winks its inflamed eye at him as he goes into the lounge in search of reading matter.
The floor and furniture are littered with the dismembered carcasses of the Mail on Sunday and the Sunday Times .
He picks up the Business Section of the Times and takes it into the kitchen.
While the kettle is boiling he scans the front page.
A headline catches his eye: ‘LAWSON COUNTS THE COST AS TAX HOPES FADE.’
Nigel Lawson, the Chancellor, is this weekend closeted with his Treasury team assessing the danger to his economic strategy from last week's rise in interest rates, and the sharp rise in unemployment.
So what else is new?
The kettle boils.
Vic makes a pot of strong tea, puts two slices of white bread in the toaster, and opens the louvres of the venetian blinds on the kitchen window to peer into the garden.
A grey, blustery morning, with no frost.
Squirrels bound across the lawn like balls of fluff blown by the wind.
Magpies strut from flowerbed to flowerbed, greedily devouring the grubs that he turned up in yesterday's gardening.
Blackbirds, sparrows, robins, and other birds whose names Vic doesn't know, skip and hop about at a discreet distance from the magpies.
All these creatures seem very much at home in Vic's garden, although it is only two miles from the city centre.
One morning not long ago he saw a fox walking past this same window.
Vic tapped on the pane.
The fox stopped and turned his head to look at Vic for a moment, as if to say,Yes?and then proceeded calmly on his way, his brush swaying in the air behind him.
It is Vic's impression that English wildlife is getting streetwise, moving from the country into the city where the living is easier — where there are no traps, pesticides, hunters and sportsmen, but plenty of well-stocked garbage bins, and housewives like Marjorie, softhearted or softheaded enough to throw their scraps into the garden, creating animal soup-kitchens.
Nature is joining the human race and going on the dole.
Vic has eaten his two slices of toast and is on his third cup of tea and first cigarette of the day when Marjorie shuffles into the kitchen in her dressing-gown and slippers, a scarf over her curlers, her pale round face puffy with sleep.
She carries the Daily Mail , which has just been delivered.
‘Smoking,’ she says, in a tone at once resigned and reproachful, condensing into a single word an argument well-known to both of them.
Vic grunts, the distillation of an equally familiar rejoinder.
He glances at the kitchen clock.
‘Shouldn't Sandra and Gary be getting up?
I won't waste my breath on Raymond.’
‘Gary doesn't have school today.
The teachers are on strike.’
‘What?’ he says accusingly, his anger at the teachers somehow getting displaced on to Marjorie.
‘Industrial action, or whatever they call it.
He brought a note home on Friday.’
‘Industrial in action, you mean.
You don't see teachers out on the picket line, in the cold and the rain, have you noticed?
They're just sitting around in their warm staff-rooms, chewing the fat, while the kids are sent home to get into mischief.
That's not action.
It's not an industry, either, come to that.
It's a profession and it's about time they started to act like professionals.’
‘Well…’ says Marjorie placatingly.
‘What about Sandra?
Is the Sixth Form College taking industrial action’ too?’
‘No, I'm taking her to the doctor's.’
‘What's the matter with her?’
Marjorie yawns evasively.
‘Oh, nothing serious.’
‘Why can't she go on her own?
A girl of seventeen should be able to go to the doctor's without someone to hold her hand.’
‘I don't go in with her, not unless she wants me to.
I just wait with her.’
Vic regards his wife suspiciously.
‘You're not going shopping with her afterwards?’
Marjorie blushes.
‘Well, she needs a new pair of shoes…’
‘You're a fool, Marje!’
Vic exclaims.
‘You spoil that girl something rotten.
All she thinks about is clothes, shoes, hairstyles.
What kind of A-Levels do you think she's going to get?’
‘I don't know.
But if she doesn't want to go to university…’
‘What does she want to do, then?
What's the latest?’
‘She's thinking of hairdressing.’
‘Hairdressing!’
Vic puts as much contempt into his voice as he can muster.
‘Anyway, she's a pretty girl, why shouldn't she enjoy clothes and so on, while she's young?’
‘Why shouldn't you enjoy dressing her up, you mean.
You know you treat her like a doll, Marje, don't you?’
Rather than answer this question, Marjorie reverts to an earlier one.
‘She's been having trouble with her periods, if you must know,’ she says, imputing a prurient inquisitiveness to Vic, although she is well aware that such gynaecological disclosures are the last thing he wants, especially at this hour of the morning.
The pathology of women's bodies is a source of great mystery and unease to Vic.
Their bleedings and leakages, their lumps and growths, their peculiarly painful-sounding surgical operations — scraping of wombs, stripping of veins, amputation of breasts — the mere mention of such things makes him wince and cringe, and lately the menopause has added new items to the repertory: the hot flush, flooding, and something sinister called a bloat.
‘I expect he'll put her on the pill,’ says Marjorie, making herself a fresh pot of tea.
‘What?’
‘To regulate her periods.
I expect Dr Roberts will put Sandra on the pill.’
Vic grunts again, but this time his intonation is ambiguous and uncertain.
He has a feeling that his womenfolk are up to something.
Could the real purpose of Sandra's visit to the doctor's be to fix her up with contraception?
With Marjorie's approval?
He knows he doesn't approve himself.
Sandra having sex?
At seventeen?
With whom?
Not that spotty youth in the army-surplus overcoat, what's his name, Cliff, not him for God's sake.
Not with anyone.
An image of his daughter in the act of love, her white knees parted, a dark shape above her, flashes unbidden into his head and fills him with rage and disgust.
He is conscious of Marjorie's watery blue eyes scanning him speculatively over the rim of her teacup, inviting further discussion of Sandra, but he can't face it, not this morning, not with a day's work ahead of him.
Not at any time, to be honest.
Discussion of Sandra's sex-life could easily stray into the area of his and Marjorie's sex-life, or rather the lack of it, and he would rather not go into that.
Let sleeping dogs lie.
Vic compares the kitchen clock with his watch and rises from the table.
‘Shall I do you a bit of bacon?’ says Marjorie.
‘No, I've finished.’
‘You ought to have a cooked breakfast, these cold mornings.’
‘I haven't time.’
‘Why don't we get a microwave?
I could cook you a bit of bacon in seconds with a microwave.’
‘Did you know,’ says Vic,’that ninety-six percent of the world's microwave ovens are made in Japan, Taiwan or Korea?’
‘Everybody we know has got one,’ says Marjorie.
‘Exactly,’ says Vic.
Marjorie looks unhappily at Vic, uncertain of his drift.’
I thought I might price some this morning,’ she says.
‘After Sandra's shoes.’
‘Where would you put it?’
Vic inquires, looking round at the kitchen surfaces already cluttered with numerous electrical appliances — toaster, kettle, coffee-maker, food-processor, electric wok, chip-fryer, waffle-maker…
‘I thought we could put the electric wok away.
We never use it.
A microwave would be more useful.’
‘Well, all right, price them but don't buy.
I can get one cheaper through the trade.’
Marjorie brightens.
She smiles, and two dimples appear in her pasty cheeks, still shiny from last night's application of face cream.
It was her dimples that first attracted Vic to Marjorie twenty-five years ago, when she worked in the typing pool at Vanguard.
These days they appear infrequently, but the prospect of a shopping expedition is one of the few things that are guaranteed to bring them out.
‘Just don't expect me to eat anything cooked in it,’ he says.
Marjorie's dimples fade abruptly, like the sun going behind a cloud.
‘Why not?’
‘It's not proper cooking, is it?
My mother would turn in her grave.’
Vic takes the Daily Mail with him to the lavatory, the one at the back of the house, next to the tradesmen's entrance, with a plain white suite, intended for the use of charladies, gardeners and workmen.
By tacit agreement, Vic customarily moves his bowels in here, while Marjorie uses the guest cloakroom off the front hall, so that the atmosphere of the en suite bathroom remains unpolluted.
Vic smokes a second cigarette as he sits at stool, and scans the Daily Mail .
Westland and Heseltine are still making the headlines.
STOP THE NO. 10 WHISPERS.
MAGGIE'S BID TO COOL OFF BATTLE.
He flicks through the inside pages.
MURDOCH FACING UNION CASH CLASH.
THE IMAM'S CALL TO PRAYER MAKES THE VICAR TALK OF BEDLAM.
HEARTACHE AHEAD FOR THE BRIDE WHO MARRIED TWICE.
WE'RE IN THE SUPER-LEAGUE OF NATIONS.
Hang about.
Britain is back in the Super-League of top industrial nations, it is claimed today.
Only Germany, Holland, Japan and Switzerland can now match us for economic growth, price stability and strong balance of payments, says Dr David Lomax, the Natwest's economic adviser.
‘Match’ presumably means ‘beat’.
And since when was Holland an industrial superpower?
Even so, it must be all balls, a mirage massaged from statistics.
You only have to drive through the West Midlands to see that if we are in the Super-League of top industrial nations, somebody must be moving the goalposts.
Vic is all in favour of backing Britain, but there are times when the Mail's windy chauvinism gets on his tits.
He takes a drag on his cigarette and taps the ash between his legs, hearing a faint hiss as it hits the water.
100 M.P.G. FAMILY CAR LOOKING GOOD IN TESTS.
Trials have been started by British Leyland of their revolutionary lightweight aluminium engine for a world-beating family car capable of 100 miles per gallon.
When was the last time we were supposed to have a world-beating aluminium engine?
The Hillman Imp, right?
Where are they now, the Hillman Imps of yesteryear?
In the scrapyards, every one, or nearly.
And the Linwood plant a graveyard, grass growing between the assembly lines, corrugated-iron roofs flapping in the wind.
A car that nobody wanted to buy, built on a site chosen for political not commercial reasons, hundreds of miles from its component suppliers.
He turns to the City Pages.
HOW TO GET UP A HEAD OF ESTEEM.
What has been designated Industry Year has got off to a predictably silly start.
Various bodies in Manufacturing Industry are working themselves into one of their regular lathers about the supposed low social esteem bestowed upon engineers and engineering.
Vic reads this article with mixed feelings.
Industry Year is certainly a lot of balls.
On the other hand, the idea that society undervalues its engineers is not.
It is 7.40 when Vic emerges from the lavatory.
The tempo of his actions begins to accelerate.
He strides through the kitchen, where Marjorie is listlessly loading his soiled breakfast things into the dishwasher, and runs up the stairs.
Back in the en suite bathroom, he briskly cleans his teeth and brushes his hair.
He goes into the bedroom and puts on a clean white shirt and a suit.
He has six business suits, which he wears in daily rotation.
He used to think five was enough, but acquired an additional one after Raymond wisecracked, ‘If that's the charcoal grey worsted, it must be Tuesday.’
Today it is the turn of the navy-blue pinstripe.
He selects a tie diagonally striped in dark tones of red, blue and grey.
He levers his feet into a pair of highly polished black calf Oxfords.
A frayed lace snaps under too vigorous a tug, and he curses.
He rummages in the back of his wardrobe for an old black shoe with a suitable lace and uncovers a cardboard box containing a brand-new clock radio, made in Hong Kong, sealed in a transparent plastic envelope and nestling in a polystyrene mould.
Vic sighs and grimaces.
Such discoveries are not uncommon at this time of year.
Marjorie has a habit of buying Christmas presents early, hiding them away like a squirrel, and then forgetting all about them.
When he comes downstairs again, she is hovering in the hall.
‘Who was the clock radio for, then?’
‘What?’
‘I found a brand-new clock radio at the back of the wardrobe.’
Marjorie covers her mouth with her hand.
‘Sst!’
I knew I'd got something for your Dad.’
‘Didn't we give him a Christmas present, then?’
‘Of course we did.
You remember, you rushed out on Christmas Eve and got him that electric blanket…
Never mind, it will do for next year.’
‘Hasn't he already got a clock radio?
Didn't we give him one a few years ago?’
‘Did we?’ says Marjorie vaguely.
‘Perhaps one of the boys would like it, then.’
‘What they need is a clock with a bomb attached to it, not a radio,’ says Vic, patting his pockets, checking for wallet, diary, keyring, calculator, cigarettes and lighter.
Marjorie helps him on with his camelhair overcoat, a garment she persuaded him to buy against his better judgement, for it hangs well below his knees and, he thinks, accentuates his short stature, as well as making him look like a prosperous bookie.
‘When will you be home?’ she inquires.
‘I don't know.
You'd better keep my dinner warm.’
‘Don't be too late.’
She closes her eyes and tilts her face towards him.
He brushes her lips with his, then jerks his head in the direction of the first floor.
‘Get that idle shower out of bed.’
‘They need sleep when they're growing, Vic.’
‘Raymond's not growing , for Christ's sake.
He stopped growing years ago, unless he's growing a beer belly, which wouldn't surprise me.’
‘Well, Gary's still growing.’
‘Make sure he does some homework today.’
‘Yes, dear.’
Vic is quite sure she has no intention of carrying out his instructions.
If she hadn't arranged to take Sandra to the doctor's Marjorie would probably go back to bed herself, now, with a cup of tea and the Daily Mail .
A few weeks before, he'd returned home soon after getting to work because he'd left some important papers behind, and found the house totally silent, all three children and their mother sound asleep at 9.30 in the morning.
No wonder the country is going to the dogs.
Vic passes through the glazed porch and out into the open air.
The cold wind ruffles his hair and makes him flinch for a moment, but it is refreshing after the stale warmth of the house, and he takes a deep breath or two on his way to the garage.
As he approaches the garage door it swings open as if by magic — in fact by electricity, activated by a remote-control device in Vic's pocket — a feat that never fails to give him a deep, childlike pleasure.
Inside, the gleaming dark blue Jaguar V12, Registration Number VIC 100, waits beside Marjorie's silver Metro.
He backs the car out, shutting the garage door with another touch on the remote control.
Marjorie has now appeared at the lounge window, clutching her dressing-gown across her bosom with one hand and waving timidly with the other.
Vic smiles conciliatingly, puts the automatic gear lever into Drive, and glides away.
Now begins the best half-an-hour of the day, the drive to work.
In fact it is not quite half-an-hour — the journey usually takes twenty-four minutes, but Vic wishes it were longer.
It is an interval of peace between the irritations of home and the anxieties of work, a time of pure sensation, total control, effortless superiority.
For the Jaguar is superior to every other car on the road, Vic is convinced of that.
When Midland Amalgamated headhunted him for the MD's job at Pringle's they offered him a Rover 3500 Vanden Plas, but Vic stuck out for the Jaguar, a car normally reserved for divisional chairmen, and to his great satisfaction he had got one, even though it wasn't quite new.
It had to be a British car, of course, since Pringle's did so much business with the local automotive industry — not that Vic has ever driven a foreign car: foreign cars are anathema to him, their sudden invasion of British roads in the 1970s marked the beginning of the region's economic ruin in his view — but he has to admit that you don't have a lot of choice in British cars when it comes to matching the top-of-the-range Mercedes and BMWs.
In fact the Jag is just about the only one that can really wipe the smiles off their drivers' faces, unless you're talking Rolls-Royce or Bentley.
He pauses at the T-junction where Avondale Road meets Barton Road, on which the rush-hour traffic is already beginning to thicken.
The driver of a Ford Transit van, though he has priority, hangs back respectfully to let Vic filter left.
Vic nods his thanks, turns left, then right again, picking his way through the broad, tree-lined residential streets with practised ease.
He is skirting the University, whose tall redbrick clock-tower is occasionally visible above trees and rooftops.
Though he lives on its doorstep, so to speak, Vic has never been inside the place.
He knows it chiefly as a source of seasonal traffic jams about which Marjorie sometimes complains (the University day begins too late and finishes too early to inconvenience Vic himself) and of distractingly pretty girls about whose safety he worries, seeing them walking to and fro between their halls of residence and the Students' Union in the evenings.
With its massive architecture and landscaped grounds, guarded at every entrance by watchful security staff, the University seems to Vic rather like a small city-state, an academic Vatican, from which he keeps his distance, both intimidated by and disapproving of its air of privileged detachment from the vulgar, bustling industrial city in which it is embedded.
His own alma mater , situated a few miles away, was a very different kind of institution, a dingy tower block, crammed with machinery and lab benches, overlooking a railway marshalling yard and a roundabout on the inner ring road.
In his day a College of Advanced Technology, it has since grown in size and been raised to the status of a university, but without putting on any airs and graces.
And quite right too.
If you make college too comfortable nobody will ever want to leave it to do proper work.
Vic leaves the residential area around the University and filters into the traffic moving sluggishly along the London Road in the direction of the City Centre.
This is the slowest part of his morning journey, but the Jaguar, whispering along in automatic, takes the strain.
Vic selects a cassette and slots it into the four-speaker stereo system.
The voice of Carly Simon fills the interior of the car.
Vic's taste in music is narrow but keen.
He favours female vocalists, slow tempos, lush arrangements of tuneful melodies in the jazz-soul idiom.
Carly Simon, Dusty Springfield, Roberta Flack, Dionne Warwick, Diana Ross, Randy Crawford and, more recently, Sade and Jennifer Rush.
The subtle inflexions of these voices, honeyed or slightly hoarse, moaning and whispering of women's love, its joys and disappointments, soothe his nerves and relax his limbs.
He would of course never dream of playing these tapes on the music centre at home, risking the derision of his children.
It is a very private pleasure, a kind of musical masturbation, all part of the ritual of the drive to work.
He would enjoy it more, though, if he were not obliged to read at the same time, in the rear windows of other cars, crude reminders of a more basic sexuality.
YOUNG FARMERS DO IT IN THEIR WELLIES.
WATER SKIERS DO IT STANDING UP.
HOOT IF YOU HAD IT LAST NIGHT.
It, it, it.
Vic's knuckles are white as he grips the steering wheel.
Why should decent people have to put up with this crap?
There ought to be a law.
Now Vic has reached the last traffic lights before the system of tunnels and flyovers that will conduct him without further interruption through the centre of the city.
A red Toyota Celica draws up beside him, then inches forward as its driver rides his clutch, evidently intending a quick getaway.
The lights turn to amber and the Toyota darts forward, revealing, wouldn't you know it, a legend in its rear window, HANG GLIDERS DO IT IN MID-AIR.
Vic waits law-abidingly for the green light, then presses the accelerator hard.
The Jaguar surges forward, catches the Toyota in two seconds, and sweeps effortlessly past — Carly Simon, by happy coincidence, hitting a thrilling crescendo at the very same moment.
Vic glances in his rear-view mirror and smiles thinly.
Teach him to buy a Jap car.
It won't, of course.
Vic is well aware of the hollowness of his small victory, a huge thirsty 5.3-litre engine pitted against the Toyota's economical 1.8.
But never mind common sense for the moment, this is the time of indulgence, suspended between home and work, the time of effortless motion, cushioned in real leather, insulated from the noise and fumes of the city by the padded coachwork, the tinted glass, the sensuous music.
The car's long prow dips into the first tunnel.
In and out, down and up.
Vic threads the tunnels, switches lanes, swings out on to a long covered ramp that leads to a six-lane expressway thrust like a gigantic concrete fist through the backstreets of his boyhood.
Every morning Vic drives over the flattened site of his Gran's house and passes at chimney-pot level the one in which he himself grew up, where his widower father still stubbornly lives on in spite of all Vic's efforts to persuade him to move, like a sailor clinging to the rigging of a sinking ship — buffeted, deafened and choked by the thundering torrent of traffic thirty yards from his bedroom window.
Vic swings on to the motorway, going north-west, and for a few miles gives the Jaguar its head, moving smoothly up the outside lane at 90, keeping a watchful eye on the rear-view mirror, though the police rarely bother you in the rush hour, they are as eager as anyone to keep the traffic flowing.
To his right and left spreads a familiar landscape, so familiar that he does not really see it, an expanse of houses and factories, warehouses and sheds, railway lines and canals, piles of scrap metal and heaps of damaged cars, container ports and lorry parks, cooling towers and gasometers.
A monochrome landscape, grey under a low grey sky, its horizons blurred by a grey haze.
Vic Wilcox has now, strictly speaking, left the city of Rummidge and passed into an area known as the Dark Country — so called because of the pall of smoke that hung over it, and the film of coaldust and soot that covered it, in the heyday of the Industrial Revolution.
He knows a little of the history of this region, having done a prize-winning project on it at school.
Rich mineral deposits were discovered here in the early nineteenth century: coal, iron, limestone.
Mines were sunk, quarries excavated, and ironworks sprang up everywhere to exploit the new technique of smelting iron ore with coke, using limestone as a flux.
The fields were gradually covered with pitheads, foundries, factories and workshops and rows of wretched hovels for the men, women and children who worked in them: a sprawling, unplanned, industrial conurbation that was gloomy by day, fearsome by night.
A writer called Thomas Carlyle described it in 1824 as ‘A frightful scene…a dense cloud of pestilential smoke hangs over it forever…and at night the whole region becomes like a volcano spitting fire from a thousand tubes of brick .’
A little later, Charles Dickens recorded travelling ‘through miles of cinder-paths and blazing furnaces and roaring steam engines, and such a mass of dirt, gloom and misery as I never before witnessed ’.
Queen Victoria had the curtains of her train window drawn when she passed through the region so that her eyes should not be offended by its ugliness and squalor.
The economy and outward appearance of the area have changed considerably since those days.
As the seams of coal and iron were exhausted, or became unprofitable to work, mining and smelting diminished.
But industries based on iron-casting, forging, engineering, all those kinds of manufacturing known generically as ‘metal-bashing’— spread and multiplied, until their plants met and merged with the expanding industrial suburbs of Rummidge.
The shrinkage of heavy industry, and the development of new forms of energy, have reduced the visible pollution of the air, though the deadlier fumes of leaded petrol exhaust, drifting from the motorways with which the whole area is looped and knotted, thicken the characteristic grey haziness of the Midlands light.
Nowadays the Dark Country is not noticeably darker than its neighbouring city, and of country there is precious little to be seen.
Foreign visitors sometimes suppose that the region gets its name not from its environmental character but from the complexions of so many of its inhabitants, immigrant families from India, Pakistan and the Caribbean, drawn here in the boom years of the fifties and sixties, when jobs were plentiful, and now bearing the brunt of high unemployment.
All too soon it is time to slow down and leave the motorway, descending into smaller-scale streets, into the congestion of traffic lights, roundabouts, T-junctions.
This is West Wallsbury, a district dominated by factories, large and small, old and new.
Many are silent, some derelict, their windows starred with smashed glass.
Receiverships and closures have ravaged the area in recent years, giving a desolate look to its streets.
Since the election of the Tory Government of 1979, which allowed the pound to rise on the back of North Sea oil in the early eighties and left British industry defenceless in the face of foreign competition, or (according to your point of view) exposed its inefficiency (Vic inclines to the first view, but in certain moods will admit the force of the second), one-third of all the engineering companies in the West Midlands have closed down.
There is nothing quite so forlorn as a closed factory — Vic Wilcox knows, having supervised a shutdown himself in his time.
A factory is sustained by the energy of its own functioning, the throb and whine of machinery, the clash of metal, the unceasing motion of the assembly lines, the ebb and flow of workers changing shifts, the hiss of airbrakes and the growl of diesel engines from wagons delivering raw materials at one gate, taking away finished goods at the other.
When you put a stop to all that, when the place is silent and empty, all that is left is a large, ramshackle shed — cold, filthy and depressing.
Well, that won't happen at Pringle's, hopefully, as they say.
Hopefully.
Vic is very near his factory now.
A scarlet neon sign,Susan's Sauna , subject of many nudge-nudge jokes at work, but to Vic merely a useful landmark, glows above a dingy shop-front.
A hundred yards further on, he turns down Coney Lane, passes Shopfix, Atkinson Insulation, Bitomark, then runs alongside the railings that fence the Pringle site until he reaches the main entrance.
It is a long fence, and a large site.
In its heyday, in the post-war boom, Pringle's employed four thousand men.
Now the workforce has shrunk to less than a thousand, and much of the plant is in disuse.
There are buildings and annexes that Vic has never been inside.
It is cheaper to let them rot than to clear them away.
Vic hoots impatiently at the barrier; the security man's face appears at the window and flashes an ingratiating smile.
Vic nods grimly back.
Bugger was probably reading a newspaper.
His predecessor had been fired at Vic's insistence just before Christmas when, returning unexpectedly to the factory at night, he found the man watching a portable TV instead of the video monitors he was paid to watch.
It looks as though this one is not much of an improvement.
Perhaps they should employ another security firm.
Vic makes a mental note to raise the matter with George Prendergast, his Personnel Director.
The barrier is raised and he drives to his personal parking space next to the front entrance of the office block.
He checks the statistics of his journey on the digital dashboard display.
Distance covered: 9.8 miles.
Journey time: 25 mins 14 secs.
Average for the morning rush-hour.
Petrol consumption: 17.26 m.p.g.
Not bad — would have been better if he hadn't put the Toyota in its place.
Vic pushes through the swing doors to the reception lobby, a reasonably impressive space, its walls lined with light oak panelling installed in a more prosperous era.
The furniture is looking a bit shabby, though.
The clock on the wall, an irritating type with no numbers on its face, suggests that the time is just before half-past eight.
Doreen and Lesley, the two telephonist-receptionists, are taking off their coats behind the counter.
They smile and simper, patting their hair and smoothing their skirts.
‘Morning, Mr Wilcox.’
‘Morning.
Think we could do with some new chairs in here?’
‘Oh yes, Mr Wilcox, these are ever so hard.’
‘I didn't mean your chairs, I mean for visitors.’
‘Oh…’
They don't know quite how to react.
He is still Mr New Broom, slightly feared.
As he pushes through the swing doors and walks down the corridor towards his office, he can hear them spluttering with stifled laughter.
‘Good morning, Vic.’
His secretary, Shirley, smirks from behind her desk, self-righteous at being at her post before the boss, even though she is at this moment inspecting her face in a compact mirror.
She is a mature woman with piled hair of an improbable yellow hue, and a voluptuous bosom on which her reading glasses, retained round her neck by a chain, rest as upon a shelf.
Vic inherited her from his predecessor, who had evidently cultivated an informal working relationship.
It was not with any encouragement from himself that she began to address him as Vic, but he was obliged to concede the point.
She had worked for Pringle's for years, and Vic was heavily dependent on her know-how while he eased himself into the job.
‘Morning, Shirley.
Make us a cup of coffee, will you?’
Vic's working day is lubricated by endless cups of instant coffee.
He hangs up his camelhair coat in the anteroom that connects his office with Shirley's and passes into the former.
He shrugs off the jacket of his suit and drapes it over the back of a chair.
He sits down at his desk and opens his diary.
Shirley comes in with coffee and a large photograph album.
‘I thought you'd like to see Tracey's new portfolio,’ she says.
Shirley has a seventeen-year-old daughter whose ambition is to be a photographic model, and she is forever thrusting glossy pictures of this well-developed young hussy, crammed into skimpy swimsuits or revealing underwear, under Vic's nose.
At first, he suspected her of trying to curry favour by pandering to his lust, but later came to the conclusion that it was genuine parental pride.
The silly bitch really couldn't see that there was anything dubious about turning your daughter in to a pin-up.
‘Oh yes?’ he says, with scarcely concealed impatience.
Then, as he opens the portfolio: ‘Good Christ!’
The pouting, weak-chinned face under the blonde curls is familiar enough, but the two huge naked breasts, thrust towards the camera like pink blancmanges tipped with cherries, are a new departure.
He turns the stiff, polythene-covered pages rapidly.
‘Nice, aren't they?’ says Shirley fondly.
‘You let someone take pictures of your daughter like this?’
‘I was there, sort of thing.
In the studio.’
‘I'll be frank with you,’ says Vic, closing the album and handing it back.
‘I wouldn't let my daughter.’
‘I don't see the harm,’ says Shirley.
‘People think nothing of it nowadays, topless sort of thing.
You should have seen the beach at Rhodes last summer.
And even television.
If you've got a beautiful body, why not make the most of it?
Look at Sam Fox!’
‘Who's he?’
‘She.
Samantha Fox.
You know !’
Incredulity raises Shirley's voice an octave.’
The top Page Three girl.
D'you know how much she earned last year?’
‘More than me, I don't doubt.
And more than Pringle's will make this year, if you waste any more of my time.’
‘Oh, you,’ Shirley roguishly, adept at receiving reprimands as if they are jokes.
‘Tell Brian I want to see him, will you?’
‘I don't think he's in yet.’
Vic grunts, unsurprised that his Marketing Director has not yet arrived.
‘As soon as he is, then.
Let's do some letters in the meantime.’
The telephone rings.
Vic picks up the receiver.
‘Wilcox.’
‘Vic?’
The voice of Stuart Baxter, Chairman of Midland Amalgamated's Engineering and Foundry Division, sounds faintly disappointed.
He was hoping, no doubt, to be told that Mr Wilcox wasn't in yet, so that he could leave a message for Vic to ring back, thus putting him on the defensive, knowing that his divisional chief knew that he, Vic, hadn't been at his desk as early as him, Stuart Baxter.
Vic becomes even more convinced that this was the motive for the call as it proceeds, because Stuart Baxter has nothing new to communicate.
They had the same conversation the previous Friday afternoon, about the disappointing figures for Pringle's production in December.
‘There's always a downturn in December, Stuart, you know that.
With the long Christmas holiday.’
‘Even allowing for that, it's well down, Vic.
Compared to last year.’
‘And it's going to be well down again this month, you might as well know that now.’
‘I'm sorry to hear you say that, Vic.
It makes life very difficult for me.’
‘We haven't got the foundry on song, yet.
The core blowers are always breaking down.
I'd like to buy a new machine, fully automated, to replace the lot.’
‘Too expensive.
You'd do better to buy in from outside.
It's not worth investing in that foundry.’
‘The foundry has a lot of potential.
It's a good workforce.
They do nice work.
Any road, it's not just the foundry.
We're working on a new production model for the whole factory — new stock control, new purchasing policy.
Everything on computer.
But it takes time.’
‘Time is what we haven't got, Vic.’
‘Right.
So why don't we both get back to work now, instead of nattering on like a couple of housewives over the garden fence?’
There is a momentary silence on the line, then a forced chuckle, as Stuart Baxter decides not to take offence.
Nevertheless he has taken offence.
It was probably a foolish thing to say, but Vic shrugs of any regret as he puts the receiver down.
He is not in the business of ingratiating himself with Stuart Baxter.
He is in the business of making J. Pringle & Sons profitable.
Vic flicks a switch on his telephone console and summons Shirley, whom he had gestured out of the office while Baxter was talking, to take some letters.
He leafs through the file of correspondence in his In-tray, the two vertical lines in his brow above the nose drawing closer together as he concentrates on names, figures, dates.
He lights a cigarette, inhales deeply, and blows two plumes of smoke through his nostrils.
Outside the sky is still overcast, and the murky yellow light that filters through the vertical louvres of the window blinds is hardly enough to read by.
He switches on his desk lamp, casting a pool of light on the documents.
Through walls and windows comes a muffled compound noise of machinery and traffic, the soothing, satisfying sound of men at work
And there, for the time being, let us leave Vic Wilcox, while we travel back an hour or two in time, a few miles in space, to meet a very different character.
A character who, rather awkwardly for me, doesn't herself believe in the concept of character.
That is to say(a favourite phrase of her own), Robyn Penrose, Temporary Lecturer in English Literature at the University of Rummidge, holds that ‘character’ is a bourgeois myth, an illusion created to reinforce the ideology of capitalism.
As evidence for this assertion she will point to the fact that the rise of the novel (the literary genre of ‘character’par excellence ) in the eighteenth century coincided with the rise of capitalism; that the triumph of the novel over all other literary genres in the nineteenth century coincided with the triumph of capitalism; and that the modernist and postmodernist deconstruction of the classic novel in the twentieth century has coincided with the terminal crisis of capitalism.
Why the classic novel should have collaborated with the spirit of capitalism is perfectly obvious to Robyn.
Both are expressions of a secularized Protestant ethic, both dependent on the idea of an autonomous individual self who is responsible for and in control of his/her own destiny, seeking happiness and fortune in competition with other autonomous selves.
This is true of the novel considered both as commodity and as mode of representation.
(Thus Robyn in full seminar spate.)
That is to say, it applies to novelists themselves as well as to their heroes and heroines.
The novelist is a capitalist of the imagination.
He or she invents a product which consumers didn't know they wanted until it is made available, manufactures it with the assistance of purveyors of risk capital known as publishers, and sells it in competition with makers of marginally differentiated products of the same kind.
The first major English novelist, Daniel Defoe, was a merchant.
The second, Samuel Richardson, was a printer.
The novel was the first mass-produced cultural artefact.
(At this point Robyn, with elbows tucked into her sides, would spread her hands outwards from the wrist, as if to imply that there is no need to say more.
But of course she always has much more to say.)
According to Robyn (or, more precisely, according to the writers who have influenced her thinking on these matters), there is no such thing as the ‘self’ on which capitalism and the classic novel are founded — that is to say, a finite, unique soul or essence that constitutes a person's identity; there is only a subject position in an infinite web of discourses — the discourses of power, sex, family, science, religion, poetry, etc.
And by the same token, there is no such thing as an author, that is to say, one who originates a work of fiction ab nihilo .
Every text is a product of intertextuality, a tissue of allusions to and citations of other texts; and, in the famous words of Jacques Derrida (famous to people like Robyn, anyway),‘il n'y a pas de hors-texte ’, there is nothing outside the text.
There are no origins, there is only production, and we produce our ‘selves’ in language.
Not ‘you are what you eat ’ but ‘you are what you speak ’or, rather ‘you are what speaks you ’, is the axiomatic basis of Robyn's philosophy, which she would call, if required to give it a name, ‘semiotic materialism’.
It might seem a bit bleak, a bit inhuman (‘antihumanist, yes; inhuman, no,’ she would interject), somewhat deterministic (‘not at all; the truly determined subject is he who is not aware of the discursive formations that determine him.
Or her,’ she would add scrupulously, being among other things a feminist), but in practice this doesn't seem to affect her behaviour very noticeably — she seems to have ordinary human feelings, ambitions, desires, to suffer anxieties, frustrations, fears, like anyone else in this imperfect world, and to have a natural inclination to try and make it a better place.
I shall therefore take the liberty of treating her as a character, not utterly different in kind, though of course belonging to a very different social species, from Vic Wilcox.
Robyn rises somewhat later than Vic this dark January Monday.
Her alarm clock, a replica of an old-fashioned instrument purchased from Habitat, with an analogue dial and a little brass bell on the top, rouses her from a deep sleep at 7.30.
Unlike Vic, Robyn invariably sleeps until woken.
Then worries rush into her consciousness, as into his, like clamorous patients who have been waiting all night for the doctor's surgery to open; but she deals with them in a rational, orderly manner.
This morning she gives priority to the fact that it is the first day of the winter term, and that she has a lecture to deliver and two tutorials to conduct.
Although she has been teaching now for some eight years, on and off, although she enjoys it, feels she is good at it, and would like to go on doing it for the rest of her life if possible, she always feels a twinge of anxiety at the beginning of a new term.
This does not disturb her self-confidence; a good teacher, like a good actress, should not be immune from stage fright.
She sits up in bed for a moment, doing some complicated breathing and flexing of the abdominal muscles, learned in yoga classes, to calm herself.
This exercise is rendered easier to perform by the fact that Charles is not lying beside her to observe and ask ironic questions about it.
He left the previous evening to drive to Ipswich, where his own term is due to begin today at the University of Suffolk.
And who is Charles?
While Robyn is getting up, and getting ready for the day, thinking mostly about the nineteenth-century industrial novels on which she has to lecture this morning, I will tell you about Charles, and other salient facts of her biography.
She was born, and christened Roberta Anne Penrose, in Melbourne, Australia, nearly thirty-three years ago, but left that country at the age of five to accompany her parents to England.
Her father, then a young academic historian, had a scholarship to pursue post-doctoral research into nineteenth-century European diplomacy at Oxford.
Instead of returning to Australia, he took a post at a university on the south coast of England, where he has been ever since, now occupying a personal Chair.
Robyn has only the dimmest memories of the country of her birth, and has never had the opportunity to refresh or renew them, Professor Penrose's characteristic response to any suggestion that the family should revisit Australia being a shudder.
Robyn had a comfortable childhood, growing up in a pleasant, unostentatious house with a view of the sea.
She attended an excellent direct-grant grammar school (which has since gone independent, much to Robyn's disgust) where she was Head Girl and Captain of Games and which she left with four A grades at A-Level.
Though urged by the school to apply for a place at Oxbridge, she chose instead to go to Sussex University, as bright young people often did in the 1970s, because the new universities were considered exciting and innovatory places to study at.
Under the umbrella of a degree course in English Literature, Robyn read Freud and Marx, Kafka and Kierkegaard, which she certainly couldn't have done at Oxbridge.
She also set about losing her virginity, and accomplished this feat without difficulty, but without much pleasure, in her first term.
In her second, she was recklessly promiscuous, and in her third she met Charles.
(Robyn kicks off the duvet and gets out of bed.
She stands upright in her long white cotton nightgown from Laura Ashley, scratches her bottom through the cambric, and yawns.
She goes to the window, treating the rugs spread on the sanded and waxed pine floorboards as stepping-stones, pulls back the curtain, and peers out.
She looks up at the grey clouds scudding across the sky, down at a vista of narrow back gardens, some neat and trim with goldfish ponds and brightly painted play equipment, others tatty and neglected, cluttered with broken appliances and discarded furniture.
It is an upwardly mobile street of nineteenth-century terraced cottages, where houseproud middle-class owners rub shoulders with less tidy and less affluent working-class occupiers.
A gust of wind rattles the sash window and the draught makes Robyn shiver.
She has not double-glazed the house in order to preserve its architectural integrity.
Clutching herself, she skips to the door from rug to rug, like a Scottish country dancer, across the landing and into the bathroom, which has smaller windows and is warmer.)
The Sussex campus, with its tastefully harmonized buildings in the modernist-Palladian style, arranged in elegant perspective at the foot of the South Downs a few miles outside Brighton, was much admired by architects, but had a somewhat disorienting effect on the young people who came to study there.
Toiling up the slope from Falmer railway station, you had the Kafkaesque sensation of walking into an endlessly deep stage set where apparently three-dimensional objects turned out to be painted flats, and reality receded as fast as you pursued it.
Cut off from normal social intercourse with the adult world, relieved of inhibition by the ethos of the Permissive Society, the students were apt to run wild, indulging in promiscuous sex and experimenting with drugs, or else they turned melancholy mad.
Robyn's generation, coming up to university in the early 1970s, immediately after the heroic period of student politics, were oppressed by a sense of belatedness.
There were no significant rights left to demand, no taboos left to break.
Student demonstrations developed an ugly edge of gratuitous violence.
So did student parties.
In this climate, shrewd and sensitive individuals with an instinct for self-preservation looked around for a partner and pair-bonded.
By living in what their parents called sin, they nailed their colours to the mast of youth revolt, while enjoying the security and mutual support of old-fashioned matrimony.
Sussex, some long-haired, denim-clad veteran of the sixties complained, was looking more and more like a housing estate for first-time buyers.
It was full of couples holding hands and plastic carrier bags that were as likely to contain laundry and groceries as books and revolutionary pamphlets.
One of these couples consisted of Robyn and Charles.
She had looked around, and chosen him.
He was clever, personable, and, she thought, probably loyal (she had not been proved wrong).
It was true that he had been educated at a public school, but he managed to disguise this handicap very well.
(Robyn, her white nightdress billowing round her hips, sits on the loo and pees, mentally rehearsing the plot of Mrs Gaskell's Mary Barton (1848).
Rising from the toilet, she pulls the nightdress over her head and steps into the bath, not first pulling the chain of the toilet because that would affect the temperature of the water coming through the showerhead on the end of its flexible tube, with which she now hoses herself down.
She palpates her breasts as she washes, checking for lumps.
She steps from the bath, stretching for a towel in one of those ungainly, intimate postures so beloved of Impressionist painters and deplored by the feminist art historians Robyn admires.
She is tall and womanly in shape, slender of waist, with smallish round breasts, heavier about the hips and buttocks.)
In their second year, Robyn and Charles moved off campus and set up house in a small flat in Brighton, commuting to the University by local train.
Robyn took an active part in student politics.
She ran successfully for the Vice-Presidentship of the Student Union.
She organized an all-night telephone counselling service for students in despair about their grades or love-lives.
She spoke frequently in the Debating Society in favour of progressive causes such as abortion, animal rights, state education and nuclear disarmament.
Charles led a more subdued and private life.
He kept the flat tidy while Robyn was out doing good works, and always had a cup of cocoa or a bowl of soup ready for her when she returned home, tired but invariably triumphant.
At the end of the first term of her third year, Robyn resigned from all her commitments in order to prepare for Finals.
She and Charles worked hard and, despite the fact that they were pursuing the same course, without rivalry.
In their Final Examinations, Robyn obtained a First — her marks, she was unofficially informed, were the highest ever achieved by a student in the School of European Studies in its short history — and Charles an extremely high Upper Second.
Charles was not jealous.
He was used to living in the shade of Robyn's achievements.
And in any case his degree was good enough to earn him, as Robyn's did for her, a Major State Studentship to do postgraduate research.
The idea of doing research and pursuing an academic career was common ground to both of them; indeed they had never considered any alternative.
They had got used to living in Brighton, and saw no reason to uproot themselves, but one of their tutors took them aside and said, ‘Look, this place hasn't got a proper research library, and it's not going to get one.
Go to Oxbridge.’
He had seen the writing on the wall: after the oil crisis of 1973 there wasn't going to be enough money to keep all the universities enthusiastically created or expanded in the booming sixties in the style to which they had become accustomed.
Not many people perceived this quite so soon.
(Robyn, a dressing-gown over her underclothes and slippers on her feet, descends the short dark staircase to the ground floor and goes into her narrow and extremely untidy kitchen.
She lights the gas stove, and makes herself a breakfast of muesli, wholemeal toast and decaffeinated coffee.
She thinks about the structure of Disraeli's Sybil: or, the Two Nations (1845), until the sound of the Guardian dropping on to the doormat sends her scurrying to the front door.)
So Robyn and Charles went to Cambridge to do their PhDs.
Intellectually it was an exciting time to be a research student in the English Faculty.
New ideas imported from Paris by the more adventurous young teachers glittered like dustmotes in the Fenland air: structuralism and poststructuralism, semiotics and deconstruction, new mutations and graftings of psychoanalysis and Marxism, linguistics and literary criticism.
The more conservative dons viewed these ideas and their proponents with alarm, seeing in them a threat to the traditional values and methods of literary scholarship.
Battle was joined, in seminars, lectures, committee meetings and the review pages of scholarly journals.
It was revolution.
It was civil war.
Robyn threw herself enthusiastically into the struggle, on the radical side naturally.
It was like the sixties all over again, in a new, more austerely intellectual key.
She subscribed to the journals Poétique and Tel Quel so that she could be the first person on the Trumpington Road to know the latest thoughts of Roland Barthes and Julia Kristeva.
She forced her mind through the labyrinthine sentences of Jacques Lacan and Jacques Derrida until her eyes were bloodshot and her head ached.
She sat in lecture theatres and nodded eager agreement as the Young Turks of the Faculty demolished the idea of the author, the idea of the self, the idea of establishing a single, univocal meaning for a literary text.
All this of course took up a great deal of time and delayed the completion of Robyn's thesis on the nineteenth-century industrial novel, which had to be constantly revised to take the new theories into account.
Charles was not quite so committed to the new wave.
He supported it, naturally — otherwise he and Robyn could hardly have continued to co-habit — but in a more detached spirit.
He chose a subject for his PhD — the idea of the Sublime in Romantic poetics — which sounded reassuringly serious to the traditionalists and off-puttingly dry to the Young Turks, but which neither party knew much about, so Charles was not drawn into the front-line controversy in his own research.
He delivered his dissertation on time, was awarded his doctorate, and was lucky enough to obtain a lectureship in the Comparative Literature Department at the University of Suffolk, ‘the last new job in Romanticism this century’, as he was wont to describe it, with justifiable hyperbole.
(Robyn scans the front-page headline of the Guardian , ‘LAWSON DRAWN INTO FRAY OVER WESTLAND’, but does not linger over the text beneath.
It is enough for her to know that things are going badly for Mrs Thatcher and the Tory party; the details of the Westland affair do not engage her interest.
She turns at once to the Women's page, where there is a Posy Simmonds strip cartoon adroitly satirizing middle-aged, middle-class liberals, an article on the iniquities of the Unborn Children (Protection) Bill, and a report on the struggle for women's liberation in Portugal.
These she reads with the kind of pure, trance-like attention that she used to give, as a child, to the stories of Enid Blyton.
A column entitled ‘Bulletin’ informs her that Marilyn French will be discussing her new book,Beyond Power: Women, Men and Morals , at a public meeting to be held later in the week in London, and it crosses Robyn's mind, not for the first time, that it is a pity she lives so far from the metropolis where such exciting events are always happening.
This thought reminds her of why she is living in Rummidge.
She puts her soiled breakfast things in the sink, already crammed with the relics of last night's supper, and hurries upstairs.)
Charles's success in landing a job provoked in Robyn the first twinge of jealousy, the first spasm of pique, to mar their relationship.
She had grown used to being the dominant partner, the teachers' favourite, the victrix ludorum.
Her grant had expired, and she was still some way off completing her PhD dissertation.
However, she had her sights fixed on higher things than the University of Suffolk, a new ‘plateglass’ university with a reputation for student vandalism.
Her supervisor and other friends in the Faculty encouraged her to think that she would get an appointment at Cambridge eventually if she could hang on.
She hung on for two years, existing on fees for supervising undergraduates and an allowance from her father.
She finished, at last, her thesis, and was awarded her PhD.
She competed successfully for a post-doctoral research fellowship at one of the less fashionable women's colleges.
It was for three years only, but it was a promising stepping-stone to a proper appointment.
She got a contract to turn her thesis on the Industrial Novel into a book, and settled enthusiastically to the task.
Her personal life did not change much.
Charles continued to live with her in Cambridge, commuting by car to Ipswich to teach his classes, and staying there for a night or two each week.
Then, in 1981, all hell broke loose in the Cambridge English Faculty.
An extremely public row about the denial of tenure to a young lecturer associated with the progressive party opened old wounds and inflicted new ones on this always thin-skinned community.
Long-standing friendships were broken, new enmities established.
Insults and libel suits were exchanged.
Robyn was almost ill with excitement and outrage.
For a few weeks the controversy featured in the national and even international press, up-market newspapers carrying spicy stories about the leading protagonists and confused attempts to explain the difference between structuralism and poststructuralism to the man on the Clapham omnibus.
To Robyn it seemed that critical theory had at last moved to its rightful place, centre-stage, in the theatre of history, and she was ready to play her part in the drama.
She put her name down to speak in the great debate about the state of the English Faculty that was held in the University Senate; and in the Cambridge University Reporter for the 18th February, 1981, occupying a column and a half of small print, sandwiched between contributions from two of the University's most distinguished professors, you may find Robyn's impassioned plea for a radical theorization of the syllabus.
(Robyn straightens the sheet on the bed, shakes and spreads the duvet.
She sits at her dressing-table and vigorously brushes her hair, a mop of copper-coloured curls, natural curls, as tight and springy as coiled steel.
Some would say her hair is her finest feature, though Robyn herself secretly hankers after something more muted and malleable, hair that could be groomed and styled according to mood — drawn back in a severe bun like Simone de Beauvoir's, or allowed to fall to the shoulders in a Pre-Raphaelite cloud.
As it is, there is not much she can do with her curls except, every now and again, crop them brutally short just to demonstrate how inadequately they represent her character.
Her face is comely enough to take short hair, though perfectionists might say that the grey-green eyes are a little close-set, and the nose and chin are a centimetre longer than Robyn herself would have wished.
Now she rubs moisturizer into her facial skin as protection against the raw wintry air outside, coats her lips with lipsalve, and brushes some green eyeshadow on her eyelids, pondering shifts of point of view in Charles Dickens's Hard Times (1854).
Her simple cosmetic operations completed, she dresses herself in opaque green tights, a wide brown tweed skirt and a thick sweater  loosely knitted in muted shades of orange, green and brown.
Robyn generally favours loose dark clothes, made of natural fibres, that do not make her body into an object of sexual attention.
The way they are cut also disguises her smallish breasts and widish hips while making the most of her height: thus are ideology and vanity equally satisfied.
She contemplates her image in the long looking-glass by the window, and decides that the effect is a little too sombre.
She rummages in her jewellery box where brooches, necklaces and earrings are jumbled together with enamel lapel badges expressing support for various radical causes —Support the Miners, Crusade for Jobs, Legalize Pot, A Woman's Right To Choose — and selects a silver brooch in which the CND symbol and the Yin sign are artfully entwined.
She pins it to her bosom.
She takes from the bottom of her wardrobe a pair of calf-length fashion boots in dark brown leather and sits on the edge of the bed to pull them on.)
When the dust settled in Cambridge, however, it seemed that the party of reaction had triumphed.
A University committee charged to investigate the case of the young lecturer determined that there had been no administrative malpractice.
The man himself departed to take up a more remunerative and prestigious post elsewhere, and his friends and supporters fell silent, or retired, or resigned and took jobs in America.
One of the latter group, somewhat the worse for drink at his farewell party, advised Robyn to get out of Cambridge too.
‘This place is finished,’ he said, meaning that Cambridge would be a less interesting place for his own absence from it.
‘Anyway, you'll never get a job here, Robyn.
You're a marked woman.’
Robyn decided she would not put this gloomy prediction to further test.
Her research fellowship was coming to an end, and she could not bear the prospect of ‘hanging on’ for another year as a freelance supervisor of undergraduates, sponging on her parents.
She began to look for a university job outside Cambridge.
But there were no jobs.
While Robyn had been preoccupied with the issues of contemporary literary theory and its repercussions on the Cambridge English Faculty, the Conservative Government of Mrs Thatcher, elected in 1979 with a mandate to cut public spending, had set about decimating the national system of higher education.
Universities everywhere were in disarray, faced with swingeing cuts in their funding.
Required to reduce their academic staff by anything up to twenty per cent, they responded by persuading as many people as possible to take early retirement and freezing all vacancies.
Robyn considered herself lucky to get a job for one term at one of the London colleges, deputizing for a woman lecturer on maternity leave.
There followed an awful period of nearly a year when she was unemployed, searching the back pages of the Times Higher Education Supplement in vain every week for lectureships in nineteenth-century English Literature.
The previously unthinkable prospect of a non-academic career now began to be thought — with fear, dismay and bewilderment on Robyn's part.
Of course she was aware, cognitively, that there was a life outside universities, but she knew nothing about it, nor did Charles, or her parents.
Her younger brother, Basil, in his final year of Modern Greats at Oxford, spoke of going into the City when he graduated, but Robyn considered this was just talk, designed to ward off hubris about this forthcoming examinations, or an Oedipal teasing of his academic father.
When she tried to imagine herself working in an office or a bank, her mind soon went blank, like a cinema screen when the projector breaks down or the film snaps.
There was always schoolteaching, of course, but that would entail the tiresome business of acquiring a Postgraduate Certificate of Education, or else working in the independent sector, to which she had ideological objections.
In any case, teaching English Literature to schoolchildren would only remind her daily of the superior satisfactions of teaching it to young adults.
Then, in 1984, just when Robyn was beginning to despair, the job at Rummidge came up.
Professor Philip Swallow, Head of the English Department at Rummidge University, had been elected Dean of the Arts Faculty for a three-year term; and since the duties of this office, added to his Departmental responsibilities, drastically reduced his contribution to undergraduate teaching, he was by tradition allowed to appoint a temporary lecturer, at the lower end of the salary scale, as what was quaintly termed ‘Dean's Relief’.
Thus a three-year lectureship in English Literature was advertised, Robyn applied, was interviewed along with four other equally desperate and highly qualified candidates, and was appointed.
Glory!
Jubilation!
Huge sighs of relief.
Charles met Robyn off the train from Rummidge with a bottle of champagne in his hand.
The three years stretching ahead seemed like a long time, then, worth buying a little house in Rummidge for (Robyn's father lent her the money for the deposit) rather than paying rent.
Besides, Robyn had faith that, somehow or other, she would be kept on when her temporary appointment came to an end.
She was confident that she could make her mark on the Rummidge Department in three years.
She knew she was good, and it wasn't long before she privately concluded that she was better than most of her colleagues — more enthusiastic, more energetic, more productive.
When she arrived she had already published several articles and reviews in academic journals, and shortly afterwards her much-revised thesis appeared under the imprint of Lecky, Windrush and Bernstein.
Entitled The Industrious Muse: Narrativity and Contradiction in the Industrial Novel (the title was foisted on her by the publishers, the subtitle was her own) it received enthusiastic if sparse reviews, and the publishers commissioned another book provisionally entitled Domestic Angels and Unfortunate Females: Woman as Sign and Commodity in Victorian Fiction .
She was a popular and conscientious teacher, whose optional courses on women's writing were oversubscribed.
She performed her share of administrative duties efficiently.
Surely they couldn't just let her go at the end of the three years?
(Robyn goes into her long narrow living-room, formed by knocking down the dividing wall between the front and back parlours of the little house, which also serves as her study.
There are books and periodicals everywhere — on shelves, on tables, on the floor — posters and reproductions of modern paintings on the walls, parched-looking potted plants in the fireplace, a BBC micro and monitor on the desk, and beside it sheaves of dot-matrix typescript of early chapters of Domestic Angels and Unfortunate Females in various drafts.
Robyn picks her way across the floor, putting her shapely boots down carefully in the spaces between books, back numbers of Critical Inquiry and Women's Review , LP albums by Bach, Philip Glass and Phil Collins (her musical tastes are eclectic) and the occasional wineglass or coffee cup, to the desk.
She lifts from the floor a leather Gladstone bag, and begins to load it with the things she will need for the day: well-thumbed, much underlined and annotated copies of Shirley, Mary Barton, North and South, Sybil, Alton Locke, Felix Holt, Hard Times ; her lecture notes — a palimpsest of holograph revisions in different-coloured inks, beneath which the original typescript is scarcely legible; and a thick sheaf of student essays marked over the Christmas vacation.
Returning to the kitchen, Robyn turns down the thermostat of the central heating and checks that the back door of the house is locked and bolted.
In the hall she wraps a long scarf round her neck and puts on a cream-coloured quilted cotton jacket, with wide shoulders and inset sleeves, and lets herself out by the front door.
Outside, in the street, her car is parked, a red six-year-old Renault Five with a yellow sticker in its rear window, ‘BRITAIN NEEDS ITS UNIVERSITIES.’
It was formerly her parents' second car, sold to Robyn at a bargain price when her mother replaced it.
It runs well, though the battery is getting feeble.
Robyn turns the ignition key, holding her breath as she listens to the starter's bronchial wheeze, then exhales with relief as the engine fires.)
Three years didn't seem such a long time when one of them had elapsed, and although Robyn was satisfied that she was highly valued by her colleagues, the talk at the University these days was all of further cuts, of tightening belts, deteriorating staff-student ratios.
Still, she was optimistic.
Robyn was naturally optimistic.
She had faith in her star.
Nevertheless, the future of her career was a constant background worry as the days and weeks of her appointment at Rummidge ticked away like a taxi meter.
Another was her relationship with Charles.
What was it, exactly, this relationship?
Hard to describe.
Not a marriage, and yet more like marriage than many marriages: domesticated, familiar, faithful.
There was a time, early in their days at Cambridge, when a brilliant and handsome research student from Yale made a determined pitch for Robyn, and she had been rather dazzled and excited by the experience (he wooed her with a heady mixture of the latest post Freudian theoretical jargon and devastatingly frank sexual propositions, so she was never quite sure whether it was Lacan's symbolic phallus he was referring to or his own real one).
But in the end she pulled back from the brink, conscious of Charles's silent but reproachful figure hovering on the edge of her vision.
She was too honest to deceive him and too prudent to exchange him for a lover whose interest would probably not last very long.
When Charles obtained his post at Suffolk, there had been a certain amount of pressure from both sets of parents for them to get married.
Charles was willing.
Robyn indignantly rejected the suggestion.
‘What are you implying?’ she demanded from her mother.
‘That I should go and keep house for Charles in Ipswich?
Give up my PhD and live off Charles and have babies?’
‘Of course not, dear,’ said her mother.
‘There's no reason why you shouldn't still have your own career.
If that's what you want.’
She managed to imbue this last phrase with a certain pitying incomprehension.
She herself had never aspired to a career, finding complete satisfaction in acting as her husband's typist and research assistant in the time she had left over from gardening and housekeeping.
‘Certainly it's what I want,’ said Robyn, so fiercely that her mother let the subject drop.
Robyn had a reputation in the family for being strong-willed, or, as her brother Basil less flatteringly put it, ‘bossy’.
There was a much-told tale of her Australian infancy that was held to be prophetic in this respect — about how at the age of three she had, by the sheer force of her will, compelled her uncle Walter (who was taking her for a walk to the local shops at the time) to put all the money he had on his person into a charity collecting-box in the shape of a plaster-of-Paris boy cripple; as a result of which the uncle, too embarrassed to admit to this folly and borrow from his relatives, had run out of petrol on the way back to his sheep station.
Robyn herself, needless to say, interpreted this anecdote in a light more favourable to herself, as anticipating her later commitment to progressive causes.
Charles found a pied-à-terre in Ipswich and continued to keep his books and most of his other possessions in the flat at Cambridge.
Naturally they saw less of each other, and Robyn was aware that this did not cause her to repine as much as perhaps it should have done.
She began to wonder if the relationship was not, very very slowly, dying a natural death, and whether it would not be sensible to terminate it quickly.
She put this calmly and rationally to Charles one day, and calmly and rationally he accepted it.
He said that although he was personally quite happy with things as they were, he understood her doubts and perhaps a trial separation would resolve them one way or the other.
(Robyn drives her red Renault zigzag across the south-west suburbs of Rummidge, sometimes with the flow of rush-hour traffic, sometimes against — though the rush hour is almost over.
It is 9.20 a.m. as Robyn reaches the broad tree-lined streets that border the University.
She takes a short cut down Avondale Road, and passes the five-bedroom detached house of Vic Wilcox without a glance, for she does not know him from Adam, and the house is outwardly no different from any of the other modern executive dwellings in this exclusive residential district: red brick and white paint, ‘Georgian’ windows, a tarmac drive and double garage, a burglar alarm prominently displayed on the front elevation.)
So Charles moved his books and other possessions to Ipswich, which Robyn found rather inconvenient, since she was in the habit of borrowing his books, and occasionally his sweaters.
They remained good friends, of course, and called each other up frequently on the telephone.
Sometimes they met for lunch or a theatre in London, on neutral ground, and both looked forward to these meetings as if they were occasions of almost illicit pleasure.
Neither was short of opportunities to form new relationships, but somehow neither of them could be bothered to do so.
They were both busy people, preoccupied with their work — Robyn with her supervisions and the completion of her PhD, Charles with the demands of his new job — and the thought of having to adjust to another partner, to study their interests and minister to their needs, wearied them in anticipation.
There were so many books and periodicals to be read, so many abstruse thoughts to be thought.
There was sex, of course, but although both of them were extremely interested in sex, and enjoyed nothing better than discussing it, neither of them, if the truth be told, was quite so interested in actually having it, or at any rate in having it very frequently.
They seemed to have burned up all their lust rather rapidly in their undergraduate years.
What was left was sex in the head, as D.H.
Lawrence called it.
He had meant the phrase pejoratively, of course, but to Robyn and Charles D.H.
Lawrence was a quaint, rather absurd figure, and his fierce polemics did not disturb them.
Where else would the human subject have sex but in the head?
Sexual desire was a play of signifiers, an infinite deferment and displacement of anticipated pleasure which the brute coupling of the signifieds temporarily interrupted.
Charles himself was not an imperious lover.
Calm and svelte, stealthy as a cat in his movements, he seemed to approach sex as a form of research, favouring techniques of foreplay so subtle and prolonged that Robyn occasionally dozed off in the middle of them, and would wake with a guilty start to find him still crouched studiously over her body, fingering it like a box of index cards.
During their trial separation, Robyn became deeply involved in a Women's Group at Cambridge who met regularly but informally to discuss women's writing and feminist literary theory.
It was an article of faith with this circle that women must free themselves from the erotic patronage of men.
That is to say, it was not true, as every novel, film, and TV commercial implied, that a woman was incomplete without a man.
Women could love other women, and themselves.
Several members of the group were lesbians, or tried to be.
Robyn was quite sure she was not; but she enjoyed the warmth and companionship of the group, the hugging and kissing that accompanied their meetings and partings.
And if her body occasionally craved a keener sensation, she was able to provide it herself, without shame or guilt, theoretically justified by the writings of radical French feminists like Hélène Cixous and Luce Irigaray, who were very eloquent on the joys of female auto-eroticism.
Robyn had two casual heterosexual encounters at this time, both one-night stands after rather drunken parties, both unsatisfactory.
She took no new live-in lover, and as far as she was aware, neither did Charles.
So then it became a question, what was the point of separation?
It was just costing them a lot of money in phone calls and train tickets to London.
Charles moved his books and sweaters back to Cambridge and life went on much as before.
Robyn continued to give much of her time and emotional energy to the
Women's Group, but Charles did not object; after all, he considered himself a feminist too.
But when, two years later, Robyn was appointed to Rummidge, they had to split up again.
It was impossible to commute from Rummidge to Ipswich or vice versa .
The journey, by road or rail, was one of the most tedious and inconvenient it was possible to contrive in the British Isles.
To Robyn, it seemed a providential opportunity to make another — this time decisive — break with Charles.
Much as she liked him, much as she would miss his companionship, it seemed to her that the relationship had reached a dead end.
There was nothing new in it to be discovered, and it was preventing them from making new discoveries elsewhere.
It had been a mistake to get together again — a symptom of their immaturity, their enslavement to Cambridge.
Yes (she swelled with the certainty of this insight), it had been Cambridge, not desire, that had reunited them.
They were both so obsessed with the place, its gossip and rumours and intrigues, that they wanted to spend every possible moment together there, comparing notes, exchanging opinions: who was in, who out, what X said about Y's review of P's book about Q. Well, she was sick and tired of the place, tired of its beautiful architecture housing vanity and paranoia, glad to exchange its hothouse atmosphere for the real if smoky air of Rummidge.
And to make the break with Cambridge somehow entailed breaking finally with Charles.
She informed him of this conclusion, and with his usual calm he accepted it.
Later she wondered if he was counting on her not sticking to her resolution.
Rummidge was a new leaf, a blank page, in Robyn's life.
She had at the back of her mind the thought that some new male companion might figure in it.
But no such person manifested himself.
All the men in the University seemed to be married or gay or scientists, and Robyn had no time or energy to look further afield.
She was fully stretched preparing her classes, on a whole new range of subjects, marking her essays, researching Domestic Angels and Unfortunate Females , and making herself generally indispensable to the Department.
She was fulfilled and happy, but, occasionally, a little lonely.
Then sometimes she would pick up the telephone and natter to Charles.
One day she rashly invited him to stay for a weekend.
She had in mind a purely platonic visit — there was a guestroom in the little house; but in the event, perhaps inevitably, they ended up in bed together.
And it was nice to have someone else caress your body, and release the springs of pleasure hidden within it, instead of having to do the job yourself.
She had forgotten how nice it was, after so long an interval.
It seemed, after all, that they were indispensable to each other; or, if that was putting it too strongly, they fulfilled a mutual need.
They did not go back to ‘living together’ even in the purely conceptual sense of many academic couples they knew, separated by their jobs.
When Charles came to visit, he did so as a guest, and when he departed he left no possessions behind him.
However, on these occasions they invariably slept together.
An odd relationship, undoubtedly.
Not a marriage, not a living-together, not an affair.
More like a divorce in which the two parties occasionally meet for companionship and sexual pleasure without strings.
Robyn is not sure whether this is wonderfully modern and liberated of them, or rather depraved.
So these are the things that are worrying Robyn Penrose as she drives through the gates of the University, with a nod and a smile to the security man in his little glass sentry box: her lecture on the Industrial Novel, her job future, and her relationship with Charles — in that order of conspicuousness rather than importance.
Indeed, her uneasiness about Charles scarcely counts as a conscious worry at all; while the worry about the lecture is, she is well aware, a trivial and mechanical one.
It is not that she does not know what to say, it is that there is not enough time to say all she knows.
After all, she worked on the nineteenth-century industrial novel for something like ten years, and even after publishing her book she went on accumulating ideas and insights about the subject.
She has boxes full of notes and file cards on it.
She probably knows more about the nineteenth-century industrial novel than anyone else in the entire world.
How can all that knowledge be condensed into a fifty-minute lecture to students who know almost nothing about it?
The interests of scholarship and pedagogy are at odds here.
What Robyn likes to do is to deconstruct the texts, to probe the gaps and absences in them, to uncover what they are not saying, to expose their ideological bad faith, to cut a cross-section through the twisted strands of their semiotic codes and literary conventions.
What the students want her to do is to give them some basic facts that will enable them to read the novels as simple straightforward reflections of ‘reality’, and to write simple, straightforward, exam-passing essays about them.
Robyn parks her car in one of the University's landscaped car parks, lugs her Gladstone bag from the front passenger seat, and makes her way to the English Department.
Her gait is deliberate and stately.
She holds her head erect, her red-gold curls like a torch burning in the grey, misty atmosphere.
You would not think her unduly burdened with worries, if you watched her crossing the campus, smiling at people she knows, her eyes bright, her brow unfurrowed.
And indeed, she carries them lightly, her worries.
She has youth, she has confidence, she regrets nothing.
She passes into the foyer of the Arts Block.
Its stairs and passages are crowded with students; the air is loud with their shouts and laughter as they greet each other on the first day of the new term.
Outside the Department Office she meets Bob Busby, the Department's representative on the local committee of the Association of University Teachers, pinning a sheet of paper to the AUT noticeboard.
The notice is headed ‘ONE DAY STRIKE — WED.
JANUARY 15TH’.
Unbuttoning her coat, and unwinding her scarf, she reads over his shoulder: ‘Day of Action…protest against cuts…erosion of salaries…pickets will be mounted at every entrance to the University…volunteers should give their names to Departmental representatives…other members are asked to stay away from the campus on the Day of Action .’
‘Put me down for picketing, Bob,’ says Robyn.
Bob Busby, who is having trouble digging a drawing-pin out of the noticeboard, swivels his black beard towards her.
‘Really?
That's jolly decent of you.’
‘Why?’
‘Well, you know, a young temporary lecturer…’
Bob Busby looks slightly embarrassed.
‘No one would blame you if you wanted to keep a low profile.’
Robyn snorts indignantly.
‘It's a matter of principle!’
‘Right then.
I'll put you down.’
He resumes work on the drawing-pin.
‘Good morning, Bob.
Good morning, Robyn.’
They turn to face Philip Swallow, who has evidently just arrived, since he is wearing his rather grubby anorak and carrying a battered briefcase.
He is a tall, thin, stooped man, with silvery grey hair, deeply receding at the temples, curling over his collar at the back.
Robyn has been told that he once had a beard, and he is forever fingering his chin as if he missed it.
‘Oh, hallo, Philip,’ says Bob Busby.
Robyn merely says,
‘Hallo.’
She is always uncertain how to address her Head of Department.
‘Philip’ seems too familiar, ‘Professor Swallow’too formal, ‘Sir’impossibly servile.
‘Had a good vac, both of you?
All set to return to the fray?
Jolly good.’
Philip Swallow utters these platitudes without waiting for, or appearing to expect, a reply.
‘What are you up to, Bob?’
His face falls as he reads the heading of the notice.
‘Do you really think a strike is going to do any good?’
‘It will if everyone rallies round,’ says Bob Busby.
‘Including those who voted ‘Against’ in the ballot.’
‘I was one of them, I don't mind admitting,’ says Philip Swallow.
‘Why?’
Robyn boldly interjects.
‘We must do something about the cuts.
Not just accept them as if they're inevitable.
We must protest.’
‘Agreed,’ says Philip Swallow.
‘I just doubt the effectiveness of a strike.
Who will notice?
It's not as if we're like bus drivers or air traffic controllers.
I fear the general public will find they can get along quite well without universities for a day.’
‘They'll notice the pickets,’ says Bob Busby.
‘A very sticky wicket,’ says Philip Swallow.
‘Pickets.
I said, they'll notice the pickets,’ says Bob Busby, raising his voice against the surrounding hubbub.
‘Hmm, mounting pickets, are we?
Going the whole hog.’
Philip Swallow shakes his head, looking rather miserable.
Then, with a slightly furtive glance at Robyn, ‘Have you got a moment?’
‘Yes, of course.’
She follows him into his office.
‘Have a good vac?’ he says again, divesting himself of his coat.
‘Yes, thanks.’
‘Do sit down.
Go anywhere interesting?
North Africa?
Winter sports?’
He grins encouragingly, as if to intimate that a positive reply would cheer him up.
‘Good Lord, no.’
‘I hear they have very cheap packages to the Gambia in January.’
‘I couldn't afford the time, even if I had the money,’ says Robyn.
‘I had a lot of marking to catch up on.
Then I was interviewing all last week.’
‘Yes, of course.’
‘What about you?’
‘Oh, well, I, er, don't do admissions any more.
Used to, of course—’
‘No,’ says Robyn, smiling.
‘I mean, did you go anywhere interesting?’
‘Ah.
I had an invitation to a conference in Florida,’ says Philip Swallow wistfully.
‘But I couldn't get a travel grant.’
‘Oh dear, what a shame,’ says Robyn, without being able to work up much genuine compassion for this misfortune.
According to Rupert Sutcliffe, the most senior member of the Department, and its most pertinacious gossip, there was a time not so long ago when Philip Swallow was for ever swanning around the globe on some conference jaunt or other.
Now it seems that the cuts have clipped his wings.
‘And quite right, too,’ Rupert Sutcliffe declared.
‘A waste of time and money, in my opinion, those conferences.
I've never attended an international conference in my life.’
Robyn nodded polite approval of this abstention, while privately guessing that Rupert Sutcliffe had not been embarrassed by a large number of invitations.
‘Mind you,’ Sutcliffe added, ‘I don't think it's just lack of funds that has kept him at home lately.
I have a hunch that Hilary read him the riot act.’
‘Mrs Swallow?’
‘Yes.
He used to get up to all kinds of high jinks on those trips, by all accounts.
I suppose I ought to tell you: Swallow has a bit of a weakness where women are concerned.
Forewarned is forearmed.’
Sutcliffe tapped the side of his long nose with his index finger as he uttered these words, dislodging his spectacles and causing them to crash into his tea-cup — for this conversation took place in the Senior Common Room, not long after Robyn's arrival at Rummidge.
Looking at Philip Swallow now, as he seats himself in a low, upholstered chair facing her, Robyn has difficulty in recognizing the jet-set philanderer of Rupert Sutcliffe's description.
Swallow looks tired and careworn and slightly seedy.
She wonders why he has invited her into his office.
He smiles nervously at her and combs a phantom beard with his fingers.
Suddenly a portentous atmosphere has been established.
‘I just wanted to say, Robyn…
As you know, your present appointment is a temporary one.’
Robyn's heart leaps with hope.
‘Yes,’ she says, interlocking her hands to stop them from trembling.
‘For three years only.
You're a third of the way into your second year, with another full year still to run from next September.’
He states these facts slowly and carefully, as if they might somehow have slipped her mind.
‘Yes.’
‘I just wanted to say that, we would of course be very sorry to lose you, you've been a tremendous asset to the Department, even in the short time you've been here.
I really mean that.’
‘Thank you,’ says Robyn dully, untwining her fingers.
‘But?’
‘But?’
‘I think you were going to say something beginning with But .’
‘Oh.
Ah.
Yes.
But I just wanted to say that I, we, shouldn't at all blame you if you were to start applying for jobs elsewhere now.’
‘There aren't any other jobs.’
‘Well, not at this moment in time, perhaps.
But you never know, something may turn up later in the year.
If so, perhaps you should go in for it.
I mean, you shouldn't feel under any obligation to complete the three years of your contract here.
Much as we should regret losing you,’ he says again.
‘What you mean is: there's no chance of my being kept on after the three years are up.’
Philip Swallow spreads his hands and shrugs.
‘No chance at all, as far as I can see.
The University is desperate to save on salaries.
They're talking about another round of early retirements.
Even if someone were to leave the Department, or drop dead-even if you were to, what's the expression, take out a contract on one of us’— he laughs to show that this is a joke, displaying a number of chipped and discoloured teeth, set in his gums at odd angles, like tombstones in a neglected churchyard —‘even then, I very much doubt whether we should get a replacement.
Being Dean, you see, I'm very aware of the financial constraints on the University.
Every day I have the Heads of other Departments in here bellyaching about lack of resources, asking for replacements or new appointments.
I have to tell them that the only way we can meet our targets is an absolute freeze.
It's very hard for young people in your position.
Believe me, I do sympathize.’
He reaches out and puts a hand comfortingly on Robyn's pair.
She looks at the three hands with detachment, as if they are a still life.
Is this the long-delayed, much-heralded pass?
Is there a promotions-and-appointments couch somewhere in the room?
It seems not, for Philip Swallow immediately removes his hand, stands up and moves to the window.’
It's no fun being Dean, these days, I can tell you.
All you do is give people bad news.
And, as Shakespeare observed, the nature of bad news infects the teller.’
‘When it concerns the fool or coward.’
Robyn recklessly recites the next line from Antony and Cleopatra , but fortunately Philip Swallow appears not to have heard.
He is staring down gloomily into the central quadrangle of the campus.
‘I feel as if , by the time I retire, I shall have lived through the entire life-cycle of post-war higher education.
When I was a student myself, provincial universities like Rummidge were a very small show.
Then in the sixties, it was all expansion, growth, new building.
Would you believe our biggest grouse in the sixties was about the noise of construction work?
Now it's all gone quiet.
Won't belong before they're sending in the demolition crews, no doubt.’
‘I'm surprised you don't support the strike then,’ says Robyn tartly.
But Philip Swallow evidently thinks she said something entirely different.
‘Exactly.
It's like the Big Bang theory of the universe.
They say that at a certain point it will stop expanding and start contracting again, back into the original primal seed.
The Robbins Report was our Big Bang.
Now we've gone into reverse.’
Robyn glances surreptitiously at her watch.
‘Or perhaps we've strayed into a black hole,’ Philip Swallow continues, evidently enchanted with his flight of astronomical fancy.
‘If you'll excuse me,’ says Robyn, getting to her feet.
‘I have to get ready for a lecture.’
‘Yes, yes, of course.
I'm sorry.’
‘It's all right, only I —’
‘Yes, yes, my fault entirely.
Don't forget your bag.’
With smiles, with nods, with evident relief that an awkward interview is over, Philip Swallow ushers her out of his office.
Bob Busby is still busy at his bulletin board, rearranging old notices around the new one, like a fussy gardener tidying a flower bed.
He cocks an inquisitive eyebrow at Robyn as she passes.
‘Is it your impression that Philip Swallow is a bit hard of hearing?’ she asks him.
‘Oh, yes, it's been getting worse lately,’ says Bob Busby.
‘It's high-frequency deafness, you know.
He can hear vowels but no consonants.
He tries to guess what you say to him from the vowels.
Usually he guesses what he happens to be thinking about himself, at the time.’
‘It makes conversation rather a hit-or-miss affair,’ says Robyn.
‘Anything important, was it?’
‘Oh no,’ says Robyn, disinclined to share her disappointment with Bob Busby.
She smiles serenely and moves on.
There are several students slouching against the wall, or sitting on the floor, outside her room.
Robyn gives them a wry look as she approaches, having a pretty good idea of what they want.
‘Hallo,’ she says, by way of a general greeting as she fishes for her door key in her coat pocket.
‘Who's first?’
‘Me,’ says a pretty, dark-haired girl wearing an outsize man's shirt like an artist's smock over her jeans and sweater.
She follows Robyn into her room.
This has the same view as Philip Swallow's, but is smaller — indeed, rather too small for all the furniture it contains: a desk, bookcases, filing cabinets, a table and a dozen or so unstacked stacking chairs.
The walls are covered with posters illustrative of various radical causes — nuclear disarmament, women's liberation, the protection of whales — and a large reproduction of Dante Gabriel Rossetti's painting, ‘The Lady of Shalott’, which might seem incongruous unless you have heard Robyn expound its iconic significance as a matrix of male stereotypes of the feminine.
The girl, whose name is Marion Russell, comes straight to the point.
‘I need an extension for my assessed essay.’
Robyn sighs.
‘I thought you might.’
Marion is a persistent defaulter in this respect, though not without reason.
‘I did two jobs in the vac, you see.
The Post Office, as well as the pub in the evenings.’
Marion does not qualify for a maintenance grant because her parents are well off, but they are also estranged, from each other and from her, so she is obliged to support herself at University with a variety of part-time jobs.
‘You know we're only supposed to give extensions on medical grounds.’
‘Well, I did get a terrible cold after Christmas.’
‘I don't suppose you got a medical certificate?’
‘No.’
Robyn sighs again.
‘How long do you want?’
‘Ten days.’
‘I'll give you a week.’
Robyn opens a drawer in her desk and takes out the appropriate chit.
‘Thanks.
Things will be better this term.
I've got a better job.’
‘Oh?’
‘Fewer hours, but better pay.’
‘What is?’
‘Well, it's sort of…modelling.’
Robyn stops writing and looks sharply at Marion.
‘I hope you know what you're doing.’
Marion Russell giggles.
‘Oh, it's nothing like that.’
‘Like what?’
‘You know.
Porn.
Vice.’
‘Well, that's a relief.
What is it you model, then?’
Marion Russell drops her eyes and blushes slightly.
‘Well, it's sort of underwear.’
Robyn has a vivid mental image of the girl before her, now so pleasantly and comfortably dressed, sheathed in latex and nylon, the full fetishistic ensemble of brassiere, knickers, suspender belt and stockings with which the lingerie industry seeks to truss the female body, and having to parade at some fashion show in front of leering men and hardfaced women from department stores.
Waves of compassion and outrage fuse with delayed feelings of self-pity for her own plight, and society seems for a moment a huge conspiracy to exploit and oppress young women.
She feels a choking sensation in her chest, and a dangerous pressure in her tear-ducts.
She rises and clasps the astonished Marion Russell in her arms.
‘You can have two weeks,’ she says, at length, sitting down and blowing her nose.
‘Oh, thanks, Robyn.
That's super.’
Robyn is rather less generous with the next supplicant, a young man who broke his ankle falling off his motorbike on New Year's Eve, but even the least deserving candidate gets a few days' respite, for Robyn tends to identify with the students against the system that assesses them, even though she is herself part of the system.
Eventually they are all dealt with, and Robyn is free to prepare for her lecture at eleven.
She opens her Gladstone bag, pulls out the folder containing her notes, and settles to work.
The University clock strikes eleven, its chimes overlapping with the chimes of other clocks, near and far.
All over Rummidge and its environs, people are at work — or not, as the case may be.
Robyn Penrose is making her way to Lecture Room A, along corridors and down staircases thronged with students changing classes.
They part before her, like waves before the prow of a stately ship.
She smiles at those she recognizes.
Some fall in behind her, and follow her to the lecture theatre, so that she appears to be leading a little procession, a female Pied Piper.
She carries under one arm her folder of lecture notes, and under the other a bundle of books from which to read illustrative quotations.
No young man offers to carry this burden for her.
Such gallantry is out of fashion.
Robyn herself would disapprove of it on ideological grounds, and it might be interpreted by other students as creeping.
Vic Wilcox is in a meeting with his Marketing Director, Brian Everthorpe, who answered Vic's summons at 9.30 complaining of contraflow holdups on the motorway, and whom Vic, himself dictating letters at 9.30, told to come back at eleven.
He is a big man, which in itself doesn't endear him to Vic, with bushy sideboards and RAF-style moustache.
He wears a three-piece suit with an old-fashioned watch-chain looped across his waistcoated paunch.
He is the most senior, and the most complacent, member of the management team Vic inherited.
‘You should live in the city, like me, Brian,’ says Vic.
‘Not thirty miles away.’
‘Oh, you know what Beryl is like,’ says Brian Everthorpe, with a smile designed to seem rueful.
Vic doesn't know.
He has never met Beryl, said to be Everthorpe's second wife, and formerly his secretary.
As far as he knows, Beryl may not even exist, except as an excuse for Brian Everthorpe's delinquencies.
Beryl says the kids need country air.
Beryl was poorly this morning and I had to run her to the doctors.
Beryl sends her apologies — she forgot to give me your message .
One day, quite soon in fact, Brian Everthorpe is going to have to concentrate his mind on the difference between a wife and an employer.
In a cafe in a covered shopping precinct at the centre of Rummidge, Marjorie and Sandra Wilcox are sipping coffee, debating what colour shoes Sandra should buy.
The walls of the cafe are covered with tinted mirrors, and soft syncopated music oozes from speakers hidden in the ceiling.
‘I think a beige,’ says Marjorie.
‘Or that sort of pale olive,’ says Sandra.
The shopping precinct is full of teenagers gathered in small clusters, smoking, gossiping, laughing, scuffling.
They look at the goods in the shiny, illuminated shop-windows, and wander in and out of the boutiques, but do not buy anything.
Some stare into the cafe where Marjorie and Sandra are sitting.
‘All these kids,’ says Marjorie disapprovingly.
‘Wagging it, I suppose.’
‘On the dole, more likely,’ says Sandra, suppressing a yawn, and checking her appearance in the mirrored wall behind her mother's back.
Robyn arranges her notes on the lectern, waiting for latecomers to settle in their seats.
The lecture theatre resonates like a drum with the chatter of a hundred-odd students, all talking at once, as if they have just been released from solitary confinement.
She taps on the desk with an inverted pencil and clears her throat.
A sudden hush falls, and a hundred faces tilt towards her — curious, expectant, sullen, apathetic — like empty dishes waiting to be filled.
The face of Marion Russell is absent, and Robyn cannot suppress a tiny, ignoble twinge of resentment at this ungrateful desertion.
‘I've been looking at your expense account, Brian,’ says Vic, turning over a small pile of bills and receipts.
‘Yes?’
Brian Everthorpe stiffens slightly.
‘It's very modest.’
Everthorpe relaxes.
‘Thank you.’
‘I didn't mean it as a compliment.’
Everthorpe looks puzzled.
‘Sorry.’
‘I'd expect the Marketing Director of a firm this size to claim twice as much for overnight stays.’
‘Ah, well, you see, Beryl doesn't like being on her own in the house at night.’
‘But she has your kids with her.’
‘Not during term, old man.
We send them away to school — have to, living in the depths of the country.
So I prefer to drive back home after a meeting, no matter how far it is.’
‘Your mileage is pretty modest, too, isn't it?’
‘Is it?’
Brian Everthorpe, beginning to get the message, stiffens again.
‘In the 1840s and 1850s,’ says Robyn, ‘a number of novels were published in England which have a certain family resemblance.
Raymond Williams has called them
‘Industrial Novels’ because they dealt with social and economic problems arising out of the Industrial Revolution, and in some cases described the nature of factory work.
In their own time they were often called ‘Condition of England Novels’, because they addressed themselves directly to the state of the nation.
They are novels in which the main characters debate topical social and economic issues as well as fall in and out of love, marry and have children, pursue careers, make or lose their fortunes, and do all the other things that characters do in more conventional novels.
The Industrial Novel contributed a distinctive strain to English fiction which persists into the modern period — it can be traced in the work of Lawrence and Forster, for instance.
But it is not surprising that it first arose in what history has called ‘the Hungry Forties’.
‘By the fifth decade of the nineteenth century the Industrial Revolution had completely dislocated the traditional structure of English society, bringing riches to a few and misery to the many.
The agricultural working class, deprived of a subsistence on the land by the enclosures of the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, thronged to the cities of the Midlands and the North where the economics of laissez-faire forced them to work long hours in wretched conditions for miserable wages, and threw them out of employment altogether as soon as there was a downturn in the market.
‘The workers' attempt to defend their interests by forming trades unions was bitterly resisted by the employers.
The working class met even stiffer resistance when they tried to secure political representation through the Chartist Movement.’
Robyn glances up from her notes and sweeps the audience with her eyes.
Some are busily scribbling down every word she utters, others are watching her quizzically, chewing the ends of their ballpoints, and those who looked bored at the outset are now staring vacantly out of the window or diligently chiselling their initials into the lecture-room furniture.
‘The People's Charter called for universal male suffrage.
Not even those far-out radicals could apparently contemplate the possibility of universal female suffrage.’
All the students, even those who have been staring out of the window, react to this.
They smile and nod or, in a friendly sort of way, groan and hiss.
It is what they expect from Robyn Penrose, and even the rugby-playing boys in the back row would be mildly disappointed if she didn't produce this kind of observation from time to time.
Vic Wilcox asks Brian Everthorpe to stay for a meeting he has arranged with his technical and production managers.
They file into the office and sit round the long oak table, slightly in awe of Vic, serious men in chain-store suits, with pens and pencils sticking out of their breast pockets.
Brian Everthorpe takes a chair at the far end of the table, slightly withdrawn as if to mark his difference from the engineers.
Vic sits at the head of the table, in his shirtsleeves, half a cup of cold coffee at his right hand.
He unfolds a sheet of computer printout.
‘Does anybody know,’ he says, ‘how many different products this firm made last year?’
Silence.
‘Nine hundred and thirty-seven.
That's about nine hundred too many, in my opinion.’
‘You mean different specs, don't you?
Not products,’ says the technical manager, rather boldly.
‘All right, different specs.
But every new specification means that we have to stop production, retool or reset the machines, stop a flow line, or whatever.
That costs time, and time is money.
Then the operatives are more likely to make mistakes when set-ups are constantly changing, and that leads to increased wastage.
Am I right?’
‘There were two climactic moments in the history of the Chartist Movement.
One was the submission of a petition, with millions of signatures, to Parliament in 1839.
Its rejection led to a series of industrial strikes, demonstrations, and repressive measures by the Government.
This is the background to Mrs Gaskell's novel Mary Barton and Disraeli's Sybil .
The second was the submission of another monster petition in 1848, which forms the background to Charles Kingsley's Alton Locke .
1848 was a year of revolution throughout Europe, and many people in England feared that Chartism would bring revolution, and perhaps a Terror, to England.
Any kind of working-class militancy tends to be presented in the fiction of the period as a threat to social order.
This is also true of Charlotte Bronte's Shirley (1849).
Though set at the time of the Napoleonic wars, its treatment of the Luddite riots is clearly an oblique comment on more topical events.’
Three black youths with huge, multicoloured knitted caps pulled over their dreadlocks like tea-cosies lean against the plateglass window of the shopping-precinct cafe, drumming a reggae beat on it with their finger-tips until shooed away by the manageress.
‘I hear there was more trouble in Angleside at the weekend,’ says Marjorie, wiping the milky foam of the cappuccino from her lips with a dainty tissue.
Angleside is the black ghetto of Rummidge, where youth unemployment is eighty per cent and rioting endemic.
There are long queues in the Angleside Social Security office this morning, as every morning.
The only job vacancies in Angleside are for interviewers in the Social Security office, where the furniture is screwed to the floor in case the clients should try to assault the interviewers with it.
‘Or maybe oyster,’ says Sandra dreamily.
‘To go with my pink trousers.’
‘My point is simply this,’ says Vic.
‘We're producing too many different things in short runs, meeting small orders.
We must rationalize.
Offer a small range of standard products at competitive prices.
Encourage our customers to design their systems around our products.’
‘Why should they?’ says Brian Everthorpe, tipping his chair back on its rear legs and hooking his thumbs in his waistcoat pockets.
‘Because the product will be cheap, reliable and available at short notice,’ says Vic.
‘If they want something manufactured to their own spec, OK, but we insist on a thumping great order or a high price.’
‘And if they won't play?’ says Brian Everthorpe.
‘Then let them go elsewhere.’
‘I don't like it,’ says Brian Everthorpe.
‘The small orders bring in the big ones.’
The heads of the other men present have been swivelling from side to side, like spectators at a tennis match, during this argument.
They look fascinated but slightly frightened.
‘I don't believe that, Brian,’ says Vic.
‘Why should anybody order long when they can order short and keep their inventory down?’
‘I'm talking about goodwill,’ says Brian Everthorpe.
‘Pringle's has a slogan —’
‘Yes, I know, Brian,’ says Vic Wilcox.
‘If it can be made, Pringle's will make it .
Well, I'm proposing a new slogan.
If it's profitable, Pringle's will make it.’
‘Mr Gradgrind in Hard Times embodies the spirit of industrial capitalism as Dickens saw it.
His philosophy is utilitarian.
He despises emotion and the imagination, and believes only in Facts.
The novel shows, among other things, the disastrous effects of this philosophy on Mr Gradgrind's own children, Tom, who becomes a thief, and Louisa, who nearly becomes an adulteress, and on the lives of working people in the city of Coketown which is made in his image, a dreary place containing:
several streets all very like one another, and many more streets still more like one another , inhabited by people equally like one another , who all went in and out at the same hours, with the same sound upon the same pavements, to do the same work, and to whom every day was the same as yesterday and tomorrow, and every year the counterpart of the last and the next.
‘Opposed to this alienated, repetitive way of life, is the circus — a community of spontaneity, generosity and creative imagination.
‘You mutht have us, Thquire ,’ says the lisping circus master, Mr Sleary, to Gradgrind.
‘People mutht be amuthed .’
It is Cissie, the despised horserider's daughter adopted by Gradgrind, who proves the redemptive force in his life.
The message of the novel is clear: the alienation of work under industrial capitalism can be overcome by an infusion of loving kindness and imaginative play, represented by Cissie and the circus.’
Robyn pauses, to allow the racing pens to catch up with her discourse, and to give emphasis to her next sentence:
‘Of course, such a reading is totally inadequate.
Dickens' own ideological position is riddled with contradiction.’
The students who have been writing everything down now look up and smile wryly at Robyn Penrose, like victims of a successful hoax.
They lay down their pens and flex their fingers, as she pauses and shuffles her notes preparatory to the next stage of her exposition.
In Avondale Road, the Wilcox boys have risen from their beds at last and are making the most of their unsupervised occupancy of the house.
Gary is eating a heaped bowl of cornflakes in the kitchen, while reading Home Computer propped up against the milk bottle and listening via the hall and two open doors to a record by UB40 playing at maximum volume on the music centre in the lounge.
In his bedroom Raymond is torturing his electric guitar, which is plugged into an amplifier as big as an upended coffin, grinning fiendishly as he produces howls and wails of feedback.
The whole house vibrates like a sounding-box.
Ornaments tremble on shelves and glassware tinkles in sideboards.
A tradesman who has been ringing at the front door for several minutes gives up and goes away.
‘It is interesting how many of the industrial novels were written by women.
In their work, the ideological contradictions of the middle-class liberal humanist attitude to the Industrial Revolution take on a specifically sexual character.’
At the mention of the word ‘sexual’, a little ripple of interest stirs the rows of silent listeners.
Those who have been daydreaming or carving their initials into the desktops sit up.
Those who have been taking notes continue to do so with even greater assiduousness.
People cease to cough or sniff or shuffle their feet.
As Robyn continues, the only interference with the sound of her voice is the occasional ripping noise of a filled-up page of A4 being hurriedly detached from its parent pad.
‘It hardly needs to be pointed out that industrial capitalism is phallocentric.
The inventors, the engineers, the factory owners and bankers who fuelled it and maintained it, were all men.
The most commonplace metonymic index of industry — the factory chimney — is also metaphorically a phallic symbol.
The characteristic imagery of the industrial landscape or townscape in nineteenth-century literature — tall chimneys thrusting into the sky, spewing ribbons of black smoke, buildings shaking with the rhythmic pounding of mighty engines, the railway train rushing irresistibly through the passive countryside — all this is saturated with male sexuality of a dominating and destructive kind.
‘For women novelists, therefore, industry had a complex fascination.
On the conscious level it was the Other, the alien, the male world of work, in which they had no place.
I am, of course, talking about middle-class women, for all women novelists at this period were by definition middle-class.
On the subconscious level it was what they desired to heal their own castration, their own sense of lack.’
Some of the students look up at the word ‘castration’, admiring the cool poise with which Robyn pronounces it, as one might admire a barber's expert manipulation of a cut-throat razor.
‘We see this illustrated very clearly in Mrs Gaskell's North and South .
In this novel, the genteel young heroine from the south of England, Margaret, is compelled by her father's reduced circumstances to take up residence in a city called Milton, closely based on Manchester, and comes into social contact with a local mill-owner called Thornton.
He is a very pure kind of capitalist who believes fanatically in the laws of supply and demand.
He has no compassion for the workers when times are bad and wages low, and does not ask for pity when he himself faces ruin.
Margaret is at first repelled by Thornton's harsh business ethic, but when a strike of workers turns violent, she acts impulsively to save his life, thus revealing her unconscious attraction to him, as well as her instinctive class allegiance.
Margaret befriends some of the workers and shows compassion for their sufferings, but when the crunch comes she is on the side of the master.
The interest Margaret takes in factory life and the processes of manufacturing — which her mother finds sordid and repellent — is a displaced manifestation of her unacknowledged erotic feelings for Thornton.
This comes out very clearly in a conversation between Margaret and her mother, who complains that Margaret is beginning to use factory slang in her speech.
She retorts:
‘And if I live in a factory town, I must speak factory language when I want it.
Why, Mamma, I could astonish you with a great many words you never heard in your life.
I don't believe you know what a knobstick is.’
‘Not I, child.
I only know it has a very vulgar sound; and I don't want to hear you using it.’’
Robyn looks up from the copy of North and South from which she has been reading this passage, and surveys her audience with her cool, grey-green eyes.
‘I think we all know what a knobstick is, metaphorically.’
The audience chuckles gleefully, and the ballpoints speed across the pages of A4 faster than ever.
‘Any more questions?’ says Vic Wilcox, looking at his watch.
‘Just one point, Vic,’ says Bert Braddock, the Works Manager.
‘If we rationalize production like you say, will that mean redundancies?’
‘No,’ says Vic, looking Bert Braddock straight in the eye.
‘Rationalization will mean growth in sales.
Eventually we'll need more men, not fewer.’
Eventually perhaps, if everything goes according to plan, but Braddock knows as well as Vic that some redundancies are inevitable in the short term.
The exchange is purely ritual in function, authorizing Bert Braddock to reassure anxious shop stewards if they start asking awkward questions.
Vic dismisses the meeting and, as the men file out, stands up and stretches.
He goes to the window, and fiddles with the angle of the louvred blinds.
Staring out across the car park, where silent, empty cars wait for their owners like patient pets, he ponders the success of the meeting.
The telephone console on his desk buzzes.
‘It's Roy Mackintosh, Wragcast,’ says Shirley.
‘Put him on.’
Roy Mackintosh is MD of a local foundry that has been supplying Pringle's with castings for many years.
He has just heard that Pringle's is not reordering, and has phoned to inquire the reason.
‘I suppose someone is undercutting us,’ he says.
‘No, Roy,’ says Vic.
‘We're supplying ourselves now.’
‘From that old foundry of yours?’
‘We've made improvements.’
‘You must have…
‘Roy Mackintosh sounds suspicious.
After a certain amount of small talk, he says casually, ‘Perhaps I might drop by some time.
I'd like to have a look at this foundry of yours.’
‘Sure.’
Vic does not welcome this proposal, but protocol demands a positive response.
‘Tell your secretary to fix it with mine.’
Vic goes into Shirley's office, shrugging on the jacket of his suit.
Brian Everthorpe, who is hanging over Shirley's desk, straightens up guiltily.
Griping about the boss, no doubt.
‘Hallo, Brian.
Still here?’
‘Just off.’
Smiling blandly, he tugs the points of his waistcoat down over his paunch and sidles out of the office.
‘Roy Mackintosh wants to look round the foundry.
When his secretary rings, put him off as long as you decently can.
Don't want the whole world knowing about the KW.’
‘OK,’ says Shirley, making a note.
‘I'm just going over there now, to see Tom Rigby.
I'll drop into the machine shop on my way.’
‘Right,’ says Shirley, with a knowing smile.
Vic's frequent but unpredictable visits to the shop floor are notorious.
Robyn's student, Marion Russell, wearing a long, shapeless black overcoat and carrying a plastic holdall, hurriedly enters a large building in the commercial centre of Rummidge and asks the security man at the desk for directions.
The man asks to see inside her bag and grins at the contents.
He motions her towards the lift.
She takes the lift to the seventh floor and walks along a carpeted corridor until she comes to a room whose door is slightly ajar.
The noises of men talking and laughing and the sound of champagne corks popping filter out into the corridor.
Marion Russell stands at the threshold and peeps cautiously round the edge of the door, surveying the arrangement of people and furniture as a thief might case a property for ease of entry and swiftness of escape.
Satisfied, she retraces her steps until she comes to a Ladies' cloakroom.
In the mirror over the washbasin she applies pancake makeup, lipstick and eyeliner, and combs her hair.
Then she locks herself in one of the cubicles, puts her bag on the toilet seat, and takes out the tools of her trade: a red satin basque with suspenders attached, a pair of black lace panties, black fishnet stockings and shiny high-heeled shoes.
‘The writers of the industrial novels were never able to resolve in fictional terms the ideological contradictions inherent in their own situation in society.
At the very moment when they were writing about these problems, Marx and Engels were writing the seminal texts in which the political solutions were expounded.
But the novelists had never heard of Marx and Engels — and if they had heard of them and their ideas, they would probably have recoiled in horror, perceiving the threat to their own privileged position.
For all their dismay at the squalor and exploitation generated by industrial capitalism, the novelists were in a sense capitalists themselves, profiting from a highly commercialized form of literary production.’
The campus clock begins to strike twelve, and its muffled notes are audible in the lecture theatre.
The students stir restlessly in their seats, shuffling their papers and capping their pens.
The spring-loaded clips of looseleaf folders snap shut with a noise like revolver shots.
Robyn hastens to her conclusion.
‘Unable to contemplate a political solution to the social problems they described in their fiction, the industrial novelists could only offer narrative solutions to the personal dilemmas of their characters.
And these narrative solutions are invariably negative or evasive.
In Hard Times the victimized worker Stephen Blackpool dies in the odour of sanctity.
In Mary Barton the working-class heroine and her husband go off to the colonies to start a new life.
Kingsley's Alton Locke emigrates after his disillusionment with Chartism, and dies shortly after.
In Sybil , the humble heroine turns out to be an heiress and is able to marry her well-meaning aristocratic lover without compromising the class system, and a similar stroke of good fortune resolves the love stories in Shirley and North and South .
Although the heroine of George Eliot's Felix Holt renounces her inheritance, it is only so that she can marry the man she loves.
In short, all the Victorian novelist could offer as a solution to the problems of industrial capitalism were: a legacy, a marriage, emigration or death.’
As Robyn Penrose is winding up her lecture, and Vic Wilcox is commencing his tour of the machine shop, Philip Swallow returns from a rather tiresome meeting of the Arts Faculty Postgraduate Studies Committee (which wrangled for two hours about the proposed revision of a clause in the PhD regulations and then voted to leave it unchanged, an expenditure of time that seemed all the more vain since there are scarcely any new candidates for the PhD in arts subjects anyway these days) to find a rather disturbing message from the Vice-Chancellor's office.
His secretary Pamela reads it off her memo pad: ‘The VC's PA rang to say could they have your nomination for the Industry Year Shadow Scheme.’
‘What in God's name is that?’
Pamela shrugs.
‘I don't know.
I've never heard of it.
Shall I ring Phyllis Cameron and ask her?’
‘No, no, don't do that,’ says Philip Swallow, nervously fingering his beardless chin.
‘Last resort.
Don't want to make the Arts Faculty look incompetent.
We're in enough trouble already.’
‘I'm sure I never saw a letter about it,’ says Pamela defensively.
‘No, no, my fault, I'm sure.’
It is.
Philip Swallow finds the VC's memorandum, its envelope still unopened, at the bottom of his In-tray, trapped between the pages of a brochure for Bargain Winter Breaks in Belgium which he had picked up from a local travel agency some weeks ago.
His casual treatment of this missive is not entirely surprising, since its external appearance hardly conveys an idea of its august addresser.
The brown manila envelope, originally despatched to the University by an educational publishing firm, whose name and address, printed on the top left-hand corner, has been partially defaced, is creased and tattered.
It has already been used twice for the circulation of internal mail and resealed by means of staples and Sellotape.
‘Sometimes I think the VC takes his economy drive a little too far,’ says Philip, gingerly extracting the stencilled memorandum from its patched and disintegrating container.
The document is dated 1st December, 1985.
‘Oh dear,’ says Philip, sinking into his swivel seat to read it.
Pamela reads it with him, peering over his shoulder.
From : The Vice-Chancellor To : Deans of all Faculties
Subject : INDUSTRY YEAR SHADOW SCHEME
As you are no doubt aware, 1986 has been designated Industry Year by the Government.
The DES, through the UGC, have urged the CVCP to ensure that universities throughout the UK —
‘He does love acronyms, doesn't he,’ Philip murmurs.
‘What?’ says Pamela.
‘All these initials,’ says Philip.
‘It's supposed to save paper and typing time,’ says Pamela.
‘We had a memo round about it.
Acrowhatsits to be used whenever possible in University correspondence.’
— make a special effort in the coming year to show themselves responsive to the needs of industry, both in terms of collaboration in research and development, and the provision of well-trained and well-motivated graduates for recruitment to industry.
A working party was set up last July to advise on this University's contribution to IY, and one of its recommendations, approved by Senate at its meeting of November 18th, is that each Faculty should nominate a member of staff to ‘shadow’ some person employed at senior management level in local manufacturing industry, nominated through CRUM, in the course of the winter term.
‘I don't remember it coming up at that meeting of Senate,’ says Philip.
‘Must have been passed without discussion.
What's CRUM?’
‘Confederation of Rummidge Manufacturers?’
Pamela hazarded.
‘Could be.
Good try, Pam.’
There is a widespread feeling in the country that universities are ‘ivory tower’ institutions, whose staff are ignorant of the realities of the modern commercial world.
Whatever the justice of this prejudice, it is important in the present economic climate that we should do our utmost to dispel it.
The SS will advertise our willingness to inform ourselves about the needs of industry.
‘The SS?
Got his own stormtroopers, now, has he, the VC?’
‘I think it stands for Shadow Scheme,’ says Pamela.
‘Yes, I'm afraid you're probably right.’
A shadow, as the name implies, is someone who follows another person about all day as he goes about his normal work.
In this way a genuine, inward understanding of that work is obtained by the shadow, which could not be obtained by a simple briefing or organized visit.
Ideally, the shadow should spend an uninterrupted week or fortnight with his opposite number, but if that is impracticable, a regular visit of one day a week throughout the term would be satisfactory.
Shadows will be asked to write a short report of what they have learned at the end of the exercise.
Action : Nominations to reach the VC's Office by Wednesday, 8th January, 1986.
‘Oh dear,’ says Philip Swallow, once more, when he has finished reading the memorandum.
Anxiety makes him want to pee.
He hurries to the Male Staff toilet and finds Rupert Sutcliffe and Bob Busby already ensconced at the three-stall urinal.
‘Ah, well met,’ says Philip, taking his place between them.
In front of his nose dangles a hexagonal rubber handle suspended from a chain, installed a year or two earlier when the University removed all automatic flushing systems from its men's cloakrooms as an economy measure.
Someone in the Works and Buildings Department, haunted by the thought of these urinals gushing pointlessly at regular intervals all through the hours of darkness, Sundays and public holidays, had hit on this means of reducing the University's water rate.
‘I need a volunteer,’ says Philip, and briefly explains the Shadow Scheme.
‘Not my cup of tea, I'm afraid,’ says Rupert Sutcliffe.
‘What are you laughing at, Swallow?’
‘Cup of pee.
Very good, Rupert, I must admit.’
‘Tea.
I said cup of tea ,’ says Rupert Sutcliffe frostily.
‘Traipsing round a factory all day is not mine.
I can't think of anything more wearisome.’
Buttoning up his fly (Sutcliffe's trousers date back to that era, and look it) he retreats to the washbasins on the other side of the room.
‘Bob, what about you?’ says Philip, swivelling his head in the opposite direction.
Bob Busby had also concluded his business at the urinal, but is adjusting his dress with a great deal of fumbling and knee-flexing, as if his member is of such majestic size that it can be coaxed back into his Y-fronts only with the greatest difficulty.
‘Quite impossible this term, Philip.
With all the extra AUT work on top of everything else.’
Bob Busby stretches out a hand in front of Philip's face and pulls the chain.
The cistern flushes, sending a fine spray over Philip's shoes and trouser bottoms, and the swinging handle released by Busby hits him on the nose.
The protocol of chain-pulling in multiple-occupancy urinals has not been thought through by the Works and Buildings Department.
‘Who shall I nominate then?’ says Philip Swallow plaintively.
‘I've got to have a name by 4.30 this afternoon.
There isn't time to consult other Departments.’
‘Why not do it yourself?’
Rupert Sutcliffe suggests.
‘Don't be absurd.
With all the work I have as Dean?’
‘Well, the whole idea is pretty absurd,’ says Sutcliffe.
‘What has the Faculty of Arts to do with Industry Year, or Industry Year to do with the Faculty of Arts?’
‘I wish you'd put that question to the Vice-Chancellor, Rupert,’ says Philip.
‘What has the FA to do with IY or IY with the FA?’
‘I'm sure I don't know what you're talking about.’
‘Just my little joke,’ says Philip to Sutcliffe's departing back.
‘Not much to joke about when you're Dean of sweet FA,’ he continues to Bob Busby, who is carefully combing his hair in the mirror.
‘It's responsibility without power.
You know, I ought to be able to order one of you to do this shadow nonsense.’
‘You can't,’ says Bob Busby smugly.
‘Not without asking for nominations and holding a Department meeting to discuss it first.’
‘I know, and there isn't time.’
‘Why don't you ask Robyn Penrose?’
‘The most junior member of the Department?
Surely it wouldn't —’
‘It's right up her street.’
‘Is it?’
‘Of course— her book on the Victorian industrial novel.’
‘Oh,that .
It's hardly the same…
Still, it's a thought, Bob.’
Later that day, much later, when Shirley and the other office staff have gone home, and Vic sits alone in the administration block, working in his darkened office by the light of a single desk lamp, he gets a call from Stuart Baxter.
‘You've heard about Industry Year, Vic?’
‘Enough to know it's a waste of time and money.’
‘I'm inclined to agree with you.
But the Board feels that we've got to go along with it.
Good PR for the Group, you know.
Our Chairman is dead keen.
I've been asked to coordinate initiatives —’
‘What do you want me to do?’
Vic cuts in impatiently.
‘I was coming to that, Vic.
You know what a shadow is, don't you?’
When Stuart Baxter has finished telling him, Vic says:
‘No way.’
‘Why not, Vic?’
‘I don't want some academic berk following me about all day.’
‘It's only one day a week, Vic, for a few weeks.’
‘Why me?’
‘Because you're the most dynamic MD in the division.
We want to show them the best.’
Vic knows this compliment is totally insincere, but he has no wish to disown it.
It could be useful to remind Stuart Baxter of it some time in the future.
‘I'll think about it,’ he says.
‘Sorry, Vic.
I've got to tie it up now.
Seeing the Chairman tonight at a function.’
‘Left it a bit late, haven't you?’
‘To tell you the truth, my secretary fucked up.
Lost the letter.’
‘Oh yes?’ says Vic sceptically.
‘I'd be very grateful if you'd co-operate.’
‘You mean it's an order?’
‘Don't be silly, Vic.
We're not in the Army.’
Vic keeps Baxter in suspense for a few moments, while he reviews the advantages of having him under an obligation.
‘About that automatic core blower…‘
‘Send me a Capex and I'll run it up the flagpole.’
‘Thanks,’ says Vic.
‘Will do.’
‘And the other?’
‘All right.’
‘Great!
The name of your shadow is Dr Robyn Penrose.’
‘A medic?’
‘No.’
‘Not a shrink, for Christ's sake?’
‘No, I understand he's a lecturer in English Literature.’
‘English what?’
‘Don't know much else about him — only got the message this afternoon.’
‘Jesus wept.’
Stuart Baxter chuckles.
‘Read any good books lately, Vic?’
Ten days later, at eight-thirty in the morning of Wednesday, 22nd January, Robyn Penrose set off in a snowstorm and an ill humour to begin her stint as the University of Rummidge Faculty of Arts Industry Year Shadow, or URFAIYS as she was designated in memoranda emanating from the Vice-Chancellor's Office.
One of these documents had informed her that she was to be attached to a Mr Victor Wilcox, Managing Director of J. Pringle & Sons, for one day a week during the remainder of the winter term, and she had chosen Wednesdays for this undertaking since it was the day she normally kept free from teaching.
By the same token it was a day she normally spent at home, catching up on her marking, preparation and research, and she bitterly resented having to sacrifice it.
For this reason above all others she had come very close to declining Philip Swallow's proposal to nominate her for the Shadow Scheme.
After all, if the University wasn't going to keep her on (Swallow's request had come, rather tactlessly, later in the very same day on which he had communicated this gloomy prognosis) why should she put herself out to oblige the University?
Exactly!’ said Penny Black the following evening, as she peeled off her jeans in the women's changing-room at the University Sports Centre.
‘I don't understand why you agreed to do it.’
Penny was a feminist friend of Robyn's from the Sociology Department, with whom she played squash once a week.
‘I wish I hadn't now,’ said Robyn.
‘I wish I'd told him to, to…’
‘To stick his Shadow Scheme up his ass.
Why didn't you?’
‘I don't know.
Well, I do, really.
A little voice, a nasty, calculating little voice whispered in my ear that one day I'm going to need a reference from Swallow.’
‘You're right, honey.
That's how they screw us, these men in authority.
It's a power trip.
Damn these hooks and eyes.’
Penny Black fumbled with the fastenings of her bra, reversed around her waist like a belt.
Succeeding, she rotated the garment, levered her formidable breasts into the cups and thrust her arms through the shoulderstraps.
Latex smacked lustily against solid flesh.
Playing squash was the only time Penny wore a bra — without it, as she said, her boozums would bounce from wall to wall faster than the ball.
‘Oh, I wouldn't say that about Swallow,’ Robyn demurred.
‘To be fair, he doesn't seem to have much power.
He was practically begging me to agree.’
‘So why didn't you bargain with him?
Why didn't you say you'd be his fucking shadow if he'd give you tenure?’
‘Don't be ridiculous, Penny.’
‘What's ridiculous?’
‘Well, A, he's not in a position to give it to me, and B, I wouldn't stoop to that sort of thing.’
‘You British!’ said Penny Black, shaking her head in despair.
She herself was British, in fact, but having spent several years as a graduate student in California, where she had been converted to radical feminism, she now thought of herself as spiritually an American, and tried as far as possible to speak like one.
‘Well,’ she continued, pulling on a red Amazon sports shirt, ‘you'll just have to sweat out your hostility on the squash court.’
Her dark, tousled head popped out of the collar, a grinning Jill-in-the-box: ‘Pretend the ball is one of Swallow's.’
A middle-aged grey-haired woman swathed in a bath-towel nodded a greeting to Robyn as she passed between the sauna and the showers.
Robyn smiled radiantly back, hissing between her teeth, ‘For God's sake keep your voice down, Penny, that's his wife.’
Charles was amused by this story when Robyn rang him up later that evening.
But, like Penny, he was surprised Robyn had agreed to be nominated as Arts Faculty Shadow.
‘It's not your sort of thing, is it?’
‘Well, I am supposed to be an expert on the industrial novel.
Swallow made a great point of that.’
‘But not in a realist sort of way.
I mean, you're not suggesting that there's any possible relevance —’
‘No, no, of course not,’ said Robyn, anxious to disown the taint of realism.
‘I'm just trying to explain the pressure that was put on me.’
She was beginning to feel that she had made a mistake, and allowed herself to be exploited.
It was a rare sensation for Robyn, and all the more unpleasant for that.
This suspicion hardened into certainty in the days that followed.
She woke on the morning appointed for her initiation into the Shadow Scheme with a heavy heart, which the weather did nothing to lighten.
‘Oh no,’ she groaned, pulling the bedroom curtain aside on a sky swirling with snowflakes, like a shaken paperweight.
A thin layer already covered the frost-hardened ground, and clung delicately to tree-branches, clothes-lines and back-garden bric-à-brac.
She was tempted to use the weather as an excuse to postpone her visit to J. Pringle & Sons, but the work ethic that had carried her successfully through so many years of study and so many examinations now exerted its leverage on her conscience once more.
She had already postponed the exercise by one week, because of the AUT strike.
Another cancellation would look bad.
Over breakfast (no Guardian was delivered, doubtless because of the snow) she pondered the question of what clothes to wear for the occasion.
She possessed a boiler suit bought recently from Next, which seemed in theory appropriate, but it was bright orange, with a yellow flower appliquéd on the bib, and it might, she thought, lack dignity.
On the other hand, she wasn't going to show excessive respect by wearing her olive-green tailored interview suit.
What did a liberated woman wear to visit a factory?
It was a nice semiotic problem.
Robyn was well aware that clothes do not merely serve the practical purpose of covering our bodies, but also convey messages about who we are, what we are doing, and how we feel.
However, she did in the end let the weather partly determine her choice: a pair of elephant-cord trousers tucked Cossack-style into her high boots, and a chunky-knit cardigan with a shawl collar worn over a Liberty-print blouse.
On top of this outfit she wore her cream-coloured quilted cotton jacket and a Russian-style hat made of artificial fur.
Thus attired, she ventured out into the blizzard.
The little Renault already looked sculpted out of snow, and the key would not turn in the frozen door lock.
She freed it with a patent squirt imported from Finland, and hastily discontinued, called Superpiss.
Charles had given it to her for a joke, suggesting she use it as a visual aid to introduce Saussurean linguistics to first-year undergraduates, holding the tube aloft to demonstrate that what is onomatopoeia in one language community may be obscenity in another.
The snow adhering to the car windows created a sepulchral gloom inside, and Robyn spent several minutes brushing it off before she attempted to start the engine.
Amazingly, perversely, and rather to her regret (a flat battery would have been a cast-iron excuse to abort the visit) the engine fired.
With the Rummidge A to Z open on the passenger seat beside her, she set off to find J. Pringle & Sons, somewhere on the other side of the city: the dark side of Rummidge, as foreign to her as the dark side of the moon.
Because of the weather Robyn decides not to use the motorway, and, finding the residential backstreets treacherous and strewn with abandoned vehicles, she joins a long, slow-moving convoy of traffic on the outer ring — not a purpose-built road, this, but a motley string of suburban shopping streets and main roads, where the snow has already been churned into filthy curds and whey.
She feels as if she is negotiating the entrails of the city in the slow, peristaltic procession.
Stopping and starting, grinding forward in low gear, she passes shops, offices, tower blocks, garages, car marts, churches, fast-food outlets, a school, a bingo hall, a hospital, a prison.
Shocking, somehow, to come across this last, a gloomy Victorian gaol in the middle of an ordinary suburb where double-decker buses pass and housewives with shopping bags and pushchairs go about their mundane business.
Prison is just a word to Robyn, a word in a book or a newspaper, a symbol of something — the law, hegemony, repression (‘The prison motif in Little Dorrit is a metaphorical articulation of Dickens's critique of Victorian culture and society ’— Discuss).
Seeing it there, foursquare in soot-streaked stone, with its barred windows, great studded iron door, and high walls trimmed with barbed wire, makes her think with a shudder of the men cooped up inside in cramped cells smelling of sweat and urine, rapists and pimps and wife-beaters and child-molesters among them, and her heart sinks under the thought that crime and punishment are equally horrible, equally inevitable — unless men should change, all become like Charles, which seems unlikely.
The convoy crawls on.
More shops, offices, garages, takeaways.
Robyn passes a cinema converted into a bingo hall, a church converted into a community centre, a Co-op converted into a Freezer Centre.
This part of the city lacks the individual character of Robyn's own suburb, where healthfood stores and sportswear boutiques and alternative bookshops have sprung up to cater for the students and liberal-minded yuppies who live there; and still more does it lack the green amenities of the residential streets around the University.
There are few trees and no parks to be seen.
There are occasional strips of terraced houses, whose occupants seem to have given up the unequal struggle against the noise and pollution of the ring road, and retreated to their back rooms, for the frontages are peeling and dilapidated and the curtains sag in the windows with a permanently drawn look.
Here and there an effort has been made at renovation, but always in deplorable taste, ‘Georgian’ bay windows or Scandinavian-style pine porches clapped on to the Victorian and Edwardian facades.
The shops are either flashy or dingy.
The windows of the former are piled with cheap mass-produced goods, banks of conjunctival TVs twitching and blinking in unison, blinding white fridges and washing-machines, ugly shoes, ugly clothes, and unbelievably ugly furniture, all plastic veneers and synthetic fabrics.
The windows of the dingy shops are like cemeteries for unloved and unwanted goods — limp floral print dresses, yellowing underwear, flyblown chocolate boxes and dusty plastic toys.
The people slipping and sliding on the pavements, spattered with slush by the passing traffic, look stoically wretched, as if they expect no better from life.
A line from D.H.
Lawrence — was it Women in Love or Lady Chatterley ?— comes into Robyn's head.
‘She felt in a wave of terror the grey, gritty hopelessness of it all .’
How she wishes she were back in her snug little house, tapping away on her word-processor, dissecting the lexemes of some classic Victorian novel, delicately detaching the hermeneutic code from the proairetic code, the cultural from the symbolic, surrounded by books and files, the gas fire hissing and a cup of coffee steaming at her elbow.
She passes launderettes, hairdressers, betting shops, Sketchleys, Motaparts, Currys, a Post Office, a DIY Centre, a Denture Centre, an Exhaust Centre.
An exhaustion centre is what she will soon be in need of.
The city seems to stretch on and on — or is she going round and round the ring road in an endless loop?
No, she is not.
She is off the ring road.
She is lost.
Robyn thinks she must be in Angleside, because the faces of the people slithering on the pavements or huddled miserably at bus-stops are mostly swarthy and dark-eyed, and the bright silks of saris, splashed with mud, gleam beneath the hems of the women's drab topcoats.
The names on the shopfronts are all Asian.
Nanda General Stores.
Sabar Sweet Centre.
Rajit Brothers Import Export.
Punjabi Printers Ltd.
Usha Saree Centre.
Halted at a red light, Robyn consults her A to Z , but before she has found the place on the map, the lights have changed and cars are hooting impatiently behind her.
She takes a left turn at random and finds herself in an area of derelict buildings, burned out and boarded up, the site, she realizes, of the previous year's rioting.
Caribbean faces now preponderate on the pavements.
Youths in outsize hats, lounging in the doorways of shops and cafes, with hands thrust deep into their pockets, gossip and smoke, jog on the spot to keep warm, or lob snowballs at each other across the road, over the roofs of passing cars.
How strange it is, strange and sad, to see all these tropical faces amid the slush and dirty snow, the grey gritty hopelessness of an English industrial city in the middle of winter.
Halted on the inside lane, Robyn catches the eye of a young West Indian with Rastafarian dreadlocks, hunched in the entrance of a boarded-up shop, and smiles: a friendly, sympathetic, anti-racist smile.
To her alarm the young man immediately straightens up, takes his hands out of the pockets of his black leather jacket, and comes over to her car, stooping to bring his head level with the window.
He mouths something through the glass which she cannot hear.
The car in front moves forward a few yards, but when Robyn inches forward in turn the young man lays a restraining hand on the Renault's wing.
Robyn leans across the passenger seat and winds the window down a little way.
‘Yes?’ she says, her voice squeaky with suppressed panic.
‘Yow want soom?’ he says in a broad Rummidge accent.
‘What?’ she says blankly.
‘Yow want soom?’
‘Some what?’
‘The weed, man, wudjerthink?’
‘Oh,’ says Robyn, as the penny drops.
‘No thank you.’
‘Somethin' else?
Smack?
Speed?
Yow nime it.’
‘No, really, it's very kind of you, but —‘The car ahead moves forward again and the car behind hoots impatiently.
‘Sorry — I can't stop!’ she cries and lets out the clutch.
Mercifully the traffic progresses for fifty yards before it stalls again, and the Rasta does not pursue her further, but Robyn keeps a nervous eye on her rear-view mirror.
Robyn sees a roadsign to West Wallsbury, the area in which J. Pringle & Sons is situated, and gratefully follows it.
But the snow, which has been slight in the past half-hour, suddenly begins to fall fast and furiously again, limiting her vision.
She finds herself on a dual carriageway, almost a motorway, raised above the level of the neighbouring houses, and with no apparent exits.
She is forced to go faster than she would choose by the intimidating bulk of lorries nudging up behind her, their radiator grilles looming like cliffs in her rear-view mirror, the drivers high above, out of sight.
Every now and again one of these vehicles swings out and surges past, splattering her side windows with filth and making the little Renault stagger under the impact of displaced air.
How can these men (of course they are all men) drive their juggernauts at such insane speeds in such dreadful conditions?
Frightened, Robyn clings to the steering wheel like a helmsman in a storm, her head craned forward to peer past the flailing windscreen wipers at the road ahead, ribbed with furrows of yellow-brown slush.
At the last possible moment, she glimpses a slip-road to her left and swerves down it.
At the bottom there is a roundabout, which she circles twice, trying to make sense of the direction signs.
She takes an exit at random and pulls up at the side of the road to consult her A to Z , but there are no street names visible which would enable her to orient herself.
Seeing the glow of a red and yellow Shell sign ahead, she drives on and pulls into the forecourt of a self-service petrol station.
Inside the little shop, a doleful Asian youth wearing finger mittens, walled in behind racks of cheap digital watches, ballpoint pens, sweets, and music cassettes, shakes his head and shrugs when she asks him the name of the street.
‘Do you mean to say that you don't know the name of the street your own garage is in?’ she says sharply, exasperation overcoming sensitivity to racial minorities.
‘An't my garridge,’ says the youth in a broad Rummidge accent.
‘Oi juss work 'ere.’
‘Well, do you know if this is West Wallsbury?’
The youth admits that it is.
Does he know the way to J. Pringle & Sons?
He shakes his head again.
‘Pringle's?
I'll take you there.’
Robyn turns to face a man who has just entered the shop: tall, heavily built, with bushy sideboards and moustache, a sheepskin coat open over his three-piece suit.
‘With pleasure,’ he adds, smiling and looking Robyn up and down.
‘If you would just show me the route on this map,’ says Robyn, without returning the smile, ‘I'd be most grateful.’
‘I'll take you.
Just let me settle with Ali Baba here.’
‘I have my own car, thank you.’
‘I mean you can follow me.’
‘I couldn't put you to that trouble.
If you would just —‘
‘No trouble, my love, I'm going there myself.’
Seeing the doubtful expression on Robyn's face, he laughs.
‘I work there.’
‘Oh well, in that case…
Thank you.’
‘And what brings you to Pringle's?’ says the man, as he signs his credit card slip with a flourish.
‘Going to work for us, too?
Secretary?’
‘No.‘
‘Pity.
But you're not a customer, I think?’
‘No.’
‘So…what?
Are you going to make me play twenty questions?’
‘I'm from Rummidge University.
I'm, er, taking part in, that is to say…
I'm on a kind of educational visit.’
The man freezes in the act of stowing away his wallet.
‘You're never Vic Wilcox's shadow?’
‘Yes.’
He gapes at her for a moment, then chortles and slaps his thigh.
‘My word, Vic's in for a surprise.’
‘Why?’
‘Well, he was expecting…someone rather different.
Older.’
He snorts with suppressed laughter.
‘Less attractive.’
‘Perhaps we should get on,’ says Robyn frostily.
‘I'm going to be very late.’
‘No wonder, in this weather.
I'm a bit late myself.
Motorway was a shambles.
I'm Brian Everthorpe, by the way.
Marketing Director at Pringle's.’
He produces a small card from his waistcoat pocket and presents it.
Robyn reads aloud: ‘Riviera Sunbeds.
Daily and weekly rental.’
‘Oops, somebody else's card, got mixed up with mine,’ says Brian Everthorpe, exchanging the card with another.
‘Nice little business that, as a matter of fact, Riviera Sunbeds.
I know the people.
I can arrange a discount if you're interested.’
‘No thank you,’ says Robyn.
‘You get a marvellous tan.
Good as a trip to Tenerife, and a fraction of the cost.’
‘I never sunbathe,’ says Robyn.
‘It gives you skin cancer.’
‘If you believe the newspapers,’ says Brian Everthorpe, ‘everything nice is bad for you.’
He opens the door of the shop and a flurry of snow blows in.
‘That's my Granada over there by pump number two.
Just get on my tail and stick to it, as the bee said to the pollen.’
Brian Everthorpe led Robyn a tortuous route through streets lined with factories and warehouses, many of them closed down, some displaying ‘For Sale’ or ‘For Lease’signs on them, some derelict beyond the hope of restoration, with snow blowing through their smashed windows.
There was not a soul to be seen on the pavements.
She was glad of Everthorpe's guidance, though she disliked his manners and resented his evident desire to stage-manage her arrival at Pringle's.
At the entrance to the factory, he engaged the man controlling the barrier in some kind of argument, then got out of his car to speak to Robyn.
She lowered her window.
‘Sorry, but the security johnny insists that you sign the visitors' book.
He's afraid Vic'll bawl him out otherwise.
Bit of a martinet, Vic, I should warn you.’
His eye lit upon the little tube on the dashboard.
‘Superpiss!
What's that for?’ he chortled.
‘It's for unfreezing car locks,’ said Robyn, hastily stowing it away in the glove compartment.
‘It's made in Finland.’
‘I'd rather use my own,’ said Brian Everthorpe, enjoying the joke hugely.
‘It costs nothing, and it's always on tap.’
Robyn got out of the car and looked through railings across the car park to a brick office block and a tall windowless building behind it, a prospect almost as depressing as the prison she had seen that morning.
Only the carpet of snow relieved its drabness, and that was being rolled up by a man driving a small tractor with a scoop on the front.
‘Where are the chimneys?’ she asked.
‘What chimneys?’
‘Well, you know.
Great tall things, with smoke coming out of them.’
Brian Everthorpe laughed.
‘We don't need 'em.
Everything runs on gas or electricity.’
He looked at her quizzically.
‘Ever been inside a factory before?’
‘No,’ said Robyn.
‘I see.
A virgin, eh?
Factorywise, I mean.’
He grinned and stroked his whiskers.
‘Where's the visitors' book?’
Robyn inquired coldly.
After she had signed in, Brian Everthorpe directed her to the section of the car park reserved for visitors, and waited for her at the entrance to the Administration Block.
He ushered her into an overheated wood-panelled lobby.
‘This is Dr Penrose,’ he said to the two women behind the reception desk.
They gaped at her as if she was an alien from outer space, as she shook the snow from her fur cap and quilted jacket.
‘I'll tell Mr Wilcox she's here,’ said Brian Everthorpe, and Robyn thought she saw him wink for some inscrutable reason.
‘Take a seat,’ he said, indicating a rather threadbare sofa of the kind Robyn associated with very old-fashioned cinema foyers.
‘I won't be a tick.
Can I take your coat?’
The way he looked her up and down made Robyn wish she had kept it on.
‘Thanks, I'll keep it with me.’
Everthorpe left, and Robyn sat down.
The two women behind the reception desk avoided her eye.
One was typing and the other was operating the switchboard.
Every minute or so the telephone operator intoned in a bored sing-song,
‘J. Pringle & Sons good morning kin I 'elp yew?’, and then,
‘Puttin' yew threw,’ or ‘Sorree, there's no reply.’
Between calls she murmured inaudibly to her companion and stroked her platinum-blonde hair-do as if it were an ailing pet.
Robyn looked around the room.
There were framed photographs and testimonials on the panelled walls, and some bits of polished machinery in a glass case.
On a low table in front of her were some engineering trade magazines and a copy of the Financial Times .
It seemed to her that the world could not possibly contain a more boring room.
Nothing her eye fell upon aroused in her the slightest flicker of interest, except a bulletin board with removable plastic letters which declared, under the day's date:J. Pringle & Sons welcomes Dr Robin Penrose, Rummidge University .’
Noticing that the two women were now looking at her, Robyn smiled and said, ‘It's Robyn with a ‘y’ actually.’
To her bewilderment they both dissolved into giggles.
Vic Wilcox was dictating letters to Shirley when Brian Everthorpe knocked and put his head round the door, grinning, for some reason, from sideburn to sideburn.
‘Visitor for you, Vic.’
‘Oh?’
‘Your shadow.’
‘He's late.’
‘Well, not surprising, is it, in this weather?’
Brian Everthorpe came uninvited into the room.
‘The motorway was a shambles.’
‘You should move further in, Brian.’
‘Yes, well, you know what Beryl is like about the country…
This shadow caper: what happens exactly?’
‘You know what happens.
He follows me about all day.’
‘What, everywhere?’
‘That's the idea.’
‘What, even to the Gents?’
Brian Everthorpe exploded with laughter as he uttered this question.
Vic looked wonderingly at him and then at Shirley, who arched her eyebrows and shrugged incomprehension.
‘You feeling all right, Brian?’ he inquired.
‘Quite all right, thanks, Vic, quite all right .’
Everthorpe coughed and wheezed and wiped his eyes with a silk handkerchief which he wore, affectedly, in his breast pocket.
‘You're a lucky man, Vic.’
‘What are you talking about?’
‘Your shadow.
But what will your wife say?’
‘What's it got to do with Marjorie?’
‘Wait till you see her.’
‘Marjorie?’
‘No, your shadow.
Your shadow's a bird, Vic!’
Shirley gave a little squeak of surprise and excitement.
Vic stared speechlessly as Brian Everthorpe elaborated.
‘A very dishy redhead.
I prefer bigger boobs, myself, but you can't have everything.’
He winked at Shirley.
‘Robin!’ said Shirley.
‘It can be a girl's name, can't it?
Though they spell it different.
With a ‘y’ sort of thing.’
‘In the letter it was ‘Robin’ with an ‘i’,’said Vic.
‘An easy mistake,’ said Brian Everthorpe.
‘Stuart Baxter said nothing about a woman,’ said Vic.
‘I'll bring her in.
Seeing's believing.’
‘Let me find that letter first,’ said Vic, riffling blindly through the papers in his Pending-tray, playing for time.
He felt anger surging through his veins and arteries.
A lecturer in English Literature was bad enough, but a woman lecturer in English Literature!
It was a ludicrous mistake, or else a calculated insult, he wasn't sure which, to send such a person to shadow him.
He wanted to rage and swear, to shout down the telephone and fire off angry memoranda.
But something in Brian Everthorpe's demeanour restrained him.
‘How old is she sort of thing?’
Shirley asked Brian Everthorpe.
‘I dunno.
Young.
In her thirties, I'd say.
Shall I bring her in?’
‘Go and find that letter, first,’ Vic said to Shirley.
She went into her office, followed, to his relief, by Brian Everthorpe.
Everthorpe was getting a lot of mileage out of the mix-up, trying to make him look foolish.
Vic could imagine him spreading the story all round the works.
‘You should have seen his face when I told him!
I couldn't help laughing.
Then he went spare.
Shirley had to cover her ears …
‘No, better to limit the damage, control his anger, make nothing of it, pretend he didn't mind.
He rose from his desk and went through the anteroom into Shirley's office.
High up on one wall were some glazed panels.
They were painted over, but someone had scraped away a small area of paint, exposing the clear glass.
Shirley was peering through this spyhole, balanced precariously on top of a filing cabinet, steadied by the hand of Brian Everthorpe on her haunch.
‘Hmmm, not a bad-looking wench,’ she was saying.
‘If you like that type.’
‘You're just jealous, Shirley,’ said Brian Everthorpe.
‘Me, jealous? don't be daft.
I like her boots, mind.’
‘What in God's name are you doing up there?’
Vic said.
Brian Everthorpe and Shirley turned and looked at him.
‘A little dodge of your predecessor,’ said Brian Everthorpe.
‘He liked to look over his visitors before a meeting.
Reckoned it gave him a psychological advantage.’
He removed his hand from Shirley's rump, and assisted her to the ground.
‘I couldn't find that letter,’ she said.
‘You mean you can see into reception from there?’ said Vic.
‘Have a dekko,’ said Brian Everthorpe.
Vic hesitated, then sprang on to the filing cabinet.
He applied his eye to the hole in the paint and gazed, as if through a telescope already fixed and focused, at the young woman seated on the far side of the lobby.
She had copper-coloured hair, cut short as a boy's at the back, with a mop of curls tilted jauntily forward at the front.
She sat at her ease on the sofa, with her long, booted and pantalooned legs crossed at the ankles, but the expression on her face was bored and haughty.
‘I've seen her before,’ he said.
‘Oh, where?’ said Shirley.
‘I don't know.’
She was like a figure in a dream that he could not quite recall.
He stared at the topknot of red-gold curls, straining to remember.
Then she yawned suddenly, like a cat, revealing two rows of white, even teeth, before she covered her mouth.
She lifted her head as she did this, and seemed to look straight at him.
Embarrassed, feeling too like a Peeping Tom for comfort, he scrambled to the floor.
‘Let's stop playing silly buggers,’ he said, striding back into his office.
‘Show the woman in.’
Brian Everthorpe threw open the door of Vic Wilcox's office and motioned Robyn across the threshold with a flourish.
‘Doctor Penrose,’ he announced, with a smirk.
The man who rose from behind a large polished desk on the far side of the room, and came forward to shake Robyn's hand, was smaller and more ordinary-looking than she had expected.
The term ‘Managing Director’ had suggested to her imagination some figure more grand and gross, with plump, flushed cheeks and wings of silver hair, a rotund torso sheathed in expensively tailored suiting, a gold tiepin and cufflinks, and a cigar wedged between manicured fingers.
This man was stocky and wiry, like a short-legged terrier, his face was pale and drawn, with two vertical worry-lines scored into the brow above the nose, and the hank of dark, flat hair that fell forward across his brow had clearly never had the attention of an expert barber.
He was in shirtsleeves, and the shirt did not fit him very well, the buttoned cuffs hanging down over his wrists, like a schoolboy's whose clothes had been purchased with a view to his ‘growing into’ them.
Robyn almost smiled with relief as she appraised his advancing figure — she already heard herself describing him to Charles or Penny as ‘a funny little man’— but the strength of his handshake, and the glint in his dark brown eyes, warned her not to underestimate him.
‘Thanks, Brian,’ he said to the hovering Everthorpe.
‘I expect you've got work to do.’
Everthorpe departed with obvious reluctance.
‘See you later, I hope,’ he said unctuously to Robyn, as he closed the door.
‘Like some coffee?’ said Wilcox, taking her coat and hanging it on the back of the door.
Robyn said she would love some.
‘Have a seat.’
He indicated an upright armchair drawn up at an angle to his desk, to which he now returned.
He flicked a switch on a console and said.
‘Two coffees, please, Shirley.’
He thrust a cigarette pack in her direction.
‘Smoke?’
Robyn shook her head.
He lit one himself, sat down and swivelled his chair to face her.
‘Haven't we met before?’ he said.
‘Not that I'm aware of.’
‘I've a feeling I've seen you recently.’
‘I can't imagine where that would be.’
Wilcox continued to stare at her through a cloud of smoke.
If it had been Everthorpe, she would have dismissed this performance as a clumsy pass, but Wilcox seemed teased by some genuine memory.
‘I'm sorry I'm a bit late,’ she said.
‘The roads were terrible, and I got lost.’
‘You're a week late,’ he said.
‘I was expecting you last Wednesday.‘
‘Didn't you get my message?’
‘About halfway through the morning.’
‘I hope I didn't inconvenience you.‘
‘You did, as a matter of fact.
I'd cancelled a meeting.’
He did not lighten this rebuke with a smile.
Robyn felt herself growing warm with resentment of his rudeness, mingled with the consciousness that her own conduct had not been entirely blameless.
Her original plan for the previous Wednesday had been to put in an hour or two of picket duty very early in the morning, and then go on to her appointment at Pringle's.
But on the picket line Bob Busby had pointed out to her that the Shadow Scheme was official University business and that she would be strike-breaking if she kept her appointment.
Of course it was and of course she would!
Stupida!
She punched her head with her fist in self-reproach.
She was inexperienced in the protocol of industrial action, but only too pleased to have an excuse to put off her visit to Pringle's for a week.
‘I'm sorry,’ she said to Wilcox.
‘It was a bit chaotic at the University last Wednesday.
We had a one-day strike on, you see.
The switchboard wasn't operating normally.
It took me ages to phone.’
‘That's where I saw you!’ he exclaimed, sitting up in his chair, and pointing a finger at her like a gun.
‘You were standing outside the University gates at about eight o'clock in the morning, last Wednesday.’
‘Yes,’ said Robyn.
‘I was.’
‘I drive past there every day on my way to work,’ he said.
‘I was held up there last Wednesday.
Put two minutes on my journey time, it did.
You were holding a banner.’
He pronounced this last word as if it denoted something unpleasant.
‘Yes, I was picketing.’
What fun it had been!
Stopping cars and thrusting leaflets through the drivers ‘windows, turning back lorries, waving banners for the benefit of local TV news cameras, cheering when a truck driver decided not to cross the picket line, thawing one's fingers round a mug of thermos-flask coffee, sharing the warm glow of camaraderie with colleagues one had never met before.
Robyn had not felt so exalted since the great women's rally at Greenham Common.
‘What were you striking about?
Pay?’
‘Partly.
That and the cuts.’
‘You want no cuts and more pay?’
‘That's right.’
‘Think the country can afford it?’
‘Certainly,’ said Robyn.
‘If we spent less on defence —‘
‘This company has several defence contracts,’ said Wilcox.
‘We make gearbox casings for Challenger tanks, and con-rods for Armoured Personnel Carriers.
If those contracts were cancelled, I'd have to lay off men.
Your cuts would become ours.’
‘You could make something else,’ said Robyn.
‘Something peaceful.’
‘What?’
‘I can't say what you should make,’ said Robyn irritably.
‘It's not my business.’
‘No, it's mine,’ said Wilcox.
At that moment his secretary came into the room with two cups of coffee, which she distributed in a pregnant silence, shooting curious, covert glances at each of them.
When she had gone, Wilcox said, ‘Who were you trying to hurt?’
‘Hurt?’
‘A strike has to hurt someone.
The employers, the public.
Otherwise it has no effect.’
Robyn was about to say, ‘The Government,’ when she saw the trap: Wilcox would find it easy enough to argue that the Government had not been troubled by the strike.
Nor, as Philip Swallow had predicted, had the general public been greatly inconvenienced.
The Students' Union had supported the strike, and its members had not complained about a day's holiday from lectures.
The University, then?
But the University wasn't responsible for the cuts or the erosion of lecturers' salaries.
Faster than a computer, Robyn's mind reviewed these candidates for the target of the strike and rejected them all.
‘It was only a one-day strike,’ she said at length.
‘More of a demonstration, really.
We got a lot of support from other trade unions.
Several lorry-drivers refused to cross the picket lines.’
‘What were they doing — delivering stuff?’
‘Yes.‘
‘I expect they came back the next day, or the next week?’
‘I suppose so.’
‘And who paid for the extra deliveries?
I'll tell you who,’ he went on when she did not answer.
‘Your University — which you say is short of cash.
It's even shorter, now.’
‘They docked our salaries,’ said Robyn.
‘They can pay for the lorries out of that.’
Wilcox grunted as if acknowledging a debating point, from which she deduced that he was a bully and needed to be stood up to.
She did not think it necessary to tell him that the University administration had been obliged to circulate all members of staff with a memorandum asking them, if they had been on strike, to volunteer the information (since there was no other way of finding out) so that their pay could be docked.
It was rumoured that the number of staff who had responded was considerably smaller than the number of participants in the strike claimed by the AUT.
‘Do you have many strikes here?’ she asked, in an effort to shift the focus of conversation.
‘Not any more,’ said Wilcox.
‘The employees know which side their bread is buttered.
They look around this area, they see the factories that have closed in the past few years, they know how many people are out of work.’
‘You mean, they're afraid to strike?’
‘Why should they strike?’
‘I don't know — but if they wanted to.
For higher wages, say?’
‘This is a very competitive industry.
A strike would plunge us deep into the red.
The division could close us down.
The men know that.’
‘The division?’
‘The Engineering and Foundry Division of Midland Amalgamated.
They own us.’
‘I thought J. Pringle & Sons were the owners.’
Wilcox laughed, a gruff bark.
‘Oh, the Pringle family got out years ago.
Took their money and ran, when the going was good.
The company's been bought and sold twice since then.’
He took a brown manila folder from a drawer and passed it to her.
‘Here are some tree diagrams showing how we fit into the conglomerate, and the management structure of the company.
D'you know much about business?’
‘Nothing at all.
But isn't that supposed to be the point?’
‘The point?’
‘Of the Shadow Scheme.’
‘I'm buggered if I know what the point is,’ said Wilcox sourly.
‘It's just a PR stunt, if you ask me.
You teach English Literature, don't you?’
‘Yes.’
‘What's that?
Shakespeare?
Poetry?’
‘Well, I do teach a first-year course that includes some —’
‘We did Julius Caesar for O-Level,’ Wilcox interjected.
‘Had to learn great chunks of it by heart.
Hated it, I did.
The master was a toffee-nosed southerner, used to take the pi — used to make fun of our accents.’
‘My field is the nineteenth-century novel,’ said Robyn.
‘And women's studies.’
‘Women's studies?’
Wilcox echoed with a frown.
‘What are they?’
‘Oh, women's writing.
The representation of women in literature.
Feminist critical theory.’
Wilcox sniffed.
‘You give degrees for that?’
‘It's one part of the course,’ said Robyn stiffly.
‘It's an option.’
‘A soft one, if you ask me,’ said Wilcox.
‘Still, I suppose it's all right for girls.’
‘Boys take it too,’ said Robyn.
‘And the reading load is very heavy, as a matter of fact.’
‘Boys?’
Wilcox curled a lip.
‘Nancy boys?’
‘Perfectly normal, decent, intelligent young men,’ said Robyn, struggling to control her temper.
‘Why aren't they studying something useful, then?’
‘Like mechanical engineering?’
‘You said it.’
Robyn sighed.
‘Do I really have to tell you?’
‘Not if you don't want to.’
‘Because they're more interested in ideas, in feelings, than in the way machines work.’
‘Won't pay the rent, though, will they — ideas, feelings?’
‘Is money the only criterion?’
‘I don't know a better one.’
‘What about happiness?’
‘Happiness?’
Wilcox looked startled, caught off balance for the first time.
‘Yes, I don't earn much money, but I'm happy in my job.
Or I would be, if I were sure of keeping it.’
‘Why aren't you?’
When Robyn explained her situation, Wilcox seemed more struck by her colleagues' security than by her own vulnerability.
‘You mean, they've got jobs for life?’ he said.
‘Well, yes.
But the Government wants to abolish tenure in the future.’
‘I should think so.’
‘But it's essential!’
Robyn exclaimed.
‘It's the only guarantee of academic freedom.
It's one of the things we were demonstrating for last week.’
‘Hang about,’ said Wilcox.
‘You were demonstrating in support of the other lecturers' right to a job for life?’
‘Partly,’ said Robyn.
‘But if they can't be shifted, there'll never be room for you, no matter how much better than them you may be at the job.’
This thought had crossed Robyn's mind before, but she had suppressed it as ignoble.
‘It's the principle of the thing,’ she said.
‘Besides, if it wasn't for the cuts, I'd have had a permanent job by now.
We should be taking more students, not fewer.’
‘You think the universities should expand indefinitely?’
‘Not indefinitely, but —’
‘Enough to accommodate all those who want to do women's studies?’
‘If you like to put it that way, yes,’ said Robyn defiantly.
‘Who pays?’
‘You keep bringing everything back to money.’
‘That's what you learn from business.
There's no such thing as a free lunch.
Who said that?’
Robyn shrugged.
‘I don't know.
Some right-wing economist, I suppose.’
‘Had his head screwed on, whoever he was.
I read it in the paper somewhere.
There's no such thing as a free lunch.’
He gave his gruff bark of a laugh.
‘Someone always has to pick up the bill.’
He glanced at his watch.
‘Well, I suppose I'd better show you round the estate.
Just give me a few minutes, will you?’
He stood up, seized his jacket and thrust his arms into the sleeves.
‘Aren't I supposed to follow you everywhere?’ said Robyn, rising to her feet.
‘I don't think you can follow me where I'm going,’ said Wilcox.
‘Oh,’ said Robyn, colouring.
Then, recovering her poise, she said, ‘Perhaps you would direct me to the Ladies.’
‘I'll get Shirley to show you,’ said Wilcox.
‘Meet me back here in five minutes.’
Jesus wept!
Not just a lecturer in English Literature, not just a woman lecturer in English Literature, but a trendy lefty feminist lecturer in English Literature!
A tall trendy leftist feminist lecturer in English Literature!
Vic Wilcox scuttled into the Directors' Lavatory as if into a place of sanctuary.
It was a large, dank, chilly room, empty at this moment, which had been lavishly appointed, in more prosperous times, with marble washbasins and brass taps, but was now badly in need of redecoration.
He stood at the urinal and peed fiercely at the white ceramic wall, streaked with rusty tear-stains from the corroding pipes.
What the hell was he going to do with this woman every Wednesday for the next two months?
Stuart Baxter must be off his trolley, sending someone like that.
Or was it a plot?
It was strange, strange and ominous, that he had seen her before, outside the University last week.
Her hair, glowing like a brazier through the early-morning mist, her high boots and her cream-coloured quilted jacket with its exaggerated shoulders, had drawn his gaze as he sat impatiently in a line of cars while the pickets argued with the driver of an articulated wagon that was trying to enter the University.
She had been standing on the pavement, holding some silly banner —‘EDUCATION CUTS ARE NOT COMIC’, or something like that — talking and laughing excitedly with a big-bosomed woman stuffed into a scarlet ski-suit and pink moon boots, and he remembered thinking to himself: so it's finally happened — designer industrial action.
The two women, the copperhead in particular, had seemed to epitomize everything he most detested about such demonstrations — the appropriation of working-class politics by middle-class style.
And now he was stuck with her for two months.
There was a marble-topped table in the centre of the flagged floor, bearing, like an altar, a symmetrical arrangement of clothes brushes and men's toiletries that Vic had never seen anyone disturb since he came to Pringle's.
In his anger and frustration, he picked up a long, curved clothes brush and banged it down hard on the surface of the table.
It broke in half.
‘Shit!’ said Vic, aloud.
as if on cue, a cistern flushed and the door of one of the WC cubicles opened to reveal the emerging figure of George Prendergast, the Personnel Director.
This was not a total surprise, since Prendergast suffered from Irritable Bowel Syndrome and was frequently to be encountered in the Directors' Lavatory, but Vic had thought he was alone, and felt rather foolish standing there with the stump of the clothes brush, like an incriminating weapon, in his fist.
For the sake of appearances, he picked up another brush and began swatting at the sleeves and lapels of his suit.
‘Smartening yourself up for your shadow, Vic?’ said Prendergast jocularly.
‘I hear she's quite a, er, that is…’
Catching sight of Vic's expression, he faltered into silence.
His pale blue eyes peered anxiously at Vic through thick rimless spectacles.
He was the youngest of the senior management team and rather overawed by Vic.
‘Have you seen her?’
Vic demanded.
‘Well, no, not actually seen, but Brian Everthorpe says —’
‘Never mind what Brian Everthorpe says, he's only interested in the size of her tits.
She's a women's libber, if you don't mind, a bloody Communist too, I shouldn't be surprised.
She had one of those CND badges on.
What in the name of Christ am I —’ He stopped, struck by a sudden thought.
‘George — can I borrow your phone?’
‘Of course.
Something wrong with yours?’
‘No, I just want to make a private call.
Give me a couple of minutes, will you?
Brush yourself down while you're waiting.
Here.’
He thrust the clothes brush into the bewildered Prendergast's hand, patted him on the shoulder, and made tracks for the Personnel Director's Office by a circuitous route that did not take him past his own.
‘Mr Prendergast's just popped out,’ said his secretary.
‘I know,’ said Vic, striding past her and shutting the door of Prendergast's room behind him.
He sat down at the desk and dialled Stuart Baxter's private number.
Luckily he was in.
‘Stuart — Vic Wilcox here.
My shadow's just arrived.’
‘Oh, yes?
What's he like?’
‘She, Stuart, she.
You mean you didn't know?’
‘Honest to God,’ said Stuart Baxter, when he had finished laughing.
‘I had no idea.
Robyn with a ‘y’, well, well.
Is she good-looking?’
‘That's the only thing anybody seems to be interested in.
My managers are poncing about like gigolos and the secretaries are beside themselves with jealousy.’
This was admittedly an exaggeration, but he wanted to emphasize the potentially disruptive effect of Robyn Penrose's presence.
‘Christ knows what will happen when I take her on to the shop floor,’ he said.
‘So she is good-looking.’
‘Some might say so, I suppose.
More to the point, she's a Communist.’
‘What?
How d'you know?’
‘Well, a left-winger, anyway.
You know what those university types are like, on the arts side.
She's a member of CND.’
‘That's not a crime, Vic.’
‘No, but we do have MoD contracts.
She's a security risk.’
‘Hmm,’ said Stuart Baxter.
‘Not exactly secret weapons you're making, are they, Vic?
Gearbox casings for tanks, engine components for trucks…
Any of your people had to be vetted?
Have you signed the Official Secrets Act?’
‘No,’ Vic admitted.
‘But it's better to be safe than sorry.
I think you ought to get her taken off the scheme.’
After a brief pause for thought, Stuart Baxter said, ‘No can do, Vic.
There'd be the most almighty row if we appeared to be sabotaging an Industry Year project simply because this bird is a member of CND.
I can just see the headlines — RUMMIDGE FIRM SLAMS DOOR ON RED ROBYN.
If you catch her stealing blueprints, let me know, and I'll do something about it.’
‘Thanks a lot,’ said Vic flatly.
‘You're a great help.’
‘Why be so negative, about it, Vic?
Relax!
Enjoy the girl's company.
I should be so lucky.’
Stuart Baxter chuckled, and put down the phone.
‘Well — what did you make of it?’
Vic Wilcox demanded, an hour or so later, when they were back in his office after what he had referred to as ‘a quick whistle round the works’.
Robyn sank down on to a chair.
‘I thought it was appalling,’ she said.
‘Appalling?’
He frowned.
‘What d'you mean, appalling?’
‘The noise.
The dirt.
The mindless, repetitive work.
The…everything.
That men should have to put up with such brutalizing conditions —’
‘Now just a minute —’
‘Women, too.
I did see women, didn't I?’
She had a blurred memory of brown-skinned creatures vaguely female in shape but unsexed by their drab, greasy overalls and trousers, working alongside men in some parts of the factory.
‘We have a few.
I thought you were all for equality?’
‘Not equality of oppression.’
‘Oppression?’
He gave a harsh, derisive laugh.
‘We don't force people to work here, you know.
For every unskilled job we advertise, we get a hundred applicants — more than a hundred.
Those women are glad to work here — go and ask 'em if you don't believe me.’
Robyn was silent.
She felt confused, battered, exhausted by the sense-impressions of the last hour.
For once in her life, she was lost for words, and uncertain of her argumentative ground.
She had always taken for granted that unemployment was an evil, a Thatcherite weapon against the working class; but if this was employment then perhaps people were better off without it.
‘But the noise,’ she said again.
‘The dirt!’
‘Foundries are dirty places.
Metal is noisy stuff to work with.
What did you expect?’
What had she expected?
Nothing, certainly, so like the satanic mills of the early Industrial Revolution.
Robyn's mental image of a modern factory had derived mainly from TV commercials and documentaries: deftly edited footage of brightly coloured machines and smoothly moving assembly lines, manned by brisk operators in clean overalls, turning out motor cars or transistor radios to the accompaniment of Mozart on the sound track.
At Pringle's there was scarcely any colour, not a clean overall in sight, and instead of Mozart there was a deafening demonic cacophony that never relented.
Nor had she been able to comprehend what was going on.
There seemed to be no logic or direction to the factory's activities.
Individuals or small groups of men worked on separate tasks with no perceptible relation to each other.
Components were stacked in piles all over the factory floor like the contents of an attic.
The whole place seemed designed to produce, not goods for the outside world, but misery for the inmates.
What Wilcox called the machine shop had seemed like a prison, and the foundry had seemed like hell.
‘There are two sides to our operation,’ he had explained, when he led her out of the office block and across a bleak enclosed courtyard, where footsteps had scored a diagonal path through the snow, towards a high windowless wall of corrugated iron.
‘The foundry, and the machine shop.
We also do a bit of assembly work — small engines and steering assemblies, I'm trying to build it up — but basically we're a general engineering firm, supplying components to the motor industry mostly.
Parts are cast in the foundry or bought in and then we machine 'em.
The foundry was allowed to go to pot in the seventies and Pringle's started purchasing from outside suppliers.
I'm trying to make our foundry more efficient.
So the foundry is a cost-centred operation, and the engineering side is profit-centred.
But if all goes well, in time we should be able to sell our castings outside and make a profit on them too.
In fact we've got to, because a really efficient foundry will produce more castings than we can use ourselves.’
‘What exactly is a foundry?’ said Robyn, as they reached a small, scarred wooden door in the corrugated-iron wall.
Wilcox halted, his hand on the door.
He stared at her incredulously.
‘I told you I didn't know anything about…’
She was going to say ‘industry’, but it occurred to her that this admission would come oddly from an expert on the Industrial Novel.
‘This sort of thing,’ she concluded.
‘I don't suppose you know a lot about literary criticism, do you?’
Wilcox grunted and pushed open the door to let her through.
‘A foundry is where you melt iron or other metal and pour it into moulds to make castings.
Then in the machine shop we mill and grind them and bore holes in them so that they can be assembled into more complex products, like engines.
Are you with me?’
‘I think so,’ she said coldly.
They were walking along a broad corridor between glass-partitioned offices, lit by bleak fluorescent strip lighting, where sallow-faced men in shirt-sleeves stared at computer terminals or pored over sheets of printout.
‘This is production control,’ said Wilcox.
‘I don't think there'd be much point in trying to explain it to you now.’
Some of the men in the offices looked up as they passed, nodded to Wilcox and eyed Robyn curiously.
Few smiled.
‘We should really have started at the foundry,’ said Wilcox, ‘since that's the first stage of our operation.
But the quickest way to the foundry is through the machine shop, especially in this weather.
So you're seeing the production process in reverse.’
He pushed through another battered-looking swing door and held it open for her.
She plunged into the noise as into a tank of water.
The machine shop was an enormous shed with machines and work benches laid out in a grid pattern.
Wilcox led her down the broad central aisle, with occasional detours to left and right to point out some particular operation.
Robyn soon gave up trying to follow his explanations.
She could hardly hear them because of the din, and the few words and phrases that she did catch —‘tolerances to five thou’, ‘cross-boring’, ‘CNC machine’, ‘indexes round’— meant nothing to her.
The machines were ugly, filthy and surprisingly old-fashioned in appearance.
The typical operation seemed to be that the man took a lump of metal from a bin, thrust it into the machine, closed some kind of safety cage, and pulled a lever.
Then he opened the cage, took out the part (which now looked slightly different) and dropped it into another bin.
He did all this as noisily as possible.
‘Does he do the same thing all day?’ she shouted to Wilcox, after they had watched one such man at work for some minutes.
He nodded.
‘It seems terribly monotonous.
Couldn't it be done automatically?’
Wilcox led her to a slightly quieter part of the shop floor.
‘If we had the capital to invest in new machines, yes.
And if we cut down the number of our operations — for the part he's making it wouldn't be worth automating.
The quantities are too small.’
‘Couldn't you move him to another job occasionally?’ she said, with a sudden burst of inspiration.
‘Move them all about, every few hours, just to give them a change?’
‘Like musical chairs?’
Wilcox produced a crooked smile.
‘It seems so awful to be standing there, hour after hour, doing the same thing, day after day.’
‘That's factory work.
The operatives like it that way.’
‘I find that hard to believe.’
‘They don't like being shunted about.
You start moving men about from one job to another, and they start complaining, or demanding to be put on a higher grade.
Not to mention the time lost changing over.’
‘So it comes back to money again.’
‘Everything does, in my experience.’
‘Never mind what the men want?’
‘They prefer it this way, I'm telling you.
They switch off, they daydream.
If they were smart enough to get bored, they wouldn't be doing a job like this in the first place.
If you want to see an automated process, come over here.’
He strode off down one of the aisles.
The blue-overalled workers reacted to his passage like a shoal of minnows in the presence of a big fish.
They did not look up or catch his eye, but there was a perceptible tremor along the work benches, a subtle increase in the carefulness and precision of their movements as the boss passed.
The foremen behaved differently.
They came hurrying forward with obsequious smiles as Wilcox stopped to ask about a bin of components with ‘WASTE’ chalked on the side, or squatted beside a broken-down machine to discuss the cause with an oily-pawed mechanic.
Wilcox made no attempt to introduce Robyn to anyone, though she was aware that she was an object of curiosity in these surroundings.
On all sides she saw glazed abstracted eyes click suddenly into sharp focus as they registered her presence, and she observed sly smiles and muttered remarks being exchanged between neighbouring benches.
The content of these remarks she could guess all too easily from the pin-ups that were displayed on walls and pillars everywhere, pages torn from soft-porn magazines depicting glossy-lipped naked women with bulging breasts and buttocks, pouting and posturing indecently.
‘Can't you do something about these pictures?’ she asked Wilcox.
‘What pictures?’
He looked around, apparently genuinely puzzled by the question.
‘All these pornographic pin-ups.’
‘Oh, those.
You get used to them.
They don't register, after a while.’
That, she realized, was what was peculiarly degrading and depressing about the pictures.
Not just the nudity of the girls, or their poses, but the fact that nobody was looking at them, except herself.
Once these images must have excited lust — enough to make someone take the trouble to cut them out and stick them up on the wall; but after a day or two, or a week or two, the pictures had ceased to arouse, they had become familiar — faded and tattered and oil-stained, almost indistinguishable from the dirt and debris of the rest of the factory.
It made the models' sacrifice of their modesty seem poignantly vain.
‘There you are,’ said Wilcox.
‘Our one and only CNC machine.’
‘What?’
‘Computer-numerically-controlled machine.
See how quickly it changes tools?’
Robyn peered through a Perspex window and watched things moving round and going in and out in sudden spasms, lubricated by spurts of a liquid that looked like milky coffee.
What's it doing?’
‘Machining cylinder heads.
Beautiful, isn't it?’
‘Not the word I'd choose.’
There was something uncanny, almost obscene, to Robyn's eye, about the sudden, violent, yet controlled movements of the machine, darting forward and retreating, like some steely reptile devouring its prey or copulating with a passive mate.
‘One day,’ said Wilcox, ‘there will be lightless factories full of machines like that.’
‘Why lightless?’
‘Machines don't need light.
Machines are blind.
Once you've built a fully computerized factory, you can take out the lights, shut the door and leave it to make engines or vacuum cleaners or whatever, all on its own in the dark.
Twenty-four hours a day.’
‘What a creepy idea.’
‘They already have them in the States.
Scandinavia.’
‘And the Managing Director?
Will he be a computer too, sitting in a dark office?’
Wilcox considered the question seriously.
‘No, computers can't think.
There'll always have to be a man in charge, at least one man, deciding what should be made, and how.
But these jobs’— he jerked his head round at the rows of benches —‘will no longer exist.
This machine here is doing the work that was done last year by twelve men.’
‘O brave new world,’ said Robyn, ‘where only the managing directors have jobs.’
This time Wilcox did not miss her irony.
‘I don't like making men redundant,’ he said, ‘but we're caught in a double bind.
If we don't modernize we lose competitive edge and have to make men redundant, and if we do modernize we have to make men redundant because we don't need 'em any more.’
‘What we should be doing is spending more money preparing people for creative leisure,’ said Robyn.
‘Like women's studies?’
‘Among other things.’
‘Men like to work.
It's a funny thing, but they do.
They may moan about it every Monday morning, they may agitate for shorter hours and longer holidays, but they need to work for their self-respect.’
‘That's just conditioning.
People could get used to life without work.’
‘Could you?
I thought you enjoyed your work.’
‘That's different.’
‘Why?’
‘Well, it's nice work.
It's meaningful.
It's rewarding.
I don't mean in money terms.
It would be worth doing even if one wasn't paid anything at all.
And the conditions are decent — not like this.’
She swept her arm round in a gesture that embraced the oil-laden atmosphere, the roar of machinery, the crash of metal, the whine of electric trolleys, the worn, soiled ugliness of everything.
‘If you think this is rough, wait till you see the foundry,’ said Wilcox, with a grim smile, and set off again at his brisk terrier's trot.
Even this warning did not prepare Robyn for the shock of the foundry.
They crossed another yard, where hulks of obsolete machinery crouched, bleeding rust into their blankets of snow, and entered a large building with a high vaulted roof hidden in gloom.
This space rang with the most barbaric noise Robyn had ever experienced.
Her first instinct was to cover her ears, but she soon realized that it was not going to get any quieter, and let her hands fall to her sides.
The floor was covered with a black substance that looked like soot, but grated under the soles of her boots like sand.
The air reeked with a sulphurous, resinous smell, and a fine drizzle of black dust fell on their heads from the roof.
Here and there the open doors of furnaces glowed a dangerous red, and in the far corner of the building what looked like a stream of molten lava trickled down a curved channel from roof to floor.
The roof itself was holed in places, and melting snow dripped to the floor and spread in muddy puddles.
It was a place of extreme temperatures: one moment you were shivering in an icy draught from some gap in the outside wall, the next you felt the frightening heat of a furnace's breath on your face.
Everywhere there was indescribable mess, dirt, disorder.
Discarded castings, broken tools, empty canisters, old bits of iron and wood, lay scattered around.
Everything had an improvised, random air about it, as if people had erected new machines just where they happened to be standing at the time, next to the debris of the old.
It was impossible to believe that anything clean and new and mechanically efficient could come out of this place.
To Robyn's eye it resembled nothing so much as a medieval painting of hell — though it was hard to say whether the workers looked more like devils or the damned.
Most of them, she observed, were Asian or Caribbean, in contrast to the machine shop where the majority had been white.
Wilcox led her up a twisted and worn steel staircase to a prefabricated office perched on stilts in the middle of the building, and introduced her to the general manager, Tom Rigby, who looked her up and down once and then ignored her.
Rigby's young assistant regarded her with more interest, but was soon drawn into a discussion about production schedules.
Robyn looked around the office.
She had never seen a room that had such a forlorn, unloved look.
The furniture was dirty, damaged and mismatched.
The lino on the floor was scuffed and torn, the windows nearly opaque with grime, and the walls looked as if they had never been repainted since the place was constructed.
Fluorescent strip lighting relentlessly illuminated every sordid detail.
The only splash of colour in the drab decor was the inevitable pin-up, on the wall above the desk of Rigby's young assistant: last year's calendar, turned to the page for December, depicting a grinning topless model tricked out in fur boots and ermine-trimmed bikini pants.
Apart from her, the only item in the room that didn't look old and obsolete was the computer over which the three men were crouched, talking earnestly.
Bored, she stepped outside, on to a steel gallery overlooking the factory floor.
She surveyed the scene, feeling more than ever like Dante in the Inferno.
All was noise, smoke, fumes and flames.
Overalled figures, wearing goggles, face-masks, helmets or turbans, moved slowly through the sulphurous gloom or crouched over their inscrutable tasks beside furnaces and machines.
‘Here — Tom said you'd better put this on.’
Wilcox had appeared at her side.
He thrust into her hands a blue plastic safety helmet with a transparent visor.
‘What about you?’ she asked, as she put it on.
He shrugged and shook his head.
He hadn't even got a coat or overall to cover his business suit.
Some kind of macho pride, presumably.
The boss must appear invulnerable.
‘Visitors have to,’ said Tom Rigby.
‘We're responsible, like.’
A very loud hooter started bleating frantically, and made Robyn jump.
Rigby grinned: ‘That's the KW, they've got it going again.’
‘What was the matter with it?’ said Wilcox.
‘Just a valve, I think.
You should show her.’
He jerked his head in Robyn's direction.
‘Something worth seeing, the KW, when she's on song.’
‘What's a KW?’
Robyn asked.
‘Kunkel Wagner Automatic Moulding Line,’ said Wilcox.
‘The boss's pride and joy,’ said Rigby.
‘Only installed a few weeks back.
You should show her,’ he said again to Wilcox.
‘All in due course,’ said Wilcox.
‘The pattern shop first.’
The pattern shop was a haven of relative peace and quiet, reminiscent of cottage industry, a place where carpenters fashioned the wooden shapes that contributed the first stage of the moulding process.
After that she saw men making sand moulds, first by hand, and then with machines that looked like giant waffle-irons.
It was there that she saw women working alongside the men, lifting the heavy-looking mouldings, reeking of hot resin, from the machines, and stacking them on trolleys.
She listened uncomprehendingly to Wilcox's technical explanations about the drag and the cope, core boxes and coffin moulds.
‘Now we'll have a dekko at the cupola,’ he shouted.
‘Watch your step.’
The cupola turned out to be a kind of gigantic cauldron erected high in one corner of the building where she had earlier noticed what looked like volcanic lava trickling downwards.
‘They fill it up continuously with layers of coke and iron — scrap-iron and pig-iron — and limestone, and fire it with oxygenated air.
The iron melts, picking up the correct amount of carbon from the coke, and runs out of the tap-hole at the bottom.’
He led her up another tortuous steel staircase, its steps worn and buckled, across improvised bridges and rickety gangways, up higher and higher, until they were crouching next to the very source of the molten metal.
The white-hot stream flowed down a crudely fashioned open conduit, passing only a couple of feet from Robyn's toecaps.
It was like a small pinnacle in Pandemonium, dark and hot, and the two squatting Sikhs who rolled their white eyeballs and flashed their teeth in her direction, poking with steel rods at the molten metal for no discernible purpose, looked just like demons on an old fresco.
The situation was so bizarre, so totally unlike her usual environment, that there was a kind of exhilaration to be found in it, in its very discomfort and danger, such as explorers must feel, she supposed, in a remote and barbarous country.
She thought of what her colleagues and students might be doing this Wednesday morning — earnestly discussing the poetry of John Donne or the novels of Jane Austen or the nature of modernism, in centrally heated, carpeted rooms.
She thought of Charles at the University of Suffolk, giving a lecture, perhaps, on Romantic landscape poetry, illustrated with slides.
Penny Black would be feeding more statistics on wife-beating in the West Midlands into her data-base, and Robyn's mother would be giving a coffee morning for some charitable cause in her Liberty-curtained lounge with a view of the sea.
What would they all think if they could see her now?
‘Something funny?’
Wilcox yelled in her ear, and she realized that she was grinning broadly at her own thoughts.
She straightened her features and shook her head.
He shot her a suspicious glance, and continued his commentary: ‘The molten metal is received into that holding furnace down there.
Its temperature is regulated electrically, so we only use what we need.
Before I installed it, they had to use all the iron they melted, or else waste it.’
He stood up abruptly, and without explanation or offer of assistance, set off on the descent to the factory floor.
Robyn followed as best she could, her high-heeled boots skidding on the slippery surfaces, polished by generations of men grinding black sand underfoot.
Wilcox waited impatiently for her at the bottom of the final staircase.
‘Now we can have a look at the KW,’ he said, marching off again.
‘Better hurry, or they'll soon be knocking off for lunch.’
‘I thought the man in the office, Mr Rigby, said it was a new machine,’ was Robyn's first comment, when they stood before its massive bulk.
‘It doesn't look new.’
‘It's not new ,’ said Wilcox.
‘I can't afford to buy machines like that brand new.
I got it second-hand from a foundry in Sunderland that closed down last year.
A snip, it was.’
‘What does it do?’
‘Makes moulds for cylinder blocks.’
‘It seems quieter than the other machines,’ said Robyn.
‘It's not running at the moment,’ Wilcox said, with a pitying look.
‘What's up?’ he demanded, addressing the back of a blue-overalled worker who was standing beside the machine.
‘Fookin' pallet's jammed,’ said the man, without turning his head.
‘Fitter's workin' on it.’
‘Watch your language,’ said Wilcox.
‘There's a lady present.’
The man turned round and looked at Robyn with startled eyes.
‘No offence,’ he muttered.
The hooter recommenced its strident blasts.
‘Right — here we go,’ said Wilcox.
The workman manipulated some knobs and levers, closed a cage, stood back, and pressed a button on a console.
The huge complex of steel shuddered into life.
Something moved forward, something turned over, something began to make a most appalling noise, like a pneumatic drill greatly amplified.
Robyn covered her ears.
Wilcox jerked his head to indicate that they should move on.
He led her up some stairs to a steel gallery from which he said they would get a bird's-eye-view of the operation.
They overlooked a platform on which several men were standing.
A moving track brought to the platform, from the machine that was making the appalling noise, a series of boxes containing moulds shaped out of black sand (though Wilcox called it green).
The men lowered core moulds made of orange sand into the boxes, which were turned over and joined to boxes containing the other half of the moulds (the bottom half was the drag, the top the cope — the first bit of jargon she had managed to master) and moved forward on the track to the casting area.
Two men brought in huge ladles suspended from hoists which they guided with pushbutton controls on the end of electric cables, held in one hand.
The other hand grasped a kind of huge steering wheel attached to the side of the ladle, which they turned to tip the molten metal into the small holes in the mould-boxes.
The two men, working in rotation, turn and turn about, moved with the slow deliberate gait of astronauts or deep-sea divers.
She couldn't see their features, because they wore facemasks and goggles — not without reason, for when they tipped the ladles to pour, white-hot metal splashed like pancake batter and sparks flew through the air.
‘Do they do that job all day?’
Robyn asked.
‘All day, every day.’
‘It must be frightfully hot work.’
‘Not so bad in winter.
But in summer…the temperature can go up to a hundred and twenty Fahrenheit down there.’
‘Surely they could refuse to work in conditions like that?’
‘They could.
The office staff start whingeing if it gets above eighty.
But those two are men.’
Wilcox gave this noun a solemn emphasis.
‘The track makes a ninety-degree turn down there,’ he went on, shooting out an arm to point, ‘and the castings go into a cooling tunnel.
At the end of it, they're still hot, but hard.
The sand gets shaken off them at the knockout.’
The knockout was aptly named.
It certainly stunned Robyn.
It seemed to her like the anus of the entire factory: a black tunnel that extruded the castings, still encased in black sand, like hot, reeking, iron turds, on to a metal grid that vibrated violently and continuously to shake off the sand.
A gigantic West Indian, his black face glistening with sweat, bracing himself with legs astride in the midst of the fumes and the heat and the din, dragged the heavy castings from the grid with a steel rod, and attached them to hooks on a conveyor belt by which they were carried away, looking now like carcasses of meat, to another stage of the cooling process.
It was the most terrible place she had ever been in in her life.
To say that to herself restored the original meaning of the word ‘terrible’: it provoked terror, even a kind of awe.
To think of being that man, wrestling with the heavy awkward lumps of metal in that maelstrom of heat, dust and stench, deafened by the unspeakable noise of the vibrating grid, working like that for hour after hour, day after day…
That he was black seemed the final indignity: her heart swelled with the recognition of the spectacle's powerful symbolism.
He was the noble savage, the Negro in chains, the archetype of exploited humanity, quintessential victim of the capitalist-imperialist-industrial system.
It was as much as she could do to restrain herself from rushing forward to grasp his hand in a gesture of sympathy and solidarity.
‘You have a lot of Asians and Caribbeans working in the foundry, but not so many in the other part,’ Robyn observed, when they were back in the peaceful calm and comparative luxury of Wilcox's office.
‘Foundry work is heavy work, dirty work.’
‘So I noticed.’
‘The Asians and some of the West Indians are willing to do it.
The locals aren't any more.
I've no complaints.
They work hard, especially the Asians.
It's like poetry, Tom Rigby says, when they're working well.
Mind you, they have to be handled carefully.
They stick together.
If one walks out, they all walk out.’
‘It seems to me the whole set-up is racist,’ said Robyn.
‘Rubbish!’ said Wilcox angrily.
He pronounced it ‘Roobish’— it was a word in which his Rummidge accent was particularly noticeable.
‘The only race trouble we have is between the Indians and the Pakis, or the Hindus and the Sikhs.’
‘You just admitted blacks do all the worst jobs, the dirtiest, hardest jobs.’
‘Somebody's got to do them.
It's supply and demand.
If we were to advertise a job today — a labouring job in the foundry — I guarantee we'd have two hundred black and brown faces at the gates tomorrow morning, and maybe one white.’
‘And what if you advertised a skilled job?’
‘We have plenty of coloureds in skilled jobs.
Foremen, too.’
‘Any coloured managers?’
Robyn asked.
Wilcox fumbled for a cigarette, lit it, and exhaled smoke through his nostrils like an angry dragon.
‘Don't ask me to solve society's problems,’ he said.
‘Who is going to solve them, then,’ said Robyn, ‘if it isn't people with power, like you?’
‘Who said I have power?’
‘I should have thought it was obvious,’ said Robyn with an airy gesture that embraced the room and its furnishings.
‘Oh, I have a big office, and a secretary, and a company car.
I can hire and, with a bit more difficulty, fire people.
I'm the biggest cog in this particular machine.
But a small cog in a much bigger one — Midland Amalgamated.
They can get rid of me whenever they like.’
‘Isn't there something called a golden handshake?’
Robyn inquired drily.
‘A year's salary, two if I was lucky.
That doesn't last for ever, and it's not easy to psych yourself up to get another job after you've been given the push.
I've seen it happen to a lot of good MDs that got fired.
It wasn't their fault, usually, that the firm was doing badly, but they had to carry the can.
You can have the greatest ideas in the world for improving competitive edge, but you have to rely on other people to carry them out, from senior managers down to labourers.’
‘Perhaps if everybody had a stake in the business, they would work better,’ said Robyn.
‘How d'you mean?’
‘Well, if they had a share in the profits.’
‘And in the losses, too?’
Robyn pondered this awkward point.
‘Well,’ she shrugged, ‘that's the trouble with capitalism, isn't it?
It's a lottery.
There are winners and losers.’
‘It's the trouble with life,’ said Wilcox, looking at his watch.
‘We'd better get some lunch.’
Lunch was, in its way, as obnoxious to the senses as everything else in the factory.
Rather to Robyn's surprise, there were no special eating arrangements for management.
‘Pringle's used to have a Directors' Dining Room, with their own cook,’ Wilcox explained as he led her through the drab corridors of the administration block, and out across a yard where fresh snow was already covering the footpath that had been cleared.
‘I used to have lunch there occasionally when I worked for Lewis & Arbuckle — marvellous grub, it was.
And there was a separate restaurant for middle management, too.
All that went by the board with the first wave of redundancies.
Now there's just the canteen.’
‘Well, it's more democratic,’ said Robyn approvingly.
‘Not really,’ said Wilcox.
‘My senior managers go to the local pub, and the men prefer to bring their own snap.
So it's mostly technical and clerical who eat here.’
He ushered her into a dismal canteen with strip lighting, Formica-topped tables and moulded plastic stacking chairs.
The windows were steamed over, and there was a smell in the air that reminded Robyn nauseatingly of school dinners.
The food was predictably stodgy — steak pie or fish fried in batter, chips, boiled cabbage and tinned peas, sponge pudding and custard — but it was astonishingly cheap: 50p for the whole menu.
Robyn wondered why more workmen didn't take advantage.
‘Because they'd have to take off their overalls,’ said Wilcox, ‘and they can't be bothered.
They'd rather sit on the factory floor and eat their snap, without even washing their hands.
You don't want to get too sentimental about the operatives, you know,’ he went on.
‘They're a pretty crude lot.
They seem to like dirt.
We put new toilets in the fettling shop last November.
In two weeks they were all vandalized.
Disgusting it was, what they did to those toilets.’
‘Perhaps it was a form of revenge,’ said Robyn.
‘Revenge?’
Wilcox stared.
‘Revenge against who?
Me, for giving them new toilets?’
‘Revenge against the system.’
‘What system?’
‘The factory system.
It must generate enormous resentment.‘
‘Nobody forces them to work here,’ said Wilcox, stabbing the crust of his steak pie with a fork.
‘That's what I mean, it's the return of the repressed.
It's unconscious.’
‘Oh?
Who says?’
Wilcox inquired, cocking his eyebrow.
‘Freud, for one,’ said Robyn.
‘Sigmund Freud, the inventor of psychoanalysis.’
‘I know who you mean,’ said Wilcox sharply.
‘I'm not completely solid between the ears, you know, even if I do work in a factory.’
‘I wasn't implying that you were,’ said Robyn, flushing.
‘Have you read Freud, then?’
‘I don't get much time for reading,’ said Wilcox, ‘but I've a rough idea what he was about.
Said everything came down to sex, didn't he?’
‘That's a rather over-simplified way of putting it,’ said Robyn, disinterring some overcooked fish from its carapace of orange batter.
‘But basically right?’
‘Well, not entirely wrong,’ said Robyn.
‘The early Freud certainly thought libido was the prime mover of human behaviour.
Later he came to think the death instinct was more important.’
‘The death instinct — what's that?’
Wilcox arrested the transfer of a morsel of meat to his mouth to put this question.
‘It's hard to explain.
Essentially it's the idea that unconsciously we all long for death, for non-being, because being is so painful.’
‘I often feel like that at five o'clock in the morning,’ said Wilcox.
‘But I snap out of it when I get up.’
Not long after they got back to Wilcox's office, Brian Everthorpe appeared at the door.
His face was flushed and his waistcoat seemed perceptibly tighter than ever across his paunch.
‘Hallo, Vic.
We were expecting you down at the Man in the Moon.
But no doubt you had a nice tete-a-tete lunch somewhere a bit more upmarket, eh?
The King's Head, was it?’
He leered at Robyn, and masked a belch with the back of his hand.
‘We ate in the canteen,’ said Wilcox coldly.
Everthorpe fell back a pace, in exaggerated astonishment.
‘You never took her to that hole, Vic?’
‘Nothing wrong with it,’ said Wilcox.
‘It's clean and it's cheap.’
‘How did you enjoy the food?’
Everthorpe inquired of Robyn.
‘Not exactly cordon blue, is it?’
Robyn sat down in an armchair.
‘It's part of the factory, I suppose.’
‘Very diplomatic.
Next time — there will be a next time, I hope?
Next time, get Vic to take you to the King's Head Carvery.
If he won't, I will.’
‘Did you want to see me about something?’ said Wilcox impatiently.
‘Yes, a little idea I've had.
I think we ought to have a calendar.
You know, something to give customers at the end of the year.
Great advertisement for the firm.
It's up there on the wall three hundred and sixty-five days a year.’
‘What kind of calendar?’ said Wilcox.
‘Well, you know, the usual sort of thing.
Birds with boobs.’
He glanced at Robyn and winked.
‘Tasteful, you know, nothing crude.
Like the Pirelli calendar.
Collectors' items they are, you know.’
‘Are you off your trolley?’ said Wilcox.
‘I know what you're going to say,’ said Everthorpe, holding up his pink, fleshy palms, placatingly.
‘We can't afford it.’
But I wasn't thinking of hiring the Earl of Lichfield and a lot of London models.
There's a way we can get it done cheap.
You know Shirley has a daughter who does modelling?’
‘Wants to do it, you mean.’
‘Tracey's got what it takes, Vic.
You should see her portfolio.’
‘I have.
She looks like a double helping of pink blancmange, and about as exciting.
Did Shirley put you up to this?’
‘No, Vic, it was my own idea,’ said Everthorpe, looking hurt.
‘Of course, I've discussed it with Shirley.
She's all in favour.’
‘Yes, I bet she is.’
‘My idea is, we use the same girl — Tracey, that is — for each month, but with different backgrounds according to the season.’
‘Very original.
Won't the photographer have his own ideas?’
‘Ah, but that's where the other part of my plan comes in.
You see, I belong to a photographic club —’
‘Excuse me,’ said Robyn, standing up.
The two men, who had temporarily forgotten her presence in the heat of argument, turned their heads and looked at her.
She addressed herself to Everthorpe.
‘Do I understand that you're proposing to advertise your products with a calendar that degrades women?’
‘It won't degrade them, my dear, it will…’
Everthorpe groped for a word.
‘Celebrate them?’
Robyn helped him out.
‘Exactly.’
‘Yes, I've heard that one before.
But you are proposing to use pictures of naked women, or one naked woman — like the pin-ups that are plastered all over the factory?’
‘Well, yes, but classier.
Good taste, you know.
None of your Penthouse -style crotch shots.
Just tit and bum.’
‘What about a bit of prick and bum, too?’ said Robyn.
Everthorpe looked satisfyingly taken aback.
‘Eh?’ he said.
‘Well, statistically, at least ten per cent of your customers must be gay.
Aren't they entitled to a little porn too?’
‘Ha, ha,’ Everthorpe laughed uneasily.
‘Not many queers in our line of business, are there, Vic?’
Wilcox, who was following this conversation with amused interest, said nothing.
‘Or what about the women who work in the offices where these calendars are stuck up?’
Robyn continued.
‘Why should they have to look at naked women all the time?
Couldn't you dedicate a few months of the year to naked men?
Perhaps you'd like to pose yourself, along with Tracey?’
Vic Wilcox guffawed.
‘I'm afraid you've got it wrong, darling,’ said Everthorpe, struggling to retain his poise.
‘Women aren't like that.
They're not interested in pictures of naked men.’
‘I am,’ said Robyn.
‘I like them with hairy chests and ten-inch pricks.’
Everthorpe gaped at her.
‘You're shocked, aren't you?
But you think it's perfectly all right to talk about women's tits and bums and stick pictures of them up all over the place.
Well, it isn't all right.
It degrades the women who pose for them, it degrades the men who look at them, it degrades sex.’
‘This is all very fascinating,’ said Wilcox, looking at his watch, ‘but I've got a meeting in here in about five minutes' time, with my technical manager and his staff.’
‘I'll talk to you later,’ said Brian Everthorpe huffily.
‘When there's less interference.’
‘I'm afraid it's a non-starter, Brian,’ said Wilcox.
‘Stuart Baxter didn't think so,’ said Everthorpe, fluffing out his sideboards with the back of his hand.
‘I don't give a monkey's what Stuart Baxter thinks,’ said Wilcox.
‘I'll talk to you again, when your shadow, or your guardian angel, or whatever she is, will let me get a word in edgewise.’
Everthorpe strode out of the office.
Robyn, whose legs felt suddenly weak as the adrenalin drained out of her, sat down.
Wilcox, who had been frowning after the departing figure of Everthorpe, turned and almost smiled.
‘I quite enjoyed that,’ he said.
‘You agree with me, then?’
‘I think we'd make ourselves a laughing-stock.’
‘I mean about the principle.
The exploitation of women's bodies.’
‘I don't have much time for that sort of thing myself,’ said Wilcox.
‘But some men never grow up.’
‘You could do something about it,’ said Robyn.
‘You're the boss.
You could ban all pin-ups from the factory.’
‘I could, if I was completely barmy.
All I need is a wildcat strike over pin-ups.’
‘You could set an example, at least.
There's one of those girlie calendars in your secretary's office.’
‘Is there?’
Wilcox looked genuinely surprised.
He jumped up from his swivel chair and went into the adjoining office.
A few moments later he returned, scratching his chin thoughtfully.
‘Funny, I never noticed it.
Gresham's Pumps gave it to us.’
‘Are you going to take it down, then?’
‘Shirley says the Gresham's buyer likes to see it on the wall when he visits.
No point offending a customer.’
Robyn tossed her head scornfully.
She was disappointed, having glimpsed the possibility of returning from this expedition into the cultural heart of darkness with some creditable achievement to report to Charles and Penny Black.
Wilcox turned on some lights above the board table on the other side of the room.
He went to the window, where the daylight was already fading, and looked out between the vertical louvres of the blind.
‘It's snowing again.
Maybe you should be on your way.
The roads will be difficult.’
‘It's only half past two,’ said Robyn.
‘I thought I was supposed to stay with you all day.’
‘Suit yourself,’ he said, with a shrug.
‘But I warn you, I work late.’
While Robyn was hesitating, the office began to fill up with men wearing drab suits and dull ties and with the pasty complexions that seemed to be common to everybody who worked in the factory.
They came in diffidently, nodded respectfully to Wilcox, and looked askance at Robyn.
They sat down at the table, and took out of their pockets packets of cigarettes, lighters and calculators, placing these objects carefully in front of them as if they were necessary equipment for some game they were about to play.
‘Where shall I sit?’ said Robyn.
‘Anywhere you like,’ said Wilcox.
Robyn took a seat at the opposite end of the table from Wilcox.
‘This is Dr Robyn Penrose, of Rummidge University,’ he said.
As though given permission to stare at her, the men all turned their heads simultaneously in her direction.
‘You've all heard of Industry Year, I suppose.
And you all know what a shadow is.
Well, Dr Penrose is my Industry Year shadow.’
He looked round the table as if daring anyone to smile.
No one did.
He explained the Shadow Scheme briefly, and concluded, ‘Just carry on as if she wasn't there.’
This they seemed to find no difficulty in doing, once the meeting started.
The subject was Wastage.
Wilcox began by stating that the percentage of products rejected by their own inspectors was five per cent, which he considered far too high, and another one per cent was returned by customers.
He listed various possible causes — defective machines, careless workmanship, poor supervision, faulty lab tests — and asked the head of each department to identify the main cause of waste in their own area.
Robyn found the discussion hard to follow.
The managers spoke in cryptic, allusive utterances, using technical jargon that was opaque to her.
The adenoidal whine of their accents dulled her hearing, and the smoke of their cigarettes made her eyes smart.
She grew bored, and gazed out of the window, at the fading winter light and the fluttering descent of the snow.
The snow was general all over Rummidge, she mused, playing variations on a famous passage by James Joyce to divert herself.
It was falling on every part of the dark, sprawling conurbation, on the concrete motorways, and the treeless industrial estates, falling softly upon the lawns of the University campus and, further westward, upon the dark mutinous waters of the Rummidge-Wallsbury Canal.
Then suddenly she was listening with attention again.
They were discussing a machine that was continually breaking down.
‘It's the operative's fault,’ one of the managers was saying.
‘He's just not up to the job.
He doesn't set the indexes properly, so it keeps jamming.’
‘What's his name?’
Wilcox demanded.
‘Ram.
He's a Paki,’ said one.
‘No, he's not, he's Indian,’ said another.
‘Well, whatever.
Who can tell the difference?
They call him Danny.
Danny Ram.
He was moved on to the job when we were short-handed last winter, and up-graded from labourer.’
‘Let's get rid of him, then,’ said Wilcox.
‘He's causing a bottle-neck.
Terry — see to it, will you?’
Terry, a heavily built man smoking a pipe, took it out of his mouth and said, ‘We haven't got a basis to fire him.’
‘Rubbish.
He's been trained, hasn't he?’
‘I'm not sure.’
‘Check it out.
If he hasn't, train him, even if he can't grasp it.
Are you with me?’
Terry nodded.
‘Then each time he fails to set the machine properly, you give him a proper warning.
On the third warning, he's fired.
Shouldn't take more than a fortnight.
All right?’
‘Right,’ said Terry, putting his pipe back between his teeth.
‘The next question,’ said Wilcox, ‘is quality control in the machine shop.
Now I've got some figures here —’
‘Excuse me,’ said Robyn.
‘Yes, what is it?’ said Wilcox, looking up impatiently from his spreadsheet.
‘Do I understand that you are proposing to pressure a man into making mistakes so that you can sack him?’
Wilcox stared at Robyn.
There was a long silence, such as falls over a saloon bar in a Western at moments of confrontation.
Not only did the other men not speak; they did not move.
They did not appear even to breathe.
Robyn herself was breathing rather fast, in short, shallow pants.
‘I don't think it's any of your business, Dr Penrose,’ said Wilcox at last.
‘Oh, but it is,’ said Robyn hotly.
‘It's the business of anyone who cares for truth and justice.
Don't you see how wrong it is, to trick this man out of his job?’ she said, looking round the table.
‘How can you sit there, and say nothing?’
The men fiddled uneasily with their cigarettes and calculators, and avoided meeting her eye.
‘It's a management matter in which you have no competence,’ said Wilcox.
‘It's not a management matter, it's a moral issue,’ said Robyn.
Wilcox was now pale with anger.
‘Dr Penrose,’ he said, ‘I think you've got the wrong idea about your position here.
You're a shadow, not an inspector.
You're here to learn, not to interfere.
I must ask you to keep quiet, or leave the meeting.’
‘Very well, I'll leave,’ said Robyn.
She gathered up her belongings in a strained silence, and left the room.
‘Meeting over?’ said Shirley, with a bright, meaningless smile.
‘No, it's still going on,’ said Robyn.
‘You're leaving early, then?
I don't blame you, in this weather.
Coming back tomorrow, are you?’
‘Next week,’ said Robyn.
‘Every Wednesday — that's the arrangement.’
She was very doubtful whether this arrangement would continue, but it suited her purpose to conceal the row that had just occurred.
‘Do you know a worker in the factory called Danny Ram?’ she asked, in a casual tone of voice.
‘Can't say I do.
What's his job?’
‘I'm not sure.
He operates some kind of machine.’
‘Well, most of them do, don't they?’ said Shirley, with a laugh.
‘Quite a change for you, isn't it, this kind of place?
After the University, I mean.’
‘Yes, quite a change.’
‘This Ram a friend of yours, is he?’
Shirley's curiosity, and perhaps suspicion, had been aroused.
‘No, but I think he's the father of one of my students,’ Robyn improvised.
‘You could ask Betty Maitland in Accounts,’ said Shirley.
‘Two doors along the corridor.’
‘Thanks,’ said Robyn.
Betty Maitland very obligingly looked up Danny Ram on the payroll (his name was actually Danyatai Ram) and told Robyn that he worked in the foundry.
Since the only way she knew to the foundry was the route of her guided tour earlier that day, she was obliged to retrace it.
In the machine shop, without Victor Wilcox to escort her, Robyn was as conspicuous in her high-fashion boots, her cord breeches and her cream-coloured quilted jacket, as some rare animal, a white doe or a unicorn, would have been in the same place.
Wolf-whistles and catcalls, audible in spite of the mechanical din, followed her as she hurried through the factory.
The more the men whistled, the more ribald their remarks, the faster she walked; but the faster she walked, the more of a sexual object, or sexual quarry, she became, twisting and turning between the rows of benches (for she soon lost her bearings), stumbling over piles of metal parts, skidding on the oily floor, her cheeks as red as her hair, the wings of her nostrils white, her eyes fixed steadfastly ahead, refusing to meet the gaze of her tormentors. ‘'Allo, darlin', lookin' for me?
Fancy a bit of that, Enoch?
Show us yer legs!
Coom over 'ere and 'old me tool, will yow?’
At last she found the exit at the far end of the enormous shed, and burst out into a dark courtyard, littered with the hulks of abandoned machinery, which she remembered from the morning.
She paused for a moment under a feeble electric light to recover her self-possession, drawing the clean cold air into her lungs, before plunging once more into the third circle of this industrial inferno.
With no daylight at all penetrating to the interior of the foundry, it looked more hellish than ever, its furnaces glowing fiercely in the smoky gloom.
Here the workers were fewer than in the machine shop, and shyer — perhaps because they were mostly Asian.
They avoided her glance, and turned away at her approach, as though her presence vaguely alarmed them.
‘Danny Ram?’ she called after them.
‘Do you know where Danny Ram works?’
They shook their heads, rolled their eyes, grinned nervously, and went about their inscrutable business.
At last she came across a white man, nonchalantly lighting his cigarette from a twelve-inch flame shooting out of a gas jet, who was prepared to answer her question.
‘Danny Ram?’ he said, holding his head aslant to avoid being scorched.
‘Yeah, I know 'im.
Woi?’
‘I have a message for him.’
‘'E's over theer,’ said the man, straightening up, and pointing to a thin, rather depressed-looking Asian standing beside a complicated piece of machinery.
It was making so much noise, and absorbing his attention so completely, that he didn't register Robyn's approach.
‘Mr Ram?’ she said, touching his sleeve.
He started and swivelled round.
‘Yes?’ he mouthed, staring.
‘I have some important information for you,’ she shouted.
‘Information?’ he repeated wonderingly.
‘Who are you, please?’
Fortunately the machine came to the end of its cycle at this point and she was able to continue in a more normal tone of voice.
‘It doesn't matter who I am.
The information is confidential, but I think you ought to know.
They're going to keep finding fault with your work, and giving you warnings, so they can sack you.
Understand?
Forewarned is forearmed.
Don't tell anyone I told you.’
She smiled encouragingly, and extended her hand.
‘Goodbye.’
The man wiped his hands ineffectually on his hips and gave her a limp handshake.
‘Who are you?’ he said.
‘How do you know this?’
‘I'm a shadow,’ said Robyn.
The man looked mystified, and slightly awestruck, as if he thought the word denoted some kind of supernatural messenger.
‘Thank you,’ he said.
To avoid running the gauntlet of the machine shop again, Robyn made her way back to the car park by going round the outside of the building, but the paths were covered with drifting snow and the going was difficult.
She got lost in the labyrinth of yards and passageways that separated the numerous buildings, many of them apparently disused or derelict, that covered the factory site, and there was nobody around to direct her.
At last, after about twenty minutes' wandering, her feet soaking wet inside her leaking boots, and her leg muscles aching from wading through the snow, she arrived at the car park outside the administration block, and found her car.
She brushed a thick layer of snow from its windows, and, with a sigh of relief, got behind the wheel.
She turned the ignition key.
Nothing happened.
‘Fuck,’ said Robyn, aloud to herself, alone in the middle of the frozen car park.
‘Bum.
Tit.’
If it was the battery it must have finally given up the ghost, because there wasn't even the faintest wheeze or whisper from the starter motor.
Whatever it was, she could do nothing about it herself, since she hadn't the remotest idea what went on under the bonnet of the Renault.
She got wearily out of the car and tramped across the car park to the reception lobby, where she asked the receptionist with peroxided hair if she could phone the AA.
While she was dialling, Wilcox passed in the corridor beyond, saw her, checked, and came in.
‘Still here?’ he said, lifting an eyebrow.
Robyn nodded, holding the receiver to her ear.
‘She's phoning the AA,’ said the peroxide blonde.
‘Car won't start.’
‘What's the problem?’ said Wilcox.
‘Nothing happens when I turn the key.
It's completely dead.’
‘Let's have a look at it,’ said Wilcox.
‘No, no,’ said Robyn.
‘Please don't bother.
I'll manage.’
‘Come on.’
He jerked his head in the direction of the car park.
‘You won't get the AA to come for hours on a day like this.’
The engaged tone bleeping in Robyn's ear confirmed the good sense of this judgement, but she put down the receiver reluctantly.
The last thing she wanted at this juncture was to be under an obligation to Wilcox.
‘Don't you want to get your overcoat?’ she asked, as they passed through the swing doors into the freezing outside air.
Wilcox shook his head impatiently.
‘Where's your car?’
‘The red Renault over there.’
Wilcox set off in a straight line, indifferent to the snow that covered his thin black shoes and clung to his trouser bottoms.
‘Why did you buy a foreign car?’ he said.
‘I didn't buy it, my parents gave it to me, when they changed it.’
‘Why did they buy it, then?’
‘I don't know.
Mummy liked it, I suppose.
It's a good little car.’
‘So's the Metro.
Why not buy a Metro if you want a small car?
Or a Mini?
If everybody who bought a foreign car in the last ten years had bought a British one instead, there wouldn't be seventeen per cent unemployment in this area.’
He made a sweeping gesture with his arm that took in the wilderness of derelict factories beyond the perimeter fence.
As a subscriber to Marxism Today , Robyn had suffered occasional qualms of guilt because she didn't cycle to work instead of driving, but she had never been attacked for owning a foreign car before.
‘If British cars were as good as foreign ones, people would buy them,’ she said.
‘But everyone knows they're hopelessly unreliable.’
‘Rubbish,’ said Wilcox.
Roobish .
‘They used to be, I grant you, some models, but now our quality control is as good as anybody's.
Trouble is, people love to sneer at British products.
Then they have the gall to moan about the unemployment figures.’
His breath steamed, as though his anger were condensing in the frigid air.
‘What does your father drive?’ he said.
‘An Audi,’ said Robyn.
Wilcox grunted contemptuously, as if he had expected no better.
They came up to the Renault.
Wilcox told her to get in and release the bonnet catch.
He opened the bonnet and disappeared behind it.
After a moment or two she heard him call, ‘Turn the ignition key,’ and when she did so, the engine fired.
Wilcox lowered the bonnet and pushed it shut with the palm of his hand.
He came to the driver's window, brushing snow from his suit.
‘Thank you very much,’ said Robyn.
‘What was it?’
‘Loose electrical connection,’ he said.’
Looked as if someone had pulled out the HT lead, actually.’
‘Pulled it out?’
‘I'm afraid we get a bit of vandalism here, and practical joking.
Was the car locked?’
‘Maybe not every door.
Anyway, thanks very much.
I hope you won't catch cold,’ she said, encouraging him to leave.
But he lingered by the window, inhibiting her from winding it up.
‘I'm sorry if I was a bit sharp at the meeting this afternoon,’ he said gruffly.
‘That's all right,’ said Robyn; though it wasn't all right , she told herself, it wasn't all right at all .
She fiddled with the choke button to avoid having to look at him.
‘Only sometimes you have to use methods that look a bit dodgy, for the good of the firm.’
‘I don't think we should ever agree about that,’ said Robyn.
‘But this is hardly the time or the place…’
Out of the corner of her eye she saw a man in a white coat floundering through the snow towards them, and in some intuitive way this increased her anxiety to be off.
‘Yes, you'd better be on your way.
I'll see you next Wednesday, then?’
Before Robyn could reply, the man in the white coat had called out, ‘Mr Wilcox!
Mr Wilcox!’ and Wilcox turned to face him.
‘Mr Wilcox, you're wanted in the foundry,’ said the man breathlessly, as he came up.
‘There's been a walkout.’
‘Goodbye,’ said Robyn, and let out the clutch.
The Renault shot forward and slewed from side to side in the snow as she drove fast towards the gates.
In her rear-view mirror she saw the two men hurrying back towards the administration block.