

Peto Institute, Budapest, Hungary.
3–14 December 1990 by J Davis and J Eccleshall, Mabel Prichard School, Oxford.
Introduction
In November 1990, the First World Congress of the International Petö Institute was held in Budapest, Hungary.
Several hundred people attended from 37 different countries.
Various disciplines were represented including educationalists, psychologists, doctors and others in associated medical professions.
The Congress lasted three days, and was followed by a two week Information Course at the Institute.
We were two of the seventy people who took part in this course.
We write this report from the standpoint of teachers of children with severe learning difficulties and many of our observations are made with the needs of these children in mind.
We feel privileged to have had the chance to be part of such a valuable learning experience.
The Education System in Hungary
In order to understand Conductive Education it has to be seen in the context of the Hungarian State System.
To be admitted to a state school, children must be able to walk, to be continent and show the ability to learn and keep up with normal work.
They have to manage without aids such as wheelchairs or special furniture and be able to write and draw — typewriters and computers are not provided.
Mothers stay at home for three years after the birth of their babies on 70% of their salary (inflation is not taken into consideration).
Mothers of handicapped children can extend this to 10 years or longer.
Children are admitted to Kindergarten from 3–6 years.
Those suitable progress to primary schools (6–11 years) and then secondary schools (11–16 years).
Secondary school can be ‘grammar’ or vocational training for skilled workers.
College or university follow and can last from 4–6 years.
Before entering school, psychological, medical and educational assessments are required.
As a result of these, ten percent of children go to special schools — e.g. The Petö Institute or schools catering for the blind, deaf or moderately mentally handicapped.
Three percent are classed as ineducable and either stay at home with their families or are placed in welfare institutions — parents wishing to have teaching for these children have to pay privately.
The Petö Institute
The Institute is situated in a pleasant district of Buda, next to a large hospital.
It is a large, modern building and it would be easy to imagine oneself in a hospital except for the noise, cheerful bustle and attractive classrooms.
The building is six storeys high, with lots of stairs for the children to negotiate.
The ground floor has an out-patients department, for children from six months to three years, and also for adults.
On the next level are classrooms for conductor-trainees, offices and a sitting/buffet area, which has to cope with an international mix of families, visitors, students, staff and conductors.
It can take half-an-hour to buy a coffee and seats are often not available.
Other levels contain kindergarten and school classes for three to eleven year-olds.
Each group has two large working areas and bathrooms.
The areas are connected by folding doors and all have wall-bars, plinths, stools, ladderbacks, some carpeted areas and toys, although these seem small in number.
The residential children sleep and eat in these areas, using the plinths as beds.
Transfer procedure
When a child is considered ready to transfer from the Institute to a regular school:—
1.
The appropriate school is selected.
2.
After-care staff keep in contact with the school.
3.
Reports are requested for each ‘Institute’ child every year.
4.
Teachers are invited to the Institute to discuss the child's progress and programme.
5.
Three day courses are provided yearly for teachers with disabled children in their classes.
They are told about aids which can assist them and given time to discuss special problems.
Conductive Education
It is extremely difficult to describe in words such a highly complex method, but we are giving some ideas we have gained during our two-and-a-half weeks.
A speaker at the International Congress pointed out that there are two approaches to handicap — either we can adapt the environment (e.g. by providing wheelchairs, ramps, etc) or we can make the individual do the adapting.
The latter is the approach taken by the Institute.
They believe, ‘…that the individual can be made to learn how to learn…chromosomes do not have the last word…individuals should have the option to change, irrespective of age’.
Also, they feel that human beings do not learn left to themselves, so one generation imposes learning on another.
Conductors are needed to impose this learning in a structured manner.
Conductive Education is a preventive system aimed at stopping a disability from becoming a handicap.
Motor and intellectual development are inseparable.
Each separate action needed for life-skills is taught to the group, and within this all individuals are encouraged to find their own solutions to problems.
The reasons for learning each task are shared with the child and they are encouraged to choose an optimistic alternative in every situation.
All that is learnt must be carried over into real-life situations, so training of parents is very important (see section on ‘Groups in the Institute’).
The atmosphere in the Institute is always cheerful, busy, encouraging, warm and positive.
The children's motivation is excellent, as is their concentration.
On the whole, they appear as keen at the end of a very long day as at the beginning.
This could be surprising, as the sessions are very repetitive and the teaching session very formal.
Group work forms the basis for all programmes and within this the development of the personality is stressed, plus inter-personal and group relationships.
Tasks assigned each day teach skills needed for dressing, feeding, hygiene, speech, change of place and posture, standing and walking.
National Curriculum subjects have to be covered in school groups.
Compulsory subjects for primary children are reading, maths, writing, art and technology, drawing and nature and there are two educational sessions a day lasting between 1–2 hours each.
Assessments
Children are assessed while staying at the Institute for up to four weeks (this may be extended in some cases).
The selection criteria of children is laid down by the government department appropriate to education and health.
At the initial sessions, a registry sheet is made out and photos and videos are made.
These are continuously updated.
Observations are kept during the children's time at the Institute on their developmental progress in all areas and these are recorded approximately once a month.
However, conductors of each group would meet daily and discuss minor adjustments to the programmes.
Careful records are kept on the Spina Bifida children's  toileting — volume of urine is noted, also periods of dryness.
This is because these children easily develop kidney and bladder problems.
Assessments and records are also required from former Petö children, now in mainstream schools.
These children are regularly checked, their teachers are consulted and advised, and conductors visit their schools.
No reports were available for us to see, although there were files on the children in each area.
Conductors and their training
Conductors receive a four-year training, which covers many areas, e.g. child development, physiotherapy, speech, and biology.
Dr Maria Hari was, however, keen to point out that the training was not simply a summary of these professions but that conductors were unique products of a complex system.
However, when we talked to professionals in various fields, from the UK and abroad, no-one felt that their particular profession was understood in any depth.
During their training, emphasis is on the practice of the theory, much more so than in the usual training of teachers.
The lectures are at the Institute and what is learnt is immediately put into practice with the trainees acting as helpers in the various groups.
Students learn how to observe, plan, organise and analyse situations so that problems can be solved.
Qualified conductors work a compulsory nineteen hours a week, but most work up to thirty hours as there is so much to do.
They are paid 7,000 Forints per month (approximately 65), rising to 12,000 after five years.
They are responsible for every aspect of the children's care, i.e. they wake them up in the morning, take lying, sitting, standing, and walking groups, teach the National Curriculum lessons, toilet and bath the children and put them to bed.
Planning comes on top of all this.
Morning, afternoon, evening and weekend shifts are worked.
The work is extremely hard and conductors need to be very dedicated.
All appeared to us to be warm, positive, enthusiastic people — always praising, rarely criticising.
We almost never heard’ Nem’(no), but always’Igen’(yes) or’J’(good).
Conductive Education and PMLD children
During the three days at the conference and the two-week course that followed, it was categorically stated on several occasions that PMLD children are not suitable for Conductive Education.
These are the 3% placed in welfare institutions or left at home with parents, classed as ineducable.
However, in less formal talks with conductors and lecturers, and in a discussion led by Dr Maria Hari, it became apparent that in fact there are some concessions.
Children have been taken on by the Institute and given trial periods.
If, however, they show no sign of ability to make contact or to learn by five years they are placed in a special school, welfare institution or returned to family surroundings.
Dr Hari also congratulated Mrs Marian Fang (Chair or the Hong Kong Special Schools' Council and Principal of the John F. Kennedy Centre for Handicapped Children) on her work with mentally impaired children.
She has pioneered Conductive Style groups in Hong Kong with PMLD children who live permanently in hospital.
Nurses run the groups and there have been significant results.
Dr Hari considers that the careful structuring in Conductive Education is a suitable method for all children's learning.
She also made it clear that Conductive Education is not the only method, and admitted that other methods are used with success.
Groups in the Institute
Outpatients
1.
Parents and children out-patients department
Children are usually referred by hospitals in Hungary.
Conductors visit premature baby units and decide which children to accept.
Babies can start at six months, but it is more likely to be 12–18 months.
An early start is good as parents can help with the programmes in the home, even at a pre-verbal stage.
Developmental delay is caused by later starts and secondary damage can develop too (e.g. contractures and behaviour problems).
Earlier integration into mainstream has been noted when children begin young.
Parents come on an observation day first, then accompany their children for one to two hours a day, five days a week.
Most choose to come for two-week periods, with time to practise at home in between.
Children start in the beginners group and when they prove to have good contact with parents, the ability to understand instructions and to move from one position to another they move on to the advanced group which is for children over the age of two, still with parents accompanying.
Contact with conductors and other group members is encouraged, as is more independence and walking.
More intense programmes are followed.
2.
Kindergarten out-patients clinic
This clinic caters for children who have been integrated into mainstream kindergartens.
They attend three times per week for two-hour sessions.
We saw a class of very able children, with minimal impairment, who came for a P.E./music and movement session.
This type of programme would be very useful for Mabel Prichard children.
Petö is founded on the theory that’ Action is a pre-condition of thinking’.
3.
School-age out-patients
Children who have been integrated into mainstream schools can return at any time for help and are called back at six-monthly intervals for checks.
4.
Parent's School — minor impairments
Any child can come with its parents for one hour a month.
They are given advice, counselling and work to do at home.
5.
Adult out-patients
Multiple Sclerosis, Parkinson's and hemiplegic patients attend 2–3 morning sessions a week.
Residential groups
Kindergarten (3–6 year olds)
Children from Budapest attend Petö Kindergarten daily.
Others from the rest of Hungary (plus some international) are residential.
They follow the national kindergarten syllabus which is: mother tongue, drawing, mathematics, nature, and in addition have lying, sitting, standing, walking, and hands function programmes.
Sessions last one hour and they are grouped with similar children as far as possible.
There is a separate group for Spina Bifida children.
Children may repeat the last year if they are not ready to move up.
b) School (6–11 years)
Same as above, with extended Conductive Education tasks, more National Curriculum topics, and longer hours.
c) Secondary School (11–16 years)
At another building in Pest — for those children who never manage to attain the standards of mainstream schools.
International group
Children come from all over the world and are observed and assessed for their suitability for Conductive Education.
During the last week there is a consultation with parents and a verbal programme is given to work on back home.
Nothing is written down, unless by the parent, the stated reason being to allow for flexibility.
The children can return every six months for another month.
Families live in Budapest in flats.
A committee of parents try to help one another find accommodation, which, of course, they have to pay for themselves.
Grandparents were observed supporting parents, the other parent usually remaining at home for work or family reasons.
These children on the whole had greater problems and cried more than the Hungarian children who had been coming earlier and for longer.
Some foreign children are residential on a permanent basis.
We saw a considerable number of English, Irish and Israeli children.
We were  shown a couple of English children in the school who are fluent now in Hungarian (a very difficult language!).
On talking to parents, we were told that had there been a suitable provision in their own country they would not be in Budapest.
Provision in the UK appears to be very’ patchy’.
Primary school programme
Personal observations
We watched the morning programme of a group of 14 1st Year primary children aged 7–8.
These children had completed their preparatory year and were of normal intelligence but severe physical problems prohibited them from entering regular school.
There were four conductors in charge of this group with a different conductor planning, organising and leading each session.
There were several students on hand to help with moving of the furniture etc.
The children live at the Institute during the week, going home at the weekend where possible.
We were surprised to find that the plinths used for exercise and as tables during the day are their beds at night!
Each day starts with a programme of group exercises carefully planned to help the children to change position, starting from lying or sitting followed by individual and group standing and walking practice.
Children needing extra help have a conductor either to themselves or shared between two.
At first sight it may appear that all the children are doing the same thing but within each group allowance is made for ability and the children follow their own carefully planned programme at their own pace — this is updated regularly.
In order to prevent boredom and give motivation a theme is set by the conductor running the session.
The ‘motivation’ for the session we watched was a backcloth of a ski slope; the children were divided into 2 teams and given a skier each to race down the slope.
Any good work was rewarded with the emphasis being on team rather than individual success.
Themes seen in other classes had been even more complicated and had obviously involved an enormous amount of work.
We were endlessly impressed by the amount of effort and planning which had gone into making the whole programme run smoothly and efficiently.
The children were wonderfully responsive, with a great sense of humour and they derived enormous excitement from the games and competitions.
A relatively short time of the day is spent in educational classes — the children are divided into two groups for these according to age or ability.
The lessons we observed were reading and writing and Maths.
The children sat on ordinary chairs at normal tables and there were no grab bars or straps despite the fact that one child had great difficulty in controlling his limbs.
Most of the children had ordinary books and pencils — all had to stand up to answer questions and walk to the front of the class where possible.
Teaching is formal but the children seemed interested and responsive and managed some surprisingly good writing despite immense disabilities.
Great emphasis is put on writing and drawing skills and typewriters are not seen as a substitute for writing.
Computers are not used in the primary school although some children may have them at home.
The whole morning was very structured and we were amazed by how much was fitted into the programme.
There was, however, little time for free play or choice of activity and no chance for the children to mess about with paint, sand, water etc.
Art is seen as an exercise in fine motor skills or appreciation of nature and not as a creative activity.
Such a structured form of teaching would not fit easily into our more liberal system of education.
With the afternoon programme being much a repeat of the morning's activities we were amazed that both children and adults could retain their enthusiasm.
However, despite the formality and repetitive nature of the daily programme the atmosphere was relaxed and we have brought home an overwhelming impression of children and adults working together with great courage, motivation and a sense of humour.
Gentle encouragement is given and the children are expected to do their best, but we did not hear a raised voice or see any need for discipline.
Emphasis is put on the development of the personality and this shows in the care and affection the children show to each other.
Implications for children at Mabel Prichard School
Many of the children with whom we work at school would not be accepted at the Petö Institute for reasons explained elsewhere in the report.
However, after much thought and discussion we still feel that many aspects of the teaching programmes in Hungary are very beneficial for children with profound and multiple learning difficulties.
It was interesting, moreover, to see that Conductive Education groups at the Institute were not limited to children with severe motor problems.
We have come back believing that other children in our school could benefit from similar group physical programmes.
As teachers we feel capable of planning and organising such group programmes, but realise that regular input from other professionals such as physiotherapists, occupational therapists and speech therapists is essential.
Working as a team we will have the skills to draw up relevant programmes for individual children and the ability to keep these programmes regularly updated.
A bathroom area
Taking the ‘optimistic’ approach
A typical classroom with wallbars and special furniture
The following photos show a group of Spina Bifida children who showed great determination and humour despite enormous physical disabilities.
Several children in this group needed a full brace in order to be able to stand.
Spina Bifida children were encouraged to get up and down from this position.
Standing and walking practice
Toilet programme for Spina Bifida children — much singing and clapping and children encouraged to check results frequently.
Conductors work in teams with one conductor responsible for leading each session.
Trainee conductors help move furniture and prepare the room for class activities.
Kindergarten children bathing their dolls
There is little time for free play — most toys are used in structured group activities.
‘Hands’ group with Spina Bifida children
This little girl is English, and the boy with his back to the camera is from Israel.
Learning to change position from lying
Changing position from sitting and standing
Standing practice
Walking practice
Topic work helps to motivate and stimulate the children to work hard.
Dressing up for a walk in the forest to find eggs
Taking the eggs home to make pancakes
Reading and writing lesson — formal but much enjoyed by the children.
Children have to manage with normal un-adapted furniture.
The older ‘Motor Impaired’ group at Mabel Prichard School.
Another attempt at some of the captions:
Children have to manage with normal un-adapted furniture.
Reading and writing lesson — formal but much enjoyed by the children.
Learning to change position from lying
‘Hands’ group with Spina Bifida children
Learning to fix with one hand while moving the other