

Tony Bowran Painted Pictures?
Barney Edwards Aquatic Exposure Kevin Dutton The Face of Comedy Calcutta, City of Love
contents
NEWS
NICK COLE
Nick's stunning selection of fashion photographs, taken while on location in Miami, certainly enforce his feeling that Miami is the place to be as a fashion photographer.
MY LITHUANIA
In a Soviet Union where getting a film developed is not a simple matter Aleksandras Macijauskas has still managed to document the people, and lifestyle, of his native Lithuania.
PHOTO MONTAGES
Veronica Sive's interest in photography began at university when a friend suggested she ‘look carefully through the lens  ’.
Now, having developed her own photo-montage technique is winning fame both in her native Australia and elsewhere.
SERIOUS COMEDY
Kevin Dutton was unsure of the reaction he would get to his first unconventional portrait of a British comedian, he certainly didn't expect to find others demanding the same treatment.
ADVERTISING IN ACRYLIC GEL
Despite a busy schedule as an advertising photographer, Tony Bowran makes time for his own personal work as he feels strongly about his development as a photographer.
This fascinating series of ‘painted pictures’ may form the basis of a future campaign.
BARNEY EDWARDS
Most people would think that an accomplished director of commercials wouldn't need to sit on the bottom of the ocean taking pictures of some of the World's most dangerous creatures.
Even so, Barney Edwards heads off every year to add to his recently exhibited project — Aquatic Exposure.
CHRISTOPHER MORRIS
American war photographer Chris Morris recently took a rare break to attend the second festival of photojournalism in Perpignan where he spoke to Ted Welch about his images and his time in Iraq.
SUE GRAYSON FORD
Having taken up her post as director of the Photographer's Gallery, Sue Grayson Ford fills us in on her plans for the  gallery's future.
CALCUTTA — CITY OF LOVE
Calcutta must be the worst place to live.
Millions of people living on the streets.
Congestion.
Pollution.
Yet through it all a strong sense of caring pervades and a feeling of friendship which is not easy to find in the Western World.
Helene Rogers has documented life there in her latest book — proceeds from which go back to Calcutta to purchase medicine.
SEE HERE
Photography's comprehensive guide to what's on in the galleries.
NEWS
Ilford Launch XP2 In Roll and Miniature Film
Ilford XP2 film, designed to replace XP1-440, is now available in 120 roll film, 35mm cassettes and cut lengths.
Ilford XP2 is a 400 ISO chromogenic black and white film and, as such, is unique in being designed for processing in C41 colour chemistry.
Other key features of the emulsion are its increased sharpness and a curve shape which is matched to that of Ilford Multigrade printing paper.
This gives users high levels of enlargement without loss of detail; consistent, convenient and widely available processing and easier printing, with less need for dodging or burning-in.
Having a curve shape matched to that of Multigrade should also establish XP2 as a universal copy film.
With Ilford XP2, the professional user is offered a high speed film which will benefit from the tight quality control of negative processing available through a professionally monitored C41 process.
The film can also be processed through a mini-lab with the option of proof prints on colour paper.
Soft Picture Filer
The Phototrack range of computer software is invaluable to agencies, freelance photographers or anyone who has to organise the storage and management of photographs or transparencies.
Originating in the U.S.A. Phototrack is now available in the U.K. 
Wide Angle Improvements
First shown at Photokina in October 1990, and well received by professional photographers specialising in architectural and monumental photography, the Corfield WA67 is now available in a revised version incorporating a number of improved facilities suggested by users.
Most important is its acceptance of the new Mamiya RB67 PRO SD Polaroid film pack holder.
It will also take the former Model 3 but in this case a P adapter is required in place of the rotating back.
A second bubble level is now fitted for use with horizontal shift and the viewfinder fitted with a rotating front element for upright and horizontal formats.
All cameras sold prior to these improvements will be brought up to the new specifications entirely free of charge.
This involves fitting a new main body and viewfinder.
For further information on either the camera or the upgrade contact: K. G. Corfield Ltd. 6 John Street, London, WC1N 2ES.
Photomicrography Competition
Polaroid has recently announced details of the tenth annual International Instant Photomicrography Competition, designed to recognise the efforts of thousands of people who create images with light and electron microscopes.
The 1991 competition introduces a number of changes to the contest.
For the first time, Polaroid will recognise student entries with a special category.
Also, the traditional electron micrography category has been divided to provide separate judging for life science and materials science subjects.
Closing date for entries is 31st August 1991.
There are five categories in total and prizes of $1,000, $500 and $250 prizes will be awarded to first, second and third places respectively in each category.
Two $50 prizes may be awarded for  honourable mentions in each category.
In addition the ‘Best Micrograph’ selected from all of the winners will win a further $2,500 prize.
Entry forms can be obtained by writing to Pat Wallace, Polaroid International Instant Photomicrography Competition, Polaroid UK Ltd, Ashley Road, St. Albans, Hertfordshire, AL1 5PR.
Canon News
The Guardian Newspaper has won the Canon Best use of Photography category in the Newspaper Focus Awards 1991.
The awards, which have been designed specifically to commend excellence within newspaper publishing, were organised by Newspaper Focus magazine.
Chris Elworty, Marketing Development manager for Canon said about the award, ‘It was a unanimous decision to commend the Guardian for both its use of original material and unusual treatment of pictures in the page.’
The shot that caught the judges eye was the front cover shot of Michael Heseltine by Nigel Parry of Katz Pictures.
New Fabric Backgrounds
Colorama Photodisplay have extended their range of backgrounds by adding three new fabric materials to their product range.
Two of the new ranges, Colorich and Colorblend, each have six subtle colour/pattern options and are available in an extra wide 16 × 20 feet as well as 10 × 20 feet.
The extra width available will be a boon to photographers looking for a rich textured background for full sized studio work.
Colorich is a high quality pure cotton fabric with six colour themes of light brown, brown with a ‘shafts of light effect’, grey/white, purple, mid blue and a multicolour grey/blue/brown design.
The different textural quality of the Colorblend range results  from its cotton/polyester mix and is available in a mid and light grey, mid blue, dusty pink, brown and a multi-colour pink/blue/yellow/white option.
Both sets of backgrounds are hand painted to achieve subtle and distinctive designs.
The third range is called Colorplush and is a double sided  velour .
One side has a similar effect to deep black crushed velvet but with a slight sheen, the reverse has a rough pile effect painted in a choice of brown, blue or grey.
Its 8 × 12 ft format is suitable for both portrait and general work.
Two AF Lenses for Kyocera from Sigma
Sigma have produced two auto-focus lenses for use with Yashica 200AF and 230AF SLRs.
The compact and lightweight lenses offer an alternative to Kyocera's own.
The 28–70mm f3.5–4.5 lens makes a versatile standard zoom covering wide angle to telephoto.
It comes with a matched lens hood, pouch case and three year U.K. guarantee, for just £129.95.
The 70–210mm f4–5.6 tele zoom lens is possibly the most popular focal length today.
It shares the same high optical performance as the standard zoom.
The price of just £129.95 makes it extremely attractive.
NICK COLE
Miami is certainly a vice for Nick Cole.
He spent several weeks out there last winter shooting fashion for various clients, enjoying the art deco architecture, the big cars and the WORK.
Nick has established a system of working out there which seems to be paying off.
‘You can live quite cheaply in Miami, so once you're out there on one job, you can contact other UK clients and get them to send the gear over and keep you busy for a few weeks.
They don't have your air fares to consider, so it's an attractive proposition for them.
Winter is the time everyone wants their summer collections shooting; Miami is an exciting location and the light is great.’
Nick's recent spell over there included a 40 page supplement for More magazine.
‘This is the ideal type of assignment for me.
More often than not, clients want everything on EPR, clean lighting and every stitch showing.
I like to do tests in my style which is quite different, I particularly like using black and white and creating more interesting pictures.
The More shoot let me do just that.
We did it all in black and white in a very funky sixties style; lots of wigs, American cars and that amazing Ocean Drive background of art deco buildings.’
A Norman flash unit and Polaroid's PolaGraph HC film are a big part of Nick's black and white technique.
‘I assisted some great fashion photographers before going out on my own; Clive Arrowsmith, Roger Charity, and several others, including Parks, freelance.
Roger was very keen on PolaPan and PolaGraph, and I learned a lot about lighting black and white from him.
I like to keep the background dark, and just bring in elements of sky and buildings and use the Norman to highlight the model.’
What is it about PolaGraph that sets it apart from all the other black and white films?
‘It's an amazing film.
There isn't anything else that produces the same feel.
The grain and the tonal range help create the kind of black and white images I like best.
There is a lot of satisfaction in achieving the clean, EPR look, but I really enjoy working in the dramatic, gritty PolaGraph style, like this set of swimwear shots I did for Ms London for example.’
For the uninitiated, PolaGraph HC is the faster of two 35mm instant black and white reversal films, the other is PolaPan CT.
Both are instant daylight process, via a motorised or manual processor, which provides you with the finished image on site.
Like many other regular users, Nick prefers to hand over a print to clients rather than a slide.
‘After processing I mount the slides in glass to keep them safe, because they are more delicate than conventional slides.
For reproduction I get prints made.
This is another opportunity to be creative with this film too.
I use Danny Pope at Matchless Prints, he's a whizz with PolaPan on Cibachrome.
You need someone to discuss your work when it comes to printing, and Danny will suggest which frames to print and how he can bring out certain aspects of an image.’
Nick found Miami, and America in general, to be a great place to work, ‘Models, agencies and people in general have a good attitude over there ’, he told us.
‘The model agencies are very business minded.
If you want to contact someone you get their home phone number as well as the office, and you can call any time.
The models too have a better attitude.
They don't turn their nose up at a job for a lesser mag if their last assignment was for Elle or something.’
So when are you moving over there?
‘Well Miami is only any good in the winter months.
It's too hot and humid during the summer, and all the labs close down after May, although it would be nice to have two apartments, one here and one there in the winter.
What I would really like to do next is some really good editorial work in Milan.’
From Miami to Milan.
Isn't there enough work around in the UK?
‘Well fashion is still faring better than advertising in the current page squeeze, but there are now less editorial pages to correspond with the fewer advertising pages being sold in magazines’.
He explained.
‘Also, a lot of the big names are getting less advertising work, and they are more prepared now to do editorial, which does mean more competition’.
As they say, when the going gets tough, the tough gets going.
In Nick Cole's case he's going to Miami, Milan and anywhere else the good work is.
He's probably also going to do very well when he gets there.
Peter Lester 
MY LITHUANIA
In a Soviet Union where getting a film developed is not a simple matter, photography cannot be the action of a consumer — of holiday, sports event or sight-seeing tour — but has to be, at the very least, a technical hobby; at the best, an art form
Lithuanian photographer Aleksandras Macijauskas would admit to creating art if pressed, although he might express surprise at the impact his photography has had through exhibitions in Europe and America as well as in the former ‘eastern block’.
In a new collection of his photographs — My Lithuania — from publishers Thames and Hudson (£24.00), he certainly admits to literary pretensions as a young man and his photographs can be seen as an attempt to capture the lives of fellow Lithuanians in the detail which only words can usually portray.
His Lithuania is personified by the characters in these photographs and is the myriad expressions of his fellow countrymen and women.
This is somewhat in contrast to the photographs of former collaborator George Sutkus which provide the unpopulated settings, the places which the onlooker can choose to inhabit.
For Aleksandras Macijauskas, photography began as a profession when Sutkus persuaded him to join the Lithuanian Photographic Society based in the capital Vilnius.
Macijauskas himself is from the second city and former capital, Kaunas which is where he worked with the local branch of the society, won some competitions and became a newspaper reporter.
The published collection is edited by Daniela Mrazkova and Vladimir Remes, two of the editors of the Czechoslovakian magazine Photografie which published Macijauskas' work early on.
My Lithuania is four studies: Village Markets and Veterinary hospital have previously been exhibitions in Aries (1975) and New York (1979).
Parades and Summer complete the collection.
Village Markets
Macijauskas undertook a planned tour of villages in 1968 and found a subject close to his heart.
For Macijauskas the village market is the congregation point for his Lithuanians together with their children, animals, possessions and vices; working, playing, buying and selling, bargaining, haggling and conspiring; curious, irritated and sympathetic.
Today little has changed.
He observes the cows, goats and ducks, the horses with all their paraphernalia and pigs brought to market in the boots of private cars.
Macijauskas, like many other children from the war generation, stayed on his grandparents' farm and came to respect the animals and their contribution as workers and food to what is an essentially rural society.
There's none of the sentimentality associated with pets in this country.
These are values with which any rural community would empathise.
One third of Lithuania is covered by forest, an important ecology and animal population.
It's also a source of food and sport for Lithuanians who ride and ski in their forests and hunt game and prepare it for the table.
Veterinary Hospital
Animals feature very strongly too in the Veterinary Hospital where care for the creatures is buried by the unnatural positions of the creatures as they are manhandled by humans in white coats who plainly find it difficult to cope.
The strain and the relief shows in the faces of men and animals.
Summer
Summer is Summer at the beach.
Lithuanians cherish their Baltic coastline — in 1988 they joined hands with Latvians and Estonians to form a human chain along its full length to protest against pollution.
In these pictures, we see the holidaymakers and what holidaymakers do, not the deserted sands of Nergina nor the animal wildlife of the coastal habitat.
Macijauskas is disturbed by the beach photographer — few Soviet citizens have their own cameras — who works all day, lining up semi-naked families beside ridiculous props for the family album — a theatre of the absurd.
The subjects can look a little ridiculous to us too, the old-fashioned costumes, the strange practice of sunbathing standing up!
But the splashing, playing, picnicking fun of the beach is also apparent in these sometimes glowing photographs.
Parades
The Lithuanians readily get together for music, singing and more recently again for political statement.
Brass instruments mix with flags and uniforms but Macijauskas reveals that his pictures of marchers forming ranks before and breaking up into chatting groups after the parade, are just as important as those of the parade itself.
Tiny Lithuania — under 3 million people — has certainly arrived centre stage in world affairs in recent months.
The nationalist struggle is as much about a culture and its language as about geographical borders.
Macijauskas' photographs tell us that a country is its people.
I'll leave you with a quote from Justinas Marcinkevicius — People's Poet of the Lithuanian SSR — introducing Sutkus' collection Daina Lietuvai:
‘Lithuania is a land of life, a land of work and recreation, a land of our love and pain.
Call out to this land, Lithuania.’
Anna Bartasiena
An exhibition of My Lithuania photographs will be on show at the Portfolio Gallery, 345 Portobello Road W10 (081-969-0453).
This selection of photographs reveals Aleksandras  Macijauskas as a truly remarkable artist and observer of life, accompanied by his own  trenchant , graphic, sometimes whimsical commentaries (11 July–3 August).
Tues–Thurs 11.00, Fri–Sat 09.30–17.30, Free  
PHOTO MONTAGES
Veronica Sive's interest in photography began at university, 10 years ago when a friend suggested she ‘look carefully through the lens, it's a new world out there’.
When Veronica Sive first became interested in photography through a friend's guidance, she became aware of the basic elements of the new medium.
She eventually transferred to the Tisch School of Arts, New York University, graduating in Fine Arts with a film major.
At the same time she began working as a commercial Photographer, prior to finding her own photographic technique, that of the ‘photo-graphic montage’.
Today she is involved in both the film and photographic industries, as well as exploring the world, combining images into her own reality for advertising and design agencies and art collectors alike.
‘From sunrise to sunset, midnight to midday — signs, signals, subways, skyscrapers, streets and alleyways await…close visual exploration.
The vertical and horizontal angles, the linear lines, the juxtaposed bands — the common images; wheels, walls and wires — once captured on film ultimately unite into a distinct illusion — an illusion  designed in the imagination — created through the reality of photography.
‘Instead of using my camera to simply record reality, I use it to improve reality.
I isolate, eliminate or exaggerate parts of a scene and create my own version of the world.
The real challenge of this technique is to deceive the human eye.
‘A combination of reality, through photography and my own reality through the cutting edge of the scissors’.
The earliest sports images of the 1984 Summer Los Angeles Olympic Games lead on to graphic architectural landscapes, floral illusions, environmental impressions and memories of exotic travel destinations combined to express the moment, sensation and experience.’
With cameras in hand, numerous shooting hours pass, allowing the pieces to be gathered.
‘The images have to be just right, the right time of day, the right angle, the right perspective, the right illusion.
‘Sometimes I expose three hundred negatives for one single photographic montage prior to commencing the manipulation and duplication.
The connecting factors are in the design, in the colours, the forms and the lines — ultimately combined to create a single whole.’
Each city, town or village lends itself to a collage in  some odd way .
The possibilities are endless.
‘I always formulate a clear image in the mind prior to commencing the photography.
Without the concept clearly planned the collage process never begins.’
As each image is essentially composed through the lens, it is adjusted to the ‘final size’ by varying the focal lengths in the shooting stage.
The proportions alter according to the final placement within the montage.
After ordering and selecting the required mini-lab prints, each photograph is cut individually.
Patience, a steady hand, precision and accuracy, slowly like a puzzle, the image perceived in the mind, conceived through the camera, begins to form upon the cardboard, as each photograph is pasted down.
Perspective conjoined — obscure dimensions amalgamated, over forty hours later the ‘collage’ or is it a ‘montage’, becomes a single unit.
SERIOUS COMEDY
Last summer, something strange was emerging from a north London darkroom.
Photography meets Kev Dutton, who has produced a series of unconventional portraits of British comedians.
Oddly enough, all the shots were done when Kevin was still an assistant.
‘I'd got into the situation where I had a darkroom at home, the use of a studio in the West End and I was starting to suffer from severe guilt for not making full use of all these resources at my disposal.
I thought I'd write to a few comedians to see if I could get them to sit for a portrait, to get a few shots together for my portfolio, and then, suddenly, this snowball seemed to start rolling…
I was being given lists of telephone numbers, people were coming up to me in the Comedy Store and saying, ‘Eh, are you the bloke who's doing these odd photos.
Can you do one of me?’, until I'd completed twenty five or so in the space of about two months.
The project just seemed to pick up its own momentum.
‘Technically, the shots are much simpler than you'd think.
The portraits were originally shot in the studio on a 5 × 4 camera with a standard lens and using Polaroid 55 film.
The lighting was kept as simple as possible, so I used either flash — a single soft box overhead — or tungsten, using a 2K spot — again, overhead, and a 500w fresnel for the background.
I then made copies of the negatives and went into the darkroom, using pens, brushes, sandpaper, whatever came to hand, in fact to distort the images before finally re-copying to get higher contrast prints, which I finished  off with selenium toner.
‘In terms of ideas, I had been trying to produce pictures at that time which had a very flat, two-dimensional feel to them, being torn between what I think are two different ends of photography, but which both have that quality.
On one hand, you have the ultimate spartan aesthetic for portraits: the passport photo — cold, detached, flatly lit etc — and on the other hand, there are heavily manipulated images in which the person who's producing them is far more physically involved.
I thought, if I could go for a hybrid of these two, and get comedians to come in and sit with deadpan expressions, I might have something interesting on my hands.
‘I also liked the idea of producing images of people in the public eye which don't adhere to the unwritten rule of portraiture — that you've got to make some kind of personal comment about the sitter, capture their essence, if you like — which, at twenty four, I didn't feel particularly qualified to do.
How can you, when you've only met them five minutes ago?
In that sense, the shots are more about what's going on in my head than in theirs.’
ADVERTISING IN ACRYLIC GEL
The frantic lifestyle of an advertising photographer leaves little time for personal work.
Tony Bowran feels very strongly about his constant development as a photographer and ensures that time is taken to work on his own projects.
It was two or three days earlier that I had made my appointment, and as luck so often has it, the due day arrived to what can only be described as ‘one of those days’.
The inclement nature of the British weather makes it either easier to stay put, or alternatively, if absolutely necessary, don galoshes, raincoat and ‘souwester’.
I had surfaced somewhat ill-equipped from the Piccadilly Line dodging expanding umbrellas, and hoping that my destination was somewhere near at hand.
A helpful, somewhat overstated hotel doorman gave me instant directions, from which I found myself in the shadow of Vine Street facing what seemed to be a series of rear entrances to a rather less than impressive warehouse.
One set of doors led through to where a sign marked ‘The Studio’ took me down a flight of stairs to the basement beneath, the cosiness and warmth of which was a welcomed contrast to the watery excesses above.
Like all professional photographers working for the city's major advertising agencies, Tony Bowran's diary offers few spaces for those not wholly involved with the business of photography.
His assistant Julian immediately offers me coffee, and explains in apologetic tones that Tony has been called out —‘but you're down for 11.30’— and that he's expecting him back any moment.
The coffee duly arrives, and Julian settles back to make all the necessary phone calls for the shoot the following day.
‘David, listen I'm sorry I'm late, one of those things that just had to be done; you know I've got a casting at 1.30 — where would you like to start?’
Tony Bowran stands at a full six feet.
His expressions range from that of a contented Cheshire Cat, to a somewhat frenetic frown.
His manner is both warm and friendly, with not a hint of the pretentiousness of some of his better known colleagues.
We begin to leaf through two large black plan chests containing examples of numerous advertising campaigns that he has been involved in over the years.
But how did it all begin?
‘I left college in ‘76, and subsequently hustled around for about four months working for various people, before I heard of a second assistant's job coming up with David Thorpe.
It was a very good environment, working on the best and most creative advertising work that was being done in the mid ‘70's.
Although David Thorpe was in essence a still-life photographer, I remember going on location in Germany to do a car campaign, and we also used to do many portraits — there was a tremendous variety in what we were doing.’
Bowran worked with Thorpe for a year, but would probably have stayed longer had Thorpe not moved into the direction of T.V. commercials.
As Bowran says, ‘my job effectively ceased!’
This however proved to be the catalyst that Bowran needed to set up on his own.
At first, the only way was to rent studio space on a percentage basis with the services of a secretary, which he did for eighteen months or so.
‘Then I was lucky enough to find this place, and at the same time to find a very good agent who managed to get me plenty of work.’
That was in 1980, and over the last eleven years Tony Bowran's studio has produced a continuous output of consistently high quality creative photography for many a major advertising campaign.
There is no doubt that Tony Bowran makes a good living working as he does in the field of the ‘high profile’ advertising market — as he says, ‘agencies are my clients, my bread and butter.’
However, he dislikes being labelled a ‘commercial’ photographer.
‘I'm just a photographer — I hate pigeonholes.’
But it is this commercial work that he sees as fulfilling a far more important function — it is the means by which he is able to fund his own personal projects.
Bowran feels very strongly about his constant development as a photographer.
‘Unless you keep on trying to develop your own personal work, your own personal style, trying to find out where your main sympathies lie and what subjects you really like to work with, you end up purely being a commercial photographer shooting pretty much the same thing year in year out.
You use the same approach, have the same views on lighting, materials etc.
By virtue of not developing, you stand still and eventually become an anachronism.’
This Tony Bowran clearly has no intention of being, as he is well aware that art directors are constantly on the look out for new styles and new approaches to make their clients' products visually jump off the page.
His latest personal explorative project began a couple of years ago.
‘I had for some time been interested in the work of the 17th century Dutch and Spanish still-life school of painting.
One day I happened to come across the work of the Italian still-life painter Giorgio Morandi.
The way he collected basic objects around his studio and created the most wonderful classic, clean almost ‘empty’ still-lifes was inspirational to me.’
Bowran set about trying to create the sense and style of Morandi's painting through his photography.
‘Firstly I set up a still-life — say a bottle, vase and fruit — classic objects.
I then produce a 5 by 4 or a 10 by 8 colour transparency and set it up on a light table.
Viewing through the camera, I put on the brush strokes with artist's acrylic gel which has the benefit of being water based, so allowing changes to be easily made where necessary.
I then reshoot this image either on B&W or colour film, depending on my final intentions.
Prints are then made from the subsequent negatives, and in the case of the B&W I may either tint or tone the final print.’
The finished results are without doubt quite astounding.
In parallel to what can only be described as ‘photo-painting’, Bowran has been developing a means of recreating the effect of a charcoal drawing with a printer colleague.
‘We use long exposures and high temperatures to create print reticulation.’
The effects that they have created thus far are similarly impressive.
With such creative flair and technical expertise, the art of the Billboard Poster and the Advertising Hoarding look set for an innovative and fresh look in the ‘90's.
Perhaps it is not so surprising, since Tony Bowran learnt his craft from the practitioners of the finest photographic advertising images of the ‘70's, and like the painters of previous years that he so admires and draws great inspiration from, they too had apprentices who eventually became masters in their own time.
David Gallant 
BARNEY EDWARDS
Barney Edwards is something of an enigma.
A highly successful — not to mention wealthy — commercial director who, every Christmas takes unpaid leave for a month to go diving, risking life and limb to photograph some of the world's most dangerous aquatic creatures.
Last winter, he filmed, at a range too close for most people's comfort, the deadliest of them all, man-eating sharks.
His breathtaking, black and white exhibition of sharks, sealions and pelicans has recently been shown at the Fouts and Fouler Gallery in London, the pictures of which he is understandably most proud.
‘I'm pleased with the commercials I've made, but I consider my photographs to be the medium through which I can express myself,’ he says.
‘That's why I prefer to work in black and white; the eye sees in colour, so with mono film it takes craft and ability to construct a picture to which people can relate.
I'm also a frustrated charcoal painter, so that's got something to do with it too.
Plus the fact that it's a challenge — if you shoot a bad composition in colour, more often than not you can get away with it.
Not so black and white.’
Talking to Barney, gives the impression that somewhere underneath that Bohemian exterior lurks a frustrated artist, a brief glance at his history confirms the view.
Although he won a place at art college after leaving school, it soon became apparent that he couldn't draw.
‘They'd begun to despair of me, so one of the lecturers’ he laughs, ‘bunged a camera in my hand and suggested I go out and take some photos instead.
I fell in love with the camera immediately.’
He then spent 18 years taking still shots for posters until Saatchi and Saatchi's asked him to direct a small commercial.
‘I did well,’ he remembers.
‘The offers of more ads started to pour in, but I never gave up stills.’
Once he was wealthy enough, he began taking time out each winter to fulfil personal projects, ‘It's my way of putting something of myself into my work.
Rolling my sleeves up and getting my hands dirty it's what life is all about.
On a commercial shoot, I've got cameramen who do that, deep in the ocean it's just me.’
Although he's travelled all over the world taking stills, Mexico and the Bahamas last year, Thailand and Kampuchea before that, of all the beautiful places he's visited and the stunning scenery he's witnessed, his favourite place is the bottom of the sea.
‘I feel at one with my surroundings there, it's hard to explain, you experience a quasi-religious experience down there.’
He admits.
Religion must certainly have been at the forefront of his mind when, shooting the sharks, he twice looked death directly in the face.
‘I'd got in amongst the sharks, filming them in a feeding frenzy.’
He recalls.
‘They were moving really fast and churning up the sand.
Suddenly out of the murky haze, I saw one charging at me.
That creature must have been travelling at 60 miles per hour.
It swam straight into my chest and bowled me over, thank God it swam on but the adrenalin was flowing so all I could think about was what sort of picture I'd got.
The other hairy moment was when one of them tried to eat my camera.
I was furious and punched it, its skin was surprisingly rough and split my hand open.’
But his philosophy that when your ‘time's up your time's up’ saw him through and he's back to tell the tale, though sadly he chose not to include the pictures he took at that time.
‘They were incredible shots, powerful and practical images all of them, but I wanted beautiful photographs so anything nonethereal stayed out.’
Working with creatures of such speed it was important that he used exactly the right type of camera.
‘I shot all the stills on a Nikonos, the simplest bog-standard under-water equipment and no flash.
This meant I had to get in close.
Like Robert Capper said: ‘If you're not getting the pictures you're not close enough.’
With the viewfinder on the camera I had to set the distance and hope when I was shooting, that the shark was at that range.
I had four cameras lying around me on the seabed, all set at different distances.’
Generally, however, the type of camera figures little in Mr Edwards' way of things.
As far as Barney's concerned, it's not what you take a shot with but how you take it.
‘I use the most simple or most complex equipment available — frankly, I think cameras are boring — they're like a gun, if it shoots O.K. it doesn't matter what it is as long as it can do its job.
I fall out with a lot of photographers over this.
I think the equipment gets in the way of creativity — photography is an art not a craft, you should MAKE pictures not just take them.’
This train of thought could go  some way to explaining why he is one of the top commercial directors in Britain, the man responsible for such successful ad campaigns as Guinness, Nurofen, British Airways and Gallo Wine, who, reputedly, can earn as much as 100,000 per commercial.
In the modern material age it is hard to comprehend someone regularly and readily giving up such a vast sum to pursue expensive, unpaid projects, but for Barney it's important.
‘One of the reasons I do it,’ he explains ‘is because my wife and I can spend time alone together away from the family, feel young again (they're both in their early 40's), and have adventures.’
Unashamedly Boy's Own stuff, but it also goes deeper than that: ‘I don't want to die leaving a bunch of commercial show-reels as my legacy.
I want to be remembered for my skill as a stills photographer.
I know lots of people can't understand that, one of which is my accountant, but I feel I must put something back, it's the only way I can feel comfortable about all the money I've made.’
Emma Norma 
CHRISTOPHER MORRIS
Chris Morris, an American photographer and member of the Black Star agency was in the Gulf during the war.
He recently took a rare break to attend the second festival of photojournalism in Perpignan where he spoke to Ted Welch about his time in Iraq.
‘…in Iraq I was manipulated heavily…to the point of them actually grabbing my hand, moving the way I was pointing the camera…
The US Embassy in Iraq treated me worse than the Iraqis .’
TW.
Is war photography worth the risk?
CM.
I don't think anything is worth the risk of losing your life or losing a limb.
Personally I've tried to keep that in perspective.
TW.
Don McCullin says that when he was young he thought it exciting and glamorous to risk his life.
CM.
I think there is a lot of immaturity in it and selfishness, putting yourself at great risk for a photograph, selfish in the sense of your family; I'm not so much worried about me as about the effect it will have on my parents, my children or my wife.
I never really consciously set out to do war photography; I set out to do political photography, international politics and a lot of that revolves around conflict.
You can get mugged, you can fall off a building, as happened recently in New York when a photographer was killed photographing pigeons.
So there's risk just in daily life.
TW.
So there is no need to increase it?
CM.
But…
Yeah, sometimes I question myself why am I increasing the odds.
TW.
There is a certain kudos in it, like the attitude towards Patrick Chauvel (who has been wounded several times covering wars), and there's Capa's: ‘If your photos aren't good enough you're not close enough.’
If you are very close and the danger shows in your photos they're more likely to be used.
CM.
And you're more likely to be accepted by your peers.
There is a lot of internal pressure in the photo community, this if you're not close enough…
TW.
It's still very macho, not so many women yet?
CM.
There's some women that cover conflict, but it's still a male-dominated business.
But I think some of the best photographers are women.
I really look up to people like Mary Ellen Mark.
TW.
You referred to the category of political photography.
CM.
Being an American photographer the avenues I have are basically the news magazines.
I now work for Time magazine, they cover world politics and I cover the international end for them.
I've only done one domestic story in 3 years; all my work has been international, political.
TW.
Do you find it's frustrating?
Do some of the pictures which you think are crucial to understanding get rejected?
CM.
Yes, quite so.
Yeah, really it's a frustrating end of it, but working for Time gives me the opportunity to be in these countries and to do a good photoreportage on the country, even though it's very rarely published.
Time will usually use one photograph.
I just spent a week in Iraq and they used one photo with no other stories playing.
TW.
So do you hope to have books published?
CM.
I don't know, basically I've been working so hard and pushing so hard I haven't really slowed down to even think about what I'm doing with my work.
This is the first time I've ever had a show and if you look at my show they're basically a lot of single images.
The thing is right now I'm known for this hard, aggressive political coverage and they just keep sending me; it's become almost non-stop.
I haven't really had a vacation, this is the first time I've taken some time off and I barely got here; just because of the pace of the world, especially last year.
I thought this year was going to be a slow year but it hasn't been, it just keeps going.
Staying on the edge of being a good photographer you felt committed to trying to be there.
Having the support of a magazine willing to send you, then you go and never really question the danger of it.
TW.
There is also the Vietnam syndrome; the British authorities kept most photographers out of the Falklands.
Don McCullin wasn't allowed to go, which he thinks was because of the kind of images that he would have produced.
CM.
If you are a good journalist you're already there; you should be able to anticipate ahead that there might be an invasion on.
Patrick Chauvel and I could see things were about to happen in Panama, Noriega had declared war on America, but it was Xmas and only a few of us went there.
So for all these journalists to cry foul because they're not being given a plane and they're not being allowed to fly in — I think that's just a bunch of bullshit.
It's like why wasn't there anyone in Kuwait?
One reason was that the Kuwaitis wouldn't give anyone a visa, except female print journalists.
That's also a problem; how do you get into the country?
When I went into Panama I needed a visa, I went in without a visa.
David Turnley just flew into Iraq without a visa, which took balls.
TW.
So an important thing is being aware, keeping up with the news?
CM.
Definitely, CNN is my basic news source, but I have problems with that.
At the time of Tiananmen Square Mike Chinoy was reporting civil war, which was false.
They're under a lot of pressure because they have to be on air 24 hours.
I see a lot of inaccuracies in CNN, a lot.
They don't have time to verify stuff, a lot of the time they just put it out and it turns out to be false.
TW.
Which is pretty frightening in a way because you've got Bush watching CNN…
CM.
Oh, yes, they're very influential; but they make a lot of mistakes and they don't come back and correct them later.
CBS or the BBC might say we made a mistake, but CNN never say we made a mistake, they just keep cranking it out.
But I'm not blaming the journalists, they're under a lot of pressure; the CBS or the BBC correspondent has to do the one report for the day.
At CNN every hour they want a live piece, say something different, so they're under a lot of pressure.
But that's what I use, CNN, I read the New York Times and I listen to the BBC, even in America, for a different perspective.
I also watch Univision, a Latin American news service in New York and they give a completely different perspective on world news.
TW.
You said that you've become identified, almost trapped as a hard news or political photographer.
Are there any other things you would like to do?
CM.
Yeah, actually I really like fashion photography; not typical fashion, but there's a certain thing I know personally I'd like to do in fashion photography.
I don't know if anybody would ever give me work or if I'd find time to do it.
Surprisingly I'm very interested in that; I look at fashion magazines more than I look at news magazines.
I'm usually so disgusted with it.
I prefer to look at a nice fashion magazine, French Vogue or Italian Vogue.
TW.
Why are you so disgusted with it?
CM.
Being a photographer I understand how photographers can manipulate a situation; I understand the game.
It's like a photo-op, a big spread will appear and everybody says he's such a great photographer, when there's another ten photographers there making the same images.
I'm a bit turned off by some of the things I see.
As a photographer you know the tricks, the exposures, the way to use light.
I see some of these big photo-ops, the Berlin Wall, revolution in Prague — I didn't think would come out, but I'll talk about it — I just see that it's a manipulation of the press; photographers all know to stay in one spot so we're not in each other 's shot.
What happened in Panama was that when the other 50 photographers showed up the Americans went on some mock patrols in some neighbourhoods where there was nothing; it was basically a photo-op for the press.
There were three soldiers going house-to-house with fifteen photographers and a couple of TV crews; it was what we call a ‘dog and pony show’.
TW.
If you're feeling cynical and disenchanted with it, how do you plan to go on?
CM.
You try to be honest with yourself.
I try to edit more in camera now.
I don't want pictures to be used that I'd be ashamed of now.
A lot of the time you just shoot because you're caught up in something then you see it published and you're a bit embarrassed because in your heart you know what it was.
So I'm a bit more conscious now of what I photograph and how I photograph.
When I was in Liberia I was appalled at the way the French contrived and set things up.
They don't let reality happen, they're in too much of a hurry.
They want to get in, shoot it and get the film out, so there is this moving the soldiers around.
I was appalled by what I saw.
There was a young American photographer with me and I saw him get caught up in it and I pulled him aside and said ‘Don't even take it because that's the picture that Newsweek is going to publish.
Guys pointing guns, it's a stupid picture but that's what they're going to publish so don't take it.’
He said ‘But it's happening.’
I said ‘Yes, but why is it happening?
You guys are setting it up.’
You have to be very careful with that; I think a lot of younger photographers aren't.
TW.
Is this sort of thing on the increase because the authorities are more aware of the need to control and manipulate the photographers, or to present them with carefully chosen opportunities and photographers are under increasing pressures?
CM.
Yeah, everything is photo-ops and it's weird to see photo-ops in a war.
The Americans tried to do it in Panama, what disgusts me is that these are the pictures that sold, the ones done when there was no more opposition.
To me it was like an unreality, like fashion photography.
Why weren't they off photographing the three hundred bodies that the Americans were digging up and dumping into a mass grave?
Why weren't any of these pictures published?
The casualties of the war?
It was: ‘Oh, let's make the Americans look good.’
I was just in Iraq and in Iraq I was manipulated heavily.
I've never been so controlled, to the point of them actually grabbing my hand, moving the way I was pointing the camera.
After I had fired the frame they would want to look through the camera and would actually retake it with his own finger, saying ‘It looks better like this.’
So I would have to warn Time, ‘Be careful, some of the images I didn't actually take, my minder's taking them.’
But you work around it.
The US Embassy in Iraq treated me worse than the Iraqis.
I tried to take pictures of demonstrations in front of the American Embassy and the Americans were pushing me around worse than the Iraqis.
They wanted to be in control.
Everybody wants to be in control.
That was actually Marcos' fault; he didn't try to control the media.
Ted Coppel (a US TV reporter) was the one to cause the election.
Coppel asked Marcos ‘Why don't you have an election, why are you afraid to have an election?’
Marcos said ‘I'm not afraid to have an election.
I'll have an election.’
So he had no election and he was out of there.
In Chile Pinochet knew the power of photography; each one of us had a secret service guy.
If they saw you shooting Pinochet looking like a dictator they would stand in front of the camera.
At the funeral of one of his bodyguards after an assassination attempt Pinochet was crying.
I fired one frame and the secret service guy put his hand up.
He moved away and I popped another frame and he punched me —‘No, you don't take it.’
Pinochet understood the power of photography; he wasn't going to allow himself to become a Marcos.
TW.
So they're learning.
CM.
Oh yeah, quickly, quickly — the power of photography.
I was appalled at the British system; after the Poll Tax riot the government went around and confiscated photographers' films.
That is the most ludicrous thing I've ever heard.
At the beginning of the riot I went to take a picture of this one anarchist and he whacked me with a stick really hard.
Now I know why he whacked me, I would whack me too.
In London I would not let a photographer take my picture, because the Government confiscated all the TV footage.
They should send out their own photographers, let them risk their lives.
That just blew me away, and then to see the pictures published in the papers ‘Do you know this person?
Please call.’
That was morally wrong.
I'm glad I got whacked, I'm surprised the guy didn't beat the shit out of me, rightfully so.
What right do I have to take his picture if he feels he's in a state of revolution against his government and I'm going to cause him to be arrested.
They had their own police photographers out there, let them get their own pictures.
When I went to Liberia they freaked out, I was an American; what was I doing there?
When governments start using things — the United States Information Agency has all these publications and they get photos from the agencies, from El Salvador and Afghanistan — that's a problem.
You have to be careful how your pictures are used.
Soldier of Fortune was one of the few who published my pictures; I had a cover.
TW.
It's like being in Top Gun.
CM.
Yeah, the heroes of Panama, I didn't see any heroes, that's for sure.
TW.
Things are changing with the new technology.
CM.
They are definitely changing; both Chauvel and myself travel with video cameras.
Both of us have wives and when they can they come with us and they do video.
My wife is doing documentary work in video.
We use the Hi8 format, it's a very small tape.
Patrick had the first footage out of Panama of an attack at night, taken under great risk.
I was with him when we heard that the invasion might start.
He grabbed his wife's video camera and said ‘I'm going to the Cortel.’
During the day you don't go near there, I felt, no, way.
He went and he sold his footage to all three networks, NBC, ABC, CBS for $10,000 each.
I also filmed a firefight.
I would have liked to have shown the audience last night the footage that I did in Panama.
With the video you can really appreciate what we do, what it's really like, because you have the sound, you can almost smell it.
When I have shown it to people it even scares me; your heart really starts to beat, you see the intensity of the situation.
Whereas with still photographs — I was in this situation for maybe two hours and I shot maybe one or two rolls of film.
I couldn't see what to photograph, even when I got my slides back there was nothing there.
But the video, the sound…
When I sold CBS the video I kept apologising for the movement because it was so shaky.
But they said ‘No, no, no, we like that.’
TW.
That raises the question of what is good technique; sometimes what is normally seen as ‘bad’ technique can be good technique.
CM.
Chauvel's images aren't pretty, they aren't clean, they're not Nachtwey (who was also with the Black Star agency and is now in Magnum).
All the elements aren't there, they're a bit shaky, a bit jerky; that's what I like about them.
TW.
In fact, with his book of Spanish Civil War photographs, for the second edition he did not want them retouched; he wanted the scratches, etc, left in because there was that feeling about it.
CM.
Yeah, I like that; it's got a hardness about it.
TW.
Is there a story you would like to pursue in depth?
CM.
Yes, the Soviet Union.
It's difficult because I've worked around the world, in the Middle East, image-wise it's fascinating.
But you got into the Soviet Union and it's difficult at first for me to get emotionally connected to the story.
But now I've made two trips there and I'm anxious to go back because I feel I'm getting tapped in a little better, I'm getting emotionally connected.
TW.
And if you're emotionally connected to it, you also get intellectually connected to it; you want to learn more about it.
CM.
Yes, that's correct.
Somebody like Meiselas is like that, Gilles Peress; they don't work on a story unless they get emotionally connected to it — why bother?— to them.
They are not newshounds, they're more historians I guess.
TW.
You spoke of your preference for fashion earlier, it's as if fashion photography is more honest…
CM.
No, not…
TW. …because the artifice is more obvious.
CM.
Yes, exactly, I've spent time in Russia, this guy went and put a model in these situations.
It really excited me.
I'd like to do something more along those lines.
It's more like art photography, something good for my soul.
But I do like life, I do like reality; I just see a lot of manipulation of that in the photography business.
Ted Welch is a lecturer at Harrow College, Polytechnic of Central London.
‘George Bush, commander-in-chief of the greatest military campaign of modern times, walked into the White House office clutching a portable TV set.
He explained that he could not afford to miss a second of a briefing from Allied forces in the Gulf, General Norman Schwarzkopf.
And the station he chose to watch, rather than the giants who have dominated American TV for decades, was Cable Network News.’
Daily Mail, 19.1.1991 
SUE GRAYSON FORD, NEW DIRECTOR PHOTOGRAPHERS' GALLERY
On Sue Davies' retirement in April, Sue Grayson Ford took up her post as the new director of the Photographers' Gallery
The Photographers' Gallery, London, was the first gallery opened in the U.K. specifically dedicated to exhibiting photography.
Two decades later the gallery has become an international institution recognised throughout the photographic communities of the world.
It quite rightly earned this status through the determination, commitment and insight of its founder director Sue Davies.
In recognition to the part Sue Davies has played in the promotion of photography over the years, she was awarded an OBE in 1988.
On Sue Davies' retirement in April, Sue Grayson Ford took up her post as the new director of the The Photographers' Gallery.
She has a hard act to follow; it is never enviable to be the successor of one very powerful founder director be it in the gallery sector or in commerce.
But Sue Grayson Ford has an impressive and  commendable history and says she thrives on challenges.
Sue Grayson Ford comes from a broad visual art background; photography always being a part of her programming.
In 1970 she founded London's Serpentine Gallery in Kensington Gardens to show the works of young British artists.
She ran the gallery for 13 years, organising a number of photography shows during that time, one noticeably being the successfully staged Kertesz exhibition in 1978.
In the early 80's Sue Grayson Ford left London and became sculpture coordinator for the Liverpool International Garden Festival.
In 1985 she became the founder exhibitions director of Manchester's Cornerhouse Centre; photography being included in the programming of shows.
She went freelance in 1988 directing the Wakefield Centenary Festival.
When the Photographers' Gallery opened in 1971 at number 8 Great Newport Street, it had a staff of three and staged 10 exhibitions in its first year.
Twenty years on, it has acquired an additional building, number 5, has a staff of 23 and puts on 21 exhibitions each year in three exhibition spaces.
Many feel that The Photographers' Gallery has a somewhat lopsided view of contemporary photography and photographers and that it preaches to the already converted and them alone.
Is now the time for change?
I spoke to Sue Grayson Ford at the Photographers' Gallery.
She was understandably reluctant to talk of all changes, especially in the programming of exhibitions, ‘it is against my better judgement to put anything to print at this stage.
I have a lot of ideas to work through before I come out predicting the future.’
But one thing she is certain of is her aim to attract new audiences to the gallery, notably from those who are not yet photography lovers.
Sue Grayson Ford wants the Photographers' Gallery to be the busiest place in London in terms of excitement, ideas, artists, photographers and audiences.
A very healthy figure of 500,000 visitors currently pass through the gallery doors each year.
‘There is a danger in any organisation that has been going for twenty years of attracting a clique and closing the doors on others.
I'm anti clique and what I want to do is open every opportunity and every door, my hesitation in talking to you, is that I haven't figured out how to open all the doors.’
She feels it will not be too difficult initially attracting the general public.
(The problem will be in maintaining their interest)‘The easiest to undertake is the vision from outside the buildings.
The way in which we beckon to people to come in.’
The exterior of both buildings will have a face lift along with the reception area at No. 5.
The gallery has an ideal location on central London's Covent Garden.
This she intends to market and exploit to its fullest.
The area in which Sue Grayson Ford is going to be judged most critically will be on her programming of exhibitions.
This she expects and indeed wants.
But if she wants to attract new audiences this will not be achieved without a change of programming.
Of her program policy, she would not be precise.
‘Clearly as I am talking about broadening an audience, I need to talk about broadening the appeal of exhibitions.’
All aspects of the influence of photography throughout society will be examined, commerce and industry as much as artistic use of photography and of the divide in photography, be it real or not between the many genres of photography.
Sue Grayson Ford is naive of them.
‘Though I have shown photographs throughout my exhibition organising career, I took it as a matter of course and have shown them as I have any other art form and along side any other art form whether it is painting or sculpture.
I don't know who belongs to what clique and whom I'm offending by doing this or that.
I don't believe in any hard and fast rules when it comes to hanging the best work.
I would be horrified if we didn't work towards an understanding with most practitioners whether they are artists using photography or photographers documenting or doing other things.
I would hope to blow all boundaries and just show all the best work in all these fields.
But perhaps I'm going to be proved to be over innocent in thinking that is a viable approach.
It certainly is my approach.’
In her programming Sue Grayson Ford feels there is great potential and wants to encourage dialogue between practitioners of different art forms.
She thinks photography has been driven into an isolationist role: how right she is.
‘One really wants to look at integrating photography into the wider art world in order that one is not exclusive in any way.’
Photography is a universal media by nature, this fact assures that there is a multitude of people ready to discover and appreciate the art form of photography.
Sue Grayson Ford's aim is for a ‘broader constituency’.
With her track record, attitude and given right support she has the potential of seeing the reality of her aspirations bearing fruit.
Photography magazine wishes her every success in her new venture.
Rena Pearl  
CALCUTTA
CITY OF LOVE
Calcutta has to be about the worst place in the World to live.
Millions of people living on the streets, congestion, pollution yet through it all, caring and a friendship which are not easy to come by even in the richest parts of the Western World.
Nothing I have seen before can compare to Calcutta.
If I were a doctor I would have been happy to stay in Calcutta and work alongside British doctor, Jack Pregar, and his clinic in Middleton Row.
Jack treats in three clinics six hundred people, six days a week — relying totally on voluntary help, his only income being from the Calcutta Rescue Fund, a small UK based charity.
I have now visited the clinics twice and have come to know many of the volunteer workers from Australia, France, Holland and Britain as well as many of the patients living in the Calcutta slums.
Salina, a mother of three, suffering from leprosy developed hepatitis.
In order to save her life the doctors stopped the treatment for the leprosy.
Salina arrived at the clinic with a grossly swollen foot which had to be lanced on the spot.
There was no anaesthetic because they didn't have any.
Salina's husband is dead, she has three children whom she feeds mostly from the food she can glean from the rubbish tips, largely banana skins.
Another lady that I met was suffering from the elephant man's disease; her husband had recently died and she was expecting a baby.
Sadly she had the baby on the streets whilst only eight months pregnant.
The baby weighed less than one kilo, she took it to the clinic and a clinic worker helped her to a nearby hospital.
The hospital did not admit the child because they had already too many in the same condition.
Instead they gave her a letter saying that the baby was in perfect health.
Fortunately she returned to the clinic the following day and having no milk they showed her how to make a supplementary feed but it was too late and the baby died.
A volunteer worker took the dead baby and mother back to the hospital where the baby was immediately admitted and then pronounced dead in an effort to rectify the original mistake.
When I met the mother she was extremely depressed verging on suicidal and was given by the workers at the clinic a new sari to try and cheer her up.
Two days later I met the same lady and her sari had been stolen in the middle of the night.
Words cannot express the sadness of seeing a teenager who looks barely older than a young child suffering from severe malnutrition, but there are the wonderful moments such as a child who suffered tremendous burns after a candle fell and set fire to her night-dress; after months of careful dressing and cleaning her wounds have virtually healed — without the clinic the little girl would almost certainly have died.
There are times when as a photographer it is possible to show the truth, to show images which convey the reality of this world.
Out of the hundreds of pictures that my husband Bob Turner and I took, we decided to publish a book by ourselves of 130 images showing the life, culture and people of Calcutta.
Photography can help and all the profits from this book will be sent back to Calcutta to buy medicine for Jack and his workers.
A selection of the images I took to Australia in November and December appeared on the front of the Melbourne Age and on Good Morning Australia, a national TV news programme.
As a result we have received tremendous encouragement from the Australian people who have formed a new branch of the charity as a direct result of our photographs.
In addition to the book a selection of the images will be on view at the Barbican, Level 3 until 11 August and afterwards from 12 August to 2 September at the Thorndike Theatre, Leatherhead, Surrey.
Copies of the book may be obtained from the photographers at 4 Meadway, Epsom, Surrey KT19 8JR.
The price of the book is £19.95 plus £1.50 postage and packing.
Helene Rogers 
SEE HERE
John Szarkowski, recently retired as the director of photography at the Museum of Modern Art in New York, has been reported as considering Lee Friedlander the best photographer living.
In London during August there are two opportunities — at the Victoria and Albert Museum and Zelda Cheatle galleries — to see some of his work and decide for yourself.
It was partly Szarkowski's influence in the early 60s, which broadened collectors' minds to the idea of buying photographs which were other than self-consciously fine art.
Also, the traumas of the Vietnam War and civil liberties clashes caused a crisis of confidence and led to a questioning frame of mind, which was ready for the idiosyncratic and difficult to interpret images made by Friedlander and his contemporaries.
Friedlander came to prominence through the 1966 exhibition Toward a Social Landscape , which also introduced the work of Garry Winogrand and Duane Michals.
The V & A exhibition has examples of his social landscapes, portraits and nudes taken in the years 1956–87, while the Zelda Cheatle gallery is showing only nudes.
The nudes owe something to those of Bill Brandt done in the late 1940s and early 50s, but as in all his work Friedlander's choice of vantage point and his use of irony forces questions on the viewer, rather than supplying answers.