

Centres of Postmodernism
Postmodernism and contemporary fiction in Britain
Randall Stevenson
I want to emphasize the element of logical and historical consequence rather than sheer temporal  posteriority .
Postmodernism follows from modernism, in some sense, more than it follows after modernism.
(Brian McHale)
So many novelists still write as though the revolution that was Ulysses had never happened…
Nathalie Sarraute once described literature as a relay race, the baton of innovation passing from one generation to another.
The vast majority of British novelists has dropped the baton, stood still, turned back, or not even realised that there is a race.
(B. S. Johnson)
‘The first impulse of every critic of postmodernism’, Ihab Hassan recently suggested, ‘is still to relate it to the semanteme it contains: namely, modernism’(Hassan 1987a: 214).
As Hassan's comment half-implies, it may in some areas be time for criticism to move on from the task of defining postmodernism in relation to its antecedents.
Yet in the British context such a move is probably still premature.
The negative views B. S. Johnson expresses above are fairly widely shared: Malcolm Bradbury points to the existence of a general critical assumption that after the work of the modernists, the ‘experimental tradition’ in Britain may simply have lapsed (Bradbury 1973: 86).
This critical assumption, and its origins, are worth examining further.
The ‘first impulse’ Hassan defines, however, remains an essential one.
Any study of postmodernism in Britain must first of all establish that there really is something to study; that a literature does exist in Britain which can be seen, in Brian McHale's terms, as the ‘logical and historical’ consequence of the earlier initiatives of modernism.
For the purposes of tracing their later consequences, these initiatives can be usefully separated into three areas.
Firstly, modernist fiction's most obvious and celebrated innovation lies in its focalization of the novel in the minds or private narratives of its characters.
Stream of consciousness and a variety of other devices are used to transcribe an inner mental world at the expense of the external social experience most often favoured in the conventional, realistic forms of earlier fiction.
Virginia Woolf's demand, in her essay ‘Modern Fiction’, that the novel should ‘look within’ and examine the mind thus becomes one of the summary slogans of modernism.
In the same essay, Woolf  suggests that the movement within consciousness shows life as something other than‘a series of gig-lamps symmetrically arranged’(Woolf 1919 and 1966: 106): a second distinctive feature of modernist fiction is its abandonment of serial, chronological conventions of arrangement.
The extended histories of Victorian fiction are replaced in Ulysses (1922) and Mrs Dalloway (1925) by concentration within a single day of consciousness: random memories incorporate the past, rarely chronologically.
Time itself becomes inconceivable in terms of clocks and calendars.
Shredding and slicing life, in Woolf's view, menacing it with monotony and madness, in Lawrence's, clocks provide for modernist fiction more of a threat than a sense of order and regularity.
A more general sense of difficulty in sustaining order and regularity in the early twentieth century underlies Lily Briscoe's comments in To the Lighthouse when she remarks that an artist's brush may be the ‘one dependable thing in a world of strife, ruin, chaos’(Woolf 1927 and 1973: 170).
Lily's painting also works in the novel as a figurative analogue for the conduct and conclusion of Woolf's own narrative processes, her own imposing of order on chaos.
Joyce's A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man (1916), Wyndham Lewis's Tarr (1918), and Marcel Proust's A la recherche du temps perdu (1913–27) portray more directly and obviously the life and artistic commitments of their authors.
As these works illustrate, a third distinguishing feature of modernism is an interest in the nature and form of art which occasionally extends, self-reflexively, towards the novel's scrutiny of its own strategies.
This third aspect of modernist innovation is the one whose ‘logical and historical’ consequences are clearest and easiest to trace in later writing.
B. S. Johnson's wish to see the baton of innovation initiated by Ulysses carried forward can actually be satisfied, in this area, by looking no further than developments Joyce made himself.
Even in A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man , Joyce's semi-autobiographical hero wonders whether he may not love ‘words better than their associations’(Joyce 1916 and 1973: 167).
Competition between love of words and of the world they seek to represent expands in Ulysses .
In one way, the novel is a final triumph of realism, representing character more inwardly and intimately than ever previously.
In another way,Ulysses is at least partly an autotelic novel, its hugely extended parodies raising as much interest in its own means of representation — and in the linguistic resources of fiction generally — as in anything which they may represent.
The balance shifts very much further in favour of the latter area of interest in the ‘Work in progress’, with which Joyce followed Ulysses .
Its constant, playful, inventive forging of a self-contained language can be summed up by the novel's own phrase, ‘say mangraphique, may say nay por daguerre!’.
‘Work in progress’ is primarily ‘graphique,’not ‘por daguerre’: it is writing, writing for itself, not as daguerrotype or any other semi-photographic attempt to represent reality.
In Our Exagmination Round his Factification for Incamination of Work in Progress (1929), Eugene Jolas comments:
The epoch when the writer photographed the life about him with the mechanics of words redolent of the daguerrotype, is happily drawing to its close.
The new artist of the word has recognised the autonomy of language.
(in Beckett 1929 and 1972: 79)
The eventual publication of ‘Work in Progress’, as Finnegans Wake in 1939, provides a convenient date — if not for the success of the novel itself, too abstract and esoteric to sustain much attention during the war years which followed — at least for critics and literary historians.
Many have followed Jolas in seeing Joyce's ‘autonomy of language’ and ‘new art of the word’as marking a decisive break with earlier epochs of fiction, initiating a postmodernist writing which extends, but into markedly new areas, the initiatives of its predecessor.
Ihab Hassan talks of Finnegans Wake as ‘a ‘monstrous prophecy of our postmodernity’…both augur and theory of a certain kind of literature’(Hassan 1978a: xiii — xiv).
Christopher Butler takes After the Wake (1980) as the title of his ‘Essay on the Contemporary Avant Garde’.
Joyce's development towards Finnegans Wake also helps confirm the general distinction Brian McHale establishes in Postmodernist Fiction between modernism, dominated by epistemological concerns, and postmodernism, focused around ontological ones.
Stephen Dedalus's uncertainty about the relations which can be sustained between word and world shows, in A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man , the epistemological concerns of modernism.
In Finnegans Wake , the breach between word and world is no longer a matter of doubt or negotiation, but of some certainty, even celebration.
As McHale suggests, any ‘stable world’ the text projects is at best fragmentary, and is generally ‘overwhelmed by the competing reality of language (McHale 1987: 234).
The ‘autonomy’ of this language establishes Finnegans Wake as an almost purely linguistic domain, a self-contained world, ontologically disjunct.
If such developments in Finnegans Wake were an augur and a prophecy, what did they prophesy; which literature did they inaugurate?
Which authors relayed the baton of innovation that Joyce himself carried forward from Ulysses through ‘Work in Progress’ into Finnegans Wake ?
Two other Irish writers served as intermediaries between Joyce and later developments within Britain.
Aware of Joyce's work throughout its progress, Samuel Beckett was naturally one of the first to recognize the significance of its ‘autonomy of language’.
Beckett remarks in Our Exagmination Round his Factification for Incamination of Work in progress , that Joyce's work is ‘not about something:it is that something itself (Beckett 1929 and 1972: 14), and he goes on in the central part of his oeuvre, the trilogy Molloy, Malone Dies, The Unnamable (1950 — 2), to create a kind of autonomy of his own —— as the Unnamable remarks, ‘it all boils down to a question of words…all words, there's nothing else’(1959 and 1979: 308).
Each of the trilogy's aging narrators compensates for failing powers by the endless  spinning of evasive artifice in words, yet each anxiously foregrounds and negotiates with the inadequacies of the linguistic medium he employs.
Language and the nature of narrative imagination thus become central subjects of the trilogy.
Any ‘stable world’ it presents is further overwhelmed by the progressive revelation that each narrator exists only as an imaginative device of a subsequent one, in a succession of evasions leading towards the unnamable author and the depths of an impulse to articulate, which can neither rest nor ever consummate its desires.
Flann O'Brien's At Swim-Two-Birds (1939) follows comparably in the wake of Joyce.
Its narrator finds Joyce ‘indispensable’, and the novel in which he appears is partly a pastiche of ‘Work in progress’.
Joyce's material supposedly unfolds in the dreaming mind of a Dublin publican; the story O'Brien's narrator tells concerns a publican who operates his imagination altogether more systematically, locking up his fictional characters ‘so that he can keep an eye on them and see that there is no boozing’(O'Brien 1939 and 1975: 35).
Unfortunately for his system, they break free while he sleeps and take over his story themselves.
Like Beckett's trilogy, though in much lighter vein,At Swim-Two-Birds thus becomes a story about a man telling a story about storytelling.
Each work extends the ‘augury’ of Finnegans Wake : each work is a postmodernist paradigm, a prophecy of the self-reflexive foregrounding of language and fiction-making which has become a central, distinguishing characteristic of postmodernism.
This is a characteristic which has appeared increasingly widely in post-war British fiction.
In The Alexandria Quartet (1957 — 60), for example, Lawrence Durrell's narrator Darley sets up and discusses aesthetic paradoxes, including ones affecting the text in which he figures, quite often enough to justify Durrell's view that, as a whole, ‘the novel is only half secretly about art, the great subject of modern artists’(in Cowley 1963: 231).
Anna Wulf, Doris Lessing's narrator in The Golden Notebook (1962), highlights and demonstrates the problems of writing, dividing the transcription of her experience into various notebooks and commenting frequently on the nature and validity of each.
In The French Lieutenant's Woman (1969), John Fowles (or a version of him) intrudes famously — or notoriously — into chapter thirteen to discuss his tactics and emphasize that ‘this story I am telling is all imagination.
These characters I create never existed outside my own mind’.
Similar intrusions by authors commenting on their own practice and proceedings, or enacting in their texts problematic relations between language, fiction and reality, also appear in the work of Christine Brook-Rose, Muriel Spark, Giles Gordon, Rayner  Hepenstall , David Caute, John Berger, B.S. Johnson, Alasdair Gray, Julian Barnes and others.
Alain Robbe-Grillet, admired in The French Lieutenant's Woman as a mentor of Fowles's own tactics, once suggested:
After Joyce…it seems that we are more and more moving towards an age of fiction in which…invention and imagination may finally become the subject of the book.
(Robbe-Grillet 1965: 63)
There is evidence that in Britain this epoch has now arrived.
A certain self-reflexiveness even finds its way into otherwise realistic novels, such as Anthony Burgess's Earthly Powers , as if no contemporary novel could quite be complete without at least a moment of creative hesitation and self-examination.
This proliferating self-examination, however, has often been seen as an unlikeable, irresponsible tendency in contemporary literature.
As Linda Hutcheon suggests, there are now too many critics to list who find postmodernist writing ‘a form of solipsistic navel-gazing and empty ludic game playing’(Hutcheon 1988: 206).
To such critics, postmodernism's self-reflexiveness seems a renunciation, in favour of a sterile narcissism, of the novel's potential to shape and assimilate the world for its readers.
It is sometimes suggested not only that postmodernism scarcely exists in Britain, but that it would not be a good thing if it did: like structuralism, it is seen as a form of literary rabies, to be confined to the Continent for as long as possible.
postmodernism's self-reflexiveness can be defended, even on the grounds of responsibility upon which dismissals of it are usually based.
A fuller reply to negative criticism of postmodernism, however, can be made with the further evidence of a brief survey of ways in which postmodernism has followed from modernism's second area of innovation — chronology and structure.
In 1926 Thomas Hardy remarked forlornly of contemporary modernist writing: ‘They've changed everything now…
We used to think there was a beginning and a middle and an end’(in Woolf 1953: 94).
Beginnings, middles and ends have become still more problematic, even suspect, in recent fiction.
For William Golding, for example, in Pincher Martin (1956), they become in a sense almost simultaneous.
Pincher Martin performs an extreme form of modernism's abbreviation of the span of narrative into single days, reflecting the whole life of its protagonist supposedly within the single moment of his death.
Lawrence Durrell sustains in his own way what he calls his ‘challenge to the serial form of the modern novel’: in The Alexandria Quartet , he presents successively three different views of the same set of events, creating a novel ‘not travelling from a to b but standing above time’(Durrell 1957 and 1983: 198).
Rayner Heppenstall, in The Connecting Door (1962), establishes two different eras in which his characters exist simultaneously, and, in a later novel,Two Moons (1977), concurrently sustains stories set in two different months, one appearing on all the left-hand pages of the novel, the other on the right.
A similar double-narrative tactic is employed in Brigid Brophy's In Transit (1969), and something comparable is undertaken by Peter Ackroyd in Hawksmoor (1985), which sets alternate chapters in contemporary and in early  eighteenth-century London.
Two fairly distinct narratives also appear in Alasdair Gray's Lanark , whose individual books are presented in the order 3,1,2,4.
Somewhere in the middle of the fourth book, Gray includes an Epilogue in which he invites readers to follow the text in one order but think about it in another.
Like Gray's protagonist, readers of Lanark — readers of postmodernist fiction generally — are likely to get lost in an ‘Intercalendrical Zone’.
Strange, unstable orders of reading are perhaps most startlingly introduced by B.S. Johnson.
His Albert Angelo (1964) has holes cut in its pages so that readers may see into the future, while his celebrated novel-in-a-box The Unfortunates (1964) is made up of loose-leaf sheets, intended, as a note on the box explains, ‘to be read in random order’.
Such random or non-serial ordering thoroughly fragments the middles of some recent fiction: equal irreverence for convention appears, sometimes explicitly, in its beginnings and endings.
Flann O'Brien and Samuel Beckett once again appear as transitional figures in this postmodernist direction.
Beckett's Molloy expresses it, for example, when he remarks, ‘I began at the beginning, like an old ballocks, can you imagine that?’
(Beckett 1959 and 1979: 9), while Flann O'Brien's narrator comments, ‘one beginning and one ending for a book was a thing I did not agree with’ and goes on to offer ‘three openings entirely dissimilar’(O'Brien 1939 and 1975: 9).
John Fowles, in his turn, invites readers to choose between three different endings to The French Lieutenant's Woman .
In C. (1972), John Berger shuns defining endings, and defining order in fiction generally, remarking that ‘the writer's desire to finish is fatal to the truth.
The End unifies.
Unity must be established in another way’(Berger 1973: 88).
Berger's views relate to a specifically political motivation, variously apparent throughout the novel.
The whole text has a fragmentary, indefinite quality.
It's vague story is juxtaposed with much historical, even statistical, documentation, in paragraphs whose scant narrative connections are further exposed by their widely separate layout on the printed page.
This disjunctive, unfinished quality challenges readers to establish an order which the text does not entirely provide for them.
Far from finding, as in conventional fiction, a coherent, structured refuge from the shapelessness of life, readers of G .
are — as if at a Brecht play — bereft of secure containment within illusion, and forced to take responsibility, conceptually at least, for the reshaping of reality beyond the page.
Through the gaping openings between the novel's paragraphs, they are disturbingly re-inserted into the processes of history and power.
G .,
in this way, helps refute some of the opponents of postmodernism.
One of its most powerful adversaries is Fredric Jameson who suggests postmodernism is ‘an alarming and pathological symptom of a society that has become incapable of dealing with time and history’(in Foster 1983: 117).
C., on the contrary, seems anything but reluctant to deal with time and history, using postmodernism's freedom to challenge literary forms and structures as a means of integrating into  the text a much wider challenge to institutionalized forms and structures of power within society at large.
Such politically engaged postmodernism is rarer in Britain than elsewhere.
Comparable tactics, however, are used by David Caute in The Occupation (1971) and in a novel Caute admired as a ‘landmark’ in ‘coherent social comment’(Caute 1972: 252),The French Lieutenant's Woman .
Fowles takes from Marx his epigraph about emancipation, and, like Berger, uses textual strategies to enforce upon readers an unusually direct engagement with this wider theme in the novel.
Separate endings impose, by formal means, a need for freedom and responsible choice, also learned painfully, in personal and social terms, by Fowles's protagonist.
Not all the novels mentioned above are as concerned with political or social comment as G .
or The French Lieutenant's Woman , but few are only empty, ludic or disjunct from history.
Fractured, non-serial forms in the texts mentioned suggest a concurrence with conditions of contemporary history, summed up in Italo Calvino's If on a Winter's Night a Traveller (1982) which remarks that:
…the dimension of time has been shattered, we cannot love or think except in fragments of time each of which goes off along its own trajectory and immediately disappears.
We can rediscover the continuity of time only in the novels of that period when time no longer seemed stopped and did not yet seem to have exploded.
(Calvino 1982: 13)
Calvino's comments help connect the history of twentieth-century narrative with the wider history of the century itself.
Time, for the Victorian age, did not seem stopped, but — for writers such as Wells at least— purposively and positively progressive, a feeling reflected in the chronological continuity, firm resolution and frequent Bildungsroman form of their narratives.
Fur the modernists, on the other hand, history seemed not progress but nightmare, and the clock itself a threat.
More recent events and technologies have expanded this sense of fragmentation and discontinuity, contributing to a fractured, accelerated, plural life within a wayward, even apocalyptic history.
These conditions postmodernist art is often held to reflect.
It may not, however, do so as automatically and unhealthily as Jameson's idea of postmodernism as a ‘pathological symptom’ suggests.
Modernism attempted to contain the dark energies of historical nightmare within subtle structures and complex chronologies; that is, by radicalizing form.
Postmodernism not only radicalizes forms, but also satirizes them, exposing their incapacities to connect with reality and the possibilities for distortion which result.
In one way, as Jameson suggests, this can be seen as evasive, a negation of art's potential to confront the challenges of life and history.
In another way, however, it can be seen as responsibly encouraging readers to challenge for themselves cultural codes and established patterns of thought, including some of those which make contemporary history so intractable.
An  age of consumerism, and of powerful manipulation by mass media, creates the need for what Nathalie Sarraute calls an ‘Age of Suspicion’; for scepticism about the means and motives by which the world is constructed and communicated.
Postmodernism serves such scepticism.
B. S. Johnson's The Unfortunates , for example, could scarcely go further in the creation of what Roland Barthes calls scriptible fiction.
Readers can hardly remain passive consumers, or be seduced by the covert ideologies, of a text they have literally had to piece together, page by page, for themselves.
Without going as far as The Unfortunates , the forms of all the novels mentioned introduce a comparable questioning of conventional patterns and expectations, often heightened by the novelists' explicit commentary on their own activity.
Easily as such writing can, on occasion, include the narcissistic or the vacuously ludic, it has at least the capacity to be seriously — or wittily — challenging, an enabling enhancement of its readers' vision and decisiveness.
This sort of challenge is, in some ways, further extended by developments of the third area of modernism's initiatives, its internalization of narrative perspectives.
Joyce's use of stream of consciousness was often thought at the time to be an achievement so outstanding as to deter imitation: Ezra Pound, for example, suggested, ‘Ulysses is, presumably…unrepeatable…you cannot duplicate it’(Pound 1922: 625).
Some of the authors who have dared adopt Joyce's methods, have done so neither by duplicating nor by radically reshaping them, but by adapting them to reflect heightened or malfunctioning consciousnesses rather than relatively normal ones.
The atmosphere of the ‘Nighttown’, ‘Circe’ section of Ulysses extends further into recent writing than that of, say, Molly's soliloquy in ‘Penelope’, emphasizing in several novels the warping, unreliable way reality is represented within the mind.
Readers of Malcolm Lowry's Under the Volcano (1947), for example, are introduced to a herd of buffaloes which quickly turn out to be merely the phantoms of a drink-sodden mind.
Beckett's failing narrators manage in their torrents of words only unstably to sustain in existence on a strange edge of death and silence, adrift in ‘who knows what profounds of mind’(Beckett 1984: 288).
Jean Rhys, in Good Morning, Midnight (1939), transcribes a mind strangely unstrung by loneliness, through a mixture of thoughts and memories recorded in a variety of tenses and stream-of-consciousness and interior-monologue styles.
Though her technique clearly derives from the modernists, it is adapted into a unique, subtle form of her own.
Later novelists have continued to stretch the stream of consciousness in similar directions.
Christine Brooke-Rose's Such (1966), for example, like some of Beckett's narrative, follows movements in a mind of weirdly diminished vitality, transcribing a whirling chaos of images which invade consciousness at the point of death.
B. S. Johnson's House Mother Normal (1971) uses the contents of eight minds at, or close to, this point, and one ‘normal’ perspective, to  express a multi-faceted range of interpretative possibilities created by a single event in an old people's home.
The impairment of faculties suffered by its inmates is carefully, even graphically, represented by the text — for example, one character who dies, or perhaps falls asleep, leaves only blank pages to represent the extinction of her consciousness.
Though Pound found Ulysses ‘unrepeatable’, he suggests that ‘it does add definitely to the international store of literary technique’(Pound 1922: 625).
Many later novelists have benefited from this store, and from other forms of modernist facility in rendering individual consciousness.
The example of Virginia Woolf's interior monologue has been at least as useful, in this way, as Joyce's or Dorothy Richardson's stream of consciousness, most immediately to Rosamond Lehmann and Elizabeth Bowen in the 1930s, as well as to later writers, women perhaps especially, such as Anita Brookner.
It is important, however, to distinguish this work from the fiction of, say, B. S. Johnson and Christine Brooke-Rose.
Neither Rosamond Lehmann nor Anita Brookner, for example, should really be called postmodernist, since they follow after modernism, adopting something of its idiom and methods, without, as McHale suggests, following on from the work of the modernists by not only adopting their idiom, but adapting it into recognizably new and separate extensions of their own.
It is worth trying to retain, in the ways McHale suggests, limits to the meaning of the term postmodernism.
Umberto Eco complains, ‘Unfortunately, ‘postmodern’…is applied today to anything the user happens to like’(in Hutcheon 1988: 42): as he suggests, the term is increasingly used in the media to signify little more than vague approval of what is new and striking in contemporary culture.
Understanding of the nature and variety of this culture is better served by more careful engagement with the ‘semanteme’ postmodernism contains; by fuller investigation of the ‘logical and historical’sources of certain innovations and new fashions.
As the survey above suggests, some of the developments in recent British writing can be traced not only generally, but quite specifically, each major area of modernist initiative carried forward through intermediary writers in the 1930s into particular phases of continuing experiment.
The original point of the survey, however, was not, or not only, to suggest how specifically and illuminatingly the term ‘postmodernism’ can be applied to the British context, but simply as an answer to B. S. Johnson's fear that the baton of innovation had been dropped altogether.
On the evidence of the range of writers discussed this is not the case.
Yet such a conclusion may raise more questions than it answers.
If postmodernism does exist in Britain, how strongly and significantly does it exist, and why has it often been overlooked?
How and why has British writing acquired its ‘no experiments, please’ reputation?
What origins, and what final justice, can be found for the critical assumption that, as Bradbury expresses it, ‘the experimental  tradition did shift or lapse’ in Britain after modernism (Bradbury 1973: 86)?
Bradbury goes on to explain that this ‘shift or lapse’ is ‘usually identified with the thirties, when realism and politics came back’(86).
This view of the decade is now very widely accepted, and with reason: political and other stresses at the time did encourage in many quarters a rejection of modernism in favour of documentary, realistic forms more obviously attuned to the contemporary crisis.
Nevertheless, several of the experimental novelists mentioned above actually began their careers in the 1930s; Samuel Beckett, Lawrence Durrell, Malcolm Lowry, Flann O'Brien and Jean Rhys each having published at least a first novel by the time Finnegans Wake appeared in 1939.
The emergence in the 1930s of such writers, in touch with and impressed by the modernists, suggests that any lapse in the experimental tradition at the time was not a complete one.
With the partial exception of Durrell, however, none of the writers mentioned carried forward an energy for experiment into a later age by working in Britain.
Lowry wrote in Mexico and Canada, hardly completing a novel after Under the Volcano , begun in the late 1930s.
Beckett mostly ceased writing in English after Watt , completed in the early 1940s.
Jean Rhys virtually disappeared as an author between 1939 and 1966, and Flann O'Brien's At Swim-Two-Birds passed similarly through a penumbra of neglect between first publication in 1939 and a popular reissue in 1960.
The various shifts or lapses in their careers may be the symptoms, or results, of an indifference towards experimental writing within Britain, perhaps understandable enough, during the war and the immediately post-war years.
An indifference of this kind is clearer in the 1950s, and can even be seen to have been deliberately fostered.
The title of Rubin Rabinovitz's study,The Reaction Against Experiment in the English Novel, 1950–1960 (1967), sums up part of the mood of the decade.
‘Realism and politics’(or at least social issues) came back almost as strongly as in the 1930s, in the work of writers who often dropped the baton of innovation like a hot potato, vehemently rejecting modernism and experiment.
William Cooper, for example, suggested that for his contemporaries, ‘the Experimental Novel had got to be brushed out of the way before we could get a proper hearing’(in Rabinovitz 1967: 7), and C. P. Snow explained in 1958 that:
…one cannot begin to understand a number of contemporary English novelists unless one realises that to them Joyce's way is at best a cul-de-sac.
(Snow 1958: iii)
These views reflect what has since been recognized as a ‘prevailing ideology’ in ‘the British literary-journalistic establishment’of the 1950s —— in which Snow's influence as a reviewer played a considerable part.
In his essay ‘The Presence of Postmodernism in British Fiction’, Richard Todd adds that, although this literary-journalistic establishment emphasized certain quite genuine characteristics in the writing of the  time, it conveniently ignored others.
Passing over more innovative authors such as Lawrence Durrell or William Golding, it helped establish a sort of myth of the 1950s, to the effect that the complexities and indulgences of modernism had been sensibly rejected in favour of a thoroughgoing return to traditional, realist style, and to the true subject of the novel, class and social relations.
Todd points out how limiting this myth, and the literature it supported, have been.
As a result of the 1950s' return to:
…naive social realism in a minor key…a potentially crippling form…it still remains the case that present-day discussion of British fiction is strongly influenced by a widely-held conviction that we are dealing with a literature in decline.
(in Fokkema and Bertens 1986: 100)
Though the next decade quickly reversed the conservatism of the 1950s, the notion that British fiction lacks experimental energy, or even just quality, still survives; a partially accurate picture, based upon a lapse in the experimental tradition less complete than suggested at the time.
An important form in which the experimental tradition did survive, during the 1950s and since, is indicated by Todd when he discusses the ‘employment within realistic narrative of metafictional or intertextual devices’(in Fokkema and Bertens 1986: 102).
Many other critics have noticed this sort of combination.
Malcolm Bradbury, for example, points to the existence of:
…a generation of writers the best of whom have taken the British novel off into a variety of experimental directions…which have challenged and reconstituted the mimetic constituents of fiction while not dismissing its realistic sources.
(Bradbury 1973: 86)
Many members of the current generation of British writers, including older, established authors whose careers began in the 1950s, show, in single novels or at various points of their careers, an attraction towards experiment as well as tradition and realism.
The linguistic inventiveness of Anthony Burgess's A Clockwork Orange (1962), for example, highlights an admiration for Joyce which its author shows less clearly elsewhere in his work.
Much of Iris Murdoch's fiction seems informed by her view that the nineteenth century is ‘the great era of the novel’(in Bradbury 1977: 27), yet The Black Prince (1973) exhibits a thoroughly postmodernist concern with the process and validity of imaginative writing, its own included.
The Sea, the Sea (1978) similarly broods upon the capacity of its own language and structure to contain a reality which can be obscured as much as illumined by the illusions of art.
Angus Wilson's No Laughing Matter (1967) presents a huge family saga much in the manner of Galsworthy or the Victorians, yet it also contains alternating narrators, dramatic interludes, sustained parodies, and  frequent reflections on its own narrative technique and difficulties.
In Rites of Passage (1980), William Golding creates a comparable combination.
Though the narrative is broadly realistic, it parodies eighteenth-century styles in ways which extend into a self-reflexive, postmodernist scrutiny of the power and validity of writing itself.
Combinations of this sort continue to appear in the work of a younger generation of British novelists.
Martin Amis, for example, remarks:
I can imagine a novel that is as tricksy, as alienated and as writerly as those of, say, Alain Robbe-Grillet while also providing the staid satisfactions of pace, plot and humour with which we associate, say, Jane Austen.
In a way, I imagine that this is what I myself am trying to do.
(Amis 1978: 18)
Amis's Other People (1981) demonstrates the possibilities he outlines.
Firmly, satirically based in contemporary London, it also has a fractured time-scheme and an indecipherable, detective story plot which recalls Robbe-Grillet and the nouveau roman .
In Shuttlecock (1981), Graham Swift provides a further example of realistic narrative which also sustains postmodernist anxieties and examinations of the relation between writing and reality.
All these combinations, recent and current, suggest the continuing validity of the picture of British fiction David Lodge presented in 1971.
In his essay ‘The Novelist at the Crossroads’, Lodge sees most British authors hesitating between, or combining in a variety of ways, the possibilities of a main road of tradition —‘the realist novel…coming down through the Victorians and Edwardians’— and alternatives offered by modernism and the developments that have followed it (Lodge 1971: 18).
This may seem a reassuring picture, a balm to B. S. Johnson's fears.
Modernist innovation and the revolution that was Ulysses , far from being ignored, continue to expand the range of possibilities for British writers, encouraging new forms and combinations to sophisticate and diversify conventional resources.
On the other hand, there are ways in which such a picture is much less than wholly reassuring.
Rather than being sustained by a vibrant, developing, experimental tradition, the revolutions of modernism may simply have been absorbed by an engrained, infrangible, realist tradition which rarely does more than appropriate a few of the more alluring additions Joyce and others made to ‘the international store of literary technique’.
Indirectly, Todd emphasizes this latter possibility by presenting postmodernism as a ‘presence’, as something amalgamated with more realistic modes in British writing, rather than as a fully autonomous force in itself.
This view is developed in a way which partly reduplicates the misleading tactics he identifies at work in the 1950s.
Critics it that time excluded authors inconvenient for their picture of a general return to tradition: Todd himself has little to say about authors such as B. S. Johnson and Christine Brooke-Rose, mostly on the grounds that they belong to a counter-cultural avant-garde never identified with the  mainstream of British writing.
On the whole, this approach is unhelpful.
Although they do lie outside the mainstream — indeed,because they lie outside it — authors such as B. S. Johnson have at the very least an important exemplary function, keeping open a wide spectrum of possibility, even for authors who may not always wish to go so far in such radical directions themselves.
Nevertheless, although it is not a reason to pass over them as Todd does, a limiting factor in the work of experimental novelists in Britain does seem, as he suggests, to be that they are consistently assigned to marginal rather than mainstream positions.
Many of those mentioned above — Rayner Heppenstall, David Caute, Giles Gordon, as well as B. S. Johnson and Christine Brooke-Rose — exercise a very tenuous hold over the attention of the British public.
It is only occasionally, as in the case of Fowles or Durrell, for example, that postmodernism has generated the kind of respect and popularity enjoyed by authors such as Thomas Pynchon, Italo Calvino and Gabriel García Márquez.
The success of such authors has probably contributed to the view that the inspiration for postmodernism in Britain has often had to come from foreign models rather than a native tradition of this form of writing, or even much of a disposition towards it.
The baton of innovation, in this view, may not have been altogether dropped, but sometimes has to be carried by another team before the British outfit can continue its own rather erratic course down the tracks of literary history.
The other team in question — the main one, anyway -is that of the French, whose new philosophies and related experiments in fiction have often helped sustain the initiatives of modernism since the Second World War.
The example of Alain Robbe-Grillet, who acknowledges a debt to Joyce as well as to Sartre and Gide, offered from the late 1950s onwards a renewed incentive to experiment, at a moment when British writers might have felt themselves particularly distanced from modernism.
In John Osborne's Look Back in Anger (1956), Jimmy Porter may indicate a real feature of the contemporary scene when he complains that his Sunday newspaper contains ‘three whole columns on the English Novel.
Half of it's in French’.
Since the 1950s there has been a fifth column of British writers who demonstrate and often acknowledge their admiration for French writing, Alain Robbe-Grillet and the nouveau roman in particular.
John Fowles, a student of French literature while at university, talks in The French Lieutenant's Woman of ‘the lessons of existentialist philosophy’(Fowles 1969 and 1977: 63) and of working in ‘the age of Alain Robbe-Grillet and Roland Barthes…the theoreticians of the nouveau roman ’(p. 188).
Christine Brooke-Rose, a bilingual teacher of English at the University of Paris, in some of her early novels —Out (1964) and Such (1966), for example—— to transfer into English writing some of the characteristics of the nouveau roman .
This attempt also informs the work of Rayner Heppenstall, an acquaintance of Michel Butor and Nathalie Sarraute, who employs in The Connecting Door the chosisme and frustration of conventional orders and expectations of plot which feature generally in the nouveau roman .
Several other writers were attracted by it in the 1960s and 1970s: Douglas Oliver, in The Harmless Building (1973), for example; Muriel Spark, at several stages in her fiction; and Giles Gordon, who follows the second-person narrative of Michel Butor's La Modification (1957), making ‘you’ the protagonist of his Girl with red hair (1974).
David Caute also records — and shows in The Occupation — an admiration for French writing, though his fiction reveals a further strain of influence from postmodernist United States fiction.
This also appears widely in the work of other authors: in Thomas Hinde's spaced-out metafiction High (1968); in Andrew Sinclair's road-novel Gog (1967); even in some of the more conventional writings of David Lodge and Malcolm Bradbury.
At least until recently, however, France has remained the principal external influence on postmodernist fiction in Britain.
Even the French language seems to exercise a kind of ownership over the terminology of experiment.
Though there is no real reason not to talk of ‘the new novel’, the term nouveau roman has always been retained, perhaps for a certain alluring foreign frisson .
Similarly, English has never chosen to find an equivalent term for avant-garde .
There may in this adoption of French terms be some covert assumption that postmodernist writing, like cooking — or rather cuisine — is something best left to the French.
There may even be an emblematic quality in the image which Fowles records as the inspiration for The French Lieutenant's Woman ; of Sarah Woodruff poised on an extreme, southerly edge of England, staring across the Channel towards an imaginary lover.
Her desires might be seen as figurative of more general feelings among postmodernist British authors, seeking inspiration and affection less often to be found within their own shores.
This tendency to look abroad for inspiration is not new, of course.
It is no more a feature of postmodernism than of the modernism which preceded it, very often the work of exiles or displaced persons.
Centred around the work of an Irishman living in Trieste, Zurich and Paris, modernist fiction — though strongly an anglophone phenomenon — had relatively few significant practitioners of British nationality and domicile, apart from Virginia Woolf.
In one way, this lack of British involvement contributes to a view that, even before the shifts and lapses of the 1930s and 1950s, Britain has always had an impoverished experimental tradition, repeatedly needing to borrow from France, Ireland, the USA or wherever, to compensate for a bankruptcy of energies in the domestic context.
This view, however, may be to perceive only as a weakness within the British scene something which may more interestingly be considered an incentive to, even a necessary condition of, modernist and postmodernist writing generally.
Like many other aspects of twentieth-century thought and culture, both modernism and postmodernism negotiate with the problem that ‘we  can know the real’, as Linda Hutcheon puts it, ‘only through signs’, and, based on arbitrary relations between signifier and signified, language and sign may sheer away from the reality they seek to represent (Hutcheon 1988: 230).
In Brian McHale's model, from the arbitrariness of the signs results an epistemologic anxiety for modernism, which seeks new forms to engage with a problematic, fugitive, but still reachable external reality.
Ontologically centred postmodernism largely abandons this quest, highlighting the inadequacies of systems of representation which assume the possibility of valid contact with an ulterior reality.
In either case, modernist or postmodernist, underlying strains, epistemologic or ontologic, are likely to be particularly focused by experience of foreign language or culture.
Immersion in a foreign language environment, confrontation with an alien, yet apparently self-consistent, effective system of words, confirms the sense of arbitrariness in the relation of signifier and signified, encouraging the nature of language and representation to install themselves, self-reflexively, as subjects of enquiry within fiction.
More straightforwardly, awareness of another nation's literature helps to create for authors a sense of the particular character and limitations of their own, encouraging the pursuit of alternatives and possibilities for innovation and change.
If experimental novelists metaphorically stare across the Channel, it is not only because they hope some valuable contraband — fresh styles from France — may be smuggled through English literary customs.
It is because aspects of foreignness itself, of vision focused by contact with other nations and languages, may be a crucial encouragement to the sort of writing they produce.
A peculiarity of the British context — and a possible strength for its future — is that this sort of encouragement may be found without even looking across the English Channel, though generally by looking away from England.
A look across the Irish Sea finds Stephen Dedalus defining a particular sort of foreignness in A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man when he meets an English priest and reflects that:
His language, so familiar and so foreign, will always be for me an acquired speech.
I have not made or accepted its words.
My voice holds them at bay.
My soul frets in the shadow of his language.
(Joyce 1916 and 1973: 189)
The result of this ‘fretting’ against the English language and its accepted forms — a continuing experience during Joyce's time in Trieste, Zurich and Paris — appears in the range of parodies in Ulysses and the revolutionary linguistic of Finnegans Wake .
The outstanding inventiveness of Irish literature may be owed in part to a continuing sense of existence in the shadow of an English language and culture which authors may wish to adapt rather than accept.
Writers from areas within Britain are likely to experience comparable feelings.
Particularly while the affluent, Conservative-dominated South-East grows increasingly apart from the rest of the country, yet retains control over  the language and ideology of most of its media, a sense of separateness and of the need for separate forms is likely to result elsewhere.
This is especially likely in Scotland where strong feelings of cultural, linguistic and political autonomy have always existed.
Alasdair Gray's Lanark gives evidence of the evolution of forms which may be the result.
Around a core of traditional urban realism, Gray projects a series of fantasies and fractures of convention, as a means of confronting Glasgow's chronic deprivation, economic and imaginative.
Ron Butlin's brilliant second-person narrative,The Sound of my Voice (1987) suggests Scottish writing may continue to develop a postmodernist idiom.
Graham Swift's Waterland (1983) shows the appropriateness of this idiom even within the South-East of England, providing a setting can be found which is remote enough to establish the ‘contesting of centralisation of culture through the valuing of the local and peripheral’, which Linda Hutcheon considers an important constituent of postmodernism (Hutcheon 1988: 61).
Another sort of foreign or peripheral experience may exist for British writers even within London itself.
Virginia Woolf, in her Bloomsbury circle, could hardly have been closer to the metropolitan heart of England, yet she, too, found a foreignness within it, deliberately defining herself as an alien.
She remarks in A Room of One's Own (1929):
If one is a woman one is often surprised by a sudden splitting off of consciousness, say in walking down Whitehall, when from being the natural inheritor of that civilisation, she becomes, on the contrary, outside of it, alien and critical.
(Woolf 1929 and 1977: 93)
The ‘splitting off of consciousness’, and the alien, critical attitudes which result, help to account for departures from convention which are particularly marked in women's writing at many points throughout the twentieth century, and continue to be as a strong area of postmodernist development.
The Golden Notebook offers a kind of paradigm or anatomy of inclination to innovation created by the particularity, the foreignness, of women's experience.
Alternatives to male discourse, particular forms of expression, are sought throughout, and the formal consequences of ‘splitting off of consciousness’ repeatedly enacted and discussed.
Many women authors extend the sort of metafictional self-scrutiny which The Golden Notebook so extensively sustains: Eva Figes's novels, for example, often raise self-referential questioning of their own representational validity and Muriel Spark teases several of her heroines with unsettling awareness of the process of their own creation.
Doris Lessing's later transition into science fiction writing indicates another complete alternative to realistic conventions, fantasy offering a strategy for escaping altogether the obligation to express a male-dominated world.
Fantasy has continued to interest several other contemporary women writers, such as Emma Tennant and Angela Carter, in this way.
Fantasy is also an important component in the work of other writers who occasionally employ a postmodernist idiom: Brian Aldiss in his Joycean Barefoot in the Head (1969) or the nouveau roman, Report on Probability A (1968); J. G. Ballard in The Unlimited Dream Company (1979); Christopher Priest in The Affirmation (1981); even D. M. Thomas in The White Hotel (1981).
Fantasy also figures centrally in the work of Salman Rushdie, its interfusion with more prosaic material demonstrating Rushdie's incorporation into the novel in English of the exuberant magic realism, developed by South Americans such as Gabriel García Márquez.
Rushdie's background and career also indicate a further area of foreignness, and of promise, for postmodernist fiction in Britain.
Largely as a legacy of empire, the English language has spread very widely across the world.
For many of its current speakers — some, like Rushdie, immigrants to Britain — it remains a language foreign as well as familiar, and the culture and conventions it sustains are consequently matters for challenge and reformulation.
Culturally and linguistically, Britain offers a nexus of increasingly plural possibilities, a promising ground for a postmodernism which may in the future develop more strongly in Britain than it has hitherto.
Increasing cultural complexities suggest that Lodge's image of the crossroads might even be brought up to date — and given, appropriately, a faintly foreign flavour — by the possibility of post-imperial Britain becoming increasingly a sort of spaghetti junction, heterogeneous styles and registers meeting, intertwining, competing or coalescing.
The potential of such a situation is expressed in a different way by Brian McHale through reference to the work of Mikhail Bakhtin.
Bakhtin traces the polyphonic nature of the novel — the ‘system of languages’ which compete within it — back to the practice of popular carnival.
McHale sees the parodic, convention-breaking form of postmodernism as the particular heir of such practice; as an essentially ‘carnivalised literature’(McHale 1987: 172).
Not every critic shares this confidence in the carnivalesque capacities and subversive energies of postmodernism.
A. Walton Litz, for example, relates the term postmodernism to the semanteme it contains in a particularly pessimistic way, suggesting that ‘like post-mortem or post-coital’, it implies that ‘the fun is over’(Walton Litz 1986: 1142).
In Britain, it may not be so.
Temporary, partial scleroses in the 1950s encouraged gloomy prognoses, but the British novel is neither as dead nor as indisposed to innovation as its critics have sometimes supposed.
Mixing the familiar and the foreign, new and potentially productive connections may be taking place in a number of areas.
Much of the fun of postmodernism may be still to come.
A new race of novelists may result, making it possible to refute with more confidence than hitherto B. S. Johnson's fear that the British novel has never fulfilled the huge potential created by the irruption of modernism into the literature of the twentieth century.
In Pursuit of the Receding Plot: some American Postmodernists
David Seed
In recent years a critical consensus has gradually been forming as to the nature of postmodernism.
Peter Brooks, for instance, insists that there has been a metafictional dimension to the novel since its very beginnings but now finds a new degree of emphasis among postmodernists, ‘a greater explicitness in the abandonment of mimetic claims, a more overt staging of narrative's arbitrariness and lack of authority, a more open playfulness about fictionality’(Brooks 1984: 317).
The relation of postmodernism to modernism is, in other words, a complex continuity which, in America at least, can be dated with comparative precision.
All the novelists who are to be discussed in this chapter began their writing careers in the 1960s and recoiled from the hegemony of naturalistic modes of fiction.
They have either demonstrated or explicitly acknowledged influences from Beckett, Nabokov, and Borges, or, within the American tradition, from Kerouac (himself the heir of such modernists as Thomas Wolfe) who opened up new possibilities of voice and open structure.
Where André Malraux has stated that modern art is becoming an ‘interrogation of the world’(Malraux 1950: 151), the writers under discussion here do not abandon plot as such but interrogate the very means they are using to structure their works.
Richard Martin's comment on Walter Abish has a general relevance in this context.
Abish's use of arbitrary formal limits in Alphabetical Africa (1974)‘becomes the vehicle for an adventurous plot while simultaneously investigating various narrative modes’(Martin 1983: 230).
Plot may become a pretext.
It may be eroded by comedy or decomposed, but it can never disappear, for it constitutes the ‘dynamic shaping force of the narrative discourse’(Brooks 1984: 13).
It is typical of the vigour of contemporary experimentation in America, that apocalyptic statements of the novel's demise should be converted into fiction in Ronald Sukenick's The Death of the Novel and Other Stories (1969).
Since the early 1970s, Sukenick has emerged as one of the leading practitioners of narration as process.
Like Pynchon, he has admitted an influence from Kerouac and the Beats, and, in his 1973 article ‘The New Tradition’, Sukenick places himself within a late phase of the modernists' ‘Revolution of the Word’ where verbal and structural experimentation were aimed at coping with the enigmatic nature of the  world (Federman 1975: 42).
Sukenick has also gone on record as seeing writing as an essentially adversarial activity: ‘When I grew up, I grew up with an idea of writing as a form of resistance to the establishment and culture at large’(Sukenick 1985: 139).
One focus to this resistance has been realistic plot-paradigms which Sukenick constantly subverts in the interest of getting nearer to the real.
‘Things don't appear to happen according to Aristotle any more’, he remarks.
However, Sukenick has been equally consistent in rejecting the view that such a direction marks a narcissistic introversion of fiction, arguing instead that he has engaged more directly with his culture.
The shift in stance away from cultural exile towards critical engagement, for him marks a shift away from the élitism of the moderns towards postmodernism.
The political implications of Sukenick's experimentation can be seen clearly in his second novel Out (1973), which sets up a journey as structural metaphor in order to comment on the political temper of the late Nixon years.
A backdrop of meaningless shifts in national policy, from ‘escalation’ to ‘deescalation’and back again, foregrounds the ‘characters’in this work, who are subversives armed with sticks of dynamite.
Sukenick repeatedly draws attention to such underground processes, always as a prelude to comic dismissal: the dynamite is a dud, weapons fire blanks, and so on.
Before any line of fiction can gel, starkly contrasted possibilities are introduced: ‘You're either part of the plot or part of the counter-plot’(Sukenick 1973: 1).
The novel is mainly devoted to exploring the implications of these propositions for its own form.
Firstly, within the atmosphere of conspiracy, ludicrous and later incomprehensible messages are introduced to play games with the reader's capacity to interpret textual data.
a particular detail may ‘show how events conspire.
It indicates a plot.
The job of intelligence is to uncover this plot…
As you can see everything falls into place,(Sukenick 1973: 124).
Through a series of strategic puns Sukenick associates the collection of evidence, analysis and causal sequence with political totalitarianism.
The threat of ‘arrest’ becomes the threat of fixity, of stabilized forms, whereas the thrust of the novel is to take us further and further away from such stability.
This impulse is figured partly in geographical terms (as Jerome Klinkowitz has noted, ‘Out moves from the clutter and hassle of the East to the pure space of an empty California beach’(Klinkowitz 1980: 137)) and partly by shifting the names of the characters and the nature of their situations, so that travelling ceases to be a realistic indication of movement and becomes instead a metaphor for textual purpose.
A journey in a camper shades into a lift with a driver who turns out to be a narcotics agent; the former episode is then repeated, with sado-masochistic variations, until that too shades into a bus journey.
The situational shifts prevent a consistent plot-line from forming, making the novel essentially unpredictable, and Sukenick further complicates our sense of sequence by counterpointing a ‘count-down’ sequence of chapters against the ascending page-numbers.
As the novel approaches its end, spaces  between its verbal segments grow larger and larger until the text finally recedes into a blank white page.
By politicizing his text in this way Sukenick runs the risk of linking authorial production with political manipulation, but he regularly plays down the privilege of composition by including himself as a minor character within his narratives.
In the case of Out , a dialogue within the novel articulates Sukenick's engagement with the reader's probable, realistic expectations.
A suitably pedagogic figure called Skuul puts the case for cause and effect which is speedily reduced to relativism by an opposing voice: ‘You pursue essentials I ride with the random…
You struggle towards stillness I rest in movement’(Sukenick 1973: 127).
As in Gravity's Rainbow , Sukenick pairs contrasting voices to raise the epistemological implications of his own novel and to nudge the reader towards an acceptance of indeterminacy.
Indeed, Jerzy Kutnik has shown that amorphousness and mobility are the prime characteristics of Sukenick's texts.
They constitute ‘the ideal condition for fiction but not just for purely aesthetic reasons: they are the natural condition of ‘things chronic and cosmic’, including humanity itself’(Kutnik 1986: 87).
The very title of Out suggests avoidance, absence, departure (from norms, order, etc.); even the ending of the novel is signalled as an exit.
What limits this work is the close association between formal fluidity and a life-style reminiscent of the Beats.
It is this underwriting of moving on which Sukenick's next novel brings into question.
98.6 (1975) is divided into three sections.
The first assembles a collage of images to confirm the proposition that ‘love — power = sadism + masochism’(Sukenick 1975: 7).
Sukenick's own composed sequences (revolving around routine violence) are juxtaposed with excerpts from contemporary reports on Hell's Angels, the Manson family, etc. to suggest a picture of conditions.
It is as if Sukenick were putting into practice the principles of what he has called the ‘architectonic novel’ which (and he cites Raymond Federman's Double or Nothing as a prime example) works like a jigsaw puzzle: ‘the picture is filled out but there is no sense of development involved’(Federman 1975: 38).
Having established a context, in the second section Sukenick presents the attempts of a group to set up a commune within the country of Frankenstein (a transparent label for the USA).
This section follows the trajectory of an arc in that the attempts gradually fail.
The commune attempts to enact its own solidarity through rituals (group sex, baseball, potlatch, etc.), apparently trying to stave off the threats of such hostile outside forces as truckers and bikers.
The third section (‘Palestine’) does not conclude the novel so much as make explicit the narrative implications of what has happened so far.
The sequence of composition and decomposition, seen in Out 's alternation between meetings and departures, now becomes a textual fact of life: ‘Interruption.
Discontinuity.
Imperfection.
It can't be helped…
Together for an instant and then smash it's all gone still its worth it.
I feel.
This composure grown out of ongoing decomposition’(Sukenick 1975: 167).
The narrative base to this section (Sukenick's visit to Israel) represents a journey to a country of spiritual origins as if he is seeking a lost unity antecedent to the modern state of division.
In his more recent works, Sukenick has moved even further away from conventional narrative sequences.
Long Talking Bad Conditions Blues (1979) makes a virtue out of the condition of ‘accelerated shatter’ he had located in his earlier novels by attempting to link the diverse aspects of his text within a verbal flow, a ‘stream of language’introduced by a twelve-page unpunctuated single sentence.
This flux depresses narrative reflection (‘…it was almost impossible to come to a conclusion about one's own flow and that in fact this was a contradiction in terms since one was precisely one's own flow…’
(Sukenick 1979: 11)) and also direction, as the title appropriately suggests a spoken improvisation.
Characters thus become splintered versions of the dominant voice, examples of what Thomas LeClair has called ‘artful ventriloquism’(in McCaffery 1986: 121).
Continuity of utterance now becomes an end in itself and lacunae in consciousness, gaps and verbal ‘black holes’(linguistic vortices), things to be avoided like the plague.
Both this work and The Endless Short Story (1986) confirm Peter Currie's general assertion that ‘American postmodernism may be seen to endorse a rhetorical view of life which begins with the primacy of language’(in Bradbury and Ro 1987: 64).
Long Talking is preoccupied with the physicality of utterance, whereas The Endless Short Story equivocates about its own length and means.
It begins as a mock-documentary on Simon Rodia (architect of the Watts towers) and then shifts through stories-within-stories, digressions, verbal improvisations (explicitly modelled on jazz), and numerous references to the practicalities of narrating.
These devices cut across a linear reading of the text, in spite of the early injunction to the reader: ‘It doesn't matter where you start.
You must have faith.
Life is whole and continuous whatever the appearances’(Sukenick 1986: 7).
The latter assertion represents no more than a pious belief, since Sukenick's text repeatedly fragments itself into short phrasal units, disparate narrative strands, and oddly shifting ‘characters’.
Many of Sukenick's concerns are shared by his friend Raymond Federman.
Where both are university teachers, Federman began his career as a critic with a study of Samuel Beckett,Journey to Chaos (1965), which played a crucial role in the formation of his attitude towards modern fiction.
Federman presents Beckett as a practitioner of perversely inverted narrative values, in effect deconstructing the novel in order to expose the deceits of realism.
Beckett's characters ‘begin and end their fictional journey at the same place, in the same condition, and without having learned, discovered, or acquired the least knowledge about themselves and the world in which they exist’(Federman 1965: 4).
Federman has fully digested Beckett's influence on him to the point of formulating carefully thought-out positions on the new direction fiction will take.
His view of the American situation follows  out the formal consequences of earlier complaints by such writers as Nathanael West and Philip Roth, that the American novel can no longer keep up with contemporary reality.
Federman sees the postmodern period as one in which the media have taken over the informational role of fiction, drastically reducing its status.
The works which are aware of this predicament Federman has called ‘surfiction’ whose primary purpose ‘will be to unmask its own fictionality, to expose the metaphor of its own fraudulence’.
Among other casualties in this process will be plot: ‘the plot having disappeared, it is no longer necessary to have the events of fiction follow a logical, sequential pattern (in time and in space)’(Federman 1975: 810).
Instead, works will progress by digression or circular repetition.
Federman's own novels thus revolve around the problematic nature of their own survival.
Federman's first novel Double Or Nothing 1971) is a narrative about preparing to narrate, where the different persons named in the text personify different compositional procedures.
Many details, such as the reproduction of type-script and the printing of a page askew as if that was how it came out of the type-writer, suggest the fiction that the novel is a draft, a preliminary version, but of course the pages are printed and therefore fixed.
There is no final version which they anticipate, and in this respect Federman draws attention to the technology of the text.
The novel contains traces of an autobiographical plot-line in which a fictionalized young Federman comes by boat to America and meets his uncle in New York.
This sequence is repeated again and again with different emphases, suggesting that the novel is constantly reenacting a threshold experience which becomes a powerful metaphor of its own formal nature.
Double Or Nothing mimes out its own liminal qualities, exemplifying Federman's general assertion that, since reading completes a text, ‘writing can be considered as a PRE-TEXT…
Much of literature today…functions in the PRE-TEXT conditions, leading towards the potential text’(Federman 1976a: 564).
Just as the young Federman arrives in America and will embark on a new series of experiences, so Double Or Nothing speculates about the possible shapes it might take.
The sections which resemble realistic narrative are either mocked through parenthetical comments, which reduce the passages to pastiche, or are phrased as hypotheses: ‘Your uncle will meet you at the boat (with his car — even threw that in).
I can see the whole scene already and maybe you'll cry a little…’
(Federman 1971: 15).
The term ‘story’ becomes an important indicator of what Federman might write, although it is impossible to take this at face value.
If ‘story’ suggests a narrative sequence towards which Double Or Nothing is gesturing, Federman it the same time questions each fictional possibility so thoroughly that the only reliable sequence becomes the narrative voice which is constantly shifting in person and tone.
The novel at times resembles a rambling monologue in which the narrator sometimes performs disconcerting  antics, sometimes speculates about the theoretical nature of fiction.
Even more than Sukenick's, Raymond Federman's novels repeatedly blur the boundaries between criticism and fiction.
Federman's later novel Take It Or Leave It (1976) appears to be even less orderly than its predecessor.
Like Burroughs' Naked Lunch , it carries a directive that the sections can be read in any order but, unlike B. S. Johnson's The Unfortunates , it is not presented as a boxed set.
Although pagination has been excluded, the novel is nevertheless bound in a fixed order.
Once again the novel repeatedly turns inwards to examine its own nature, presenting itself as a kind of palimpsest.
The implications of ‘story’ have hardened to the extent that Federman constantly refers to the narrative as a ‘recitation’, as if he were writing over earlier texts such as Beat novels.
He now makes a much firmer distinction between plot and story.
At one point, quoting Aristotle on catharsis, he reflects: ‘Interesting!
However, since we are not interested here (what are we a constipated race?) in plot but only travel, it is useless to worry about such problems’(Federman 1976b).
Where plot might be jettisoned, story is retained as a principle of connection: ‘Once the story is launched it must go on it must follow its course however crooked it may be even if it takes the wrong direction’(1976b).
‘Story’, ‘travel’ and ‘journey’all blur together, drawing on Federman's study of Beckett, the title of which is incorporated into this text and into Double Or Nothing , so that once again traces of realistic action have a metaphorical role to play.
This novel draws on a later phase of Federman's life to refer to (but not describe) journeys across America.
Travel takes on a multiple significance as geographical discovery, facetious mythical enactment (its resemblance to Alger's stories is mocked), sexual fulfilment, and above all textual sequence.
Federman has recognized that this is a staple feature of his works.
In an interview he has stated: ‘My stories are usually based on a journey of some sort.
This doesn't have to be a physical, geographical journey from one place to another — I say ‘journey’ simply in terms of movement’(Le Clair and McCaffery 1983: 129).
Travelling can thus indicate the headlong tempo of the narrative or, in its twists and turns, a principle of sequence by digression — not from a ‘main action’, but simply digression from what immediately precedes or succeeds a particular section.
In an epistemological parable, ‘The Man who looked into the Future’, Allen Wheelis describes a man's attempts to escape from the fluidity of the present and imprint value on his life.
He discovers he has a talent for predicting the future, but ironically this privilege only increases his sense of the present.
In fact there is no way out of his predicament because he can find no external way of authenticating the present: ‘the more clearly the future could be seen, the more evident that it could validate nothing’(Wheelis 1971: 56).
He then sinks into a melancholy lethargy.
Federman pursues a similar scepticism but with more robust results.
He comically dismisses his attempts to project himself into the narrative future and finds that the  past is rendered elusive by the distortions of the means he uses to recapture it.
The result is that his narratives collapse time into an extended present where he, like Sukenick's narrators, gleefully rides the random.
Where Federman and Sukenick replace finished story with the process of narrating so that it becomes difficult to say what their novels are ‘about’, Rudolph Wurlitzer pursues a rather different task in his fiction.
One of his earliest pieces was a Western narrative which attempted to avoid the formulaic patterning of Louis L'Amour's novels through parody.
Like Sukenick and Pynchon, Wurlitzer has acknowledged an influence from Kerouac which can be seen in the open structure of his first novel The Octopus (1969: published in America under the title Nog ).
The narrative has no firm beginning or end.
It revolves around a narrator (never named) who is living temporarily on the west coast.
He hitch-hikes to San Francisco, lives briefly in a commune, and then sets off on a journey with two of its members, Lockett and Meridith.
This journey, which seems to involve a plan to deal in drugs, takes the three to a ghost town where the others become separated from Lockett.
Meridith and the narrator drive to Long Beach, join a ship which enters the Panama Canal, and there the narrator is separated again from Meridith.
At this point the novel ends.
The narrator is a figure in transit trying to live in a perceptual present which avoids fixed relations.
Wurlitzer took the openness of ‘moving on’ from Kerouac but without any of the latter's lyricism.
In fact the narrator's language is positively austere as he tries to minimize our sense of recapitulation.
Continuity must exclude analysis:
I am losing the thread.
I've done it again.
I have to go back, or forward, to another edge.
I must keep on forgetting.
I must not remember the story I set out to tell.
I must not betray myself.
It is the only way.
This doesn't help, setting it all down, discussing it, unravelling it and rolling it up like a dead tongue.
(Wurlitzer 1969: 46).
Story-telling becomes a means of preserving the narrator's protean fluidity and in that respect both of the novel's titles are appropriate.
Nog is a mysterious itinerant who sells the narrator a foam-rubber octopus, and whose name he adopts as an alias.
The octopus, ‘literally’ a side-show exhibit, represents the narrator's groping towards forms, the perceptual flux as he moves through geographical, residential and sexual space.
This sequence is saved from being completely arbitrary by the narrator becoming involved in the plan of others.
The road then takes on connotations of purpose but without ever becoming fixed; journeys by land alternate with journeys by water.
During the movement of the narrative, space expands and contracts; even the objects mentioned have a fluid status and take their places in shifting strings of signification.
Shells suggest vaginas, fossils, bones, and so on.
Wurlitzer has given a geographical explanation of great fluidity.
In an interview given soon after the publication of his first novel, he insisted:
…it's a West Coast book…
Like a lot of people are really nomadic and living outside of cultural definition…
The East Coast is historical…
Forms have disintegrated here [in the East]so you're involved in disintegration.
But out there forms just aren't there .
In that sense it's a weird frontier.
(Wurlitzer 1970: 36–7)
Wurlitzer originally wrote a quite different last chapter to his novel but threw it away because it seemed too analytical.
It was crucial to the consistency of the work that it should not conclude: the narrator simply states that ‘there has been no decision except that I'm moving on’(Wurlitzer 1969: 161).
All of Wurlitzer's fiction to date has dealt with this felt absence of forms on their breakdown.
Flats (1970) rules sequence down to an absolute minimum and spatializes the narrative by creating Beckett-like ‘characters’ who are personified place-names.
These figures move slowly around a terrain apparently laid waste by some great disaster.
Quake (1972) also treats of disaster, this time in a semi-realistic mode, by investigating the cultural breakdown which follows a massive earthquake in Los Angeles.
Slow Fade (1984) draws on Wurlitzer's own experiences as a screen-writer to set up narratives-within-narratives.
One focus for this composition is to discover the fate of a movie director's daughter in India, and the plot-line of that sequence enacts the erosion of cultural certainties by the Orient.
Once again, plot is conceived of as compositional process, a bringing-into-being; in other words it is conceived as something quite different from what one of the novel's characters describes as a ‘crappy mystical adventure story’.
Although he is one of the most interesting experimental writers on the contemporary American scene, Wurlitzer's novels are not particularly humorous and this would distinguish his works from those of Sukenick, Federman, and Pynchon.
All three of these writers introduce low comedy as a safeguard against the fiction claiming the status of high art.
Federman has explained this characteristic as ‘imagination mocking what it pretends to be doing…imagination laughing at its own pretensions’(Federman 1976a: 576).
For him, comedy draws the reader into a prolonged act of collusion with the author where both recognize the ‘sublime absurdity of the creative process’.
Disruption can thus become a means of subverting literary decorum, solemnity, and authorial self-effacement (‘fuck MODESTY!’ is the succinct exclamation of one of Federman's narrators).
One consequence for plot is that composition becomes equated with comic recital.
In 98.6 , Sukenick briefly casts himself as an improvising comic on the explicit model of Lenny Bruce and Milton Berle.
Take It Or Leave It is a much more vocal narrative delivered to a fictional audience with jokes, asides and comments on his own style.
Thomas Pynchon has also shown a consistent fondness for slapstick effects in his novels, drawn partly from  comic cinema.
Like Sukenick, he often refers to the Marx Brothers in Gravity's Rainbow and creates a comic dimension to the otherwise sinister phrase ‘theatre of war’.
Again and again Pynchon suspends the serious implications of his title by transforming the action into pantomime, thereby achieving a staggering variety of tones within the novel, More is involved here than temporary light relief, however.
The pantomime analogy draws the reader and characters together into a collective fictional position within an audience, and by so doing counteracts the opposite isolating direction of the forces of war, bureaucracy and totalitarianism.
The tension between the two is expressed in terms of imminence at the end of the novel when a V-rocket is poised to land on a crowded theatre.
A writer who has devised a consistently comic vision through formal disruption is Tom Robbins.
His first novel,Another Roadside Attraction (1971), sets up a ludicrous adventure plot in which two ‘heroes’ attempt to carry the mummified remains of Jesus (seized from t base for a whole series of chronological divergences and a parallel plot in which a zoo and hot-dog joint, together, are established as the roadside attraction to the title.
Robbins's purpose here is to define theatre as the quality of his narration as well as the subject-matter, and he does this by introducing three author-surrogates.
John-Paul Ziller is variously a drugs dealer, magician and con man, personifying — like Rinehart in Ralph Ellison's Invisible Man —the flux of narrative stances; Plucky Purcell, as his name suggests, represents the narrator of adventures and Marx Marvellous (‘your host and narrator’) embodies Robbins's role as narrative compère, constantly leading us into new episodes with an appropriate verbal flourish.
At times the effect is reminiscent of a Fieldingesque narrative overlaid with commentary, especially if Robbins indulges in direct address: ‘Hello, reader.
May the author once again intrude upon whatever mood his narrative might have established long enough to report on current events?’
(Robbins 1972. 170).
A tacit collusion is set up between narrator and reader not to take the novel too solemnly, but rather to sit back and enjoy the show.
Drawing on comic books, the Beatles' Sergeant Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band and — like Sukenick and Pynchon — the Marx Brothers, Robbins exploits performance and theatricality as ends in themselves.
It is not until his second novel that he really develops the implications of this stance.
Even Cowgirls Get the Blues (1976) again takes its bearings explicitly from Kerouac and the Beats but, like the first novel, through a consciously exaggerated plot.
The protagonist is one Sissy Hankshaw who uses the fact that she is afflicted with elephantiasis of the thumbs to hitch-hike round America.
She becomes drawn into the business dealings of the Countess, a New York cosmetics tycoon, in the course of which she travels to the Rubber Rose Ranch, a Dakota health spa, and takes part in a revolt by the cowgirls.
The latter action bears  directly on Robbins's statement of purpose within the novel: ‘In times such as ours…when there is too much order, too much management, too much programming and control, it becomes the duty of superior men and women to fling their favorite monkey wrenches into the machinery’(Robbins 1977: 229).
Comic disruption becomes a much needed gesture of resistance to prevailing conditions in America.
Where Federman and Sukenick have stressed the specifically linguistic dimensions to such disruption, Robbins once again casts himself in the role of entertainer, trickster and comic commentator.
Linear, realistic plot is inseparable from the forces of law and order to him, and so he seizes every opportunity to cut across the plot-sequence with digressions, ‘Cowgirl Interludes’, commentaries and even a recipe.
He controls his expository side by creating a minor, rather scholastic character called ‘Doctor Robbins’, a psychiatrist who rebels against the prescriptions of his boss.
This latter sequence expresses in miniature what the novel as a whole is undertaking.
Another Roadside Attraction deliberately smothers a simple plot by amassing more and more ludicrous information.
Robbins now draws more and more attention to the text itself, by indulging in a dialogue with his projected reader to celebrate reaching his hundredth chapter or by rejecting the claims of traditional literary decorum: ‘happily, your author is not under contract to any of the muses who supply the reputable writers, and thus he has access to a considerable variety of sentences to spread and stretch from margin to margin…’(124).
This comic expansiveness even leads Robbins to insert a chapter (111a) which he then renders as a no-go area, having first defined poetry as an ‘intensification or illumination of common objects and everyday events’:
Definitions are limiting.
Limitations are deadening.
To limit oneself is a kind of suicide.
To limit another is a kind of murder.
To limit poetry is a Hiroshima of the human spirit.
DANGER: RADIATION.
Unauthorized personnel not allowed on the premises of Chapter 111a. (379–80)
Throughout the novel Robbins has lined up clear oppositions between separations and holism, technology and the organic, restraint and freedom.
His joking spatialization of this chapter punningly (‘premises’) draws attention to the subversive implications of his assertions and ironically contrasts the availability of his text with the proprietary attitudes to property within his narrative.
Shortly after this point, the revolt at the ranch is put down in a shoot-out with the police.
‘Technology’, for Robbins as for Pynchon, becomes a short-hand term for the conditioning and patterning pressures in American life; pressures to be resisted whether in his comic struggle with his Remington type-writer which frames his next novel,Still Life with Woodpecker (1980), or, more importantly, through his disruption of narrative illusion and orderly sequence.
It should be clear by now that linear plots are never quite absent from  even the most experimental of these novels.
They function as a spurious pattern into which the narrative might slide if so allowed.
Story then becomes revised into recitation or into a deliberately implausible sequence against which the narrative voice can play.
The issue of how story can be preserved is also central to the fiction of John Barth in whose career one event looms large: his discovery of the Arabian Nights and other cycles of tales from antiquity.
Because these cycles predate by centuries the era of realism, Barth has managed to side-step the issue of narrative truth and retain some notion of the marvellous.
Narrating in his works quite literally becomes a kind of fabulation.
Barth has referred again and again to this discovery in his interviews and articles, and there is no doubt that the existence of such works as The Ocean of Story has helped to form his resistance to the ‘modernist notion that plot is an anachronistic element in contemporary fiction’.
Barth continues (in an interview of 1971):
I've never found that a congenial notion; it seemed to me that there were ways to be quite contemporary and yet go at the art in a fashion that would allow you to tell complicated stories simply for the aesthetic pleasure of complexity of complication and unravelment, suspense, and the rest.
(in Bellamy 1974: 7)
The second and later major influence on Barth has been, again by his own admission, that of Borges and he has set on record his admiration for that writer in his most famous article, ‘The Literature of Exhaustion’(1967), in which he argues that certain literary forms may be used up and so are no longer available to the writer except as parody.
Partly irritated by critical misreadings of this piece, Barth published in 1979 a ‘comparison and corrective’ entitled ‘The Literature of Replenishment’in which he sees disjunction, etc. as essentially modernistic and seeks a synthesis between modernism and nineteenth-century realism.
Here he elaborates on an argument sketched out a few years earlier, that the label ‘postmodern’ denoted the quality of being ‘free to come to new terms with both realism and anti-realism, linearity and non-linearity, continuity and discontinuity’.
Accordingly, he predicts the ‘ideal postmodernist novel will somehow rise above the quarrel between realism and irrealism’, attaining a new synthesis which might no longer need much commentary (Barth 1984: 129, 203).
In spite of some side-swipes at the theories of Raymond Federman, Barth's own fictional practice is not necessarily at odds with that of the latter.
His fascination with tales and story-telling is regularly linked to a formalistic relish of complication for its own sake, and Barth has always detached his use of plot from mimesis.
His decision to construct a ‘fantastically baroque plot’ for The Sot-Weed Factor (1960) is one example of the creation of pastiche which would not be uncongenial to the theories of Federman and Sukenick.
Again like them, Barth has shown an interest in the technology of narrating, in the formal implications of voice, and in the entirely arbitrary patterns of plot.
Lost  in the Funhouse (1968) engages with Beckett-like ultimacies by excluding action and character to the point where narrating becomes self-referential: ‘to write this alleged ultimate story is a form of artistic fill in the blank…’
(Barth 1969: 111).
The ‘plot’ now becomes purely a matter of voice, whereas in such works as Giles Goat-Boy (1966),Chimera (1972), and in other parts of Lost in the Funhouse Barth draws on ancient mythical patterns to write over.
Two recent novels will illustrate Barth's attitude to used-up forms and his move towards a new synthesis.
LETTERS (1979) must be his most complexly self-referential work to date.
It is an attempt to reuse the fictional form which first reached exhaustion, that of the epistolary novel.
Barth introduces seven correspondents, or rather reintroduces them since they are all figures from his earlier works, and Barth himself is projected into the fiction as an updated form of ‘Mr. B.’, Pamela's seducer in Richardson's novel.
LETTERS then is a ‘2nd cycle’ isomorphic with the ‘lst’’, a recycling of Barth's earlier characters whose destinies are expanded and brought to bear on the America of the late 1960s (Barth 1980a: 656).
The first of his correspondents is Lady Amherst who records a stormy love affair with one of Barth's surrogates, one Ambrose Mensch.
She carries the same name (Germaine) as Madame de Stael, suggesting a further analogy between Ambrose and her lover-author Benjamin Constant.
Such correspondences — and Barth underlines the pun — suggest that the novel is a multiple palimpsest with one textual layer over another and the roles of textual producer and fictional character constantly blurring together.
The love affair parodies that stock figure of epistolary fiction — the innocent, seduced narrator — in such a way that sexual congress becomes a comic metaphor of composition.
Accordingly, Barth plays with multiple notions of plot: love intrigue; a character trying to find the historical pattern in his family's lives; and textual ordering.
A computer prints out a ‘revolutionary novel’ to be called Notes — but in numbers!
The very proliferation of narrative details and of plots contradicts the historical exhaustion of the form but without ever leaving the parodic.
So although vast amounts of historical information are included, as Heide Ziegler has pointed out, ‘the facts of history are…the premise of other possibilities.
They seem to be like texts that allow for various interpretations’(Ziegler 1987: 70).
In effect, Barth simultaneously reworks texts and multiplies the dimensions to LETTERS so that it becomes a protean work, constantly shifting resemblances.
At one point it parodies Richardson, at another it seems to realize the ambition to compose a satirical work called The Marylandiad of Ebenezer Cook, the author of another of Barth's proto-texts, the poem ‘The Sot-Weed Factor’.
When we turn from LETTERS to Sabbatical (1982), the latter seems almost to have been written to put into practice the theoretical position laid down in ‘The Literature of Replenishment’.
The realistic base to the novel consists of a sea-journey by Fenwick Turner, a former CIA  agent, and his wife around the Chesapeake Bay.
During their voyage a narrative is assembled through a series of flashbacks which reveal a proliferation of connections between the protagonists' families and contemporary political events.
The dialogue between Fenwick and Susan establishes a point of origin for the plot since they are both consciously composing their story, drawing parallels with the ‘wandering-hero myths’ and arguing over the nature of flashbacks (they even throw out a reference to ‘something called postmodernism’).
As the novel progresses, more and more details (like the protagonists' arrival at an island not marked on any charts) are released which trigger off fears of their being the victims of conspiracy.
Such a predicament would be a cue for utter bewilderment or terror in Pynchon, whose characters cannot reliably communicate their fears to anyone else but, in Sabbatical , the reaction is a joint decision: ‘we must shorten scope on both our paranoia and our writerly sense of plot’(Barth 1983: 53).
The conjunction ‘and’ indicates a crucial aspect of the novel's method since it nicely balances between literary and non-literary reference.
The landscape traversed by the Turners is in a sense a literary one (hence indicators like Poe Cove), but Barth is also careful to specify their seamanship with realistic accuracy.
The nautical details carry a symbolic significance because they suggest that the protagonists are themselves oriented but, as Barth has said, ‘in the troubled and dangerous waters through which they, like the rest of us, necessarily sail…no degree of skill in navigation or of seaworthiness in the vessel guarantees that the destination will still be there at our Estimated Time of Arrival’(Barth 1984: 140).
Now our perception of the text as palimpsest is far more subdued than in LETTERS .
We witness the protagonists drawing their own parallels between their story and Homer, Byron's ‘Manfred’, Poe and thrillers, but in a way which suggests that the act of narrating is not separated from events.
Susan's chosen metaphor of bringing fabula and sujet together is a characteristically biological one: ‘how could either come before the other, except as one twin happens to get delivered earlier?
The doing and the telling our writing and our loving — they're twins.
That's our story’(Barth 1983: 365).
This metaphor implies that the dynamics of Sabbatical are sexual.
The Turners' love-making is directed towards bringing their story into being and, in that respect, represents the counterforce to political totalitarianism which causes deaths and rape throughout the novel.
Most impressive of all, Barth has built this moving plot on one of the oldest stock properties of literature — the notion of life as a voyage.
Plotting involves by its very nature the establishment of continuity and of interconnections.
A postmodernist option, which we have encountered briefly in Sukenick's fiction and now seen in Barth's protagonists composing their story in opposition to political forces devoted to secrecy (to a silent plot in other words), is developed to extraordinarily intricate lengths in the novels of Thomas Pynchon.
Plotting is revised into conspiracy and placed within the action instead of informing its structure.
Pynchon's characters are constantly driven by the impulse to locate themselves within larger schemes which would authenticate their own experience, but waver between the appalling extremes of total randomness (where no pattern is discernible) and paranoia (where everything is subsumed into pattern).
His first novel V .
(1963), like his subsequent works, presents a search which gives the work an apparently strong momentum.
The particular search is Herbert Stencil's attempts to trace V. through a series of appearances from the 1890s through to the present.
Stencil is the personification of a procrustean function rather than a character in any realistic sense, partly a parody of such questing scholars as Robert Graves, partly an imitation of the obsessed protagonist in Nabokov's The Real Life of Sebastian Knight .
Stencil, in short, pursues a quest the absurdity of which rules out the modernist option of structuring by myth.
His search, mocked at every turn by events and other characters, sets up a tenuous connecting thread which links a whole series of episodes set in different places and periods.
In each of these episodes, Pynchon releases far more information than Stencil registers, so that evidence proliferates far beyond the latter's tendentious inferences.
The initial of the novel's title promises withheld meaning, and is therefore more appropriate than Pynchon's original title for the novel (World on a String ), but the absurdity of Stencil's activities disqualifies him as an analyst of a hidden principle in modern history, signalled melodramatically as the ‘Ultimate Plot which Has No Name’.
Stencil only demonstrates in a more manic form a common desire to know, to gain certainty, which is enacted through the related figures of penetrating surfaces, interrogation, breaking codes, and above all analysing texts.
Pynchon, like Joyce, delights in repeating details in new contexts so as to tantalize the reader into thinking he/she has missed crucial meanings.
In fact the two protagonists of V .
could be seen as contrasting opposite ways of reacting to the modern era.
Benny Profane personifies the inertia of modern man, cultivating a passivity towards all experience, whereas Stencil only gains an identity through motion.
He apprehends this to the extent that he carefully paces his pursuit of V. to defer ever completing his search.
Plot as theatre emerges in two ways here.
Firstly, Pynchon draws on the adventure stories of Conan Doyle and Buchan and on detective fiction to create an absurdist pastiche of these popular genres.
And secondly, he stresses the element of impersonation in the action.
Behaviour is constantly revealed as imitative of projected stereotypes or to be the result of disguise.
Just as Stencil's quest parodies the reader's desire to make sense of the text through interpretative patterning, so his investigation of other periods becomes a ludicrous enactment of an author's creation of characters.
One narrator who temporarily takes over from Stencil is Fausto Maijstral, a Maltese poet who has kept a record of the German siege of the island during the last  world war.
Fausto establishes a crucially sceptical perspective on the rhetoric of texts, since he sees through the ‘fiction of continuity, the fiction of cause and effect, the fiction of a humanized history endowed with ‘reason’’(Pynchon 1975b: 306).
His chapter of ‘confessions’ questions the presumptions involved in causal sequence and acts as a helpful gloss on Pynchon's general method in the novel.
Roughly speaking, chapters in the present alternate with chapters from earlier periods, cast in such different styles that they emphasize the novel's formal discontinuity.
Both sequences converge on Malta, and the novel seems simultaneously to stop, or — if we have been ‘stencillizing’ the narrative — to end on a note of imminent war with the Middle East crisis of 1956.
Imminence, this time of ultimate revelation, also characterizes the ending of The Crying of Lot 49 (1966).
Here the sequence begins with an instruction to a typical Californian housewife (typical in all but name, that is), Oedipa Maas, to execute the will of a dead tycoon.
This initial impetus is soon deflected into side-purposes, into the desire to explore the extent of the tycoon's estate and — even more thrilling to Oedipa — to confirm the existence of a secret society from the seventeenth century to the present.
The more determinedly she hunts for confirmatory details the more the sources and scale of her information multiply, so that she reaches a stage of nervous exhaustion from sheer overload.
Drawing once again on the detective genre, Pynchon complicates the linear hunt for information, partly by rendering every detail as ambiguous as possible and partly by having Oedipa literally go round in a huge circle when she is pursuing an ‘underground’ mail courier.
While her investigations take her into history and communication networks, one sequence in particular carries metafictional implications.
Attending the performance of a pastiche Jacobean tragedy, she attempts to incorporate lines from this play into the evidence she is piecing together, but then finds it utterly impossible to locate any edition which would confirm the lines she heard.
Oedipa's pursuit of this text — yet another diversion from the supposed main plot — thus becomes a comic expression of the reader's own attempts to fix meaning into Pynchon's own inconclusive narrative.
Connections prove yet again to be ultimately elusive.
Gravity's Rainbow (1973) marks Pynchon's most complex investigation of the ramifications of plotting to date.
With this novel particularly in mind, Richard Poirier has stated that,
In Pynchon's novels the plots of wholly imagined fiction are inseparable from the plots of known history or science.
More than that, he proposes that any effort to sort out these plots must itself depend on an analytical method which…is probably part of some systematic plot against free forms of life.
(Levine and Leverenz 1976: 23)
The novelists considered so far have consistently broken away from fixed plot-sequences in the pursuit of authenticity and freedom.
Pynchon, however, incorporates within his narrative Manichaean stories in which good opposes evil — the Fu Manchu tales become important in Gravity's Rainbow — not simply to mock such narratives out of existence, but to show their inadequacy.
In Gravity's Rainbow , conspiracies proliferate to such an extent that they beggar description.
Using a principle of recession, Pynchon even suggests that historical plotting can be traced back through its superficial manifestations to the grouping of raw matter or to the genetic code itself!
One character remarks, ‘everything is some kind of a plot, man’’, and the sentiment is echoed, though less cheerfully, by the novel's main protagonist, an American intelligence officer called Tyrone Slothrop (Pynchon 1975a: 603).
It is Slothrop who gives one kind of impetus to the novel in his desire to explain the correlation between his erections and the falling of the V-2 rockets on London (the novel is set mainly in the last months of the Second World War).
Slothrop's search, however, has scarcely begun before he realizes that he himself is under investigation.
He then joins the ranks of the novel's other characters as a victim, falling casualty to his own search when he uncovers documentary evidence that he was sold to a big business combine as a child.
Discovery then leads to a loss of self, not a confirmation of identity, and Slothrop's fate only represents the characteristic direction of thy forces operating within the novel: to reduce human beings to ciphers, units, or commercial entities.
Through at least the first half of Gravity's Rainbow , Pynchon follows a method of pursuing multiple plot-lines around and across Slothrop's search.
The criss-crossing between one sequence and another invites the reader to form interpretative connections between them, to assemble a lattice-like text — until, that is, we enter the Zone.
On its simplest level the Zone denotes Germany immediately before and after military defeat, but it is much more than that.
The Zone is an area of ontological flux where the plots of the novel blur and where texts begin to proliferate.
We encounter a string of bawdy limericks, a dream-poem (with woodcuts), a film-script, and the recording of a Kazakh singing duel, among others.
In some of these cases Pynchon deals with the political dimensions of cultural representation: print as a means of subjugating an oral culture; direction as a means of implicating actors in roles subservient to the director's fantasy (almost like a miniature history of German Fascism) and so on.
The key term here is ‘control’ whose biological and political connotations are applied to the ordering of Pynchon's text.
An important influence here has been William Burroughs's The Naked Lunch (1959) which abandons linear sequence in favour of smaller episodes often beginning with pastiches of other texts (detective novels of the 1940s, film-scripts, etc.) which are then broken down.
Burroughs anticipates Pynchon with his scientist spokesman for control, Dr Benway, the surreal city called Interzone and in sketching out commercial networks.
For Burroughs as for Pynchon, conventional plot sequence would confirm the reader within his/her cultural conditioning, hence the importance of discontinuity, shock tactics and surreally destabilizing images.
The Naked Lunch does not end so much as tail off entropically into verbal fragments.
An ‘atrophied preface’, typically at the end of the boom, contains a mock Whitmanesque statement of stylistic plenty where Burroughs whips up its visual and aural multiplicity: ‘This book spills off the page in all directions, kaleidoscope of vistas, medley of tunes and street noises, farts and riot yipes…’
(Burroughs 1968, 255).
Pynchon's tactics in Section IV of Gravity's Rainbow are related since he moves further and further from realism.
Earlier plot sequences recede into the past of the text; now Slothrop exists only in traces.
And scenes are repeatedly dissolving or fading out.
Where previously the hiatus between sections acted as an invitation for the reader to cross-relate them, Pynchon now gives individual captions to episodes which emphasize their local autonomy and which attenuate plot continuity almost out of existence.
Pynchon is as explicit as Burroughs about the disruptive effects of his method.
At one point he inserts the comment, ‘you will want cause and effect’, as a prelude to a ludicrously far-fetched explanation of what has been happening to a character in one of the text's interstices (Pynchon 1975a: 663).
It is as if Pynchon uses his earlier narrative as a pretext for setting up comic or futuristic episodes and then actually begins to deconstruct his text towards the end by separating out frozen images for comment.
‘The Counterforce’— the title of this section — becomes a shorthand way of denoting textual disruption and thereby of distinguishing Pynchon's activities from the tainted notions of synthesis and control.
Although the writers discussed here have all turned their back on mimetic realism, they have not abandoned the issue of how their fiction relates to the external world.
In spite of being an experimental novelist himself, Charles Newman has recently levelled a fierce attack on postmodernism which he argues ‘has come to rely upon its own linguistic awareness of itself rather than plot or character development, to provide its own momentum’(Newman 1985: 98).
Expressed in this way, linguistic foregrounding becomes an exercise in self-indulgence, whereas these writers are particularly anxious about how literary discourse relates to other discourses and how literary plotting compares with other systems of ordering.
The avoidance of fixed form demonstrates what Tony Tanner has identified as a dream and its corresponding fear:
there is an abiding dream in American literature that an unpatterned, unconditioned life is possible…there is also an abiding American dread that someone else is patterning your life, that there are all sorts of invisible plots afoot to rob you of your autonomy of thought and action.
(Tanner 1971: 15)
Plotting becomes charged with ambivalence as it may create or impose  order.
Thus Stephen Wright's Meditations in Green (1983) precariously tries to hold together (through thy discipline of Buddhist meditation, for instance) a self which is breaking down into hallucination under the impact of the Vietnam War.
Sequence is problematic at best, but the novel incorporates within itself sceptical references to alternative means of representation through official military history, collage and a film.
One reaction to the latter in effect bemoans the absence of an Aristotelian plot: ‘…
I couldn't make any sense out of it at all.
I mean, there's no beginning, no middle, no end.
There's no coherence’’(Wright 1985: 266).
As usual there are metafictional implications in this statement.
Wright's character is in effect a projected reader registering bewilderment before an artefact which has abandoned conventional ordering.
A broad distrust of previously accepted means of representation has led these novelists to put a high premium on distortion, disjunction and disruption.
Let us leave the last words with Walter Abish who declares that ‘the innovative novel is, in essence, a novel of disfamiliarization, a novel that has ceased to concern itself with the mapping of the ‘familiar’ world’(Martin 1983: 238).
The debate will continue over whether this process involves gain or loss.
The Nouveau Roman : Modernity and Postmodernity
Edmund Smyth
The nouveau roman has played a central role in the debates surrounding postmodernism: the metafictional techniques and strategies associated with the writers commonly identified with this movement have come to be regarded as, in many ways, synonymous with what constitutes postmodernist fiction.
It would not be an exaggeration to stress the extent to which the nouveau roman has dictated the terms of critical discourse, nor to state that it still acts as the essential reference point in any definition of postmodern aesthetics.
The sustained and systematic assault upon the assumptions and procedures of classic realism, vigorously pursued by the leading nouveaux romanciers , could almost be said to represent a manifesto of postmodern aims and aspirations; while the emphatic self-reflexivity of their novels is frequently cited as paradigmatic of radical textuality.
However, the relationship between the nouveau roman and postmodernity is in fact considerably more problematic than most accounts suggest.
For instance, it is possible to contend that the nouveau roman may be more accurately described as modernist or late modernist when compared with the apparently more subversive avant-garde experimentalism of the Tel Quel group, whose claim to be the natural successors of the revolution inaugurated by Finnegans Wake would be difficult to refute.
Similarly, it would be erroneous to equate contemporary French fiction exclusively with the nouveau roman , despite the hegemonic position it has clearly occupied since the 1950s: the work of writers as diverse (and as removed from the nouveau roman and Tel Quel ) as Georges Perec and Michel Tournier also demands the attention of those seeking to map the postmodern.
Nor is it by any means the case that the nouveau roman is automatically considered in France as emblematic of postmodernism: this remains a largely imported concept, more frequently raised in discussion concerning the wider cultural condition.
The nouveaux romanciers themselves have been reluctant to embrace the term, which has tended to occur on those occasions when parallels are bring drawn with novelists in other countries, as at the New York nouveau roman conference in 1982 which many of them attended and which also saw the participation of several leading American postmodernists.
Nevertheless, few literary movements have exhibited such an abiding preoccupation with establishing antecedents in order to defend and define their textual practices.
This ‘self-periodization’ has  been a constant feature of the nouveau roman since the 1950s: literary-historical arguments are frequently deployed by these novelists as a means of both affirming their radical modernist credentials and validating and valorizing their transgressive devices.
The development of the nouveau roman is often claimed to illustrate the evolution from modernism to postmodernism — a transition which has been perceived and articulated by several of the nouveaux romanciers themselves.
The postmodernist dilemma of periodization is vividly dramatized by these efforts to circumscribe their location in contemporary fiction.
It is now common in most accounts to begin with the proviso that the designation ‘nouveau roman’ is merely a convenient quasi-journalistic or even marketing label attached to an otherwise heterogeneous collection of writers, sharing little other than the same publishing house at one time or another (Editions de Minuit).
It has been said to comprise a central group — Alain Robbe-Grillet, Nathalie Sarraute, Claude Simon, Michel Butor, Robert Pinget — with Marguerite Duras and even Samuel Beckett as ‘co-opted’ members.
While it is certainly true that the central core never issued a single agreed programme, a considerable degree of cohesion does emerge from an examination of their critical writings, and an impression of shared novelistic values is suggested by their willingness (to a greater or lesser extent) to appear on the same platform at conferences on several occasions and to accept, however grudgingly, the ‘nouveau roman’ appellation.
During the 1970s, the critic and novelist Jean Ricardou attempted to foster a greater sense of group identity by bringing together Butor, Pinget, Robbe-Grillet, Sarraute, Simon and Claude Ollier at the famous Cerisy conference (1971), in addition to organizing separate colloques devoted to Claude Simon (1974) and Robbe-Grillet (1975); however, his endeavour to formulate a theoretical programme met with greater resistance.
An analysis of the polemics in which the nouveaux romanciers have been prepared to engage demonstrates, at the very least, a concern with modernizing the contemporary French novel which they felt had advanced little, formally and technically, since Balzac, as a consequence of the failure to assimilate both the local experiments of Flaubert and Proust and the innovations of Joyce, Woolf, Faulkner and Kafka elsewhere.
In Robbe-Grillet's Pour un nouveau roman (1963) and Nathalie Sarraute's L'ère du soupçon (1965), Michel Butor's essays and Claude Simon's conference papers, articles and interviews, all of these writers have had recourse to a modernist canon as part of an impetus of literary self-justification.
The explicitly polemical nature of the attack on the persistence of Balzacian realism was perceived as ‘historically necessary’ if French fiction was to progress in a positive way.
Implicit in the arguments produced by the nouveaux romanciers was the assumption that the presence of causality, linearity, plot and characterization in the novels  of their reactionary contemporaries rendered them redundant, both in literary-historical and in formal realist terms.
The adoption of the superannuated forms of nineteenth-century fiction did not adequately reflect the epistemological and ontological uncertainty characteristic of the contemporary experience of reality.
Nathalie Sarraute's condemnation of plot and character in L'ère du soupçon is based firmly on the conviction that traditional narrative cannot convey the experience of incoherence and discontinuity in modern life, nor the dissolution of the personality.
The fixed categories of the character-based fiction of the nineteenth century had to be abandoned in favour of structures permitting fluidity and instability.
The modern reader had also become distrustful of the authority of the act of narration and of the narrative voice, hence the condemnation of omniscience in particular.
For Robbe-Grillet, there was also a direct correlation between Balzacian realism as a literary form and the society which produced it.
In his lucid and highly combative essay, ‘Sur quelques notions périmées’(1957), he stressed that the formal components of the realist novel reflected the dominant ideology of bourgeois society:
Tous les éléments techniques du récit-emploi systématique du passé simple et de la troisième personne, adoption sans condition du déroulement chronologique, intrigues linéaires, courbe régulière des passions, tension de chaque épisode vers une fin, etc — tout visait à imposer l'image d'un univers stable, cohérent, continu, univoque, entièrement déchiffrable.
Comme l'intelligibilité du monde n'était pas mise en question, raconter ne posait pas de problème.
L'écriture romanesque pouvait être innocente.
(Robbe-Grillet 1963: 31)
It was therefore necessary to introduce narrative forms which would more accurately mirror the unintelligibility of the world: the problematic nature of reality had to be more suitably translated.
Claude Simon has also indicated that he considered the causality and confidence of the traditional novel as perpetuating a misrepresentation of reality.
Their reading of Balzac was of course extremely distorted — the Balzacian novel was made to encapsulate in a convenient way everything which the nouveaux romanciers considered to be deficient in any modern representation of reality.
It is significant that in the light of Roland Barthes's S/Z (1970), critics would subject even Balzac to the kind of analysis usually reserved for the more oppositional novels produced by the nouveau roman (see Jefferson 1983): poststructuralist and deconstructive readings could transform the ‘readerly’ into the ‘writerly’.
The classic realists could be shown to be just as transgressive and problematic as the modernists.
By default rather than by design, therefore, the nouveaux romanciers inadvertently encouraged this interpretative transformation.
The nouveau roman's ‘map of misreading’ is also apparent from its writers' confrontation with more immediate predecessors.
In establishing  their ancestry, little reference is ever made to the surrealists, who obviously contributed a great deal to the contestation of realism — this seems to arise mainly from a dislike of the practice of automatic writing.
On the other hand, a writer like Céline becomes an ‘approved’ forerunner on account of the liberation of literary language which he effected in Voyage au bout de la nuit (1932).
Existentialist fiction was considered to be insufficiently experimental.
Sartre in particular was especially reprehensible as a consequence of his advocacy of ‘la littérature engagée’— such a delineation of a social and political function for the writer was at direct variance with the formalist prerequisites of the nouveau roman .
Demonstrating in a tangible way the ‘anxiety of influence’, in Robbe-Grillet's Le Miroir qui revient (1985) and Claude Simon's Discours de Stockholm (1986), Sartre is castigated for having failed to follow through the innovative La Nausée (1938) by writing Les Chemins de la Liberté (1945 — 49), which seemed unambiguously political in conception and, as a consequence, axiomatically non-modernist.
However, their arguments rest purely on Sartre's intentions rather than his practice in the latter novel: Sartre in fact adopts a whole range of modernist devices throughout the three volumes, deriving precisely from the narrative experiments of Joyce, Dos Passos, Faulkner and others.
Arguably, Nathalie Sarraute's career benefited enormously from Sartre's famous preface to her first novel,Portrait d'un inconnu (1947), which he claimed placed her in the alternative tradition of the ‘anti-roman’.
Sartre had initially been attracted to her work because it seemed to demonstrate his own concern with the inauthenticity of human relationships, yet he would later reject her fiction simply on the basis that her novels are set in an upper-middle-class Parisian milieu.
Camus's L'Etranger (1942) is also marred (at least for Robbe-Grillet) by the unwelcome intrusion of a ‘metaphorical’ vocabulary in the second part of the novel: in his landmark essay ‘Nature, Humanisme, Tragédie’(1958) and in Le Miroir qui revient , Robbe-Grillet had condemned this unfortunate lapse from ‘le degré zéro de l'écriture’almost as a kind of betrayal of modernism, and as deficient in phenomenological terms by establishing a complicity between man and the world.
If we accept J.-F.
Lyotard's definition of postmodernism as the subversion of metanarratives, then the nouveau roman can be said to have rejected the totalizing metanarrative of existentialism, even if only to have replaced it with a literary-historical metanarrative of its own.
Significantly, it is the metaphysical dimension of Samuel Beckett's writing which places him, strictly speaking, outside the confines of the nouveau roman , despite the similarities in formal experimentation.
André Gide's Les Fauxmonnayeurs (1926), a novel characterized by self-reflexivity and self-consciousness, in which the device of mise en abyme (or internal duplication) is especially conspicuous, has perhaps not received from them the kind of attention that could be expected.
Gide was perceived as having been too closely allied to the psychological novel in the  French tradition of the roman d'analyse .
Marcel Proust's A la recherche du temps perdu , however, is recognized as an important technical achievement, especially by Claude Simon and Robbe-Grillet.
Simon's syntactical and thematic discursiveness and preoccupation with memory and time are clearly reminiscent of Proust.
For Nathalie Sarraute, Proust's psychologizing had to be refined and transformed in order to convey the mobility and fragmentation of consciousness.
Proust's use of the anonymous first-person narrator was to be adopted in several nouveaux romans .
All of the nouveaux romanciers have paid tribute most notably to Flaubert: Robbe-Grillet has explicitly credited Flaubert with the departure from realism in favour of a more self-consciously modernist writing; the title of Nathalie Sarraute's essay ‘Flaubert le précurseur’ itself underlines the indebtedness of the nouveau roman towards Flaubert's work.
In a series of overtly periodizing comments by these novelists, Flaubert's oeuvre is deemed to constitute a ‘turning-point’ in French literary history.
Flaubert's use of style indirect libre in order to voice the consciousness of his protagonists, is regarded as the forerunner of the stream of consciousness technique popularized by Joyce and other twentieth-century modernists.
It is, of course, the Joyce of Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man and Ulysses who attracted the nouveaux romanciers rather than Finnegans Wake , whose verbal and linguistic inventiveness did not receive many enthusiasts, except for a period during the 1970s when both Robbe-Grillet and Simon were influenced by the theories of Jean Ricardou, who stressed the productive nature of work on language in order to counter representation.
Ricardou was particularly guilty of attempting to establish an officially sanctioned list of approved modernist precursors: the criteria he used were based on a simplistic and over-schematic distinction between writers who accepted a mimetic function and those for whom the materiality of language could be shown to be paramount.
In general, what the nouveaux romanciers would jettison from modernism was the privileging of interiority and the portrayal of the awakening artistic sensibility: although writer figures occasionally appear in the fiction of Robert Pinget and Nathalie Sarraute, we find a rejection of the élitist preoccupation with the artist as a unique individual possessing a heightened awareness of reality.
The concern with anonymity and alienation, present in the metaphysical novel of the twentieth century, is absorbed most obviously by Robbe-Grillet, although devoid of an overtly philosophical content.
It is clear from his critical writings that, to some extent, he considers himself to be the successor of Kafka and Camus: this influence emerges in his novels,Dans le labyrinthe (1959)— whose very title evokes Kafka and Borges — and his first work,Un Régicide (1949; published 1978) in which the atmosphere is very tangibly that of the absurd-cum-behaviourist novel (see Smyth 1983), even if in both cases the metaphysical is subjected to parody.
It is evident from the comments made by the nouveaux romanciers that they considered themselves to be developing and integrating the formal experiments of writers drawn from a carefully selected modernist canon, suggesting that they judged modernism to have been incomplete in the French novel before their arrival.
The attack on the norms of Classic realism was of course aided and abetted by the emerging school of structuralist critics, most notably Roland Barthes, who, in Le degré zéro de l'écriture (1953) and in Essais Critiques (1964), espoused the efforts of the nouveau roman (or, more exactly, of Robbe-Grillet) in overturning the Balzacian bourgeois novel and its attendant retrograde ideology.
The deconstruction of narrative as a natural or unproblematic activity was to be amplified by several other literary theorists.
The decentring of the author as the source and guarantee of his/her discourse, and the increasing preoccupation with the operation of intertextuality in the novel could be demonstrated to be reflected in the work of the nouveaux romanciers .
Structuralism was able to use the nouveaux romanciers denial of an autobiographical motivation and its allocation of an apparently more active role to the reader as an illustration of the ‘death of the author’ criterion, while the difficult question of referentiality would be echoed by many of the novelists themselves in critical debate.
This collusion between writers and critics was not deliberate, let alone coordinated in any systematic fashion, yet, in cultural and intellectual terms, the principal outcome was to revolutionize the literary landscape by initiating new, evaluative criteria to chart the movement from realism to modernism: Flaubert is also considered by Barthes to be the pivotal figure in this transformation towards an apparently less transparent writing.
Both the nouveau roman and structuralism were able to find nourishment and encouragement in their parallel activities and in the polemical tactics both movements employed as a means of furthering their broadly similar aims.
If it is in any way meaningful to speak in terms of a ‘cultural dominant’, then arguably the nouveau roman could not have achieved this without the support of like-minded critics.
Indeed, in the 1970s, the theoretical influence of Jean Ricardou, who was aligned to both movements, extended even to the actual fiction produced by Robbe-Grillet and Claude Simon at that stage, and several of the concepts he formulated were regurgitated in critical interventions by these writers.
The nouveaux romanciers have used not simply formalist, but explicitly formal realist arguments to explain their departure from traditional narrative structures: the form of the novel itself had to reflect the changing perception of reality as fragmentary and discontinuous.
For Robbe-Grillet in particular, this was also a philosophical and quasi-sociological necessity, mirroring the dehumanization and alienation of man in modern society — a critique which would later be adapted by the Marxist theorist Lucien Goldmann — in Pour une sociologie du roman (1964)— who was able to use the concept of reification as a means of explaining the chosisme of Robbe-Grillet's early novels and the subversion of character in the nouveau roman generally.
Even as recently as 1982, Robbe-Grillet would explain his transgressive narrative techniques by relying on the Sartrean concept of contingency (see Oppenheim 1986): the disruptive narrative syntax conveys the fragmentation of man in the world, the absence of meaning in his novels can thus be said to correspond to the gratuitousness of existence.
With the exception of the Ricardou-dominated 1970s, Claude Simon would adopt a similar set of epistemological and phenomenological pretexts for his textual practices.
‘Rendre la perception confuse, multiple et simultanée du monde’ was the title of one of the interviews given to coincide with the publication of Histoire (1967), in the course of which he described his narrative strategy in the novel as an attempt to convey, in formal terms, the incoherence of perception and memory.
Nathalie Sarraute has consistently defended the narrative structures of her texts as the only possible means of representing, in fictional form, the psychological interactions between consciousnesses which she describes as ‘tropisms’— the depiction of subtle intersubjective activity involves the creation of a more fluid narrative discourse.
The linearity and chronology of the conventional novel had to be abandoned in order to achieve this: the minute movements of attraction and repulsion towards other consciousnesses, language and objects could not be accommodated within the character-centred novel of classic realism.
It is clear from L'ère du soupçon that Sarraute is arguing from a position which considers psychological realism of the traditional kind as a falsification of mental experience.
Michel Butor's justifications for the devices used in his early novels are also grounded in the language of mimetic realism.
Although the attack on the forms of classic nineteenth-century fiction was pursued in the interests of modernity, it is evident from the defences provided by the nouveaux romanciers that they were in fact relying to a considerable extent on a revised concept of realism.
It is certainly the case that the arguments they employed were partly designed in order to make their work appear more lisible , in response to the frequently voiced objections about the difficulty of their novels.
In this respect, their rhetoric had the principal aim of facilitating the reader's response to these otherwise ‘incomprehensible’ texts whose erosion of conventional contours impeded the reader's access.
The retrievability, or recuperability (as it came to be known), of the nouveau roman depended to some degree on the reader being convinced of the necessity for modernity.
The issue of recuperability itself became a key factor in critical debate with the publication of Bruce Morrissette's Les Romans de Robbe-Grillet (1963).
Roland Barthes's preface to this volume warns against the attempt made to ‘naturalize’ Robbe-Grillet's fiction by adopting such a markedly humanist approach.
Before Morrissette, Robbe-Grillet had appeared to accept the chosiste label attached to him by Barthes on account of the supposedly flat and neutral representation of external reality and the minute descriptions of  objects in his early novels, which seemed to be in accordance with the phenomenological position outlined in Pour un nouveau roman .
Morrissette's interpretative strategy was derived from Robbe-Grillet's own departure from this standpoint in favour of a more ‘subjectivist’ view.
Thus Morrissette was able to perform readings of his work which concentrated on the psychological realism of the texts in question.
He argued that, in each of Robbe-Grillet's first three novels, the narrative discourse is focalized around the consciousness of the central protagonist, so the recurrent objects (the rubber in Les Gommes , the cord in Le Voyeur , the centipede in La Jalousie ) connote some sexual or criminal obsession and the presence of an interiority.
Far from being neutral, the objects and descriptions become in fact suffused with meaning when attached in some way to a centre of consciousness.
Robbe-Grillet showed himself to be willing to embrace this psychological/subjectivist mode of analysis as readily as he had previously accepted Roland Barthes's imprimatur as the model chosiste .
It was not uncommon for critics at this time to be engaged in character study and reconstructions of plot and chronology.
Under Ricardou's encouragement, Robbe-Grillet's compliance with such ‘naturalizing’ endeavours would be abandoned for a textual materialist perspective focusing on the self-referentiality of the practice of writing.
This, in turn, would be replaced by the novelist's insistence on the ludic nature of his fiction.
Barthes's caveats against recuperation have been most convincingly demonstrated by Stephen Heath (1972) who is critical of the tendency towards naturalization: the radical experience of the nouveau roman is undermined when the novels are subjected to reductive readings of the psychologizing variety enacted by Morrissette, however much these may be encouraged by the novelists themselves.
For example, despite her attachment to an extra-textual and pre-linguistic domain of mental activity, Nathalie Sarraute's work, according to Heath, should not be limited by interpretative strategies which are fundamentally referentialist in orientation.
In his highly influential critical works, Jean Ricardou was particularly adamant in his condemnation of readings of nouveaux romans which suggest a mimetic motivation of any kind.
In support of the proposition that the development of the nouveau roman corresponds to the transition from modernism to postmodernism, it can certainly be shown that the early productions of the nouveaux romanciers are susceptible to readings which to some extent meet the criteria of psychological realism so important in modernist aesthetics.
The subsequent evolution towards an apparently less recuperable writing would seem to bear this out.
In Robbe-Grillet's fiction, this movement may seem most tangible.
In Un Régicide (1949/1978), the narrative oscillates between two apparently distinct, fictional universes: a ‘prosaic’ world (recounted in the third person), in which a character named Boris is socially, metaphysically and politically alienated in the manner befitting an existentialist hero, intersects with the ‘poetic’world of an anonymous  first-person narrator who inhabits an isolated farming and fishing community.
These competing discourses struggle to achieve hierarchy in diegetic terms.
However, the text invites us, as a result of the parallels and correspondences between the two worlds, to consider the first-person sequences as occurring oneirically in Boris's mind: thus the disruptions in the narrative could be interpreted as the symptom of his distorted ordering of experience.
In Les Gommes (1953), Robbe-Grillet adopts a mock-Oedipal detective story format: the detective Wallas, at the end of a period of 24 hours, kills the man whose ‘murder’ he had been sent to investigate.
His investigations are accompanied by a search for an india-rubber, about which he remembers only that it contained the two letters ‘di’ in the middle of its trade name (hence ‘Oe di pe’).
This novel becomes ‘readable’ if we accept the psychologizing interpretation that Wallas is a kind of victim of Oedipal obsessions which he projects onto the objects around him.
In Le Voyeur (1955), the intense preoccupation with specific objects which the travelling watch salesman displays — the figure-of-eight patterns, the girl's neck, the rope, the cinema poster — is contrived to function as an index of his guilt: Mathias is incriminated by the narrative, although his guilt is never proved conclusively.
The sado-sexual crime is not described, yet everything in the text points to Mathias as the perpetrator.
In La Jalousie (1957), the disjointed chronology, the use of the present tense, the repetition of scenes, the recurrence of certain details — features which initially perplex readers — become explicable if an identifiable narrator is postulated.
If we accept that the narrative discourse represents the consciousness of the unnamed ‘jealous husband’ of the woman known as A…, then the ambiguities and contradictions in the text can be related to this narrator's obsessive fascination with the possibility of his wife's adultery.
According to this reading, the repetition of episodes and the lack of a linear structure can be regarded as being in keeping with the formal realism of a narrative which is being conducted by someone whose overwrought state of mind colours his perception of the world around him, and who is no longer able to distinguish between imagination and reality.
The central gap in the text is the narrative perspective; however, by accepting the proposition that this is indeed a first-person narration, with the first person conspicuously omitted, then the novel becomes understood in psychological terms as a radical example of stream of consciousness writing.
In all of these novels, the disorders and inconsistencies can be justified as the attempt to convey the limited viewpoint of an incompetent or unreliable narrator, or the workings of a confused and obsessed consciousness.
Similarly, in what seemed a particularly unconventional technique at the time, Michel Butor, in La Modification (1957), employs a second-person narrative as a means, apparently, of voicing the monologue which Léon Delmont is conducting with himself as he travels from Paris to Rome to join his mistress, explaining to himself the history of his  affair and anticipating how it will resolve itself.
In Robert Pinget's Le Fiston (1959), the grief of the drunken narrator clouds his view of the world.
Claude Simon's fiction provides for the possibility of retrieval, if we accept the mimetic claim that the form of the novel must be dictated by the incoherence and instability of memory and perception: in Le Vent (1957),L'Herbe (1958),La Route des Flandres (1960),Le Palace (1962) and Histoire (1967), the fragmentation and discontinuity of reality is conveyed in the narrative syntax itself.
The arguments adduced by Simon reveal a concern with representation: the partial and subjective nature of perception and the flux of experience necessitate an equally disruptive formal structure.
These novels can be read as attempts to reconstruct the fragmentary apprehension of the past.
As Simon himself has stated, there is a striking incompatibility between the discontinuity of perception and the continuity of writing: it is central to Simon's aesthetics to bring to the novel the non-linearity of painting.
Many of Simon's novels dramatize the attempts to impose order and meaning on the chaos of reality and history, hence the appearance in his fiction of tumultuous events such as war and revolution.
His work is intimately concerned with epistemological questions.
In stylistic terms, the long and digressive sentences, the accumulation of parentheses, the sustained use of the present participle, the increasing lack of conventional paragraphing and punctuation are all deployed in order to convey simultaneity of perception, in a manner reminiscent of both Proust and Faulkner.
In Le Vent , there seems to be a reconstitution of the past in which perception, memory and imagination all play equally important roles: the central protagonist Montès provides the narrator with a disordered version of events.
In L'Herbe , Louise is another unreliable narrator; indeed, the perspective changes from sharing Louise's point of view to a wider lens.
The theme of disintegration in the novel (Louise's Tante Marie is lying comatose in an upstairs room on the verge of death) is suggested formally by the disjointed narration and chronology.
In La Route des Flandres , the fluctuations between first and third person mean that it is not possible to contend that the novel's discourse is organized entirely around the consciousness of the central character Georges, who otherwise seems to be re-creating his experiences in the course of a night in bed with the widow of his commanding officer, some time after the wartime conflict.
The principal theme of this novel is again decomposition in all its aspects, so the formal disintegration of the text mirrors the dispersal of Georges's subjectivity.
Using the débâcle of the Flanders campaign as a basis, a reconstruction of the fragments of a chaotic experience occupies the narrative.
Simon's decision to dispense with normal syntax implies that stylistically the intention is to render the real more satisfactorily than the conventional novel would allow.
Le Palace presents a reconstruction of the events of a day, a night and the next morning during the Spanish Civil War, apparently in the mind of a student — into this  narrative is imbricated the ‘Récit de l'homme-fusil’ by an Italian who has committed an assassination.
In Histoire , the narrator is engaged in the elaboration of descriptions which are suggested by a set of postcards: he attempts to evoke and organize these fragments of the past, aware that it is ultimately unknowable and that reconstructions are inevitably incomplete and distorted by the passage of time.
The chaotic narration is therefore in harmony with such a fractured representation: conventional syntax and punctuation would only conceal the discontinuity of experience.
It is evident from these examples that Simon wished to compose novels whose structure and language would reproduce the confusion of perception, the discontinuous and simultaneous aspect of memory and the fragmentary nature of knowledge.
Simon's own statements made at this time betray a strong representational intent: while rejecting the forms of classic realism, the novel nevertheless retained its mimetic role.
His subsequent development, however, may be said to demonstrate an autonomous and self-referential orientation: his later works confirm the anti-representational and non-recuperable trend in postmodernist fiction.
Nathalie Sarraute, however, has never deviated from her conviction that her novels must be considered as attempts to reproduce, in formal terms, the domain of the interpersonal, pre-verbal psychological reality of tropism.
It is to facilitate the translation of the dramas of sub-conversation and activity below the surface of consciousness that she abandons the conventions of linear narrative, normal chronology, plot and characterization.
The 24 texts which comprise her first work,Tropismes (1939), are in fact closer to prose poems than traditional narrative.
The representation of psychological states in formation demanded the expansiveness offered by the full-length novel to depict the psychological sub-surface in all its complexity: the experience of tropism should be created in the reader.
In Portrait d'un inconnu (1948) and Martereau (1953), anonymous first-person narrators, hypersensitive to the power of tropism, provide the narrative focus.
In Le Planétarium (1959), however, although it is possible to attribute some of the sequences to the consciousnesses of the ‘characters’ involved, we are presented with conflicting narratives and interpretations of events emanating from insufficiently individuated figures, Her subsequent novels confirm this development towards a narrative discourse in which it is increasingly difficult to situate a perceiving consciousness.
Sarraute's aim is to stress that tropistic movements are interchangeable: movements of attraction and repulsion towards or away from other human beings, and the frequently clichéd and stereotyped language they employ, demand representation in a more flexible narrative structure.
She has repeatedly emphasized that her novels are linguistically self-conscious explicitly in order to translate the apprehension of the problematic area of language.
The subject of Les Fruits d'or (1963) is a novel which is itself entitled ‘Les Fruits d'or’; this situation acts as a catalyst for tropistic interactions amongst a set of  predominantly anonymous figures who are trapped within the fixed patterns of social discourse.
Entre la vie et la mort (1968) depicts the drama of a writer's struggle with language and the processes of creation, aware as he is of the potentially enslaving power of words.
In Vous les entendez ?(1972), an art object is the topic of discussion: it becomes a kind of totem whose aesthetic value is upheld by a father and contested by his children.
In the short texts which make up L'Usage de la parole (1980), the traumatic reactions to particular words and phrases are once again dramatized in all their intensity.
Although eschewing the analysis prevalent in the traditional psychological novel, Sarraute's work nevertheless combines representation with reflexivity.
Rejecting realism as a literary form, the nouveaux romanciers are still prepared to adopt the mimetic impetus, while jettisoning the conventional devices of plot, character and linear chronology.
The obvious validity of recuperable readings of many of these nouveaux romans by applying criteria derived from psychological realism cannot be denied.
It is evident from a perusal of the ‘legitimizing’ commentary provided by the novelists themselves that the reader is being encouraged to ‘naturalize’the texts along the lines suggested.
The subsequent evolution towards the production of fiction from which no coherent narrative perspective emerges would seem to demonstrate a measure of discontent with previous textual practice.
It is certainly not the case that this can be discerned in the work of all the nouveaux romanciers at the same time; however, that such a development did indeed take place suggests that a new poetics was being tacitly formulated.
Ricardou has been credited as the instigator of this development, although his contribution to the nouveau roman was principally to articulate and systematize this new aesthetic.
Coming from the Tel Quel camp, which, under Philippe Sollers's leadership, was pushing experimentation even further, Ricardou sought to contest the referentiality of the nouveau roman .
The importance of Tel Quel in setting the new agenda should not be underestimated: from the point of view of periodization, the writers and critics associated with this journal (the most influential since Sartre's Les Temps Modernes ), in addition to espousing the ‘classic modernists’, also resurrected from literary history non-canonical writing which they considered to have been neglected.
Lautréamont, Raymond Roussel, Céline and Joyce's Finnegans Wake all benefited from this redrawing of the map of subversive discourse.
It is vital to emphasize Tel Quel's perception of the implicitly political nature of avant-garde writing: Ricardou shared the group's belief in the ‘critical function’ of oppositional works.
He also attempted to import Tel Quel's conviction, derived from semiotics, that the hors-texte did not exist.
This critical language favoured the free play of the signifier at the expense of the signified, hence the importance of word-play and the exploration of the properties of language in the elaboration of the text.
According to this version, the  materiality of the text should replace the evocation of the workings of consciousness.
In this respect, the emergence of a nouveau nouveau roman was said to have evolved which was deemed to be characterized by this emphasis on textual productivity, instead of on reference and representation.
Ricardou refused to countenance any vestigial Mimetic input, such was his preoccupation with a view of the ‘authentically’ radical text, as defined by work in and on language.
If it had become axiomatic that the author (or ‘scriptor’ in Ricardou's terminology) had become decentred and that the novel could not represent any psychological or social reality, then the origins of a text could only be found in the self-generating aspect of language itself.
Ricardou contested the ‘referential illusion’ that the text could refer to anything other than itself: the myths of expression and representation, propounded by the (historically superannuated) literary movements of Romanticism and realism, had to be excised from self-reflexive modernist practice.
He distinguished between ‘l'aventure d'une écriture’ and ‘l'écriture d'une aventure’: this precluded the existence of a pre-verbal, pre-textual domain.
The fiction of Robbe-Grillet and Claude Simon can be said to approximate most closely to these new literary values.
Dans le labyrinthe (1959) was the first of Robbe-Grillet's novels not to have a tangible focalization, unless we accept Morrissette's interpretation that it dramatizes the attempts of a delirious narrator to construct a text from objects around him.
Developing even further the gommage technique of his previous novels, this novel presents permutations and combinations of a set of elements subject to revision, repetition, and repetition with variation.
La Maison de rendez-vous (1965) and Projet pour une révolution  a  New York (1970) continue in this vein, except that the ‘content’ of these texts is provided by clichéd representations of the cities of Hong Kong and New York, respectively, in popular mythology.
Robbe-Grillet has chosen these stereotypical exotic and erotic images precisely in order to prevent the reader from constructing a ‘meaningful’ world.
In his work of this period, Robbe-Grillet increasingly abandoned the cohesion and narrative hierarchies of his earlier fiction: the ontological status of the text is problematized.
The novelist has himself referred to the self-generating quality of these works: he seems to provide the reader with a metaphor of the construction of narrative.
His highly playful Djinn (1981)— originally written as a French teaching text — demonstrates the limitless power of narrative to combine and fragment in ever-changing patterns.
Robbe-Grillet appeared to be illustrating the poetics of the jeu combinatoire : the novels reflect their own processes of composition, and the interpretative strategies which the reader brings are encoded within the text.
These novels are full of gaps and contradictions of various kinds.
Claude Simon's fiction at this time is particularly amenable to the criteria established by Ricardou.
In La Bataille de Pharsale (1969),Les Corps Conducteurs (1971),Triptyque (1973) and Leçon de chases (1976), any trace of an interiority has been elided.
The texts seem to have been composed as a result of work in and on language.
Simon explores the properties, associations and connotations of words in order to form the thematic basis of the novel.
The opening of Leçon de choses , significantly entitled ‘Générique’, can almost be said to provide a poetics of the autonomous, self-referential text, such is the emphasis upon the creative power of words: a description is composed which will generate the text as a whole and which also acts as a self-reflexive commentary on this process.
The following extract from the preface to Orion aveugle (1970) conveys the importance he attaches to the exploitation of both signifier and signified:
Chaque mot en commande (ou en suscite) plusieurs autres, non seulement par la force des images qu'il attire à lui comme un aimant, mais parfois aussi par sa seule morphologie, de simples assonances qui, de même que les nécessités formelles de la syntaxe, du rythme et de la composition, se révèlent aussi fécondes que ses multiples associations.
The descriptions can be generated almost endlessly by means of this productive view of the activity of writing.
These texts lack a fixed centre: the narrative perspective is always shifting, and what remains of ‘plot’ is subject to continual fragmentation.
The descriptions, far from gesturing to an external or subjective reality, merely affirm their own status as verbally constructed artefacts.
There is a concerted desire to destroy what remains of the referential illusion: what seems ‘real’ is immediately transformed into another representation in the form of a painting, a postcard or a film.
Robbe-Grillet's contemporaneous work exhibits similar characteristics: in La Maison de rendez-vous , for example, a ‘real’ person turns out to be a dummy, or a narrative sequence is revealed as a theatrical representation or a description of a magazine cover.
The textual practices of these nouveaux romanciers reveal a much greater similarity than was previously the case: under Ricardou's stewardship, a new aesthetic programme seems to have been in operation.
The linear and temporal progression of the narrative is disrupted by the non-stratified discourse of the text.
The proliferating, non-hierarchized narratives impede recuperable readings from occurring.
They present the reader with the autotelic novel, sufficient unto itself and the fruit of the endless play of language.
Many of these texts can be read as elaborate commentaries on the nature of writing and reading.
It would be difficult to find more suitable candidates for postmodern metafictionality than the novels of Simon and Robbe-Grillet at this time.
These plural, heterogeneous and non-totalized novels vividly proclaim their metafictional status, referring constantly to the processes of their own production.
They would seem to demonstrate the proposition that a text can only ever designate its own activity, that textuality is inherently narcissistic.
While this blatant metafictionality is most evident in Robbe-Grillet's  and Simon's novels of the period, it is less noticeable in the work of Sarraute and Butor.
Degrés (1960) is in fact the last of Butor's works to be labelled a novel; the remainder of his output is difficult to classify in generic terms, as his writings seem to eschew any narrational impulse.
Indeed, in many of these later works, coherent and sequential narrative patterns seem to have been abandoned in order to be more representational, as in Mobile (1962),Réseau aérien (1962) and 6 810 000 litres d'eau par seconde (1966).
It has already been indicated that Nathalie Sarraute has always remained committed to the depiction of psychological states, despite the apparently ‘narratorless’ trend of her fiction since Le Planétarium .
The chasm between her and the other writers is most apparent in comments she made at the ‘Nouveau roman: hier, aujourd'hui’ conference at Cerisy in 1972, in which she clung resolutely to her conviction of the existence of a pre-verbal, extra-textual reality in mental life.
This was obviously anathema to Ricardou, in particular, and a fairly acrimonious exchange erupted during the conference sessions surrounding this question of referentiality.
It is evident that Ricardou had established a new doxa of reflexivity from which no deviations could be permitted, such was the extent to which he saw himself as the custodian of a radical modernity.
For a text to be described as a nouveau roman it had to exhibit self-reflexive and metafictional features as well as foreground the exploration of the semantic and phonetic properties of language.
Nathalie Sarraute's novels could be claimed to display autonomy and reflexivity, despite her preoccupation with such a mimetic project.
An analysis of Ricardou's theoretical rhetoric, accompanied by readings of the later fiction of Robbe-Grillet and Simon, would amply support the proposition that a ‘change of dominant’ in favour of a postmodern aesthetic had occurred.
Recuperative readings grounded in psychological realism could no longer be effected.
The removal of a centre of consciousness to which the narrative discourse could be attached and the self-conscious preoccupation with both the linguistic/ verbal origins of the text and the status of the reading and writing of fiction suggested that a new aesthetic had been evolved.
However, as many of the novelists have themselves pointed out, the presence of transgressive and subversive features could be shown to exist in their earlier works.
While it is undeniable that Robbe-Grillet'– early novels are indeed capable of being read as essentially modernist texts whose narrative strategics consist in the representation of a distorted perception of reality, nevertheless, ‘retrospectively’, they can also be considered to demonstrate reflexivity.
The use of mise en abyme and the presence of an element of word-play would seem to align them with the apparently more transgressive works initiated — if the literary history of the nouveau roman is correct — by Dans le labyrinthe .
Equally, the existence of alternative and proliferating versions of ‘events’ of dubious ontological status anticipates the more radical disruptions of narrative  syntax carried out in the later novels.
Even La Jalousie , which had become assimilated into the ‘great tradition’ of the French psychological novel, could be described as an exercise in serial composition, as its author himself would claim.
All of these texts can be read equally well as examples of the récit lacunaire paradigm in poststructuralist criticism, such is the extent to which they seem to be generated by a gap or an absence.
In these earlier works, there are traces of the glissements in narrative structure which are so common in the later works.
Robbe-Grillet's insistence upon the essentially ludic dimension of all of his fiction (and cinema) was also a means of escaping what might be termed the prison-house of reflexivity; it was not uncommon to find him distancing himself from Ricardou, even during the conference devoted to his work in 1975, at which he claimed that even his supposedly ‘theoretical’ utterances over the years should be construed as attempts to maintain plurality and mobility.
Ricardou is accused (like Morrissette before him) of ironing out the contradictions and tensions in his novels.
It is only by stressing the element of play that the imposition of totalitarian meaning of any kind can be avoided.
This emphasis on an aesthetics of textual pleasure provides a convenient way of confronting the adventure of meaning present in Robbe-Grillet's oeuvre as a whole.
Of course, it could be argued that ludism is, in its way, another interpretative strategy launched by the novelist: while conceding the liberating effect of viewing the literary text as an open and democratic discourse, Robbe-Grillet is again allocating a new role to the reader.
The novelist's justification of ludism is usually couched in pseudo-political language: all meaning is seen to be implicitly ideological, therefore playful and experimental writing becomes a means of subverting dominant ideologies.
Just as the novelist considered the deconstruction and demythologizing of carefully selected cultural stereotypes to be a politically liberating activity, so, in the same way, he appears to be propagating an idealistic and positivistic view of the literary text which he was so quick to criticize in Sartre's aesthetics.
Claude Simon's Les Géorgiques (1981) was seen by several critics as a rejection of the extreme textual materialism of his more recent fiction, as if Simon had finally shaken off the pernicious influence of Jean Ricardou.
However, although there seems indeed to be a return to ‘History’(in Simonian terms) and an apparent abandonment of the scriptural narcissism of the self-generating novels he produced in the 1970s, this view also rests on a historicizing version of the development of Simon's fiction.
Again, it can be demonstrated that Simon's apparently more mimetic works also exhibit the linguistically self-generating features typical of his later fiction.
In La Route des Flandres , for example, there is ample evidence that many of the fictional sequences emerge as a result of an exploration of the properties of certain words: the inherently fertile nature of language can be shown to have generated the subsequent text, and, through the use of metaphor  and metonymy, the associations of both memory and language work together in the production of the text.
The dispersal of the narrative voice in this and other novels can be claimed to illustrate poststructuralism's preoccupation with the disintegration of subjectivity.
Histoire , whilst at one level a transposition of the discontinuity of experience, can at the same time be considered as providing an implicit commentary on the nature of fiction and writing: the text can be said to be formed from a meditation on a collection of postcards which the narrator is sifting through.
The process of description triggers off the narrative sequences.
Both of these novels contain in their opening pages a narrative sequence which acts as a kind of generating cell for the rest of the text — the process of textual production foregrounded in Leçon de choses .
Disturbing further the historicizing account of Simon's writing,Les Géorgiques commences in a similar vein.
Thus, the existence of both mimetic and autonomous features in Simon's novels proves that the two are not incompatible, as Ricardou claimed and which the novelist himself had been willing to endorse for a time.
It is evident that earlier nouveaux romans do contain, although less conspicuously, many of the radical features of the later works.
This observation raises the crucial question of precisely what kinds of criteria are being used to chart the evolution from a modernist to a postmodern aesthetic.
The example provided by the nouveau roman directly contests any strict application of many of the versions of this transformation.
If it is claimed that a poetics of textual production and reflexivity replaces mimetic strategies of any kind, then the early nouveau roman can also be made to conform to this new postmodern aesthetic.
Similarly, if subjectivity and interiority are deemed to be essentially ‘modernist’ characteristics, then it has to be said that these are also challenged in a number of ways in novels such as Le Voyeur and L'Herbe .
The increasing discontent of the nouveaux romanciers at being imprisoned in an interpretative mode of exclusive autonomy is witnessed in their attacks on Ricardou.
Nathalie Sarraute had never been prepared to accept his insistence on pure textuality, and both Robbe-Grillet and Claude Simon sought to distance themselves from the increasingly over-rigid application of his theories.
Robbe-Grillet stated that it was the tension between reference and reflexivity which characterized his works, and described as naive the belief (which he admits to having encouraged) in the self-generating text devoid of a controlling subjectivity (see Robbe-Grillet 1984: 10 — 13).
Claude Simon would become vociferous in his condemnation of Ricardou's ‘terrorism’(see Oppenheim 1986).
The major disadvantage of the textual materialist perspective is its complete failure to confront the autobiographical dimension in more recent examples of nouveau roman writing, which has proved to be increasingly fertile in the 1980s.
In Les Géorgiques , letters and documents attributed to the figure L.S.M. are in fact extracts from a bundle of papers belonging to a real ancestor of Simon.
Investigating  the life of this ‘ancestor’, the narrator is led into an account of his own experience.
Representation is called into question: the fictional status of the text being produced is repeatedly acknowledged.
In his most recent work,L'Acacia (1989), Simon again approaches, from another angle, many of the locations and themes of his previous novels.
As in Histoire , the narrative framework is provided by a kind of meditation from a window: again, the text is generated from an exploration of both the processes of memory and the fertility of language.
Ricardou's exclusively self-reflexive interpretative grid was never able to incorporate the presence of actual historical/autobiographical ‘truth’(however fundamentally relative Simon acknowledged it to be): a consideration of La Route des Flandres which is not afraid to examine the referential data can result in potentially valuable readings of the text.
Robbe-Grillet's two volumes of autobiography (Le Miroir qui revient (1984) and Angélique (1988)) merge conventional accounts of ‘real’ events with obviously fictitious sequences (based around the mysterious activities of a character called Henri de Corinthe), in addition to reflections on the nouveau roman generally and his own textual practices.
By stating provocatively, at the beginning of the book, ‘Je n'ai jamais parlé d'autre chose que de moi’(1984: 10), Robbe-Grillet could not be more ostentatiously exhibiting his departure from a textual materialist perspective.
However, the disruptions in chronology and the mixture of writings suggest that this is far from being a reactionary return to a more traditional form; indeed, these two works are grouped under the title Romanesques , further contravening the reader's conventional expectations of an autobiography as a revelation of some truth.
Nathalie Sarraute's Enfance (1983) also foregrounds hesitations concerning the legitimacy of the autobiographical temptation: generically, this work is not categorized as either novel or autobiography.
The structure of the work takes the form of a dialogue between an ‘autobiographizing’ narrator persona and an interrogative voice which raises reservations about the validity of the whole enterprise: at various points throughout the text statements and versions of events are contradicted and contested, thus inscribing the anticipated response of the reader in a manner reminiscent of the technique she used to great effect in her previous book,L'Usage de la parole (1980).
Such interjections are clearly ironic as they are likely to be those of the ‘trained’nouveau roman reader who has come to regard the decentring of the author as paradigmatic of contemporary experimental fiction.
The problematics of selfhood and subjectivity become the focus of many of the autobiographical texts produced by the nouveaux romanciers .
Robert Pinget's fiction is frequently inhabited by authorial personae.
It was mistakenly assumed that this trend represented a return to more traditional literary values; an examination of such works reveals a postmodernist contestation of the conventional boundaries between genres and an intertextual mixture of writings, of which the  fragmented subjectivity of the writer was itself a discourse capable of being plundered in order to generate text.
This is very much in evidence in Marguerite Duras's L'Amant (1984), which began as a commentary on an album of family photographs and which dramatizes the fragility of identity and the textualization of recollection.
In Philippe Sollers's most recent works (Le Coeur absolu (1987) and Les Folies françaises (1988)), the playful exploration of the drama of the male subject's sexual psyche is frequently the central theme: these texts hover between the categories of fiction, literary essay and autobiography.
This does not suggest that a return to psychological realism or a romanticization of the author is taking place; rather, the autobiographical trend in recent writing demonstrates an attempt to maintain the plural and unrestricted nature of writing.
Far from privileging authorial discourse, such writing submits the figure of the author and his/her subjectivity to intense scrutiny.
A frequent accusation levelled against the nouveau roman and, indeed, both modernism and postmodernism is their apolitical nature.
Even during the phase of rampant textual materialism, Ricardou and others were still able to claim that avant-garde writing was inherently political by its very existence.
By subverting conventional forms of representation and by foregrounding the reflexivity of the text, the dominant ideology could be in a sense unmasked.
This view involves an updating of what is essentially a Brechtian formulation: self-consciousness in formal terms will induce a socio-political prise de conscience on the part of the audience/readership, making it hostile to repressive ideological discourses.
Whilst not all the nouveaux romanciers would embrace this perspective with the enthusiasm of the Tel Quel group (whose combination of Marxism, psychoanalysis and radical semiotics made it particularly receptive to this positivistic role for avant-garde writing), Robbe-Grillet has always upheld the validity of this critical function.
The contestation of meaning can be regarded as a fundamentally transgressive practice which can have a liberating effect on the reader — hence his emphasis on the value of the ludic aspect of fractured narrative which had a ‘carnivalesque’ role (almost in the Bakhtinian sense) of freeing the reader.
In his Nobel Prize acceptance speech, Claude Simon also considered marginalized writing to be subverting totalitarian political control at least implicitly.
In this speech, Simon has recourse to the theories of the Russian Formalist school of criticism to support many of the arguments he puts forward on behalf of the inherently political viability of a formalist aesthetic.
Univocal meaning could be suppressed by evolving texts which are heterogeneous, polyvalent and thus, by their very nature, interrogative and oppositional.
The plurality and mobility of the modern experimental text was therefore, by its very rejection of the techniques and assumptions of the classic, realist, bourgeois novel, contravening the ideology on which such novels rest.
The major difficulty, however, with this view is that it stems again from a misreading of realism.
The modernity or postmodernity of the nouveau roman resides not only in the degree to which the novels in question are transgressive in narrative terms, but also in the extent to which they call into question the legitimacy of the practices they install.
It can be demonstrated that they go beyond mere autorepresentation, and that they contextualize in a variety of ways, as the recent autobiographical texts demonstrate.
Parody, self-quotation, the mixing of writings and culturally defamiliarizing strategies place the nouveau roman firmly within postmodernism.
It could be argued that there can be no more suitable example of the ‘epistemic break between the modern and the postmodern’(Hutcheon 1988: 51).
The pluralizing nature of texts as varied as Robbe-Grillet's Le Miroir qui revient and La Maison de Rendez-vous , Claude Simon's Triptyque and Les Géorgiques , Pinget's L'Apocryphe and Sarraute's Enfance places them firmly within the postmodernist camp.
Claude Simon's novels disprove the proposition that the nouveau roman is ‘dehistorical’: almost all of his novels engage directly with the epistemological and ontological status of the encounter with history.
Marguerite Duras's L'Amant and La Douleur bear witness to real, historical events; indeed, her fiction as a whole is particularly susceptible to politicizing readings because of the presence of feminist and colonial concerns.
If a definition of postmodernism rests on the removal of subjectivity, then several of the nouveaux romans cited demonstrate forcefully that the subject is a site of contradictions.
As Linda Hutcheon has stated:
Postmodern discourses both install and then contest our traditional guarantees of knowledge, by revealing their gaps or circularities.
They suggest no privileged access to reality.
(Hutcheon 1988: 157)
It would be difficult to find a better description of precisely those textual practices in the later manifestations of the nouveau roman .
An examination of the development of the nouveau roman displays exactly those difficulties with periodization which have beset postmodernist poetics, calling into question the legitimacy of literary history as a critical practice itself.
It has been central to the nouveau roman's poetics to establish a literary-historical metanarrative as a legitimizing strategy.
Postmodernism has created a reading community with specific expectations and evaluative criteria of its own.
It is important to take into account how this readership has been constructed and to recognize the danger implicit in the formulation of a totalizing version of literary evolution.
Italian Fiction in the Nineteen-Eighties
Michael Caesar
The terms ‘postmodern’, ‘postmodernism’ and their affiliates have not so far been accepted in Italy, except, for the most part, vaguely, in reports from overseas.
They are acknowledged to have a specific connotation in architecture; particular moments of contemporary Italian culture, though bearing a local label — that of the ‘trans-avant-garde’(transavanguardia ), coined for the visual arts by Achille Bonita Oliva (1984), or the philosophical notion of ‘weak thought’(pensiero debole ), theorized in a series of books and essays by Gianni Vattimo, Pier Aldo Rovatti and their colleagues (cf.
Vattimo and Rovatti 1983, Vattimo 1985, 1987)— are recognized as possessing at least a family resemblance to the more general phenomenon of ‘postmodernism’.
In literary criticism, the idea of the postmodern has scarcely taken hold at all.
That is not to say that such an idea, or something like it, is not necessary in Italy.
Insofar as the ‘post’ of postmodernism points to a lack, an emptying of a previous content, an absence of positive connotations to the present, then the term might do quite well to describe the current mood of dissatisfaction in Italian literary culture.
Simply used as a marketing term, to designate a fashionable commodity, it might also have appealed to publishers, had it been available at the time, as a packaging for the wave of fiction that followed in the tracks of Eco and Calvino in the early and mid-1980s, and for which no better epithet could be found than ‘new’ or ‘young’(despite a number of its representatives being somewhat less than youthful).
I would not wish by the foregoing to convey any sense of a lack of seriousness on the contemporary Italian literary scene.
On the contrary, what is happening, and has been happening over the past ten years or so, raises very serious questions indeed.
There appears to have been a return to narrative, with more titles published and more copies sold (although it must always be borne in mind that the Italian literary market is a relatively small one).
The reflowering of narrative has taken place without reference to one particular school or movement, to one genre or style.
Old certainties — the idea of a fundamental division between ‘realism’ and ‘experimentalism’, for example— have been superseded by a new pluralism.
Italian fiction, for a long time predicated on an absolute distinction between ‘high’ or ‘quality’writing and ‘popular’writing, and, with few exceptions, limited in its ‘higher’forms to an alternation between social observation and psychological  introspection, has changed its shape: the detective story, the thriller, the Gothic fantasy, science fiction, the romance, all now occupy an honoured place in what is accepted as ‘serious’fiction.
The result is a sense that a great deal is going on, although how good all this writing is and, even more significantly, what the make-up of the new public and the social function of its reading are matters for debate.
Beyond the obvious success (relative) of much recent Italian fiction, from Calvino to Tabucchi, from Eco to De Carlo, there surfaces from time to time the obstinate question, What can we now ask of literature, fiction in particular?
There was a time when its readers expected the novel to inform or to instruct, to contribute to the definition of a direction for society.
As recently as the late 1950s when Pasolini wrote his two novels of, and largely in, the language of the Roman slums, at least part of his purpose was to stun his reader into recognition of a hidden social reality.
That purpose might be challenged, as it was by the neo-avant-garde of the early 1960s (cf.
Hutcheon 1977 and Wagstaff 1984), in the name of a radically different literary project, wherein the text draws attention not to the outside world, but to its own procedures.
But now the question is whether anything can be asked of fiction at all.
It exists, in a variety of discrete forms, being everything and nothing.
It seems not theoretically mistaken, but simply anachronistic, an error of praxis, for Goffredo Fofi to complain about the lack of writing which confronts the terrible realities of Italian public life in the 1970s, ‘that tells who we are, that is immersed in the lives of everyone’(Fofi 1985: 13).
Such a book, or books, might exist or come into being, but there is no reason, in the present literary economy, why they should .
The critic, no longer speaking for a collectivity, if he/she ever did, cannot summon writing forth.
Never as in a time like the present — of radical social change in Italy as in other European countries, of the transition from an industrial to a service economy (Italy's second major economic revolution in 30 years), of the questioning of many social values, above all in the matter of social relations (between the sexes, between friends, between producer and consumer), of profound uncertainty about the future, commingled with fear, anxiety and even expectation — never has the impotence of literature been so apparent, its inability to say the word which, in Montale's phrase, ‘squares us off on every side’(Montale 1977: 47).
Yet one understands and sympathizes with the reader who urges for that word to be said (even as he/she understands that it cannot be), and no amount of earnest preaching that this is the way things are, that no certainties can be reached, will attenuate the sense of frustration that accompanies our contemplation of the ruins.
Calvino and his contemporaries: De Carlo, Del Giudice, Celati
Italo Calvino's last complete book,Mr Palomar (1985), opens to the movement of waves and the look of a solitary observer whose gaze  attempts to follow the progress of one single wave in its passage, separated and isolated from that of all the others, from open sea to shore.
Mr Palomar, the observer, is a nervous man, living ‘in a frenzied and congested world’(Calvino 1986: 4): congested not only with other humans like himself, crowding preferably into places which seem to reflect back at them mute incomprehension of their triumphant ubiquity (the zoo, the garden of rocks and sand of the Ryoanji of Kyoto), but criss-crossed furthermore with signals and signs, simultaneously requiring and resisting interpretation.
Mr Palomar's attempt to isolate the wave is a difficult and repeatedly unsuccessful one.
But where does the difficulty lie?
In the things themselves?
In Mr Palomar?
Neither of these, strictly, is the territory of Calvino's fiction, which focuses rather on the relation between the two.
Mr Palomar is aware that the words we use to ask the questions and phrase the answers determine the very reality which they are intended to interrogate.
The little waves ‘strike’ the shore, the high part of an advancing wave is a ‘hump’; looking to another portion of creation, it would surely be better, but impossible, just to ‘observe’the behaviour of migrating starlings than to try to understand it through the conflicting ‘explanations’that have been proposed for it.
Visiting the ruins of Tula in Mexico, Mr Palomar is torn between interpretation and non-interpretation, between the explanations of his knowledgeable friend, who transforms each mysterious stone into ‘a cosmic tale, an allegory, a moral reflection’, and the attitude of the teacher with his little party of schoolchildren who resolutely refuses to speculate on meaning, preferring simply to show his pupils the thing that is there.
Not knowing whether to interpret or not, and trying to decide between two impossible alternatives, is a characteristic problem for the ‘nervous’ Mr Palomar who, ‘to defend himself against the general neurasthenia…tries to keep his sensations under control insofar as possible’(4).
In his precisely delineated observation of the world, Calvino's Palomar is an emblematic figure of recent Italian fiction.
Neither a sociological nor a psychological type, he represents an assemblage of mental attitudes, providing a kind of vade-mecum and at the same time an ironic counterpoint to the anxieties of a public that is presumed by the book itself to have lost faith in totalizing explanations and englobing narratives.
In the face of such a generalization, it is worth pausing for a moment to take stock of the kind of observer that Palomar is not .
Stefano Tani has already pointed out that Calvino's idea of observation, within his wider poetic of ‘seeing’, is a different matter from the ‘impassive and indifferent, basically blind , gaze that we have inherited from the nouveau roman’.
Calvino's, and Palomar's, gaze, on the contrary, is interrogatory, teasing out the meaning of things, impartial but never impersonal or ‘inert’(Tani 1986: 122, 124).
This is true of some of the younger Italian writers too, but not of all: Andrea De Carlo, for example, puts much more ‘personality’ into his observing heroes and heroines than the nouveaux romanciers ever did, but it is a  very different personality from that of Palomar.
It is true that, as Calvino himself declared in his generous presentation (on the back cover) of De Carlo's first novel Treno di panna (Cream train 1981), the book recounts a youth made up, among other things, of sharp-eyed observation and an ‘insatiability of the eyes’.
Giovanni Maimeri wants to see, certainly, and gradually assembles the kind of equipment that a modern, young observer needs, a second-hand Ford to cruise the Los Angeles freeways in, a telephoto lens.
His alertness, however, hardly resembles the quizzical interrogations of the puzzled but essentially self-effacing philosopher Palomar; it is the wide-awakeness of a picaresque hero on the make.
The narrating self not only sees, but wants to be seen to be seeing: the registration of detail, also praised by Calvino, and the reproduction of objects, gestures and expressions are conscripted into a form of obsessive and narcissistic display on the part of the observer.
What is seen takes second place to the act of seeing.
Much of what is seen, furthermore, the ‘reality’ of the narrator's experience, conveys the impression of having been seen already.
For all his doubts and self-irony, Palomar still wants to penetrate the secrets of the world and, to this end, what is seen acts only as a means of activating the thoughtfulness of language.
Whether the explorations of language, with all their risk of being self-defeating, are successful is another question.
But compared with the world of De Carlo's first novel, where the information garnered by the eye leads to no critical interrogation of reality, Palomar's, and Calvino's, project seems almost hopeful.
Mr Palomar can be read as a series of representations of the world, attempted reproductions and descriptions of the out-there being constantly modified in the light of new experience and new information.
The observer's readiness to modify is admirably honest (Mr Palomar is a nice man) and ultimately exhausting: the process of adjustment can go only so far before atrophy threatens.
Each of Palomar's observations is a quest and each, in itself, a failure (even though the book, taken as a whole, conveys no sense of waste or disappointment but, on the contrary, of something rather noble and achieved).
Quests and questions of a distinctly Calvinian kind are the stuff of the two very intelligent novels published to date by Daniele Del Giudice:Lo stadio di Wimbledon (Centre Court 1983) and Atlante occidentale (Western atlas 1985), both of which also have a metaliterary dimension which links them to Calvino's other influential late novel,If on a Winter's Night a Traveller (1983).
The first follows the attempts by the first-person narrator to reconstruct the life and inner motivation of the Triestine man of letters, Roberto (‘Bobi’) Bazlen (1902–1965), whose literary ambitions were realized solely through the promotion of other writers and never through a completed work of his own.
From the tracking of this ‘non-writer’, Del Giudice proceeds, in the second novel, to the portrait of a fictional novelist who, on the brink of receiving the Nobel Prize, acknowledges with joy that he has passed beyond writing:
I do not think that I am claiming any particular credit if it seems to me that I have traversed writing in all forms, as best I could.
Now I have emerged from it, just as happy.
I have always been waiting, all my life, for writing and story-telling to be transparent to me as well; that moment has arrived…
(Del Giudice 1985: 30)
The metaliterary component is not so much in the existence of characters who discourse on the state of the art, even obliquely, through the exploration of writing's other — through non-writing or no-more-writing — as in the project of the central characters, which is an essentially dramatic one: that of trying to imagine themselves into the world of another.
In Lo stadio di Wimbledon , the young researcher is drawn in search of his elusive quarry by the few traces that remain: the occasional photograph; a few letters and other writings; the memories of surviving contemporaries.
The effect of his successive encounters and discoveries — which are very sparse — is that things become more complicated, or rather, that they become increasingly difficult to describe, to ‘capture’.
At a certain point in his investigations, at the harbour in Trieste, the narrator imagines the pleasure felt by the midshipman who at that moment is explaining the lay-out and workings of his ship to two visitors, giving all the parts of the ship and all the instruments their proper names, which ‘have no synonyms’(Del Giudice 1983: 44); and muses further on his own dreams of navigation, envying the midshipman ‘the way in which he concentrates on the angle and the height, and his habit of considering himself in relation to something’, above all ‘the exactitude of the chart’(45).
He envies too the regularity, the normality of a life at sea and the unique relation of those who work it with the element by which they are surrounded: ‘The water opens and closes continuously, and only those who are on board know that they have really passed through.
Just the act of passage is a complex one’(46).
This is an important recognition for the narrator, for gradually in his quest for Bazlen he too comes to accept that he is ‘passing through’, and that the truth of which he is in pursuit is not an object fixed in time and space.
He cannot approach it by superimposing successive and ever more accurate (more informed) mental approximations to the real thing; he cannot name it, like an object, without fear of equivocation; but rather it lies here, in the moment through which he is passing, and the important thing is to see that.
The dialectic between ‘passage’ and ‘approach’is played subtly in both novels.
Simply to pass risks a sense of purposelessness; but the purposefulness of approach requires delicacy and tact.
In Atlante occidentale , the writer Ira Epstein meets the particle physicist Piero Brahe after a near collision in mid-air between their two light aircraft in the skies above Geneva.
Brahe works on the CERN accelerator (which the novel assumes to be completed and functioning); his experiment involves close and constant watching of the monitor which will tell him when the ‘event’ has taken place.
This is not, however, a novel about  two cultures, but about two people, about friendship.
The approach of the two men to each other is conducted like a ritual, a crucial moment of which comes when they go up in a plane together for the first time.
Brahe ‘shows’ Epstein his work — that is, he flies him around the 30-kilometer circumference of the accelerator which is buried deep underground, pinpointing the surface features and describing their relation to the features concealed below the surface.
Epstein then insists that Brahe should ‘tell’ him about his work, but that he must use the right words, the words that he would use with his scientific colleagues.
Brahe complies, and they enter into a description of the accelerator and the experiment, the details of which are covered for the reader (not for them) by the engine noise:
Epstein as he listened leant towards Brahe, and Brahe as he spoke leant towards Epstein, and they were so involved with each other, and in any case the engine noise was so continuous and enveloping, like the air, that no-one, behind them, could have heard anything!
(Del Giudice 1985: 120)
This small but central incident might serve as a model for Del Giudice's representation of knowing — the broad sweep, an outline superimposed on a subterranean reality; the naming of things in a concentrated and satisfying way; these as the preparation for meetings that are both intellectually passionate and composed, without possibility or need of further elaboration.
There is a passage in Mr Palomar which plays on the dialectic between speech (or communicative language) and silence and which might be taken to foreshadow the structure of the book as a whole.
Curiously enough, it is introduced by Palomar, yearning for the knowledge provided by precise denomination: every summer he listens to the birds in the garden and does not know what birds they are.
But it is not Palomar's regrets at not having cultivated ‘precise nomenclature and classification’ that concerns us here.
After a while the whistle is repeated — by the same blackbird or by its mate — but always as if this were the first time it had occurred to him to whistle; if this is a dialogue, each remark is uttered after long reflection.
But is it a dialogue, or does each blackbird whistle for itself and not for the other?
And, in whichever case, are these questions and answers (to the whistler or the mate) or are they confirmations of something that is always the same thing (the bird's own presence, his belonging to this species, this sex, this territory)?
Perhaps the value of this single word lies in its being repeated by another whistling beak, in its not being forgotten during the interval of silence.
Or else the whole dialogue consists of one saying to the other ‘I am here,’ and the length of the pauses adds to the phrase the sense of a ‘still,’as if to say: ‘I am here still, it is still I.’And what if it is in the pause and not in the whistle that the meaning of the message is contained?
If it were in the silence that the blackbirds speak to each other?
(In this case the whistle would be a punctuation mark, a formula like ‘over and out.’)
A silence, apparently the same as another silence, could express a hundred different notions; a whistle could too, for that matter; to speak to one another by remaining silent, or by whistling, is always possible; the problem is understanding one another.
Or perhaps no one can understand anyone: each blackbird believes that he has put into his whistle a meaning fundamental for him, but only he understands it; the other gives him a reply that had no connection with what he said; it is a dialogue between the deaf, a conversation without head or tail.
(Calvino 1986: 22)
These reflections do not come at the end of the piece — Palomar then goes on to make analogies with human communication — but they do encapsulate its essential spirit and that of many other pieces in the book.
Observation is at a certain point self-effacing; interrogations cancel each other out.
Inquiry reaches a point of maximum tension, then cannot proceed further.
Impasse is reached.
The tension is resolved, the impasse broken, by pushing on, to the next moment, the next story or reflection.
But there is no interconnection between these moments: although there is a recognizable Mr Palomar throughout, operating in a recognizably similar environment from one piece to the next, there is no attempt to construct a coherent and consistent account from his scattered observations.
What the reader comes across are events, flashes, brief encounters, steps on a journey, though what the shape and direction of the journey itself might be is hard to say.
A similar structure may be discerned in Del Giudice's novels (which tend to the episodic), but is decisive in another important book of the mid-1980s, Gianni Celati's Narratori delle pianure (Story-tellers of the plains 1985), a book with which Celati returned to writing after seven years of ‘silence’ and critical and theoretical reflection.
The ‘plains’ in question are the flatlands of the Po Valley, stretching from the region around Milan in the west to the river-delta in the east, and the ‘storytellers’are the anonymous sources of the tales that Celati relates.
Each of the 30 stories in the book bears a relation, sometimes strong sometimes tenuous, to a place on the schematized map with which the reader is presented when he/she opens the volume.
This map and the sense of movement from one place to the next form the frame of the book, equivalent to Boccaccio's paradisiacal garden to which his storytellers have fled from the plague-infested city, and it ensures that Narratori delle pianure is read not as a collection of stories, but as a succession.
That said, it is also true that each of these stories is self-contained and, like each of Palomar's two or three-page reflections, suggests concentration.
The stories read as distillations of the life or experience of ordinary people (working people, lower-middle-class and also the ‘emarginated’, the young, the unemployed, the old) plucked from a grey background where nothing appears to be going on.
The stories themselves do not, however, recount an exceptional event, indeed they seldom focus on a single event at all.
Rather, they represent (in very few pages) the continuities of people's lives through and beyond the ordinary accidents of birth, marriage, death, fortune and misfortune.
A hairdresser believes he sees the ghost of a fellow-soldier; spends some years in a mental hospital; on his release is rejected by his wife who he believes is ‘denying him his existence’; begins to think that everyone else is denying him his existence, perhaps because he was once shot at by a German and they all think he is dead; spends his Sundays looking into the river for the bullet which missed him; after his death, his wife discovers she is pregnant; she lets it be known that the hairdresser has spoken to her by night and told her ‘he was very happy that she had recognized the child as his, because that way she had stopped denying him his existence’; when eventually she moves away from Piacenza, the hairdresser stops speaking to her by night.
A woman spends many years charring in Cremona; she saves all her money to buy an apartment for her son when he gets married; her no-good husband, the boy's father, reappears after years and demands assistance; she refuses; when the son is engaged, she relents and negotiates subsidies to her ex-husband, for a suit, a car, a wedding-present; she organizes a big reception to which she invites all her former employers; nobody comes except a tennis-star; there is no sign of the husband; her lawyer tells her that the girl her son is marrying is her husband's mistress and that he had already taken over the apartment; she reflects a moment and decides to carry on with the reception, everything is all right, ‘if no one notices anything, it is as though nothing has happened’; passers-by are invited to join the wedding-party, which they happily do because the tennis-star is present; the husband turns up in his new car; no one takes any notice of him because no one knows who he is, except for the dealer he sometimes does jobs for, who tells him all new cars lose half their value as soon as they are bought and end up on the scrapheap anyway.
These tales are told with an extraordinary lightness: the frequency of the present or the perfect as narrative tenses; the adoption of a simple but precise vocabulary; the sparing use of adjectives; the composition of short, essential paragraphs added one to the other, not like bricks, in the conventional metaphor of story-building, but more like transparent balloons lifting the story off the ground — with all of these techniques, Celati has created a mode of story-telling which shakes off the weight of narrative in what is a conscious and consistent effort to pare away the superstructure of ideology and ‘that homogeneous and totalizing continuity that is called history’(Celati 1975: 14; cf.
West 1986: 70).
In his travel across the plains, Celati has created a space which may he filled with meanings, but where no single or definitive meaning can be imposed.
Neither origins nor ends predetermine meaning, which for the reader may rest as much in the gaps between the stories as in the stories themselves, in their continuity and succession as in their  uniqueness and completion.
Indeed, at a certain point the stories come to seem almost like pauses, moments of reflection perhaps, in a wider discourse that envelopes the written word, such as to make the readers of Celati's narrative acknowledge something in common with Palomar listening to his blackbirds, uncertain which part of their communication is language, which silence.
3 Metaphors of space and time
Mention of the transversal space explored by Celati provokes a more general consideration of place and time in contemporary Italian narrative, starting from the marshy area where fiction borders with reportage.
Italy has at the moment no Bruce Chatwin or Paul Theroux, and the history of Italian travel-writing belongs more to the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries than to the nineteenth or twentieth, but it is possible to discern an interest in the imaginative and expressive possibilities of travel-writing in the work of some contemporaries who are not travel-writers as such.
I would particularly mention two books by Antonio Tabucchi: a collection of ‘fragments’ centred on the Azores entitled Donna di Porto Pim (Woman of Porto Pim 1983) and a quest-novella whose protagonist moves the length and breadth of India,Notturno indiano (Indian nocturne 1984).
In Donna di Porto Pim , the archipelago is represented by a variety of means: the memory of the narrator and the inhabitants; stories; legends; document; biography; a map; a historico-topographical description; fiction; what the author calls ‘guided fiction’, that is, a story based on an overheard conversation; dreams and, finally, a bibliography of the impressions of earlier writers, those ‘honest travel-books’ which ‘have the power to offer a theoretical and plausible elsewhere to our overwhelming, inescapable where ’(Tabucchi 1983: 9).
From none of these can the reader derive any composite picture of the Azores.
The place is experienced as an accumulation of its pasts, a wreck like those whose flotsam litters its shores and provides the walls and furniture and windows of one of its villages, described by the English travellers Joseph and Henry Bullar in 1841 and revisited by Tabucchi 140 years later (29).
It is experienced by the narrator as a place where he, the cultivated, Portuguese-speaking, well-read foreigner, must tread with care; an old man, who is paid to sing typical local songs for the tourists, recognizes the narrator as something different from them but also as different from himself:
You are curious, you are looking for something else, because this is the second time that you have invited me to have a drink, you order cheiro as though you were one of us, you are a foreigner and pretend to speak like us, yet you drink little and then you stay silent and wait for me to speak.
(78–9)
The old man does tell the visitor the story of the woman of Porto Pim (and his own), but there remains something menacing about the silence  of the listener-narrator, as though he were taking something away with no intention of giving anything in return.
The closest thing to an acknowledgement of what this might be comes at the end of the splendid description of a whale-hunt, which has all the care for technical precision of a Del Giudice (71–7), when the old whaler asks the narrator why he wanted to join the expedition that day, whether it was just out of curiosity (76–7).
As against this oblique and moving meditation on last things, departure, relics, abandonment, the quest of Notturno indiano adopts a different metaphor: that of the journey as mirroring or reflection.
While in Donna di Porto Pim , the writer, having sailed for many days and nights, has understood that ‘the West has no end but continues to move as we move, and that we can follow it as far as we like and never reach it’(Tabucchi 1983: 13; the notion is echoed in the title of Tabucchi's later novel,Il filo dell'orizzonte (The horizon's edge ,(1986), the Indian journey proceeds, not always straightforwardly, towards an end of a sort.
The stages of the journey are so many acts of self-questioning and self definition: its end a moment of self-recognition which is, however, also a reversal of the narrator's image, as in a mirror (Roux the pursuer is identified with Xavier the pursued, the first and last letters of their names are switched, Xavier is now Mr Nightingale, or rouxinol in Portuguese).
The ending of the novel is too pat and contrived, but in the course of it Tabucchi has created an India which is constantly surprising and challenging to the European traveller/narrator/reader without ever allowing its mysticism or its exoticism to run away with it, for the sub-continent is also an ironically observed tourists' India of hotels, buses, taxis, sights and restaurants.
While the other, the elsewhere, is used by Tabucchi to measure the self, the ‘where’, his narrator is not in awe of the other.
Otherness is not so much something to be frightened of, a threat to the stability of the self, as something that can be added to or incorporated into the already existing.
Notturno indiano tends in fact to a conciliatory posture.
In other contemporary Italian fiction, widely contrasting realities are juxtaposed to more dramatic effect.
Two novels, for example, which in other respects are very different, Claudio Piersanti's Charles (1986) and the first of Aldo Busi's three novels published to date,Seminar on Youth (1988), have this in common : they both veer between an urban setting whose contemporaneity is underlined by its fashionableness and topicality (Busi) or which is vaguely futuristic (Piersanti) and a rural, provincial past which, though overtaken by the modern world, still remains extraordinarily alive.
There is no sense of development between these two spatial blocks, no continuity.
It is as though, in literary terms, the peasant world, defined by neo-realism, and the disembodied, technocratic environments of the neo-avant-garde had been lifted out of their historical context and plastered together in a sharply disjunctive collage.
The crisis of identity suggested by this violent displacement is reflected in the themes of the two novels.
In Charles , the rural past  plays a more traditional, but still surprising, part than in Busi's novel.
The story centres on Giorgio, a successful eye-surgeon working in Paris and his alter egos : his much younger brother Piero, who is caught up in the obscure ‘manoeuvres’ going on in Sicily (it will turn out that he has sabotaged an American helicopter and is on the run), and Charles, a 12-year-old boy who is at the centre of the whole story.
There is a strong thriller element to the novel, particularly in the last part, in which Piero is tracked down by the agents of what is portrayed as something close to a police or military state in the underground corridors of the prison-like block of flats where Charles lives and the fugitive has been hiding.
It is from this forbidding, inhuman Paris, projected into the not-too-distant future, that Giorgio returns to his childhood haunts in the Abruzzi.
What is surprising is not that the rural past should be called up, but that the writer should invest it with the imaginative and emotional power that he does.
The countryside has a dignity in Piersanti's novel which keeps it from becoming a mere object of nostalgia.
Given the assertiveness and self-advertisement of modernization in Italian life across all forms of culture, from literature to political and social theory, during the 1960s and early 1970s, this return assumes something of the force of a revenge or, at any rate, a restitution.
Written by a 32-year-old who had already published in the libertarian vein of the student movement which erupted in Bologna in 1977 (Casa di nessuno, No one 's house 1981), such a move might seem like a premature return to order.
But the plot takes us back to Paris and its police for the denouement of the story, and it is there that the real and menacing power is seen to reside.
The patriarchal values of the countryside seem unthreatening by contrast, much as they do in Francesco Rosi's film Three brothers , in which a similar transaction between city and countryside is followed through.
The rural patriarchy is anything but unthreatening in the autobiographical novel by Aldo Busi (but on autobiography, Busi warns: ‘I contain my book, my book does not contain me’: Mondello 1984).
On the contrary, it represents the backdrop of repression and barbarity against which the young Barbino proclaims his homosexuality and on which he contemptuously turns his back.
Seminar on Youth (and its successors) is a novel which in many ways goes against the grain of recent writing in Italy: quite at odds with the studied poise of Tabucchi, the selective precision of Narratori , or the deceptively balanced complexities of Calvino, Busi's language is rich, extravagant and, to use the adjective which so irritated Gadda, ‘baroque’.
It is a gargantuan language spilling out from the talker who once he opens his mouth has no intention of shutting it again.
The art of vituperation comes naturally to Busi, and, although the picture of Northern Italian provincial life (in the vicinity of Brescia) which the author paints occupies only a small part of the novel, which takes his picaresque hero on to greater things in Milan, Paris and London, it is a memorable picture, and provides the necessary underpinning to a writing that  spares no effort to make the reader understand the nature of the social and sexual domination.
These two novels suggest in their different ways that the relation between province and metropolis, countryside and city, periphery and centre, ever potent themes in modern Italian writing, is open to reinterpretation and reorganization into new narrative and symbolic combinations.
One example is the combination of a rural petty-bourgeois ancestry and the children of those parents, who live a very different life in a future which is already upon us, as in the two novels already discussed and, to some extent, in Marco Lodoli's Diario di un millennio che fugge (Diary of a millennium in flight , 1986); the protagonists of these fictions seem to belong neither to the past nor to the future, but to be caught in between, in some time-slip between the nineteenth and the twenty-first centuries.
The sense conveyed here of transition, of one age giving way to another, of an approaching end, a decadence, an Untergang — veering violently in its emotional response between nonchalance and terrible fear — is in some ways more disturbing than the resolutely futuristic or science fiction settings of the very talented Stefano Benni, who has been compared, not without reason, to Vonnegut (Tani 1986: 134–8), or the sub-human dystopia created by the Sienese poet Attilio Lolini in his only novel to date,Morte sospesa (Suspended death 1987), in which a man stumbles through the aftermath of what  Loloni describes as ‘an ordinary apocalypse’, trying to confess to a horrible and long-forgotten crime of which no one will believe him guilty.
In discussions of the recent Italian novel, however, most attention has been focused on its treatment not of the future, but of the past.
There has been in the 1980s in Italy, as elsewhere, a revival of historical narrative in which, however, the reader is not allowed to take the authenticity and authority of the historical material for granted.
Umberto Eco's magisterial novel The Name of the Rose (1983), for example, plays on the dialectic between the reader's curiosity about the medieval world and his/her almost total ignorance of it (funnelled, as Eco explains in his Reflections on the novel, through the observations of the novice Adso (Eco 1985: 33–4); between the sense that the historical world (the abbey and the cultural and religious context of the time) is a world of its own and the sense that it is connected to the world of the reader.
The real protagonist of the novel is knowledge — the knowledge of the late-medieval philosophers and scholars about the natural and spiritual universe; the knowledge of the investigator, William of Baskerville, about human nature and the politics of the religious orders; the knowledge gradually acquired by the reader of an unfamiliar subject.
The novel proves that knowledge is possible, but also that it is in a sense artificial: it does not come from the past, historical knowledge in particular cannot simply be uncovered, laid bare and put out to view (or rather, the novelist can no longer create the illusion that the past is speaking for itself); it is a construction of the past, and the  reader is conscious of, and in compliance with, the careful disposition and organization of the disparate elements that go to make up the whole edifice.
Whereas in the classic Italian historical novel, Manzoni's The Betrothed (1827), much admired by Eco, the omniscience of the author consists in his ability to probe at will into the psychology of his characters and, at the same time, to link this to broad historical movements and even some sense of a providential ‘plot’ in history, in Eco it is closer to the power of the master craftsman who can make what he will with the materials to hand, and unmake it too.
This is perhaps what is most satisfying about the conflagration at the end — the child/ builder/master mason has knocked down his tower of bricks.
And it is from this point of view that I would endorse the observation made by Gian Carlo Ferretti about this and other historical novels (by Saltini and Mancinelli, for example), that:
In these novels, ‘history’ no longer(as in the past) provides illusory certainties nor is a gallery of misleading models; but neither is it a moment of critical verification or problematical comparison.
For better or worse, it is a de-historicized ‘history’: a reservoir of literary and cultural materials that can be drawn on precisely for the purpose of making novels; a reservoir, more exactly, of cultures, themes, characters, rhetorical forms, stereotypes and structures…
(Ferretti 1981)
A fascinating example of the dehistoricization of history is provided by the two novels published to date by the poet Roberto Pazzi,Cercando l'imperatore (Looking for the Emperor 1985) and La principessa e il drago (The Princess and the Dragon 1986), both set in the last years of Tsarist Russia.
The first in particular is an accomplished piece of work.
Two separate but converging stories are recounted in alternating chapters: the story of the White Russian Preobrajensky regiment under the command of Prince Ypsilanti, which for two years, cut off from contact with the outside world, marches through Siberia trying to reach the Tsar, and that of Tsar Nicholas II himself and his family in their last months, especially during their confinement at Ekaterinburg.
The forced march through Siberia becomes increasingly desperate and hallucinatory (in fact Ypsilanti is, from the outset, clear in his own mind that they will never find the emperor): when the regiment comes to cross the tajga in July 1918, the forest takes on the appearance both of a paradise regained and of a place of horror, endless in extent, haunted by marauding tigers and ghostly tribes.
In parallel, the inner life of the Tsar and that of the two most visionary of his children, the haemophiliac Tsarevich Alexis and the daughter Tatiana, becomes increasingly burdened and tormented by visions.
The two stories are linked towards the end by reciprocal dreams (in which the protagonists dream of each other) and by the symbolic flight of hundreds of birds, the migrating souls of the dead soldiers and the doomed imperial family.
The novel exercises considerable power over the reader, perhaps because of this duality, because, as Giovanni Raboni suggests in his Preface, it articulates two typical and basic forms of the narrative imagination, ‘the claustrophobic fascination of imprisonment, exile’ and ‘the adventurous-picaresque fascination of the journey, of a search across hostile and uncertain spaces’(Pazzi 1985: x); because of its capacity, to paraphrase Angelo Guglielmi, to tell a story of life while it is telling a story of death (Guglielmi 1985).
But despite the fact that at first sight the novel looks as though it is going to offer a fairly conventional, though well-written account of an actual incident, this is not a book from which to learn about Russian history.
No doubt the evocation of a specific and well-known moment of the twentieth — century past corresponds to the needs, not only of the author — whose reactionary views are amply documented in his frequent interviews — but also to a public that does not necessarily share those views, but appears to be fascinated by the spectacle of a culture in decline or at its end.
Contrary to the process in Eco's novel, Pazzi effects a caesura between past and present in a way that is disturbing — the fascination of his novel is also a morbid one.
His past is made up very largely of futures — plans, expectations, anxieties, fantasies, dreams and visions — but they are futures which are closed: every forward thought is stalked by death.
If the present, our present, has a place in the novel, it is as something that is looked to and not seen; we do not exist.
3 Genre and the market
It is not only its intrinsic qualities which have guaranteed Umberto Eco's novel its prominent position in the Italian literary scene.
With the uncanny sense of timing which has characterized Eco's writing career,The Name of the Rose epitomizes, almost in counterpoint to Calvino, certain conditions of the contemporary novel.
The knowing use of the conventions of the detective story to write something that is not quite a detective story not only follows a rather well-established practice in post-war Italian writing, of which the novels of Gadda and Sciascia are the best-known examples (cf.
Tani 1984), but is part of a more recent trend on the part of‘serious’ fiction to incorporate what hitherto tended to be regarded as ‘popular’genres: the detective story (giallo ) in Stefano Benni's Comici spaventati guerrieri (Comic frightened Warriors , 1986) and in Gianfranco Manfredi's two novels to date; the thriller in De Carlo's Uccelli da gabbia e da voliera (Cage Birds and Aviary Birds , 1982) and, in a form largely hidden by the luxuriance of the language, in Aldo Busi's most recent book La Delfina Bizantina (The Byzantine Dolphin , 1987); science fiction (Benni's Terra !, 1983); the fantastic, with its recurring topic of ‘doubles’, in another novel published by the enterprising Ancona firm Il Lavoro Editoriale, Claudio Lolli's L'inseguitore Peter H .
(Peter H. the Shadow , 1984).
A special frisson seems to be guaranteed for readers who think they are  readers if the object of the mystery is itself a literary (or artistic) artefact — the manuscript in The Name of the Rose , the novel in Francesca Duranti's The House on Moon Lake (1987), the unwriting writer in Del Giudice.
Laura Mancinelli's Mozart's Ghost (1986) combines two rather donnish mysteries: the protagonist is pursued by ‘anonymous’ telephone calls which consist of nothing but music by Mozart; when she is spared further harassment by the entire Turin telephone system seizing up, she goes off in pursuit of the concealed manuscript of Plato's last dialogue.
Along with the mingling of the genres go the other stylistic features of a rather modish postmodernism: pastiche; montage; paraphrase; parody; allusion; quotation; often adding up to no more than a cultivated divertissement .
While a number of writers have profited from Eco's example, they seem less exercised by the specifically creative problems with which, if we are to follow the Reflections , he was faced as a working author, not least the problems of how to say anything about anything without sounding unbearably false:
Is it possible to say ‘It was a beautiful morning at the end of November’ without feeling like Snoopy?
But what if I had Snoopy say it?
If, that is, ‘It was a beautiful morning…’ were said by someone capable of saying it, because in his day it was still possible, still not shopworn?
A mask: that was what I needed.
(Eco 1985: 19)
There is a carnival spirit abroad in contemporary Italian writing, with a lot of masks being worn, but a depressing sense that a few of them have much to hide.
It is perhaps because of an effort to buck the trend towards an insufferable and market-conscious cleverness that we are witnessing an attempt amongst more committed narrators to seek out a way of dealing directly with the emotions, without all the paraphernalia of intrigue and description that has accumulated over the past few years.
Celati's unadorned ‘tales from the plains’ is one example; the second novel of a talented young writer, Enrico Palandri, is another.
Already in his first novel,Boccalone (1979), widely recognized as the best to come out of the youth movement of the late 1970s, Palandri had shown an extraordinary ability to create sufficient space for his characters, ‘enrico’ and ‘anna’and their friends, to speak for themselves without being overwhelmed by the surrounding clutter or by the pretensions of ‘literature’, pretensions from which the narrator keeps his distance: ‘I don't want to make big speeches, I never did when I was with anna and I was better off; I just want to recount incidents and let the rest come out of that, if there actually is anything’(Palandri 1979: 124).
In Le Pietre e il Sale (Stones and Salt 1986), Palandri tells a story of adolescent love and adult corruption in a manner which generated mixed notices in Italy, many seeing it as simply a return to the ‘shopworn’.
But while some moments, particularly settings (the school, the petty-bourgeois home, the professional home) and situations, seem highly formalized, even stereotypical, the deliberately paced dialogue  and unhurried tone of the narration allow the novel to achieve a rare psychological density.
The idea that the only way of coping with the desuetude of the age, its profound certainty that everything has been said already, is by openly proclaiming this fact as itself the new fact, the idea that the only way of selling your article as original is to declare that it is repro, seems to run up against an ethical objection in a writer like Palandri, however sophisticated his own literary apparatus undoubtedly is.
The notion of pastiche is now a guiding thread in critical discourse, to the extent that Palandri's novel can be put forward as ‘a disturbing attempt to write a kitsch novel’(De Michelis 1986a), and the argument be made —— referring to Piersanti's Charles — that no novelist born in the 1950s can return to ‘traditional narrative’ without being aware that he/she is ‘holding an old toy which might look fine in an antique shop, or might be an ornament or a collector's item, but is no good for playing with any more’; if they do use it (but why should they if it is no use any more?), it is with a mixture of pleasure and melancholy, ‘like someone repeating a game which once gave pleasure for years and years and now gives none, only the memory of the joy it once gave’(De Michelis 1986b).
These are ‘novels squared, novels of novels’, a formula which tells us little about the actual narrative rendition of the works in question, but a great deal about the unhappiness of the critic.
Authors, readers and critics, however, are no longer the only actors on the stage.
Publishers have come to assume an ever more prominent role.
It is not perhaps since Romanticism that there has been so much discussion, and underlying uncertainty, about the market of literature, and it is no accident that recent years have seen an expansion of the sociology of literature as an academic discipline, alongside increased research into reading habits, the best-seller and how to write it, and the levels of writing that appeal to different strata of the public.
Perhaps the only firm conclusion to emerge from this continuing debate is the recognition that the literary scene has become pluralistic.
In particular, the traditional, if untheorized, distinction between serious literature and ‘rubbish’ has broken down; as Franco Fortini said, the occasional slummings of the aristocratic writer of the past have given way to a situation in which we all live off the ‘guano’which our society produces day by day (Cadioli and Peresson 1984: 85).
American (and, to a lesser extent, British) criticism has tended in the past to be less hierarchical than Italian and at the same time more alert to very minute differences in the type of product and the type of consumer being aimed at by the literary market.
Italy is moving rapidly in that direction, in pursuit of something that is ‘enjoyable’ at the same time as being ‘not escapist’, that magic formula which Eco believes to have been the discovery of the American postmodernists (with Barth as their prophet) and to which in his own best-seller he aspired (Eco 1985: 65 — 72).
Spanish America's New Narrative
James Higgins
Recent decades have seen a remarkable flourishing of Spanish-American fiction.
The emergence of the so-called ‘new narrative’ presupposes the existence of an ‘old narrative’which it superseded and, in effect, the early 1940s may be regarded as a watershed.
The preceding decades had been dominated by the old-style realism of the regionalist novel, which reached its high point in the 1920s with the publication of José Eustasio Rivera's The Vortex (1924), Ricardo Güiraldes's Don Segundo Sombra (1926) and Rómulo Gallegos's Doña Barbara (1929) and produced its last major work, Ciro Alegría's Broad and Alien is the World , in 1941.
The new narrative itself falls into at least two phases.
In the 1940s and 1950s a new kind of fiction began to be cultivated by the likes of Borges, Onetti, Sábato, Asturias, Carpentier, Rulfo, Arguedas and Roa Bastos.
Properly speaking, therefore, the new narrative pre-dates the so-called ‘boom’, a term which is sometimes erroneously used as a synonym but which in fact refers to a process which took place in the 1960s and continued into the 1970s, when Spanish-American fiction won increasing recognition outside Latin America itself and achieved unprecedented commercial success.
Essentially, the boom revolved around four figures who rapidly became international celebrities — Cortázar, Fuentes, García Márquez and Vargas Llosa — and, in the wake of their success, other writers such as Lezama Lima, Donoso and Cabrera Infante came to prominence.
At the same time, as a result of Spanish-American fiction's growing popularity, the work of the earlier writers mentioned became more widely known and some of them went on to enhance their reputation by producing new works in the 1960s and 1970s.
Finally, towards the end of the 1960s, a second wave of successful new writers emerged in the shape of younger figures like Puig and Bryce Echenique.
The following table, though by no means exhaustive, lists the major writers and their principal works.
1 The pre-boom (1940s and 1950s)
Jorge Luis Borges (Argentina):Fictions (1944);The Aleph (1949) Juan Carlos Onetti (Uruguay):A Brief Life (1950);For a Nameless Tomb (1959);The Shipyard (1961);Body Gatherer (1964) Ernesto Sábato (Argentina):The Outsider (1948);On Heroes and Tombs (1961);Abaddon the Exterminator (1974) Miguel Angel Asturias (Guatemala):The President (1946);Men of Maize (1949) Alejo Carpentier (Cuba):The kingdom of This World (1949);The Lost Steps (1953);Explosion in a Cathedral (1962);Reasons of State (1974) Juan Rulfo (Mexico):The Burning Plain (1953);Pedro Páramo (1955) José Maria Arguedas (Peru):Deep Rivers (1958);All Bloods (1964);The Fox Above and the Fox Below (1971) Augusto Roa Bastos (Paraguay):Son of Man (1960);I the Supreme (1974)
The boom (1960s and 1970s)
Julio Cortázar (Argentina):The Winners (1960);Hopscotch (1963); 62:A Model Kit (1968) Carlos Fuentes (Mexico):The Death of Artemio Cruz (1962);A Change of Skin (1967);Terra nostra (1977) Gabriel García Márquez (Colombia):No One Writes to the Colonel (1961);Big Mama's Funeral (1962);One Hundred Years of Solitude (1967);The Autumn of the Patriarch (1975) Mario Vargas Llosa (Peru):The Time of the Hero (1963);The Green House (1966);Conversation in the Cathedral (1969);The War of the End of the World (1981) José Lezama Lima (Cuba):Paradiso (1966) Guillermo Cabrera Infante (Cuba):Three Trapped Tigers (1967) José Donoso (Chile):The Obscene Bird of Night (1970);A House in the Country (1978) Manuel Puig (Argentina):Betrayed by Rita Hayworth (1968);Heartbreak Tango (1969);Kiss of the Spider Woman (1976) Alfredo Bryce Echenique (Peru):A World for Julius (1970);So Many Times Pedro (1977)
The regionalist novel represented a kind of literary discovery of America, in that it revealed to an urban public the conditions of life in the remote, underdeveloped areas of the continent's interior: the plains; the jungle; the Andes.
In the main, it was a documentary type of novel which aimed to be an authentic depiction of a particular environment, and as such it tended to continue the tradition of nineteenth-century realism.
It was also a didactic novel that set out to expose social injustice, to diagnose problems of national development or to vindicate local cultures.
In fairness, it should be said that the best of the regionalist novels were considerably more complex and accomplished than they are usually given credit for, but, nonetheless, the regionalist novel as a whole came to be identified with a type of writing against which later writers reacted, one which, in its concern to document and to convey a message, was artistically clumsy and  simplistic in its presentation of reality.
What distinguishes the new novelists from their regionalist predecessors is, above all, their attitude towards the writer's craft.
As has been implied, the motivation of the regionalist novelists was often extra-literary, the novel being used as a vehicle to draw a particular situation to the eyes of the world, to influence public opinion and, thereby, to bring about social change.
In contrast, the new novelists consider themselves first and foremost to be creative artists whose main obligation is to produce a well-crafted work of art that stands up in its own right as an autonomous reality.
Indeed, in reaction to the documentary pretensions of regionalist fiction, they sometimes insist on the fictionality of their work.
A case in point is Gabriel García Márquez's One Hundred Years of Solitude , on whose closing page the last of the Buendía family finally succeeds in deciphering the hitherto incomprehensible manuscript presented to the family by the mysterious gypsy Melquíades, only to discover that it is an account of the history of the Buendías written 100 years before, that they will cease to exist when he finishes reading it and that he is, in effect, no more than a creature of Melquíades's imagination, with no existence outside the pages of the manuscript.
Such an ending serves, among other things, to warn the reader that the novel is, in David Gallagher's words, ‘a fictive construct, a creation, and not a mirror that meticulously reflects reality’(Gallagher 1973: 88).
Another major difference between the new novelists and their regionalist predecessors is that, whereas, by and large, the latter were men of limited cultural formation, the former are generally much more widely read, more cosmopolitan in outlook, more in tune with developments on the international literary and intellectual scene.
One only has to note the impressive erudition manipulated by the likes of Borges, Cortázar, Carpentier or Fuentes or the intertextual references that abound in the new narrative to realize that the Spanish-American writer has long since ceased to be a provincial and is now very much a citizen of the world.
Moreover, while the new narrative has undoubtedly been influenced by European and North-American fiction, and by Joyce, Faulkner and the nouveau roman in particular, the new novelists have had the maturity and self-confidence to assimilate influences and to develop their own distinctive literary voice, and thus to make their own original contribution to world literature.
Spanish America's new narrative has therefore to be seen not only in its local context, but in wider terms as part of the evolution of modern fiction generally.
Like most modern literature, the new narrative reflects the ontological uncertainty of contemporary man.
Emblematic in that respect are the short stories of Jorge Luis Borges which debunk man's intellectual pretensions and express scepticism about his ability to understand his world.
‘Death and the Compass’, for example, parodies the detective story to satirize the faith in reason which that genre epitomizes.
The story may in fact be read as an allegory in which the  detective's attempt to solve a series of crimes by the use of logic represents man's efforts to decipher the meaning of the universe, but he himself ends up as the final victim, undone by his misplaced confidence in his intellect and baffled by a confusing world that makes a mockery of his pretensions to explain it.
The afore-mentioned tendency of writers to insist on the fictionality of their work is to be understood partly in the context of the attitude here expressed by Borges.
When, in One Hundred Years of Solitude , the last Aureliano Buendía tries to persuade others of the truth of his version of certain events, he runs up against the scepticism of the local priest who, ironically, is conspicuously lacking in the certainties which he is supposed to embody:
The priest measured him with a pitying look.
‘Oh, my son,’ he sighed.
‘I'd be satisfied if I could be sure that you and I exist at this moment.’
(García Márquez 1978: 330)
Effectively, García Márquez is here waiving any claim to be ‘telling it the way it is’, for the new novelists no longer share traditional realist fiction's confident assumption of man's ability to understand and describe the world.
Scepticism with regard to the writer's power to translate reality into words is taken even further by Guillermo Cabrera Infante in Three Trapped Tigers , where endless word-games, irreverent discussions of literature and parodies of various literary styles all point to an acute sense of the treachery of language.
Indeed, one of the characters even goes so far as to advocate an aleatory literature which, abandoning all pretence of saying anything, would provide the reader with dice and a random list of words and leave him/her to make of it what he/she may.
In a whole variety of ways, the new narrative challenges the traditional perception of an ordered and coherent world which underpins realist fiction's pretension to reproduce reality in literature.
One procedure, favoured by Mario Vargas Llosa in particular, is to abandon a linear plot in favour of a disconnected narrative which confronts the reader with a world that is confusing, shifting and elusive.
Thus, the fragmented structure of The Green House , which changes in form, style, time, place and protagonists every few pages, conveys an image of Peru as a disunited nation, divided by geography, levels of development, culture, race and class, and of the world as a chaotic labyrinth in which disoriented individuals struggle in vain to find some coherence.
Other writers undermine conventional notion of reality by blurring the frontiers between the real and the imaginary.
A favourite device of Borges, for example, is to toy with the reader by sprinkling his fictions with references to real people and places, a technique used to good effect in ‘Tlön, Uqbar, Orbis Tertius’, whose realistic trappings lend credibility to the story of a non-existent world which is the reverse of our own, while the fictional world in its turn calls into question the reality of the one in which we live.
However, the work which most dramatically highlights the unreliability of the world and of literature's  portrayal of it is perhaps José Donoso's The Obscene Bird of Night , whose schizophrenic narrator/protagonist experiences modern man's ontological insecurity as a psychological condition.
In recounting the story of his life, he assumes a variety of identities and gives multiple conflicting versions of events in a contradictory attempt to acquire the sense of identity he has always lacked and to conceal himself from a world by which he has always felt persecuted.
As Pamela Bacarisse explains:
Many pieces of information given to the reader are subsequently contradicted, many of the events recounted are then said not to have happened, there are conversations which may or may not have taken place and characters are themselves then someone else, or themselves and someone else.
(Bacarisse 1980: 19)
The end result is a novel in which it is impossible to be sure of anything.
Such scepticism about literature's power to duplicate reality leads the new novelists to shun the stance of the traditional, omniscient narrator with a total overview of the world he is describing.
In some cases, the author seeks to disguise his presence and distances himself from the narrative by employing techniques such as interior monologue, dialogue and intermediaries, which simultaneously highlight the subjective nature of the material presented and create the impression of an autonomous narration.
An outstanding example of this type of narrative is Vargas Llosa's Conversation in the Cathedral , which pivots around a four-hour conversation between two characters, the whole novel being made up of dialogue and narrative units generated in waves by the central conversation, as the two men's review of their past lives sparks off inner thoughts and recollections and conjures up other conversations and dramatized episodes.
In contrast, other writers abandon all pretence of detached objectivity and deliberately flaunt their presence, thereby foregrounding the subjective nature of their narrative.
Cabrera Infante, among others, repeatedly draws attention to his role as author, while the narrator of Alfredo Bryce Echenique's A World for Julius not only maintains a running dialogue with the reader, but also involves himself with his characters, putting himself in their shoes, addressing them directly as if they were there alongside him and, like a supporter at a sporting event, siding with some against others.
A consequence of the demise of the traditional, omniscient narrator is that the new narrative invites, and requires, the active participation of the reader, who, in the absence of authorial guidance, must disentangle the complexities of the text for him/herself to arrive at his/her own understanding of the world described.
The new role assigned to the reader is defined in Julio Cortázar's Hopscotch by the writer Morelli:
Better yet, give him something like a façade, with doors and windows behind which there operates a mystery which the reader-accomplice will have to look for…
What the author of this novel might have succeeded in for himself, will be repeated…in the  reader-accomplice.
As for the female-reader, she will remain with the façade…
(Cortázar 1975: 408)
The reader for whom the new novelist is writing, in other words, is not the traditionally passive figure who is content to accept and, indeed, expects a straightforward narrative expounding a clear-cut view of the world, but an accomplice who will collaborate with the author in the search for a deeper understanding of a complex and confusing world.
Yet the passage quoted above implies a continuing belief in the meaningfulness of literature, and it would be fanciful to conclude from the new narrative's questioning of realism that the novel has been reduced to a formalistic game, without reference to anything outside itself.
It is true that there is a considerable element of self-referentiality in the new narrative, in that many novels contain reflections on the nature of fiction and the problems of writing.
It is also true that several novelists, such as Carpentier and Fuentes, delight in weaving elaborate, formal patterns.
And it is also true that much contemporary Spanish-American fiction has a distinctly ludic quality, with Borges and Cabrera Infante, in particular, taking pleasure in playing games with the reader.
Yet one text at least makes an explicit profession of faith in the act of writing.
José Lezama Lima's Paradiso , a kind of portrait of the artist, recounting the childhood and adolescence of a young poet, elaborates a poetics in which words are the tools to understand the world, to make sense of history and even to achieve transcendence.
As the work of a man who is not only a poet but a Catholic poet,Paradiso is hardly a typical case, but the sheer volume of fiction produced in Spanish America in recent decades — and continues to be produced — scarcely betokens a general collapse of confidence in the written word, and it is noteworthy that Cabrera Infante's Three Trapped Tigers , for example, re-creates the atmosphere of pre-revolutionary Havana even as it casts doubt on the feasibility of such an enterprise.
Most of the new novelists, in fact, set out to portray in their works the social reality of their respective countries, and some novels — notably Carpentier's Explosion in a Cathedral , García Márquez's One Hundred Years of Solitude and Vargas Llosa's The War of the End of the World — are continental in scope, reflecting the reality of Latin America as a whole.
In effect, despite their questioning of the assumptions of realism, and despite their awareness of the enormity of the task confronted by the writer, Spanish America's new novelists still aspire, by and large, to do what novelists have always sought to do, namely, to depict the world in which they live.
In practice, the new narrative is based in large part on what might be described as a broader concept of realism, one which takes account of the complex, multifaceted nature of reality.
The fragmented narrative cultivated by Vargas Llosa, for example, is intended to replicate the way in which we experience real life, in that events and information are presented to us in a disjointed fashion and it is only when we have lived  through the reading experience that we are able to piece it all together with the benefit of hindsight.
That is not to say that the novels are unstructured, of course.
Indeed, montage plays a crucial role in enriching the reader's view of reality, for narrative units are arranged in such a way as to create an interplay, so that they bring fresh perspectives to bear on one another and are mutually illuminating.
Another favourite technique is the use of multiple narrators to give differing views of the same reality.
Vargas Llosa's The Time of the Hero , which is set in a Peruvian military academy where the cadets assume an ostentatious machismo as a survival strategy, oscillates between third-person narration and monologue (interior and spoken) to bring out the gulf between the boys' public personae and their sensitive and vulnerable inner self, and to highlight how social intercourse distorts their personality by conditioning them to suppress their softer feelings.
This gulf is shown most dramatically in the surprise ending, which obliges us to re-evaluate our reading of the novel by revealing that the anonymous, timid and sensitive lad who has been narrating the story of his early life in the first person is none other than Jaguar, the aggressive bully we have seen ruling the roost in the school.
One of the most impressive examples of multiple narration is Carlos Fuentes's The Death of Artemio Cruz , in which the story of a dying ex-revolutionary turned corrupt capitalist magnate is recounted in alternating sequences of first, second and third-person narrative.
The third-person sections narrate the main events of his life in a more or less objective manner.
His interior monologues convey the thoughts that pass through his mind as he lies on his deathbed and reviews his past life with a mixture of pride and guilt.
In the second-person sequences, he is addressed by the voice of his subconscious which, speaking in the future tense, takes him back to relive the moments of truth when he made the choices which were to determine what he later became.
This multiple view of Cruz not only gives an insight into the conflicting forces that have been struggling to control his soul, but also reflects his loss of integrity as a man and his disintegration in face of his approaching death.
The overall effect is that the morally indefensible opportunist appears as a very human figure, a man who would have liked to have had his cake and eaten it and who, forced to make choices, alternates between self-congratulation and a sense of self-betrayal.
The new narrative also extends the scope of realism by according to the world of the mind the same status as to that of the physical and social world.
Subjective reality is treated as no less real than so-called objective reality, and what is thought, felt or imagined is recorded as if it were literally true.
The events narrated in Donoso's The Obscene Bird of Night , for example, are largely a working-out of the fantasies and obsessions of the narrator/protagonist, Humberto Peñaloza, who, as secretary to Don Jerónimo Azcoitía, lives on the fringes of the privileged world of the oligarchy, and whose dreams of joining the ranks of the upper classes are counterbalanced by a humiliating sense of  social inferiority.
In one of the central episodes in the novel, Humberto not only cuckolds his employer, but fathers on his wife the heir whom the oligarch himself has never been able to engender, and it is only subsequently that it becomes clear that what has been narrated as a factual account of events is, in reality, no more than a fantasy in which he simultaneously avenges his social humiliation and effects the incorporation of the humble Peñaloza line into the oligarchy.
A somewhat different case is García Márquez's One Hundred Years of Solitude which recounts the history of the small town of Macondo, not so much as it actually happened, but as its inhabitants experienced and interpreted it and as it was transmitted by popular oral tradition.
Thus, when Remedios the Beauty disappears, the narrative records the fact that outsiders were of the opinion that she had run off with a man and that the story of her ascent into heaven was an invention of her family to cover up the scandal.
But it is the family's version which the texts privileges and recounts in full detail, for this view of events is entirely consistent with the cultural assumptions of an isolated rural people and, indeed, is regarded as more credible than wonders of modern technology, such as the cinema.
This type of so-called magic realism assumes major importance in the fiction of Asturias, Carpentier and Arguedas, where it serves to give expression to the magical-religious thought and mythical world-view of the Indian and Negro peoples of Latin America.
Another way in which the new narrative extends the range of traditional realism is by re-creating modes of spoken speech, not for reasons of costumbrism or authenticity, but to portray a society through the way in which it expresses itself orally.
Bryce Echenique s A World for Julius , for example, captures the peculiarly honeyed speech of Lima's upper classes to mirror the pampered, insulated existence of the Peruvian oligarchy, Similarly, in Cabrera Infante's Three Trapped Tigers , a picture of pre-revolutionary Cuban society is conveyed on a linguistic level, through the reproduction of the type of language spoken in Havana at the time, the country's dependent status and cultural inferiority complex being reflected in self-consciousness about speaking Cuban, in the aping of cultured Spanish and in the widespread use of Spanglish.
Likewise, Manuel Puig's Betrayed by Rita Hayworth and Heartbreak Tango are based on interior monologues, long dialogues and extracts from diaries and letters, through which of identity of their own in their assumption of a borrowed identity derived from pop culture in the shape of Hollywood films, radio soap operas, popular songs, etc.
Orality is also a feature of the fiction of Juan Rulfo, whose Pedro Páramo re-creates the world of rural Mexico through a narrative which initially appears to be a conventionally written text but turns out to be constituted orally, with one of the characters, Juan Preciado, emerging as the internal author as he recounts his own story and hears and transmits those of the other  characters.
Rulfo's oral style — which manifests itself in this novel and in the stories of The Burning Plain , in the frequent repetition of words and phrases, in a manner typical of the backtracking of oral narrative — is, of course, much more than a formal device, for its function is to take us inside the world of a rural peasantry whose cultural tradition is non-literate.
Another writer who seeks to give expression to a popular oral culture is José Maria Arguedas, whose fiction portrays the world of the Indian peasantry of the Peruvian Andes.
Arguedas, however, was faced with the thorny problem of translating into the alien medium of Spanish the sensibility of a people which expresses itself in Quechua, and his great achievement has been to evolve a style which captures the rhythm and flavour of Quechua to convey the spiritual world of the Andean Indians.
While the new narrative is based in part on a broader concept of realism, it also seeks to increase the expressiveness of prose by representing reality in a non-mimetic manner, encapsulating it in the way that poetry has traditionally done.
In García Márquez's One Hundred Years of Solitude , for example, the telepathic communication, which confounds the laws of nature to reunite José Arcadio and Ursula in spirit at the moment of his murder, is conveyed symbolically in physical terms: the son's blood goes in search of the source from which it sprang, climbing kerbs, doing right-angled turns and running along the walls to avoid staining the carpets, and, as the mother follows the trail back to his body, it becomes a kind of monstrous umbilical cord re-establishing the pre-natal bond between them.
In Rulfo's Pedro Páramo , likewise, the frustration that embitters the eponymous protagonist's life and the dashing of illusions that is the pattern of existence as depicted in the novel, are symbolized by an episode in which young Pedro and his lover climb a hill and fly a kite in the shape of a bird, only to see the string break and the kite fall back to earth, and the novel as a whole is punctuated by recurrent images of rising and falling which reiterate the central theme of the thwarting of human hopes and aspirations.
Some novels, indeed, do not operate primarily on the level of plot, but develop an internal theme through the use of recurrent motifs.
Such is the case of Miguel Angel Asturias's The President , whose underlying theme is the breakdown of all normal human relationships in a society ruled by an oppressive dictatorship.
Thus, the protagonists' encounter with a postman who is too drunk to articulate properly or to deliver his letters, which he keeps dropping in the street, is one of a series of symbolic episodes expressing the generalized breakdown of communication in a country that has lost all sense of social cohesion.
One of the main forms of figurative expression employed by the new narrative is myth, many novels being structured on a mythical framework.
Asturias's The President , which recounts the story of the dictator's henchman who falls out of favour when, under the influence of love, he repents of his misdeeds and changes his ways, re-creates in  inverted terms the myth of Lucifer's rebellion against God.
Ruling over an infernal world, the President is cast in the role of Satan, while his favourite, Angel Face, is identified with Lucifer, but his rebellion takes the form of forsaking evil for good, a crime of treason for which he is banished to the bowels of the earth in the President's deepest dungeon.
This mythical treatment of dictatorship not only gives the novel a more universal dimension, but communicates the fundamental struggle between human decency and selfishness that lies behind the political struggle.
Similarly, Rulfo's Pedro Páramo centres on Juan Preciado's pilgrimage to his birthplace, the town of Comala, to seek out his father, an archetypal journey representing the Mexican's quest for identity and, more generally, the human search for happiness.
The journey, however, proves to be a descent into hell, for Comala turns out to be a ghost town which has been devastated by the oppression of his father, the tyrannical landowner Pedro Páramo, and whose few remaining inhabitants live in despair, convinced that they have been banished forever from the grace of God.
Moreover, the narrative, based on Mexican myths about life after death, is narrated from the grave, where Comala's former inhabitants, far from finding release in the afterlife, are condemned to relive eternally the frustrations and torments of their earthly existence.
Implicit in the new narrative's challenging of the assumptions of realism and in its privileging of subjective reality and of figurative forms of expression, is a questioning of the rationalist, cultural tradition of the West.
Many of the new novelists, in fact, portray the alienation of Western man.
Larsen, the protagonist of Juan Carlos Onetti's The Shipyard , for example, caricatures the thrusting, social-climbing heroes of nineteenth-century fiction by assuming charge of a shipyard and paying court to the owner's daughter, but the world in which he operates grotesquely parodies the industrial age's spirit of optimism and progress, for the owner is bankrupt, his daughter is mad, the decaying yard is no longer operational and the two remaining employees spend their time reading out-of-date files.
Larsen, in fact, represents the alienated hero who seeks to come to terms with an absurd world by entering into the game, by playing out a meaningless life as if it were meaningful.
More generally, Onetti's disenchantment with Western civilization expresses itself through protagonists who are at odds with society and seek to create their own alternative reality.
However, the writer who most explicitly questions the Western cultural tradition and proclaims the need for an alternative way of relating to reality is Julio Cortázar.
The central theme of Hopscotch is the quest for the authenticity which Western man has lost, stifled by a distorting rationalism and by the conventions of the bourgeois social order.
The protagonist Oliveira refuses to submit to the accepted norms and, instead, surrenders himself to the irrational, seeking to live on a more authentic and vital dimension which appears absurd by conventional standards.
As the title indicates, life is presented as being like a game of  hopscotch, the object being to find a way to the square of ultimate reality.
In a whole variety of ways, the novel shows conventional Western modes of thought and behaviour to be absurd and an obstacle to that goal.
In particular, it does not have a fixed structure and, instead, we are offered two alternative ways of reading it.
It may be read in the conventional order, with or without the final section of ‘dispensable’ chapters, or in a shuffled order, interpolating the ‘dispensable’chapters according to the author's directives so as to have fresh perspectives on the events described.
The order of the book as laid out is thus merely a façade, disguising a deeper, underlying order, and, in effect, what Cortázar is inviting us to do is to throw off our habitual passiveness, to reject the given and to join him and Oliveira in their quest for a different, more authentic order.
The result is that, whereas, for the passive reader, the novel effectively ends with Oliveira seemingly about to commit suicide by throwing himself out of a window, the active reader goes beyond this to the understanding that Oliveira's jump into the void is a metaphorical leap into a metaphysical state, where conventional categories are abolished and dualistic contradictions reconciled.
It could be said, however, that this type of critique of Western rationalism itself belongs to a tradition within Western culture.
More fundamentally, the new Spanish-American narrative challenges Eurocentrism by expressing a Third-World experience and by drawing on its own local cultural tradition.
It is true that the Spanish-American novel has entered the mainstream of world literature in that it is informed by the major intellectual currents of our age, in that its exponents share the artistic and philosophical preoccupations of modern writers in general, and in that it has consciously sought and attained a universality that earlier Spanish-American fiction sometimes lacked.
That universality, indeed, is one of its main strengths.
Part of the richness of Rulfo's Pedro Páramo , for example, is that Juan Preciado's archetypal journey creates universal resonances by evoking parallels with Greek myths, such as those of Telemachus and Orpheus.
Yet to impose a purely ‘universal’ reading on a novel such as Pedro Páramo is to impoverish it, for it also — and more immediately — conjures up associations with the ancient Mexican myth of Quetzalcoatl's journey to Mictlan, the kingdom of the dead, and the world into which we are introduced is one where the indigenous cultural tradition constitutes a living presence.
Likewise, the dictator of Asturias's The President is identified not only with Satan but with Tohil, the Maya Quiché deity who demanded human sacrifice, the effect of that association being to present the Central-American political despot as a modern incarnation of an ancestral tradition.
As William Rowe (1984) has argued, a universalist approach to Spanish-American fiction incurs the risk of domesticating and falsifying texts whose subversiveness derives, in large part, precisely from their specificity.
In many works, in fact, the Latin-American people's struggle against  social, political and economic domination expresses itself in cultural terms, in resistance to the dominant culture imposed by Western imperialism.
This conflictive relationship between popular culture and official culture manifests itself in Augusto Roa Bastos's Son of Man , in the life-sized figure of Christ carved by a leper, which, despite the disapproval of the ecclesiastical authorities, is venerated by the townsfolk of Itapé in preference to the stylized crucifix in the local church.
For, as a representation of the Paraguayan people's suffering and of a hoped-for redeemer who is one of their own, it articulates popular sentiments and aspirations in a way that institutionalized religion has failed to do in its subservience to an oppressive social system.
Likewise, in Alejo Carpentier's The Kingdom of This World , an account of slave revolts in Haiti at the end of the eighteenth century, the Negroes' struggle for liberty opposes their magical world of voodoo to the rational, cerebral world of their French masters.
And in Asturias's Men of Maize , which deals with the expropriation of Indian communal lands for the commercial exploitation of maize, the Guatemalan Indians' resistance to the destruction of their way of life is waged not only with arms, but also through the myths by which they preserve their concept of the world.
For his part, Arguedas shows in his fiction that, despite centuries of oppression, the Indian peasants of the Peruvian Andes have retained their sense of identity by clinging to their traditional culture.
In The Fox Above and the Fox Below , a greater threat to that identity is seen to be the capitalist, industrial development of recent decades, which has attracted a massive flow of migrants from the countryside to the cities and brought with it an erosion of traditional values and ways of life.
But the pervasive and insidious presence throughout the novel of manifestations of Quechua culture suggests the ability of that culture not only to survive in an alien environment, but also, as it itself is modified, to exercise an ‘Indianizing’ influence on the country as a whole.
However, such works do not merely show the dominant culture being resisted and subverted by popular culture; in their form, they themselves have been influenced by the culture which they depict.
The Fox Above and the Fox Below , for example, is structured on Andean organizing principles and develops a style of ‘oral writing’ that transposes popular Quechua art forms to the printed page, and Rowe notes ‘the compositional impact of popular oral culture in García Márquez, that of Guarani culture in Roa Bastos, and of middle-American culture in Asturias’(Rowe 1984: 85).
In much Spanish-American fiction, in effect, the élitist, Western medium of the novel is being subverted by popular culture.
Behind this privileging of popular culture lies not only an identification with the oppressed masses, but also a sense that Latin-American reality is radically different from that of the developed, industrial West, as well as a search for an identity whose roots are to be found in Latin America itself.
Carpentier, in particular, explores Latin America's relation to the Western world, notably in Explosion in a Cathedral , which portrays Caribbean society against the background of the French Revolution, and, in all of his works, implanted European systems are seen to be inappropriate to the American environment.
Embodying the alienation of the Westernized Latin-American intellectual, the protagonist of The Lost Steps , a musician resident in New York, recovers his lost identity as a man and as an artist when he undertakes an expedition to the jungles of the Orinoco, a journey that takes him backwards in time to a prehistoric world; but his eventual return to civilization implies a recognition on Carpentier's part that, for a twentieth-century Latin American, going back to one's roots has to be compatible with the realities of the modern world.
That same problem is treated in Arguedas's Deep Rivers , the story of a young boy, Ernesto, who identifies emotionally with the Indians among whom he was brought up and who, on moving to school to receive the education that will equip him to take his place in society, finds himself alienated in the world of the whites.
What sustains him is the comfort he derives from the spiritual world of the Indian, as he escapes the alienating environment of the school to listen to Quechua music and to renew his bonds with the magical world of nature, but his experiences call into question the effectiveness of Quechua values in the white world in which he must live.
However, the novel's climax, which sees the Indians successfully assert themselves, reflects Arguedas's confidence in the ability of Quechua culture to flourish beyond its traditional rural confines and to change the character of national society.
In conclusion, the vitality of Spanish-American fiction in recent decades indicates that, despite an ironic awareness of the limitations of literature, writers have retained the ambition and confidence to tackle major themes.
Its quality is a measure of the craftsmanship which they have brought to their writing.
For, above and beyond the ‘theory’ underpinning the new narrative, the most significant development is that Spanish-American writers have become accomplished practitioners of their trade.