

Preface
This is a very personal view of Roman art.
Rather than attempt in a short book a history of artistic developments at Rome from the early days on the Palatine to the rise of the Christian city, I have chosen to write about four important themes, which are briefly described in the introduction.
I have, of course, been very selective, but I hope that the book will cast further light on surviving Roman monuments and the collections of antiquities displayed in the British Museum and elsewhere.
The text has been much improved by Brian Cook, Lesley Fitton, John Wilkes, Susan Woodford, and not least my editor Jenny Chattington.
Donald Bailey, Amanda Claridge, Kenneth Painter and Veronica Tatton-Brown contributed expert advice on pottery, sculpture, silver and glass.
I am especially grateful to Susan Bird, Andrew Burnett, Bernard Jackson, Ralph Jackson and Philip Nicholls for providing illustrations at short notice.
My thanks, too, to Andrew Brock, Kay Cummins, Ken Evans, Bill Field, Kin Overend, Derek Redford and Susan Smith for transforming bright ideas into groups of objects ready for photography; my gratitude, finally, to Hafed Walda, for organising the photographic work.
September 1990 
I Part of the Forum of Augustus.
In the centre, the Temple of Mars Ultor with curved bays and colonnades to either side.
Introduction
From the early Republic to the later Empire the art and culture of Classical and Hellenistic Greece strongly influenced the art of the Romans.
The first chapter of this book gives an historical account of how the Romans came into contact with the art of the contemporary Hellenistic world.
As they conquered peninsular Italy and Sicily in the third century BC, the Romans took works of art and dedicated them to the gods at Rome.
By this process they literally made the art of other communities their own.
The coastal areas of southern Italy were dotted with cities occupied by the descendants of Greek colonists.
The south-east lay close to Macedon, across the Adriatic Sea.
Here ruled the successors to Alexander the Great (d.323 BC), who had extended Greek culture far beyond Greece to Asia Minor, Cyprus, Egypt and the Middle East.
The Romans, by 200 BC masters of Italy, then became engaged in conflict with Alexander's successors throughout the eastern Mediterranean.
The art of these peoples, too, was brought back to Rome, and many artists came to fulfil the demand of wealthy Romans for versions of famous works for private enjoyment.
In the first century BC Rome underwent a political revolution, which led to the collapse of the Republic and the establishment of an empire.
The first emperor, Augustus (27 BC–AD 14), encouraged the revival of taste for the art of Classical Athens (fifth century BC).
In the second century AD the emperor Hadrian developed a new relationship between Rome and the Greek heartlands, which allowed the culture of Classical and later Greece to flourish until late antiquity.
Throughout the period from the late Republic (first century BC) to the late Empire (fourth century AD) portraits were made, many of outstanding quality.
The second chapter is devoted to them.
Many convey in the physical appearance of their subjects the traditional Roman virtues of austerity and respect for authority.
During the Empire these conservative traditions were brought up to date by the adoption of hairstyles fashionable at court; some individuals even imitated the physical characteristics of the imperial family.
The unflattering and lively style of Roman portraits makes even the most conventional subject seem lifelike to the modern viewer.
The third chapter deals with Roman art in public places, mostly cities and sanctuaries.
Of particular interest here is the very strongly developed Roman sense of decor , meaning not ‘decoration’, but the selection of a style suited to its setting.
The Romans applied this principle widely in planning and furnishing cities, forts and even private houses.
The sculptures and inscriptions with which the Romans embellished their cities provide a particularly valuable insight into the purpose of Roman monuments, although only a few sites are known in which buildings, statues and inscriptions survive together.
These show that the Romans devised complex ways of referring in monuments, pictorially and in writing, to historical events and to ideas.
When such monuments are reduced to ruins the surviving remains may appear a meaningless mixture of motifs borrowed from too many sources.
But in monumental sculpture, as in gatherings of important people in real life, what matters is who stands next to whom, and what is said of them.
It is, then, important to try to reconstruct monuments and understand them in their entirety.
Some discussion of funerary monuments is included in this chapter; although today we may consider these private, many Romans evidently thought that the more people saw their memorial the better.
It was not unusual for a direct appeal to be made in a memorial text to casual passers-by, or for visually impressive and even amusing  monuments to command attention from the side of a road.
2 The fulcra (decorative end-pieces) of a Roman couch.
These are inlaid with silver leaf, and ornamented with heads of satyrs and mules.
1st century AD.
The last chapter is devoted to life at home, to the organisation and use of space in the Roman house, and to its furnishings and decoration.
There follows a detailed account of dining habits and tableware, in ceramic, glass and metal.
I have stressed this aspect of Roman social life, because it appears from the surviving literary and archaeological evidence that the entertainment of friends at home was one of the greatest pleasures during the Empire.
Moreover, tableware is the most common survival of Roman artistic products: anyone who engages in Roman art and archaeology will come across it.
For the most part these themes are well illustrated by the collections of Roman antiquities in the British Museum, and it is my general purpose to offer some historical background to the present exhibitions.
It so happens that the Roman collections, which cover a geographical area from Britain to the Middle East and North Africa, fall within the interests of several departments of antiquities.
Roman Britain, for example, is part of the Department of Prehistoric and Romano-British Antiquities, an arrangement which emphasises the continuity of settlement in this country, but implies that British antiquities are exhibited separately from their European counterparts.
Such a division is of no little interest today, as politicians debate the extent of European political and economic union, and of Britain's involvement in Europe.
It is no coincidence that the areas of greatest prosperity in late twentieth-century Britain correspond to the civil area of the Roman province: at no time since the withdrawal of the Romans from Britain in AD 410 has the economic and political relationship with continental Europe been so close.
Learning to love luxury: the Romans and Greek art
3 (Above) Prisoners from Dacia in an imperial triumphal parade.
Terracotta plaque, early 2nd century AD.
4 (Right) Vase in the form of an elephant.
3rd century BC.
From Vulci, Etruria.
The art of the Hellenistic world presented a profound moral difficulty for the Romans of the Republic.
The elegant refinement of Hellenistic art conflicted with Roman ideals of austerity and a simple style of life.
But as Rome became first an Italian and then a Mediterranean power, it became inevitable that the Roman people should have contact with Greeks and with Greek art.
Much of the history of early Roman art reflects the tortured relationship of the (ideally) austere conquering power to its (supposedly) decadent but culturally superior vanquished subjects.
The contradictions were not completely resolved until Greek culture was fully accepted by the Roman emperor Hadrian and his court (AD 117–38).
The earliest displays of Etruscan and Greek art in Republican Rome were seen at the triumphal parades of loot and prisoners held in the centre of Rome to celebrate the victories of Roman consuls, senior magistrates who led the army into battle.
The art was looted from conquered cities in Etruria, to the north of Rome, and from the Greek communities of southern Italy.
Such spectacles were not likely to encourage an educated view of the treasures displayed.
The Roman people liked  triumphal parades to be entertaining.
In this respect they considered elephants, brought to Rome as exhibits from the Punic Wars against Hannibal, superior to works of art and fine craftsmanship.
The taking of booty from conquered cities was called by the Romans deditio (surrender), a process in which captured weapons, money, works of art or other valuables were dedicated to the gods at Rome, thereby giving divine sanction to the imposition of Roman rule.
Wars with the Samnites to the south (343–290 BC) opened contacts with the Greek communities of southern Italy.
The fall of Tarentum in 272 BC and the ravages of the wars of the Romans against Pyrrhus of Epirus, conducted in south-east Italy, led to the decline of the Greek cities of southern Italy and Sicily.
Pliny perhaps had this in mind when he wrote that art ceased in 296 BC.
Archaeological evidence points to a slightly later break, with a gap in the production of fine pottery, paintings and metalware from about 250 to 210 BC.
It may also be argued that Roman military advances effectively changed the artistic map of Italy.
Roads built to reach newly founded Roman colonies and to transport armies by-passed long-established cultural centres, leaving them to decay.
Other new centres were to flourish.
The horizons of Roman taste were revolutionised by Marcus Claudius Marcellus' sack of Syracuse, the last independent city of Sicily, in 211 BC.
Syracuse had long been ruled by tyrants who patronised the arts and sciences.
The booty included paintings and statues and two astronomical globes, the work of Archimedes.
According to Plutarch, writing in highly refined Greek circles in the early second  century AD: ‘Before this, Rome neither had nor even knew of these exqusite and refined things, nor was there in the city any love of what was charming and elegant; rather, it was full of barbaric weapons and bloody spoils.’
Marcellus met with opposition from conservative senators, who accused him of making Rome the object of envy, and of corrupting the populace with a taste for leisure and idle chat.
Marcellus' defence was that he had taught the ignorant to respect and wonder at the beautiful and marvellous works of Greece (Marc.21).
Map 2: map of roads built in Italy during the 3rd and 2nd centuries BC.
5 Sarcophagus decorated with the Labours of Hercules.
The figures are thought to have been adapted from a cycle of statues made by the sculptor Lysippus for a sanctuary at Alezia (Acarnania, Greece) in the 4th century BC and later brought to Rome.
Made in Rome about AD 150–70.
In 209 BC spoils arrived from the Greek city of Tarentum, in south-east Italy.
Quintus Fabius Maximus, who punished the Tarentines for going over to Hannibal during the Second Punic War, found the colossal bronze Zeus, the work of the famous sculptor Lysippus, too difficult to transport to Rome.
But another work by Lysippus, showing the hero Hercules purging the Augean Stables, was exhibited in Rome next to a statue of the triumphant Fabius Maximus on horseback.
In the fourth century AD the statue of Hercules was removed to the new capital of the eastern Roman Empire, Constantinople, which became a museum of ancient art (the snake column from Delphi may still be seen in the Hippodrome).
Evidently the need to furnish an emerging capital with prestigious works of art remained important throughout antiquity and indeed in more recent times: Rome lost much, though temporarily, from Napoleon's ambitious plans for embellishing Paris with famous works of art, and during the Second World War many artistic works were transported from Italy to Germany.
By the end of the third century the process of deditio of works from Italian cities was complete.
The first acquisitions of booty from Greece itself came from the campaigns of Lucius Quinctius Flamininus against Philip V of Macedon in 198–197 BC.
Rome subsequently became involved in wars containing the expansionist policies of the Seleucid monarchs of Syria.
Contemporary dedications at Rome reflected the growing trend of relatives of military commanders to glorify their illustrious ancestors, a trend also seen in portraiture (see chapter 2).
There was also a growing tendency to retain a certain amount of booty for personal use.
Lucius Cornelius Scipio, brother of Publius Scipio Africanus who was famed for his victory over Hannibal in Africa, defeated Antiochus III of Syria at the Battle of  Magnesia in western Asia Minor in 189 BC.
In his triumphal parade Scipio (known as Asiaticus) displayed gold, ivory, silver, money and bronzes.
He also brought Greek artists to Rome, and was himself portrayed dressed as a Greek in cloak and sandals in a statue dedicated on the Capitol, where paintings of his campaigns were displayed.
The Tomb of the Scipios, the ruins of which still survive by the Via Appia south of Rome, offers ample evidence of the early and long-lasting adoption of Greek values by this noble Roman family.
A later epitaph carved on the sarcophagus of Scipio Africanus' ancestor, Lucius Cornelius Scipio Barbatus, described him as having ‘good looks equal to his valour’, an idea foreign to traditional Roman thought but very much in the tradition of Alexander of Macedon.
Indeed, Scipio Barbatus' sarcophagus, made in the early third century BC of local stone, resembles a contemporary Greek altar.
The very notion of burial in a sarcophagus was alien to Republican Rome, where most individuals were cremated.
6 Sarcophagus of Lucius Cornelius Scipio Barbatus.
Made in the early 3rd century BC.
The inscription was added later, and the order of the consul's names was then reversed.
Vatican Museums.
Furniture, carpets and musical instruments made an appearance in the triumphal parade of Gnaeus Manlius Vulso (consul in 189 BC), victor over the Gauls in Asia.
Though depleted by robbery in Thrace on the way home, Vulso's loot astonished the Romans for its size and quality.
Until late antiquity Vulso's triumph remained a byword for luxury.
Pliny the Elder, writing in the later first century AD, says that about the time of Vulso's triumph statues of wood and terracotta ceased to be used at Rome and were replaced by luxuria from Asia Minor.
These were, no doubt, the products of the many Greek artists who were brought to Rome at this time.
On 22 June 168 BC Lucius Aemilius Paullus defeated King Perseus of Macedon at the Battle of Pydna.
In 167 he celebrated a three-day triumph.
The wealth accruing to the treasury was so great that the citizens of Italy were henceforth relieved of the need to pay tribute.
Much of the booty consisted of works of art, including a statue of Athena by Pheidias, displayed by Paullus in the temple of Fortuna.
The painter and philosopher Metrodorus was brought from Athens to record the story of the triumph and instruct Paullus' son.
There are other indications that the great general had a personal interest in Greek art.
When Paullus saw at Olympia the gold and ivory statue of Zeus by Pheidias, he declared he felt himself in the presence of a god.
Most significantly, he took over a monument in the great sanctuary at Delphi, previously intended to commemorate his vanquished opponent Perseus.
On the upper register of the monument was an ambitious if small-scale scene of battle, now reworked to show Paullus' victory at Pydna.
Paullus himself may appear as one of the Roman riders.
An inscription on the base confirms the new destiny of the monument.
Of prime importance for the history of Roman attitudes to Greek art are the activities of Paullus' successors, Quintus Caecilius Metellus (later named Macedonicus for his victories in Macedonia) and Lucius Mummius.
In his triumphal parade at Rome Metellus  showed a group of thirty-four bronzes by Lysippus, court sculptor to Alexander the Great.
The Macedonian ruler and his fellow soldiers were portrayed fighting the Battle of the Granicus.
The bronzes were later set up in the Porticus Metelli, the first secular building in Rome specifically intended for the display of booty.
The portico formed part of a complex of buildings linking the temple of Juno Regina, restored by Metellus, and the temple of Jupiter Stator, possibly the first marble temple in Rome, designed by the Greek architect Hermodorus of Salamis in Cyprus at the invitation of Metellus.
Here, too, were probably housed the statues of Aesculapius and Diana by the Greek sculptor Cephisodotus.
7 The imperial façade of the Porticus of Octavia, Rome, a redevelopment of the monumental colonnaded enclosure built by the distinguished admiral Cnaeus Octavius in 168 BC.
In 146 BC, acting on a senatorial decree, Metellus' colleague Mummius sacked Corinth, the richest city of Greece.
The looting that ensued was the most notorious act of plunder in the history of the Republic.
The historian Polybius, a witness, reported that soldiers used the works of the painter Aristides as gaming-boards.
One of these paintings was later spotted by the Greek geographer Strabo in the temple of Ceres at Rome.
He says it was burned shortly afterwards.
The painting, which represented the god of wine, Dionysos, might have had a happier fate had Mummius agreed to the bid of 100 talents made for it after the sack by King Attalus of Pergamum, but Mummius was intent on taking his booty to Rome.
The plunderer of Corinth did not belong to one of the old noble families of Rome, and attracted  numerous sneers from the Roman intelligentsia.
That much is clear from the standard of his labels; he would have made a poor museum curator!
A statue of Poseidon of Isthmia was labelled as Zeus, and a portrait representing Philip II of Macedon as Zeus was described quite simply as Zeus.
Two portraits of Greek youths were mistakenly labelled Nestor and Priam.
The surviving accounts of his triumph dwell on the size of the booty, but of greater interest to us is its dispersal: statues were dedicated in Italian and even in Spanish towns, where Mummius had earlier served as praetor (judicial magistrate) and provincial governor.
Mummius made some amends to the Greeks by generous dedications in their sanctuaries.
Greece was to suffer a further blow half a century later with the rise of Lucius Cornelius Sulla, Dictator at Rome in 82–1 BC.
Declared an enemy of the Roman state in 88 BC, Sulla was granted no funds for his campaigns against King Mithradates of Pontus, in northwest Asia Minor.
Consequently, he plundered the sanctuaries of Delphi, Epidaurus and Olympia, and gold and silver were collected throughout the Peloponnese to be melted down for coin to pay his armies.
In 86 BC Sulla plundered Athens.
The centre of the city did not fully recover for nearly two centuries.
Even the uncompleted temple of Olympian Zeus was robbed of some columns, taken for the temple of Capitoline Jupiter at Rome.
Sulla's successor in the eastern command, Lucius Licinius Lucullus, became a byword for luxury and personal indulgence.
Concentrating on Mithradates' home ground, he stripped the Pontic cities of their art treasures.
Both Lucullus and his successor Pompey displayed works of art that were the property of the royal house of Pontus, emphasising the crushing of the dynasty by Rome.
Misappropriation of plunder was punished.
The most famous surviving account of this is the prosecution of Verres,pro-praetor (a governor with the authority of a Roman judge) in Sicily from 73 to 70 BC.
During his prosecution by Cicero Verres fled to Marseilles, but appeared again on the proscription list of Mark Antony, compiled in 43 BC, thirty years after Verres' term of office.
Verres had not yet handed to the state his collection of Corinthian bronzes.
Following the defeat of Antony and Cleopatra at the Battle of Actium in 31 BC Julius Caesar's great-nephew and heir, Octavian, became master of the Mediterranean world.
Actium, and Octavian's victory in Egypt the following year, provided the occasion for the last great triumph in the Republican style.
Egyptian jewellery adorned the statue of Victory long since looted from Tarentum in southern Italy and displayed in the Curia Julia, named after the Julii, Octavian's family.
A gold statue of Cleopatra was paraded at the triumph; this was later displayed in the temple of Venus Genetrix, a patron deity of the Julii.
The obelisks now adorning the Piazza del Populo and the Piazzo di Montecitorio in the centre of Rome were brought by Octavian from Egypt.
They were first displayed in the Circus Maximus and the Campus Martius by the Tiber.
To suggest continuity between himself and the triumphant generals of the later Republic, Octavian reconstructed all the buildings in the area of the Porticus Metelli, where their booty had been displayed.
In 27 BC Octavian took the name Augustus, offered to him by the Roman Senate.
Though he claimed to have restored the Republic after thirteen years of civil war that lasted from the murder of Julius Caesar in 44 BC to the Battle of Actium in 31, he was in fact sole ruler and emperor of Rome and its conquered territories.
As emperor, Augustus gave financial compensation and some booty back, though it must be said that such acts of generosity were inspired less by guilt than by political revenge against  cities that had supported his rival, Mark Antony: the returned booty was Antony's plunder.
Augustus kept his own, and, moderating the custom of his Republican predecessors, displayed some publicly while reserving a few items for private enjoyment.
Thus an ivory statue of Athena Alea from the famous sanctuary at Tegea in the Greek Peloponnese was set at the entrance to his Forum, while a tusk of the Calydonian boar — no doubt correctly labelled — passed into the emperor's bone collection.
Both items were reported 150 years after Augustus' death by the traveller Pausanias (8, 46, 5), who says that the ‘keepers of the wonders’ note that one of the boar's tusks is broken while the surviving tusk is kept in the Emperor's Gardens in a Sanctuary of Bacchus and it measures just three feet long.
8 The Obelisk of Augustus from the Circus Maximus in the Piazza del Populo, where it has stood since 1589.
Until well into the reign of Augustus the display of Greek art in Rome was more closely linked to political advancement and military might than to religious belief and aesthetic appreciation.
It is very characteristic of the Romans that they chose to display in public parades those objects considered particularly suited to the context in which they were won — gods and heroes were explicitly linked to the glory of battle.
There were currents of opinion at Rome, represented by the Elder Cato and, much later, by Augustus' lieutenant, Marcus Agrippa, that favoured the restriction of the display of booty to public settings.
These arguments were directed against the corrupting accumulation of astounding wealth by private individuals, and aimed at bolstering the prestige of Rome as the most powerful state in the Mediterranean world.
The city of Rome had to appear worthy of its position.
There was, of course, a conflict between the traditional right of generals to dispose of their plunder as they saw fit, by rewarding themselves, their relatives and supporters, and their obligation to the state to supply money and the visible trappings of power.
From 19 BC none but the emperor was permitted to enjoy a triumph, and victorious generals had to be content with the nominal honours of the ornamenta triumphalia .
With the onset of empire, the conflicts of interest between state and individual, and between luxury and austerity, were subsumed by the power of the emperor to embellish the city and court as he wished.
Greek art and artists at Rome
In the later Republic and early Empire Greek artists were brought to Rome to design buildings appropriate for the display of booty, to repair old sculptures and make new ones for these and other structures, and to restore decaying old temples, once venerated for their wooden and terracotta statues, but now seen to be in need of renovation.
Naturally, the public display of great works of art led to a demand for imitations for enjoyment by wealthy individuals.
At the same time a taste arose for the refined lifestyle of the cultured Greek.
Some members of the Roman aristocracy became exceedingly Hellenised, but particular aspects of Greek culture met with resistance from the more conservative elements of Roman society.
No permanent theatre was permitted in Rome until that built by Pompey in the mid-first century BC.
A decree of the Senate was passed in 186 BC, ordering the destruction of sanctuaries of Bacchus, the god of wine (Greek, Dionysos), and banning his worship, but the growth of the Italian wine trade and the personal involvement in it of many of Rome's leading senators ensured the god's recovery.
A great wave of Greek influence in Rome began in the mid-second century BC with the conquest of Greece, and lasted well into the first century, by which time it had become a well-established fashion for young men of well-to-do families to complete their education in Athens.
Indeed, artistic traffic was not only in one  direction.
Some Greeks who favoured Rome adopted a Roman style of portrait.
In 174 BC the Roman architect Decimus Cossutius, son of Poplius, worked on the construction of the temple of Olympian Zeus at Athens, a project sponsored by the Seleucid king Antiochus IV.
The huge temple, begun at the close of the sixth century BC by the Athenian tyrant Pisistratus, was finally dedicated by Hadrian in AD 131–2.
Most of the standing remains date to the second century BC.
9 The Temple of Olympian Zeus, Athens, a project begun in the late 6th century BC by the Athenian tyrant Pisistratus.
Most of the standing remains date to the 2nd century BC.
Greek artists of this period were highly mobile, and this is reflected in the development of a well-defined style dispersed over a wide geographical area.
Generations of artists travelled about the Mediterranean.
Thus in the later second century BC the sculptor Timarchides worked with his brother Timokles on various commissions, including a statue of Apollo in Rome.
His nephew, also called Timarchides, worked with the elder Timarchides on the Greek island of Delos, where he sculpted a portrait of the Roman businessman Gaius Ofellius Ferus.
Some sculptors were quick to take advantage of gullible Roman collectors new to the game.
A Rhodian, Menodotus, collaborated with another Rhodian to forge a bronze statue of Apollo and pass it off as a work of the early fifth century BC.
It was not uncommon for craftsmen to excel in a variety of media.
Pasiteles was a famous sculptor of the first century BC who founded a school at Rome.
He was probably a Greek from southern Italy.
Pasiteles was skilled in working stone and bronze, but was especially talented at metalwork and at modelling from life.
Works signed by members of his school survive, and indicate that Pasiteles and his pupils specialised in creating works in the ‘severe’ style of early Classical Greece.
Pasiteles is known to have made an ivory image of Jupiter for the temple of Jupiter in the complex of buildings developed by Metellus Macedonicus.
His career was not without personal risk: the sculptor was nearly mauled in the dockyards at Puteoli while drawing caged animals destined for the arena.
It is clear from the surviving works by Pasiteles' pupils that, though they were famed as copyists, their copies of famous works were in fact rather free adaptations.
There are a number of possible reasons for this.
The demands of the collector, with the need to consider the setting and purpose of a copy, contributed to the distancing of Roman copy from Greek original.
In addition, the Greek sculptures displayed in Rome had been removed from their intended context, and were therefore reproduced without reference to it.
Moreover, most surviving copies are made of marble, which does not perform as bronze.
It used to be thought that as the practice of copying became more common the Romans devised an instrument similar to the modern pointing machine for making exact reproductions.
The modern instrument consists of a fixed frame with adjustable rods.
Three basic points are fixed on a plaster model of the original and on the marble block, and the frame transferred back and forth from model to block, each point being marked by drilling a hole to the required depth.
If sufficient measurements are taken, this is a very accurate way of making a copy.
However, though plaster models are known from antiquity, no certain traces of the use of a pointing machine have yet been found on Roman copies.
(It is only too easy to drill the holes slightly too deep, leaving tell-tale ‘points’ on the surface of the finished sculpture).
Roman sculptors appear to have made use of only a few set measuring points, which sometimes survive, raised off the surface like pimples.
From these other points could be measured by triangulation with compasses or calipers.
It is difficult to achieve truly three-dimensional accuracy with this method, but mathematical precision was not a prime requirement in Roman commissions, most of which were intended to be displayed in a setting with a restricted angle of view.
As in Roman portrait sculpture, so in copies of statues of deities and other figures the element of recognition was provided in the head.
This is where the sculptor might be expected to remain close to the original, though even here a Roman preference can be detected for a certain shape, or for an angle that increases the sentimental value of the copy.
10 Two figures of Pan, signed by the sculptor Marcus Cossutius Cerdo, freedman of Marcus.
From the site of a villa near Civita Lavinia.
Italy.
1st century BC, and extensively restored in the eighteenth century.
11 (Right) The ‘Westmacott Youth’, photographed from the direction of the figure's gaze, thereby eliminating the strut and the support.
A version made at reduced scale about AD 150 of an original of the 5th century BC by the Greek sculptor Polyclitus.
Most Roman sculptors were very cautious about supporting large blocks of marble.
Many statues were bolstered by struts that now appear unsightly, especially in comparison with unsupported bronze statues.
Some sculptors dealt with the problem by making the support part of the narrative, decorating it with features that helped to identify the figure.
Others designed the sculpture for a specific viewpoint, which can sometimes be reconstructed by looking up into the figure's eyes.
Most Roman statues were displayed in niches, which necessarily limited the angle of view.
It was then possible to hide structural supports by aligning a figure suitably within a niche.
It should also be borne in mind that ancient marble statues were painted.
Paint, too, played a useful role in disguising ugly struts.
In marked contrast to their taste in portraiture (see chapter 2), it seems that many Roman collectors preferred youth, physical beauty and sentiment to the reality of Greek originals.
They went for small-scale figures, often made to appear more youthful than the subject allowed.
The ‘Westmacott Youth’, named after the nineteenth-century collector and sculptor Richard Westmacott, is a case in point.
This is a copy in Parian marble of a bronze statue by the fifth-century Argive sculptor Polyclitus, whose works were much admired in imperial Rome.
The original, although it is hard to believe from the fragile beauty of the copy, represented a boy boxer, Cyniscus of Mantineia, whose feats were commemorated in a bronze statue set up in the sanctuary at Olympia.
In the marble version the struts have been banished from sight by designing the statue to be seen from a restricted viewpoint.
We may suppose that it originally stood in a niche.
The shape of the head has been sharpened, the overall aspect of the figure softened and sentimentalised.
Polyclitan youths, the bread and butter of the Roman sculptor, came in three sizes:pais (child: 1.10m);ephebe (youth: 1.50m);neos (mature youth: 1.86m).
In the last category fell four types that embodied the ideal qualities of physical form as set out in the ‘canon’ of Polyclitus: the diskophoros (discus-carrier), the doryphoros (spear-carrier), the diadumenos (victor crowning himself) and the hero Hercules.
The second, it has been argued, formed the basis of the portraits of Augustus, and in that capacity the doryphoros achieved heroic proportions.
But it was more customary for the copyist to reduce the proportions, turning diadumenoi into ephebes to please the client's personal tastes and fit well into the dining-room.
This last point may be appreciated by visiting the Townley Room in the British Museum (Room 84).
Charles Townley (1737–1805) collected Roman sculpture rather as a Roman connoisseur would have done, with a view to making a cultured ambience at home, well suited to his intellectual interests.
Standing in the Townley Room and looking through to the sculptures displayed next door (Room 83), most of which were intended for public display, one is well aware of the reduced scale and decorative qualities sought by the private collector who wined and dined amidst his collection.
12 (Above) The Portland Vase: scenes of love (left) and loss (right), probably taken from a mythological subject.
Cameo glass made in Italy in the early 1st century AD.
Augustan classicism
The age of Augustus saw a formidable interest in the Classical period.
On some objects scenes were reproduced whose precise meaning is difficult to recapture.
The Portland Vase is a good example of the genre.
The most exquisite surviving example of cameo glass, it is decorated with two scenes, evidently connected with each other and concerned with love and loss.
Much scholarly debate has arisen over the identification of the figures and the interpretation of the scenes.
Those who favour a depiction of the fortunes of the imperial house have to reckon with the difficulty of recognising Augustus.
Recognition is so fundamental to Roman imperial portraiture that any doubt over the mortal identity of a figure should indicate that the scene is not concerned with important people.
We may see in the modern confusion surrounding the Portland Vase a tendency, particularly marked in later works of the Claudian period (AD 41–54), to liken idealised figures to portraits.
There are two good examples of this in the British Museum's Roman sculpture collections: the ‘Spinario’, a boy removing a thorn from his foot, and ‘Clytie’, long taken to be a portrait of the emperor Claudius' mother, the younger Antonia, but perhaps better identified as a personification of one of the nations defeated by Augustus.
The ‘Spinario’ is clearly based on a genre figure, one of the studies of everyday life so popular in the later Hellenistic era, but his hair and features reflect fashions in Claudian portraiture.
Both ‘Clytie’ and the ‘Spinario’are very popular with modern museum visitors, reflecting the appeal that such works undoubtedly had to the Roman connoisseur.
Another striking characteristic of Roman art of the first century AD is the adoption for private use of motifs originally intended for public monuments.
This tendency is also apparent in the design and decoration of  Roman houses (see chapter 4).
It may be that the use of imperial motifs was thought to bring good fortune.
The imperial eagle and the personification of Victory are obvious examples of symbols of imperial power, but they turn up with surprising frequency upon ornamental furniture, lamps and, most notably, 15 funerary monuments.
Private citizens were also quick to adopt the more decorative motifs of imperial monuments.
The famous acanthus scrolls decorating the Ara Pacis (Altar of Augustan Peace) were reproduced at every scale and in many media.
It seems that the reforms and the taste of Augustus extended to every area of political and social life, and ‘the empire style’ was enthusiastically adopted, not least by the ‘upwardly mobile’classes, newly enfranchised by the first emperor.
13 ‘Clytie’.
Marble bust.
possibly representing one of the peoples conquered by Augustus.
Made about AD 40–60.
14 The ‘Spinario’(boy removing a thorn from his foot).
Marble version of a Hellenistic genre figure.
made about AD 50.
From Rome.
15 (Right) Victory on a Roman lamp.
with a palm branch and inscribed shield.
Here imperial symbols are used to mark the New Year; seasonal gifts appear in the background.
Made in Italy.
AD 50–100.
The Hadrianic Greek revival
It has been well observed that classical revivals tend to be of short duration.
They incline to the academic, the exclusive, the theoretical and the pedantic.
By the middle of the first century AD a less restrained taste prevailed in idealised art as in portraiture.
An obsession with the Classical past was to return under the emperor Hadrian, who took a deep personal interest in the fortunes of Greece and eagerly adopted a Greek appearance.
The earlier taste for Greek art had been associated with the enjoyment of otium, the life of pleasurable contemplation indulged in by those sectors of Roman society with no need to work.
By the second century AD such refined tastes had spread to a wider public.
Many cities, even in provinces as distant as Britain, were now equipped with public buildings and these were filled with sculptures fulfilling the ever-important  criterion of decor (suitability to setting).
To meet the demand, the marble trade from quarries largely owned by the emperor was rationalised.
By the end of the second century AD marble veneer and sculptures from Greece and Asia Minor were shipped as far as London.
16 Marble relief: a youth restrains a horse.
Made in the early 2nd century AD, imitating the Classical style of Athens in the mid-5th century BC.
Found in the Villa of Hadrian at Tivoli, near Rome.
17 (Above) Statue of a priestess from Atrapaldo. southern Italy.
The figure is carved from a thin slab of Carrara marble.
The forearms were added separately.
Made about AD 20–40.
Height 209cm: width 82cm: thickness 52cm.
18 (Above right) Statue of a Roman emperor, from Carthage.
The figure is carved from a huge block of Parian marble.
2nd century AD.
Preserved height 211Cm: width 100cm: thickness 75cm.
With Hadrian we reach the second great age of Roman interest in Classical Greece.
The mid-second century saw a passionate interest in the exact reproduction of Classical Greek speech.
Archaism was the fashion of the day: the Asiatic Greek traveller Pausanias roamed Greece, noting the state of preservation of Archaic and Classical originals missed by Roman looters, including indiscriminately works in precious materials and venerated wooden idols.
Contemporary achievements, with the notable exception of the gifts of Hadrian, were largely ignored.
Such antiquarian interest in the past laid a rather deadening hand upon contemporary sculptors.
The extraordinary growth in public commissions, almost all destined for display in niches cut into the walls of huge buildings, increased the existing tendency to restrict viewpoints.
Advances in the organisation of manpower at the marble quarries allowed the transport of huge blocks of stone, which enabled sculptors to make large statues in one piece.
In some ways sculptors became more adventurous, creating figures of larger scale and with more expansive poses than would have been tried in the first century.
But the delicacy of small-scale work, and the demands upon skill made by the need to join exactly the pieced works of the early Empire were diminished.
The passion for Greece was by no means restricted to wealthy art collectors, antiquarians and professors of rhetoric.
The Roman Empire was itself more acceptable to provincial subjects than had been the case in the age of Augustus, and the emperor's taste for Greek art, well publicised by Hadrian's zest for provincial travel, therefore enjoyed wide support.
The broadly based Hadrianic Greek revival thus proved long lasting, and exerted a profound influence on the art of later antiquity.
The taste for Greek culture also influenced the personal appearance of individuals and fashions in burial; it is particularly apparent in portraiture, even of people of modest origin.
Roman portraits
19 (Right) Inscribed portrait of Aeschines, the Athenian orator accused of treachery in an embassy to King Philip of Macedon (346 BC).
Roman copy of a Greek original, found in Bitolia (Macedonia).
20 (Above) Head from a statue of Alexander the Great (d.323 BC).
A copy.
probably made in the first century BC, from Alexandria.
From the later Republic onwards there is no period of Roman history lacking fine portraits, and it may be argued that the lack of earlier survivals is merely due to chance.
Indeed, the portrait must be considered one of the outstanding Roman contributions to the visual arts.
The Romans were interested in conveying aspects of individual character as these were reflected in personal appearance.
It was not a Roman tradition to commemorate youth or physical beauty, so Roman portraits, of the ‘warts and all’ school, appear to modern eyes reassuringly true to life and easy to understand.
Portraiture in the Republic
There came to exist in Roman as in Greek portraiture a visual code in which expression was given to moral qualities.
Portraits of Greek philosophers and city fathers, mostly devised in the fourth century BC and often highly individualised, had expressed admiration of their subjects' asceticism, their seniority and wisdom.
Such portraits were far removed, in appearance and in the moral authority they were intended to convey, from contemporary images of the Macedonian kings who then ruled the Hellenistic world: royal portraits suggested the physical attractions and hopes of youth.
Roman portraits of public figures emphasised their subjects' fitness to hold public office and their personal authority as heads of families.
More specifically, Roman portraits embodied a set of virtues traditionally valued by the Roman people.
These comprised a respect for the old, for those in positions of authority and for austerity of manner and appearance.
Though evidently similar to the moral values of certain Greek philosophers, these virtues were considered typically Roman.
This is apparent in a striking passage of the Histories (6. 5 3–4) written by Polybius, a Greek exiled to Rome in the second century BC.
Polybius comments on the quaint customs of the Romans, who had wax death-masks made of their ancestors.
The masks were worn at funerals by young men of the family who bore the nearest physical resemblance to the subjects of the wax portraits.
The purpose of this exercise, verbally repeated in funeral orations, was to instil in the young the duty of living up to the glorious achievements of their forefathers.
This was a means of strengthening the family group and, in a political sense, the grip of a small number of families upon public life.
The tradition, surely of primitive origin, proved remarkably long-lived.
In the rise to power of individuals in the closing decades of the Roman Republic many magistrates advertised their right to office by reminding the populace of the virtues of their ancestors through portraits reproduced on the coins they were authorised to mint.
Some of these ancestors were indeed remote: Marcus Claudius Marcellus, consul in 222 BC (and another four times) was portrayed on a coin of his homonymous descendant in 50 BC.
Though of miniature format, portraits on coins and gems could be impressively characterised: witness the image of Gaius Antius Restio, Tribune of the People in 71 BC and portrayed on a coin of his descendant minted in 47 BC, or an unknown man whose authoritative portrait was brilliantly engraved in chalcedony.
The Republican tradition lasted into the Empire: ancestor portraits were carried at the funerals of early imperial princes and notables, and both the imperial family and the surviving nobility continued to stress, and indeed enhance, their origins and virtues.
21 (Above) Portrait of a Roman in the traditional Republican style.
Made about 60–40 BC.
Scholars have long debated the origins of Roman portraiture and the influence of the contemporary Greek world upon the appearance of the portraits of individual Romans.
The earliest surviving portraits are almost exclusively of the first century BC.
Roman generals who campaigned in the Greek-speaking eastern Mediterranean during the second and first centuries BC were regarded by the Greeks as successors to the Macedonian kings, who were in their turn successors to Alexander the Great (d.323 BC).
The inspiration of Alexander is apparent in the portraits of Pompey, the most powerful Roman of his day, and for a time the effective ruler of the eastern Mediterranean.
Much more than a military commander, Pompey appointed kings and created new Roman provinces.
Like Alexander, he bore the name ‘Magnus’(the Great), and imitated Alexander's leonine hairstyle and upturned gaze, a feature of Hellenistic royal portraits that implied an almost divine status.
More commonly powerful Romans had themselves portrayed with their bodies idealised in the  Greek manner and their heads idealised in the Roman tradition — indeed, even Pompey never quite lost his homely Roman countenance The result was an aesthetic catastrophe, but the harshly jarring styles accurately conveyed the confusion of cultures in the early first century BC, a time when many well-to-do Romans completed their education in Athens, but when the moral values expressed in traditional Roman portraits were still considered an essential element in the representation of individuals.
22 (a) Marcus Claudius Marcellus, consul in 222 BC, portrayed on a coin of his descendant minted about I 70 years after Marcellus held office (top left).
(b) Gaius Antius Restio, tribune of the Roman people in 71 BC, and portrayed on a coin minted by his descendant 24 years later (top right).
(c) Unknown man: chalcedony intaglio in the traditional Republican style, made in the 1st century BC (bottom left).
23 Pompey the Great, portrayed on a coin minted by his son Sextus Pompey in 38 BC.
Julius Caesar favoured a traditional style of portrait, but used his image in a regal manner that traditionalists found offensive.
Caesar was the first Roman to allow his own portrait to appear on coins minted at Rome and elsewhere in his lifetime; his statue was carried on a litter, and set next to statues of the gods.
Portraits in the Empire
After Caesar's assassination in 44 BC his heir Octavian radically changed the style of portraits of Roman rulers.
Following an interval of mourning for Caesar, Octavian adopted an image loosely based on that of earlier Hellenistic kings.
But in the years after his victory at Actium (31 BC) it became clear that this form of portrait, bearing associations of foreign kingship, was ill suited to Octavian's self-proclaimed role as the restorer of the Roman Republic.
The traditional Roman Republican  portrait was also problematic, since it had been so abused by Caesar.
A more neutral image, fitting Octavian's presentation of himself as princeps (‘first citizen’) of the restored Republic, was required.
25 (From left to right: a) Julius Caesar, portrayed on a coin minted at Rome in 44 BC, the year of his assassination.
Caesar was the first Roman to have himself portrayed on coins during his lifetime.
(h) Octavian, later Augustus, heir to Julius Caesar, portrayed on a coin minted in 36–31 BC. (c) Antiochus III, King of Syria (223–187 BC), Is thought to have been the model for the portraits of Octavian made at this period.
(d) The new classicising image of Augustus appears on coinage as early as 27BC.
24 (Left) Statue of a Roman general, portrayed in heroic semi-nudity.
The head is in the traditional Republican style, but the body is idealised in the Greek manner.
The general's cuirass appears as a support beside his left leg.
Made about 70–50 BC.
Found at Tivoli, near Rome.
26 (Right) Gaius Caesar, one of the grandsons of Augustus, and his favourite potential successor.
(Far right) Tiberius Caesar, Augustus' stepson, at the time of his adoption as successor after Gaius' death in AD 4.
Although he deliberately affected a republican stance, in 27 BC Octavian effectively became emperor of Rome, taking the name Augustus.
The first emperor's new image may be closely associated with the establishment of the new constitution, for it first appears on coins minted in the eastern city of Pergamum in 27–26 BC.
The new portrait was a bland adaptation of a Classical Greek figure, the spear-carrier created by the sculptor Polyclitus (p.18), which was thought to embody the ideal qualities of the human body and spirit.
Though evidently representing the same individual, the head was much calmer than that of the agitated portrait of the previous decade.
The emperor looked purposeful and reassuring.
The image did not change until the emperor's death at the age of 76 in AD 14.
Augustus' portrait was disseminated on coins and in sculptures throughout the Empire.
The succession was complicated, and the various candidates were all portrayed in similar fashion, to suggest family likeness and political stability.
It is thus quite difficult to; distinguish the various princes of the family of Augustus.
The style survived, with modifications, until the end of the dynasty in AD 68, and it was deliberately revived in late antiquity by Constantine I (AD 307–37), the first emperor to embrace Christianity.
What happened in the early Empire to the traditional Roman portrait?
It was still used  for images of private citizens, though some very important officials and foreign clients of Augustus based their images upon that of the emperor.
The austere Republican image, formerly restricted by law to the nobility and to the families of serving magistrates, had by now become an expression of Roman identity.
As such it was eagerly taken up by newly enfranchised members of Roman society.
Under Augustus legislation was passed to allow freed slaves to marry and their children to become Roman citizens.
Of alien origin, such people wanted to be portrayed as ‘more Roman than the Romans’.
They were commonly shown as half-figures carved in relief within a frame.
The marble block was then set into the wall of the family tomb, so the occupants appeared to be gazing at passers-by as if from a window.
Hundreds of freedmen-reliefs have survived, mostly from Rome but also from elsewhere in Italy.
It has been estimated that some 85 per cent of these are of Augustan date.
Later, when freedmen had been assimilated into Roman society, there was no longer any need to proclaim Roman identity in this way.
27 Marble funerary relief: two former slaves who were freed together.
The freedmen appear with (left) the rod and staffs used in the ceremony of freeing a slave:(above and right) the tools of a smith or moneyer and of a carpenter.
The younger man has adopted a contemporary hairstyle, while his older companion is portrayed in the traditional Republican style.
Found near Rome.
Made about 20–1 BC.
The traditional style of Roman portrait was revived at the court of the emperor Vespasian (AD 69–79), a man of modest Italian origin  who rose to power through command of an army following a year of civil war.
The style passed to the provinces; by the late first century AD a Roman political career (cursus honorum ) was the goal of men of provincial origin, and the Roman Empire offered many opportunities for personal advancement to wealthy provincials.
28 (Above left) Head from a statue of the emperor Vespasian (AD 69–79).
From Carthage.
29 (Above right) Gold coin of the emperor Gallienus. minted at Rome in AD 262–3, to celebrate his tenth year as emperor (left), with (right) a coin mounted in a gold disc: portrait of the emperor Philip (AD 244–9).
A similarly austere portrait style reappeared in the mid-third century AD during a period of prolonged crisis in the administration of the Roman Empire.
From AD 235 to 285 the Empire was ruled by a succession of men, mostly of undistinguished provincial background, who had risen to power through the control of armies.
These men appeared with shaven heads and grim, worried expressions.
As is always the case with Roman portraiture, such images captured the subject's social class and preoccupations.
It is instructive to contrast the portrayal of these emperors with that of the longest survivor of this period, the emperor Gallienus (AD 253–68).
Of aristocratic family, Gallienus was highly educated, and his portrait exudes cultured refinement.
His reign is often described as a period of revival of interest in Classical themes and modes of expression, but the profound change in the social composition of the court did not outlast the emperor.
The art of Gallienus' reign recalled happier days under the emperors of the second century AD.
The imperial image had undergone a drastic change at the accession of Hadrian (AD 117–38).
From this period until the reign of Constantine the emperor and his mature male subjects were almost invariably bearded.
The wearing of beards had long been out of fashion at Rome: as we have seen, the contenders for power at the death of the Republic imitated the clean-shaven kings of the Hellenistic world.
Nor were beards a feature of  traditional Republican portraits, though it is said that in the early Republic the Romans wore beards and long hair.
The first barbers at Rome, of Sicilian origin, were said to have arrived in the city in 300 BC, after which date the Romans were clean-shaven.
The date coincides with the institution at Alexandria of the cult of Alexander the Great, whose clean-shaven features were copied by many of his successors.
It is likely that the Romans followed Alexandrian fashion in this respect, but surviving portraits of later date suggest that they retained their own conventions of representing character in facial features.
The Romans of the later Republic and early Empire shaved off their beards at the age of twenty-four, and formally dedicated the shaven hair to the Lares, gods of the household, in a ceremony marking the transition to mature adulthood and public life.
However, mature men did wear beards in mourning, and the very earliest portraits of Octavian show him bearded in grief for the death of Julius Caesar.
30 (a) Octavian, bearded in mourning for the murdered Caesar.
Coin minted in Gaul in 39 BC (top).
(b) Cold coin issued in 193 BC by the Roman general Flamininus to commemorate his liberation of Greece from Macedonian rule (middle).
(c) Bearded portrait of the emperor Nero on a coin issued after his declaration of the freedom of Greece in AD 65–6 (bottom).
Beards had been the norm in Classical Greece for portraits of politicians and philosophers.
In the wake of Macedonian rule of their cities many intellectuals of late Classical and Hellenistic Greece retained their beards, deliberately intending a contrast with their rulers.
Beards also signified an association with traditional Greek culture, and as such they were worn by some later Macedonian kings and philhellene Romans.
The Roman general Flamininus, who proclaimed the freedom of Greece from Macedonian rule in the stadium at Isthmia (near Corinth) in 196 BC. was portrayed bearded.
Two centuries later Flamininus was emulated by the Roman emperor Nero (AD 54–68), who had a passion for Greek culture and who, in AD 67, exempted all Greek cities, by then incorporated within the Roman province of Achaia, from taxation and Roman interference in local administration.
Nero also made his proclamation in the stadium at Isthmia in a deliberate evocation of Flamininus, and adopted a bearded portrait at about this time.
There are some bearded private portraits surviving from this period.
The emperor's antics on stage embarrassed the Roman Senate, but the opening of membership of that august body to Greeks led to an irreversible improvement in the standing of Greeks within the Roman Empire.
By the turn of the century Greek men of culture held prominent local office.
Even the city of Athens, not yet recovered from the devastations of the first century BC, had begun to flourish.
Hadrian served as archon (chief magistrate) of the city four years before he became emperor.
Though his detractors claimed that Hadrian's beard was grown to hide blemishes on his skin, it more likely reflects the emperor's profound commitment to Greek culture.
His interest was advertised personally, in his appearance and manner, and publicly, in his favourable treatment of the cities of the Greek heartlands and in his decoration of public buildings and imperial residences at Rome.
Hadrian's energy, mobility and his tendency to intervene in provincial and private affairs led to far-reaching changes, both in the personal appearance of his subjects and in wider aspects of public and private life.
From his reign onwards the Romans reversed their view of beards as symbols of immature adulthood and apparently embraced the ethical values of late Classical and Hellenistic Greece.
The fashion for beards even survived emperors with no interest in Greek culture, such as Antoninus Pius (AD 138–61), who as emperor ventured no further than Naples, and continued in the succeeding century, despite a series of military coups by men of Balkan origins with no cultural pretensions.
Recent research has confirmed the long-assumed view that court fashions were rapidly adopted by the provincial aristocracy.
The  copying of rulers' portraits by private individuals may seem particularly characteristic of the Roman Empire, but it was already apparent in the Hellenistic kingdom of Ptolemaic Egypt and its dependent territories, notably Cyprus.
Most likely the introduction of a cult of worship of the ruler was responsible for this development, which is reflected in small objects as in large statues.
31 Bust of a man in tunic and fringed cloak.
Found in a Roman villa at Lullingstone, Kent.
The nose is mutilated; the bust was apparently deliberately buried in late antiquity with a companion piece of slightly later date.
This portrait, probably made in Italy, exemplifies the intellectual refinement of the middle of the 2nd century AD.
No evidence survives for the means by which the portraits of the emperor and his court were sent around the Empire.
It seems clear from the surviving images that emperors took interest in and approved the form of their portraits, particularly those that would be seen by many of their subjects on coins and statues set up in public places.
There are some indications that inappropriate dedications were not approved: in Rome alone Augustus had eighty silver portraits of himself destroyed, declaring that such images were unsuited to portraiture of mortals.
However, the act of dedicating a portrait and describing its subject on an accompanying inscription was not necessarily initiated by the emperor.
In the eastern provinces, where there were well-established traditions of kingship, many surviving dedications were made up by local communities who likened the reigning emperor to a god.
In antiquity portraits served as surrogates for their subjects.
Petitions were fastened to a statue of Julius Caesar set up in the Roman Forum, and appeals for justice were made to statues of emperors in later antiquity.
As imperial portraits attracted faith, so images of emperors who had betrayed their subjects' trust were treated with contempt.
The phrase damnatio memoriae (formal condemnation of an emperor following his death) refers not to the repealing of the acts of an unpopular emperor but to the destruction of his images and the elimination of his name from inscriptions.
Such destruction could be vicious: the  staid senator.
the Younger Pliny, was vehement in his description of the fate that befell the portraits of the emperor Domitian on his downfall in AD 96:
It was our delight to dash those proud faces to the ground, to smite them with the sword and savage them with the axe, as if blood and agony could follow from every blow.
Our transports of joy, so long deferred, were unrestrained; all sought a form of vengeance in beholding those mutilated bodies, limbs hacked in pieces, and finally that baleful, fearsome visage cast into the fire, to be melted down…
(Pan-52)
Damage to the imperial image could reflect contemporary forms of punishment.
Thus the 32 over-life-sized bronze head of Augustus found at Meroë (Sudan) was detached from its body by Meroitic tribesmen raiding Roman camps in upper Egypt, carried to the site of a temple of victory, and deliberately buried beneath the steps leading into the temple.
Anyone entering the shrine committed the insult of literally stepping on the head of the Roman emperor.
Inside the shrine wall-paintings showed the young king of Meroë with his feet resting on lines of bound prisoners (one of them possibly a Roman legionary) who were being subjected to the same indignity.
In the later Empire Christians took vengeance upon the representatives of pagan authority by mutilating a bust 33 of Germanicus Caesar, in his day one of the most popular members of Augustus' family: the nose was sliced off and a cross was cut into the forehead.
32 (Right) Bronze head decapitated from a statue of Augustus in 25–24 BC.
Found in a temple of victory at Meroe, Sudan.
33 (Far right) Bust of Germanicus Caesar.
Made about AD 20 of green basanite.
The bust was mutilated in late antiquity, probably by Christians who carved a cross in the forehead.
Probably from Egypt.
The reworking of heads of unpopular emperors was not uncommon.
Even ‘good’ emperors could be reused for portraits of their successors by provincial craftsmen short of material.
Less radically, the fashion for making heads, arms and feet from separate blocks of stone allowed the insertion of new portrait heads in old torsos, a practice condemned by some Roman and Greek writers.
34 Bronze statue of a lictor (magistrate's attendant).
The youth carries the symbols of magisterial office.
He is dressed in a toga with sinus and umbo .
Late 1st century BC.
35 (Right) The ceding of military victory to Augustus by Tiberius following a successful Alpine campaign in 16/15 BC.
(Right) On a commemorative scabbard made for a senior officer, Augustus appears in the pose of Jupiter, and receives a statuette of Victory from Tiberius.
Mars Ultor and Victory attend the ceremony to give divine approval to the emperor's formal acceptance of victory.
(left) On a coin with wide circulation, Augustus is modestly dressed in a toga and receives symbols of victory from Tiberius and his colleague Drusus.
Fashion in dress, hair and jewellery
In the Roman Empire, as now, dress could serve as an eloquent expression of social rank, ethnic origin, political allegiance or religious belief.
and especially as a sign of cultural aspiration.
Though Hellenistic Greek kings were frequently portrayed naked, a device suggesting superhuman status, Roman Republican notables were more modestly portrayed in military dress or wearing a traditional Roman garment — the toga, a large woollen cloak with curved hem.
Beneath lay a simple tunic.
By the first century BC a straight-edged Greek cloak, often made of fine cloth, had become fashionable for men and women.
The pallium (Greek,himation ) was tightly draped to give a swaddled appearance.
Augustus revived the toga as a form of national dress, and insisted that Roman men wore the toga in the Forum and when attending races at the circus.
A new way of wearing the toga was developed, hitching the voluminous garment off the ground with a long fold (the sinus) below the right arm.
The edge of the toga was drawn up to form a loop of cloth (umbo ) by the waist.
As the toga increased in social importance it also gained in size, though it clearly remained a difficult garment to wear.
The complex folds introduced by Augustus were simplified in succeeding centuries, and eventually the toga was evidently only worn on formal occasions.
An amusing vignette of the complexities of formal Roman dress is given by the late antique writer Macrobius, who describes the difficulties of a dandy, Hortensius:
To go out well-dressed, he checked his appearance in the mirror, and so draped the toga on his body that a graceful knot gathered the folds, arranging them not randomly but with care, so that the sinus was composed to flow down the side, defining its outline.
On one occasion when he had arranged it with elaborate care, he charged a colleague who brushed against him in a narrow passage, destroying the structure of his toga.
He thought it a crime that folds should be moved from their place on his shoulder.
(Satires 3, 13, 4)
Even in late antiquity the wearing of the toga remained a privilege indicative of age, sex and social rank.
Boys wore the toga praetexta , with a purple band around the hem.
On attaining manhood this was formally exchanged for the toga virilis or pura , a white garment.
Magistrates, like boys, wore the  praetexta , and flamines (priests of the imperial cult) a scarlet toga with a purple border.
Perhaps in personal support of his campaign to restore the toga as a symbol of Roman male identity, Augustus usually appeared in his portraits dressed in a toga.
Often the toga was drawn over his head to make a veil, worn at the performance of religious rites.
However, in portraits made as gifts from loyal individuals, notably cameos and commemorative weapons, Augustus allowed the Republican mask to slip, and was portrayed in god-like pose and dress.
In contrast only one surviving statue of Hadrian shows him dressed in a toga.
By this period it was no longer necessary for the emperor to stress Roman identity.
Women were often portrayed in Greek dress, usually the chiton , a voluminous tunic, made of lightweight cloth such as linen, buttoned down the sleeves and belted above the waist.
Less common was the Doric peplos , a sleeveless tunic with overfold gathered in at the waist, the whole pinned or buttoned at the shoulders.
Greek dress became more common for men after Hadrian's enthusiastic adoption of Greek fashions, and is often seen in early Christian art.
Though the Hadrianic fashion for Greek dress and hairstyles proved pervasive, other imperial initiatives did not.
An interesting example is the stola , a traditional female garment deliberately revived by Augustus as an expression of his policy of moral restraint upon members of the aristocracy, not least his own family.
Some poetic complaints survive on the concealing nature of this dress, designed to cover the tunic but to be worn beneath a cloak.
But women clearly found ways of turning a restrictive garment into an alluring fashion: the surviving representations of the stola show it as a revealing slip, cut low between the breasts and often suspended from the slimmest of decorative straps.
Most surviving portraits of feminae stolatae (women legally privileged to wear the stola ) of the Augustan dynasty are cameos or fine marble busts.
The majority represent relatives of the emperor Gaius (called ‘Caligula’: AD 37–4I), princesses who received exceptional privileges from the emperor.
There are a few later portraits of women wearing the stola ; some, from provincial Italy and elsewhere, are of private citizens.
None is later than about AD 100, after which the fashion seems to have been supplanted by the taste for a Greek appearance.
However, the title matrona or femina stolata appears in later funerary inscriptions, with the implication, derived from the earlier Empire, of high social rank.
36 Five gems illustrate developments in women's hairstyles and fashions in dress from the early Empire to the later 2nd century AD.
Top row, left to right:(a) early Augustan.
30–10 BC:(b) the younger Agrippina wearing a stola .
about AD 38;(C) a woman wearing the stola .
about AD 90; bottom row, left:(d) Hadrianic, about AD 120–40; right:(e) mid-Antonine, AD 160–70.
37 The front of Projecta's casket: the seated Projecta receives two attendants, who bring a casket and a mirror while Projecta perfumes her hair.
The composition of the three figures is reminiscent of Greek vases of the later 5th century BC.
Made in Rome in the later 4th century AD.
As with dress, hairstyles also reflected not only the social status of the subject but, to same extent, the moral climate of a reign.
Women's hairstyles were copied so rapidly that, for the modern historian, they provide a good indication of the date of a portrait.
In the later Republic and under Augustus hair was well restrained, tightly drawn back from the face and elaborately plaited over the crown of the head, the bulk wound into a bun at the nape of the neck.
After the death of Augustus the style became less restrictive; pincurls appeared around the brow, and locks of hair escaped the bun, which grew longer and tail-shaped.
In the later first century overwhelming emphasis was placed on the hair framing the face.
The pincurls became larger and were arranged in tiers.
Women's hairstyles under the Flavian emperors (AD 69–96) became as fantastic as those of eighteenth-century Europe.
Wigs, hair-pieces or frames were used to give added height.
Young women of this period were often portrayed with a coquettish appearance.
As freedmen and freedwomen rose to previously unimaginable positions of political power and wealth, some portraits were made which likened their subjects to deities.
Such images, it may be surmised, were not well received by the nobility, who continued to commission portraits of conventionally austere appearance.
The reaction to fin-de-siècle excess was a retreat to harsh severity.
In the early second century women continued to be portrayed with their hair piled in tiers above the brow, but the tightly restrained locks were deeply unflattering in comparison with the coiffures of Flavian portraits.
Facial expressions became suitably harsh and drapery appropriately modest.
In the Hadrianic period the tiers of locks disappeared, and hair was simply drawn into a plaited bun set high on the crown of the head.
This development, like the revival of beards, was inspired by the contemporary passion for Greek culture.
By the end of the century the bun had slid to the back of the head, where it appeared as a flatly coiled plait.
The hair was now centrally parted, and crimped on either side of the face.
This hairstyle proved pervasive, lasting with minor variations into late antiquity.
On a casket made in Rome in the later fourth century AD commemorating her marriage, a woman named Projecta appears with the flattened plaits coiled onto the crown of her head.
She is modestly draped but wears jewellery, and in one vignette she applies perfume to her hair with a pin dipped in a flask.
Although jewellery is known from burials throughout the Empire, the best evidence for how it was worn comes from Egypt and the Levant in portraits painted on wood and carved in stone.
Funerary reliefs from Palmyra (Syria) are particularly rich in the   representation of jewels.
Some stone heads, notably female portraits from Cyrene, which remained culturally close to Egypt after the incorporation of both areas within the Roman Empire, have cuttings for the insertion of metal earrings and hairpins.
Much jewellery, especially gemstones and hairpins, was itself used as a vehicle for portraiture.
Wearing the portrait of a military or political leader upon a ring or on a coin mounted as a jewel was an obvious sign of allegiance; other portraits of unknown individuals were presumably private commemorations.
38 (Above) Limestone bust of Tamma, daughter of Shamsigeram.
From Palmyra, Syria.
2nd century AD.
The subject is richly bedecked with jewellery.
39 (Right) Portrait of a woman wearing a gold wreath, hooped earrings set with pearls, and two gold necklaces.
AD 130–150.
Perhaps from Saqqara, Egypt.
40 Jewellery from a woman's tomb at Miletopolis, on the southern shore of the Sea of Marmara.
The jewels include a cameo portrait of a woman, made about AD 200.
41 (Right) Jewellery used for portraiture:(a) Caesar appears on a gilded emblem set in an iron ring, worn by a member of the Caesarian faction in the civil wars following the Dictator's murder in 44 BC (above left).
(b) Portrait of a couple on a commemorative wedding ring.
Made about AD 200 (below left).
(c) Portrait of a woman on a bone pin.
Early 3rd century AD (right).
Portraits of children
An interesting class of portraits consists of depictions of Roman children.
Most surviving examples are funerary, often commissioned quickly in response to unexpected death from disease, by no means uncommon in antiquity.
Sometimes portraits of mature adults were used for children and adolescents, not necessarily of the same sex as the intended subject.
Many portraits of infant boys appear to have a hairstyle resembling that of the emperor Trajan (AD 98–117).
However, it is misleading to date the portraits on that basis, as they are a naturalistic rendering of the appearance of boys after the loss of infant curls at the age of two or three.
Some portraits of young children copy imperial features in, for example, the shape of the ears or in their hairstyles.
No child is known to have appeared on a public monument until the age of Augustus, when the Ara Pacis Augustae (Altar of Augustan Peace) presented members of the imperial family and others prominent in public life in their role as heads of families, the children naturalistically shown tugging on togas and hushed by nurses.
For the first time in classical antiquity the nuclear family had assumed a central role in the politics of state.
Some later public monuments also included portraits of children, and by the second century AD the notion of including portraits of children in public monuments had spread to some highly influential provincial families.
The portraits were arranged to form a three-dimensional family tree, and to suggest links with the imperial family in Rome.
Beneath the wealth of statuary and architectural ornament, such monuments usually had a practical purpose.
One surviving example is the fountain built by the Athenian millionaire Herodes Atticus in the sanctuary at Olympia (Greece); another is the handsome gymnasium given by Publius Vedius Antoninus to the city of Ephesus, the provincial capital of Asia.
The combination of utilitarian function, personal advertisement through statues and inscriptions, and florid architectural ornament is typical of imperial buildings in the Mediterranean provinces in their heyday from the late first century to the early third century AD.
42 Bust of a small boy, an initiate in the cult of the Egyptian god Serapis. 2nd century AD.