

The Birth of an Idea
David Stirling was one of those individuals who combine within themselves the ability to dream and the ruthless singlemindedness to transform their ideas into action.
Scion of an ancient family of Scottish gentry, the Stirlings of Keir, he was the founder of what was to become the Special Air Service Regiment as we know it today, although with typical modesty he always insisted on sharing the credit with others.
In 1984 at the opening of new accommodation for the regiment at Hereford, appropriately named Stirling Lines, his speech included the following comment.
I have always felt uneasy in being known as the founder of the regiment.
To ease my conscience I would like it to be recognised that I have five co-founders: Jock Lewes, Paddy Mayne of the original ‘L’ Detachment, George Bergé who started the French S.A.S., Brian Franks who re-raised the S.A.S. flag after the war and John Woodhouse who created the modern S.A.S. during the Malaysian Campaign by restoring to the regiment its original philosophy.
In the same speech, he described himself as ‘something of a ‘cheekie laddie’ and of dubious value to the army’in the spring of 1941.
There was an element of truth in these comments and before charting the history of the regiment he raised, it is worth examining the background of this remarkable man, later known to members of the regiment either as ‘Colonel David’ or simply as DS.
Born in 1915, one of a family of four boys and two girls, Stirling spent his childhood in Scotland.
Like most young men of his background he excelled in outdoor activities — deer-stalking, mountaineering and shooting.
He was sent away to boarding school at Ampleforth and from there went to Trinity College, Cambridge, to read architecture.
His one remarkable feature was his height, six feet and five inches.
At Cambridge he showed little aptitude for study and tended to be diverted by horse-racing and other forms of gambling.
A professional career as such seemed out of the question; his only ambition in life was to be an artist.
After leaving Cambridge he went off to Paris to study drawing, but soon realized that he did not have sufficient talent.
So instead he decided to climb Everest.
With this in mind he spent most of the last two years of peacetime, training in Switzerland and then in the USA.
While wandering in the Rockies on horseback in 1939, he heard that war had been declared and returned home to join two of his brothers (William and Hugh) in the Scots Guards.
Life as a second lieutenant in the Guards with little prospect of action did not appeal, although by the time the Germans invaded France in May 1940, Stirling was in Chamonix training with a force of experienced skiers who were to be sent to help the Finns.
The first chance of real action came in the late summer of 1940 after the retreat from Dunkirk.
Stirling volunteered and was accepted for one of the new Commandos, No. 8, which was raised by Captain Robert Laycock largely from Guards regiments.
They moved north to Scotland for an intensive period of training, and he found himself in command of a section of young volunteers, many of whom were to serve with him later in the Middle East.
One of them was Guardsman Johnny Cooper who had managed to join the Scots Guards while still under age and who was very impressed by his commanding officer: ‘he was different from the officers I had come into contact with up to that time.
This quietly spoken young lieutenant commanded far more respect and confidence, with his ability to put soldiers at their ease and his willingness to help.’
Their training completed, No. 8 Commando together with two others embarked for the Middle East.
They formed a composite unit known as Layforce, commanded by Bob Laycock, promoted to colonel, and their mission was to invade the island of Rhodes.
The voyage out was a lengthy one via the Cape of Good Hope, and by his own admission Stirling spent most of it in his cabin gambling at cards.
Two of his companions were Randolph Churchill and Evelyn Waugh.
In a letter to his wife, the latter described Stirling as ‘a gentleman obsessed by the pleasures of chance.
He effectively wrecked Ludo as a game of skill and honour.
We now race clockwork motor-cars.’
On arrival, the various Commandos were billeted in camps along the Suez Canal and discovered that their mission had been overtaken by events.
After the almost total defeat of the Italians in North Africa by General O'Connor in January 1941, the Germans had decided to send an Afrika Korps to bolster their allies.
Commanded by the brilliant Rommel in a lightning campaign, the Afrika Korps threw the British forces into headlong retreat back to the Egyptian border, leaving only a garrison encircled in the coastal town of Tobruk.
At the same time, the Germans swept through Greece and Yugoslavia.
Layforce was thrown into the action piecemeal and parts of it fought gallantly in Crete.
No. 11 Commando became involved in fighting the Vichy French in Syria, while No. 8 Commando took part in a few unsuccessful raids along the North African coast, transported into action by the Navy.
The latter on each occasion was either defeated by rough seas or spotted by enemy aircraft.
Young David Stirling's frustration at his inability to have a crack at the enemy mounted, yet in a most extraordinary episode he was nearly court-martialled for cowardice.
Feeling bored at being cooped up in the desert, he decided to feign temporary illness.
‘This got me into the very comfortable American hospital, where I was well pampered.
In a sense I was pretty ill, because I would go out at eight o'clock in the evening, having recovered from the appalling hangover caused by my previous night's activities in Cairo, and re-establish my illness by that night's activities.’
Hearing that there was the prospect of action with No. 8 Commando, he reported back for duty.
Returning from a training exercise one night, Stirling tripped over the guy ropes of his tent and cut his eye quite badly, which entailed a return to hospital.
This, combined with the previous episode, created suspicion that he had been malingering to avoid going into action and resulted in his being charged with cowardice.
The charges were eventually dropped after an investigation, but had he stayed with the Scots Guards his career would inevitably have been wrecked.
The 24-year-old David Stirling was no rough and ready brawling cut-throat though, in spite of his thirst for coming to grips with the enemy.
Always immaculately dressed, he was remembered for his invariable courtesy and charm as he moved through the hotel bars and restaurants of cosmopolitan wartime Cairo.
His height he tended to disguise with a slight stoop, and he made no secret of his contempt for the desk-bound staffs who had mushroomed far behind the lines.
As Layforce was now spread out all over the Middle East, it was  decided to disband it and use the manpower to bolster other units.
Shortly before this, however, fate took a hand in the so far uneventful war of Second Lieutenant Stirling.
A brother officer, Jock Lewes of the Welsh Guards, had discovered some parachutes which were destined for transport to India, and obtained permission from Laycock for himself and Stirling to experiment with them, together with four other Guardsmen.
The following is a report of the first parachute jump in the Middle East, written by Guardsman D'Arcy, Irish Guards, who later served with the Special Boat Section.
He [Lewes]and his party first went to an R.A.F. headquarters located somewhere near Fuka.
There he discussed the details with an R.A.F. officer who, although none of the party had jumped before, was most helpful.
He showed us the parachutes we were to use.
From the logbooks we saw that the last periodical examination had been omitted, but Lt. Lewes decided they were okay.
Next day, along with Lt. Stirling and Sgt. Storrie, who were hoping to do a job in Syria, we made a trial flight.
The 'plane used was a Vickers Valentia.
We threw out a dummy made from sandbags and tent poles.
The parachute opened okay, but the tent poles smashed on landing.
Afterwards we tried a ten foot jump from the top of the 'plane and then a little parachute control.
The following afternoon we flew inland in the Valentia, which was used to deliver mail.
We reached the landing field towards dusk, landed, fitted on our parachutes and decided to jump in the failing light.
We were to jump in pairs.
Lt. Lewes and his servant, Guardsman Davies first, the R.A.F. officer to despatch.
The instructions were to dive out as though we were going into water.
We hooked ourselves up, circled the field, and on a signal from the R.A.F. officer, Lt. Lewes and Davies dived out.
Next time round I dived out and was surprised to see Lt. Stirling pass me in the air.
Lt. Lewes made a perfect landing.
Next came Davies, a little shaken.
Lt. Stirling injured his spine and also lost his sight for about an hour.
Next, myself, a little shaken and a few scratches, and lastly Sgt. Storrie, who seemed okay.
Guardsman Evans was unable to jump as the pilot decided to land owing to the approaching darkness.
The aircraft that this intrepid group had used was a large lumbering biplane dating back to the early 1930s.
It seems incredible that they were allowed to go up and jump out without any rudimentary training in  landing techniques.
The static lines which pulled open their parachutes had simply been tied to the metal legs of the seats inside the fuselage.
What had happened was that Stirling's static line had snagged on the tail section as he exited from the door, and two panels were ripped from the parachute, causing him to descend too rapidly.
He was carted off to the Scottish Military Hospital in Alexandria, while the remainder of the group made a second jump the following day without any further serious mishaps.
In fact, both Stirling's legs were temporarily paralysed and he suffered quite a severe back injury which was to keep him immobilized for the best part of two months.
This period of enforced idleness, however, was not wasted, as Stirling's ever-fertile brain analysed the progress of the war in the Middle East and drew its own conclusions.
Layforce having virtually ceased to exist, there was no longer any credible raiding force at the disposal of the Commander-in-Chief.
The advent of Rommel had changed the balance in favour of the Axis powers, and everywhere British forces were on the defensive.
In the desert, an offensive in June to relieve Tobruk, code-named ‘Battleaxe’, failed and the commander-in-chief, Wavell, was sacked.
He was replaced by General Auchinleck on 2 July.
The outline of what was to become the Special Air Service was roughed out in pencil on sheets of paper in hospital during June and July 1941.
Though unable to sally out to sample the night life, Stirling was not alone, as he had a constant stream of visitors with whom he discussed his ideas, including Jock Lewes who came to see him before departing for Tobruk.
But in spite of his obsession with the failures of the past, his essential irreverent humour remained undimmed.
I remember Evelyn Waugh coming in, a great chum of mine in those days.
The matron had told him that they had removed one of my legs and were going to have the other one off the following day.
He sat on the edge of the bed with his usual cynical observations, but he kept looking out of the corner of his eye.
I was very proud of having got movement back in my second leg and was twiddling my toes, but he thought that he was seeing a bloody ghost.
Then he couldn't stand it any longer and said, ‘What the hell's happening here?
Matron told me that you would have both legs removed.
What's that twiddling at the end of the bed?’
The original document no longer exists, as far as can be determined, but in November 1948 David Stirling wrote a confidential memorandum on the origins of the regiment he founded, on which much of the following section is based.
The proposal by the then second lieutenant was addressed directly to the Commander-in-Chief Middle East, as Stirling knew full well that ‘going through channels’ would be a total waste of time.
There was no way you could put it in except to the C-in-C.
Never at MEHQ [Middle East Headquarters].
There was layer on layer of fossilized shit.
The energetic soldiers who had survived the first war were in active command, but there was a great residue of staff officers from the first war who did not fight, who determined the spirit of the administration.
It was ludicrously swollen, unnecessarily big and wholly obstructive to anything that looked like a new idea.
He started off by pointing out that Rommel's lines of communication, stretched out along the coast, were extremely vulnerable to a determined attack.
The Commando raids, however, had been too unwieldy and had thus lacked the element of surprise.
In addition, the Navy was far too hard pressed to find the shipping to transport a large Commando force.
I argued the advantages of establishing a Unit based on the principle of the fullest exploitation of surprise and of making the minimum demands on man-power and equipment.
I argued that the application of this principle would mean in effect the employment of a sub-unit of five men to cover a target previously requiring four troops of a commando, i.e., about 200 men.
I sought to prove that, if an aerodrome or transport park was the objective of an operation, then the destruction of 50 aircraft or units of transport was more easily accomplished by a sub-unit of five men than by a force of 200 men.
Stirling went on to suggest that a force of 200 men, properly selected, trained and equipped, and organized into five-man sub-units, should thus be able to attack thirty different objectives simultaneously on the same night — compared to only one target using the Commando technique.
The corollary to this was that a unit operating according to such principles would have to be trained to arrive on the scene of an operation by every practical method from land, sea or air.
I insisted that the Unit must be responsible for its own training and  operational planning and that, therefore, the Commander of the Unit must come directly under the C in C. I emphasised how fatal it would be for the proposed unit to be put under any existing branch or formation for administration.
(I was determined to combat in advance any risk of being taken over by G(R), the Middle East equivalent of S.O.E., which was already showing signs of being the monstrous and inefficient octopus it later became; or coming under the control of the Director of Combined Operations.)
I pointed out that the head of any such branch or formation would have less experience than myself or my successor in the medium in which we proposed to operate.
Future events were to prove just how right Stirling had been in making the latter observations and how his basic principles were to be constantly watered down by interference from outside bodies trying to get their hands on the SAS Regiment, which achieved its greatest successes when left to its own devices.
It is interesting to note that the concept of the five-man sub-unit was reduced to four and even three as the result of operational experience in the desert.
Stirling himself realized that if he was to stand any chance of getting his radical ideas accepted, he had to ‘sell the proposal’ to the Commander-in-Chief.
To do this he put forward in his submission a detailed plan for the employment of his unit in the offensive being planned by Auchinleck to take place in November, which was no secret in Cairo at the time.
What Stirling instinctively realized was that the German and Italian air forces posed a very real threat to an advance by the Eighth Army and that if those enemy aircraft could be neutralized on the ground, the offensive would stand a much greater chance of success.
His aim was to drop five parties by parachute two nights before the offensive to attack the five enemy forward airfields around Timimi and Gazala.
They would use incendiary-cum-explosive bombs to disable the aircraft and then retire to a pre-arranged rendezvous point in the desert where they could be picked up by a patrol of the Long Range Desert Group (LRDG).
This group needs a brief introduction at this stage, as its activities were interwoven with those of the SAS during its early period of operations in the Middle East.
In the years prior to the Second World War, a small group of pioneers had spent long periods exploring the Libyan desert in vehicles.
One of those men was Major R. A. Bagnold and in June 1940 he was authorized to form a reconnaissance unit to collect information from behind enemy lines.
Using 30-cwt.
Chevrolet  trucks, the LRDG patrols ranged thousands of miles deep into Libya radioing back vital information to their base and perfecting the art of desert navigation.
The story of how the convalescent David Stirling got his proposal into the hands of General Auchinleck was told to the journalist Virginia Cowles in 1958, and is based on Stirling's memory of events not too long after they occurred.
It was a perfect example of sheer brazen cheek.
He took a car to the front entrance of MEHQ and, still on crutches, told the sentry that he had left his pass behind.
That failed to gain him entry.
Then he noticed a gap in the wire through which he squeezed his vast height, leaving the crutches behind.
Limping across the courtyard he was noticed by the sentry who promptly raised a hue and cry.
The second lieutenant disappeared inside the main building intending to call on the Commander-in-Chief — without an appointment needless to say — but realized that he was in difficulties.
He hobbled through the first available door, which was marked Adjutant General, and saw a red-faced major seated behind the desk.
He started to explain what it was he wanted, with sentries shouting along the corridors outside, but was cut short.
The red-faced major had a good memory for faces and well recalled that when he was lecturing to the officers of the Scots Guards at Pirbright in 1939, a certain young gentleman had persistently slept through his talks, having spent the previous nights at wild parties in London.
Mumbling apologies, Stirling retreated into the corridor and decided on one more attempt.
He pushed through the door of the Deputy Chief of Staff, who at that time was General Neil Ritchie, and handed him his pencil-written memorandum.
To his everlasting credit, Ritchie, instead of having the intruder thrown out, read it through carefully and promised to hand it personally to Auchinleck.
He said that he thought the proposal could well be what they wanted and promised a definite decision within two days.
In the meantime he authorized a start to be made with planning and summoned, of all people, the red-faced major to his office.
The latter, to his chagrin no doubt, was ordered to assist Stirling with working out details of supplies and equipment for the new force.
In a further interview with Ritchie, Stirling was authorized to recruit a force of six officers and sixty men from the remnants of Layforce and was promoted to captain.
He was to plan the operation with the Director of Military Operations at MEHQ and was allotted an area near the Suez Canal at Kabrit as a base.
This embryo raiding force was to be called  L Detachment, Special Air Service Brigade.
Such a brigade did not exist, but had been dreamed up by Brigadier Dudley Clark, who at the time was in charge of an outfit dealing with deception plans.
One of his ideas was to convince the Italians that there was a large airborne force in the Middle East.
To do this he had been dropping dummies by parachute near Italian prisoner-of-war camps, and the advent of some real parachutists was an obvious gift.
Stirling's first job was to start recruiting and there were two particular officers he had in mind.
The first was Jock Lewes who was in Tobruk, where he had been successfully carrying out small raids against the surrounding enemy outposts.
Travelling there by boat, Stirling found Lewes in bed, suffering from desert sores, but managed to persuade him to join L Detachment, bringing with him one or two of his own men.
Before the war, Lewes had been President of the Oxford University Boat Club, and was quiet and studious, in contrast to most of the young officers who had been with the Commandos.
The other officer was Blair Mayne, known as Paddy.
An Ulsterman and pre-war Irish rugby international, Paddy had been in No. 11 (Scottish) Commando, which was part of Layforce.
He had tasted action in a raid along the Litani river in Syria against Vichy French forces in June 1941 but when Stirling went to interview him he discovered that Paddy was under close arrest for striking his commanding officer in the mess.
Stirling managed to obtain his release, but had quite some difficulty in persuading Paddy to join him.
‘He had every reason not to take me seriously as a soldier as he knew how idle I had been in prior days in Layforce.’
Mayne was another immensely tall man endowed with tremendous physical strength.
To the men under him he was a most considerate and loyal officer, but he had a darker side to his character.
Often morose and withdrawn, his drinking bouts frequently ended in mindless violence.
Yet when in action he was the perfect fighting machine with a total disregard for his own personal safety.
Many members of the Guards Commando were in a camp at Genefa on the Great Bitter Lake and that was where Stirling went in search of the bulk of his sixty other ranks.
Bob Bennett, Grenadier Guards, was one of those frustrated warriors who were called in to a large marquee.
‘He put the proposition to us that he was forming a unit that would operate behind the lines.
He realized that we felt disgusted at what had been achieved in the commandos and that he had had this brainwave of small parties behind the lines.’
Stirling's old troop from No. 8 Commando had been absorbed by the  2nd Battalion Scots Guards who were in the desert at a place called Bug Bug, from where Johnny Cooper was recruited.
‘The majority of the old No. 3 Troop volunteered and I crawled out of my foxhole to put in my application’.
Initial selection was based solely upon Stirling's impressions of the men at brief interviews.
He had no great difficulty in getting together the numbers he required, and simply told them that if they failed to make the grade in training, they would have to return to their original units.
Thus the ‘Originals’ were in a sense on probation from the moment they clambered into the lorries which took them to Kabrit.
On arrival we were bemused to find only two medium sized marquees and three 180lb tents piled up in the middle of the strip of desert allotted to us….
Our lorry stopped outside one of the marquees and out strode the portly figure of C.Q.M.S. Gerry Ward, who was eventually to become our quartermaster.
He ordered us to collect picks and shovels and to start digging holes already marked out for the tentage….
So we set to under our section corporal, Jimmy Brough, and slogged away until we had completed ten such excavations, wondering where the tents were that were to fill them.
They soon found out.
That evening the new recruits to L Detachment were informed that their first operation was to steal their camp.
Nearby was the base camp for the New Zealand Division that was away fighting in the front line.
After dark the men of the SAS crept in and obtained the necessary tentage and equipment to set themselves up, including even a piano for the officers' mess.
They were driven to this by the obstructiveness that Stirling met with.
It was not enough to have the Commander-in-Chief's approval to set up his unit.
He continued to have to battle with the various staff departments where he had already made enemies.
‘I found during this and subsequent stages, that the A.G. [Adjutant General's]Branch was unfailingly obstructive and uncooperative.’
But in spite of every difficulty placed in his path, by the end of July 1941 David Stirling had got roughly what he wanted.
He had three months to train and equip his force before their first operation in November.
In the eyes of higher headquarters, L Detachment was so small that it was simply expendable.
If they proved that they could deliver what they promised, well and good.
If not, any that survived could simply be posted back to their parent units and the whole scheme could be rapidly forgotten.
At this stage, David Stirling might perhaps have allowed himself a moment or two of self-congratulation.
After all, he had managed to defeat the system and was in sole command of a small military unit.
His immediate priority, though, was to weld a disparate group of men into a cohesive fighting force.
He had no track record himself in combat and the men he was to lead in battle were a pretty tough crowd, all of them individualists and likely to be highly critical of any officer who did not come up to their own standards.
Looking back after forty-five years had elapsed, he had the following to say about the ‘Originals’ of L Detachment.
In a sense they weren't really controllable.
They were harnessable and all had a sense of individuality.
The object was to give them a sense of purpose and once they were harnessed to that proposition, they policed themselves, so to speak.
And that goal had to be a very exacting one….
That bag of vagabonds had to grasp what they had to do in order to get there, which included discipline.
Although most of them were escaping from conventional regimental discipline, they didn't fully appreciate that they were running into a much more exacting type of discipline.
There is no real common denominator that can be used to classify the ‘Originals’, the first fifty-odd recruits to the SAS, some of whose names will constantly crop up during the course of this book.
Most of them had done their basic training in one of the Guards regiments and most had completed the Commando course.
Few had any experience of combat, although Dave Kershaw had served as a volunteer during the Spanish Civil War.
Johnny Cooper was the ‘baby’ of the unit and was only 18 at the time.
A slim, wiry youth, he was one of the few who could claim a ‘middle-class’ upbringing.
Bob Bennett was a typical Cockney with a dry sense of humour, who had volunteered for anything that was going just to get away from the parade-ground atmosphere of the Grenadier Guards.
He gained a reputation as a practical joker, yet at the same time could be quite morose.
Pat Riley, large, square and solid, the sergeant-major who ruled by tact, was actually an American citizen, having been taken there as a child.
There were Sergeant Rose, whom everyone remembered for his fine singing voice, and Bob Lilley, married and at nearly 40 one of the oldest operatives.
Reg Seekings, a short, stocky and pugnacious East Anglian, had achieved a considerable reputation in the boxing ring.
Nobody could put one over on him.
‘Gentleman, Jim  Almonds, immensely tall and a little less boisterous than some of the others, had seen action at Tobruk together with Pat Riley and Jock Lewes.
The principles of training laid down by Stirling differed from those in the Commandos, where a group of volunteers, once recruited, were nursed up to the required standard.
‘L Detachment on the other hand, had set a minimum standard to which all ranks had to attain and we had to be most firm in returning to their units (R.T.U.) those who were unable to reach that standard.’
Even today, RTU is the ultimate sanction applied in the SAS.
Stirling also insisted on a Brigade of Guards standard of turnout and behaviour even when off duty.
There had grown up in the Commandos a tradition that to be a tough regiment it was necessary to act tough all the time in the barracks and on leave, and they were liable to be badly dressed, ill disciplined and noisy in the streets and restaurants of Cairo.
We insisted with L Detachment that toughness should be reserved entirely for the benefit of the enemy.
There is very little in the way of documentation in the public records about those early days of L Detachment and the story of their first three months has to be pieced together from their own memories.
Stirling himself spent a lot of time in Cairo wheedling supplies and planning the first operation.
He placed Jock Lewes in charge of training, describing him as ‘the best training officer I have ever been associated with or heard of during the war’.
Lewes instituted a pretty strict regime which at times tended to be resented, although it brought results.
Reg Seekings, who came from No. 7 Commando, remembers an incident right at the beginning when they got fed up with erecting tents, that nearly erupted into a minor mutiny.
‘Jock Lewes had a word with us.
He told us we'd got a yellow streak a yard wide down our backs.
Christ, I don't know how he survived.
He said: ‘Right, prove me wrong.
I'll do anything that you do and you do anything that I do.’’
The first priority was to get parachute training underway, and as there were no facilities in the Middle East everything had to be improvised.
A letter requesting help was sent to Ringway, near Manchester, where airborne troops in Britain were trained, but no reply was received.
Eventually some instructional material did arrive, but not until October, by which time the whole detachment had qualified.
Ultimately Captain Peter Warr was sent out from England and remained a chief parachute  instructor.
Lewes had some towers made of scaffolding poles from which men could swing from ropes to simulate the final drop of landing.
What caused a crop of broken limbs, however, was his brainwave of making men do backward rolls out of a 15-cwt. truck speeding across the desert at 30 miles per hour.
With a considerable number of men in plaster, he resorted to constructing a sled which sped down an incline on rails, from which the trainee rolled off sideways.
All this was to prepare the men for their first actual jump from an aircraft.
Stirling had managed to get the use of a Bristol Bombay, an aged and under-powered troop-carrier, from 216 Squadron RAF.
It was converted for parachuting by having a rail bolted along the fuselage on to which the rings at the end of the static lines were fixed by a dog-lead clip.
The group to jump, known as a stick, hooked up and shuffled in a line to exit from the side door.
On the day appointed, the aircraft took off with the first stick, all of whom landed successfully.
Then disaster struck.
The first two men to exit from the following party were killed when their parachutes failed to open, but luckily the RAF dispatcher managed to stop the rest from jumping.
Stirling called all the men together on the ground and promised that modifications would be made, but that jumping would continue at first light the following morning.
It transpired that somehow the clips had twisted and become detached from the rail, causing the only fatal accidents during the entire training programme.
Stirling also authorized the issue of fifty cigarettes to each man.
It was a very nervous group, their fingers stained with nicotine, who assembled on the airfield the next day, but Stirling himself jumped first, followed by the rest of the detachment.
Parachuting, however, was only a small part of a most intensive programme.
There were lectures on quite advanced medical care, on intelligence-gathering, signalling and demolitions.
On the range, the men had to familiarize themselves with every form of weapon including German and Italian ones.
There was strenuous PT and swimming in the Suez Canal.
To train their memories, Kim's game was used.
The men were taken into a tent and allowed to look at a group of objects for a short period after which they had to recall every detail they had observed.
Jock instilled into us that the end product of our training was for us to become independent in every way, operating either alone or in very small groups.
We would have to develop an ingrained self-confidence in our ability to navigate across featureless terrain without any  back-up whatsoever and using maps that gave little or no detail.
We would have to survive on minimum sustenance and to control the use of food and water during the hot periods of the day, using the cover of darkness for offensive activity.
Reg Seekings recalled,
It was practically a twenty-four-hour programme and we'd be out at night, reading the stars and familiarizing ourselves with them.
We'd have our packs loaded with various weights and we'd march 100 yards measuring the length of pace, the time it took.
Then we'd go on a ten- to twenty-mile march and when we came back it would all be weighed again.
Then we'd again pace 100 yards, counting the paces and the time it took, so that we could do dead reckoning on our march in.
All who went through that regime of training remember the extremes of fatigue and of being pushed to their limits.
Even the food in camp was of poor quality and there was little opportunity for relaxation.
Lewes drove them hard, but when not training he was wrestling with a different problem.
In order to achieve their aims, the various sub-units of L Detachment would have to be able to carry enough explosive in their packs to destroy considerable numbers of aircraft on the ground.
What was needed was a small bomb capable of blowing a hole through the wing of an aircraft and igniting the fuel in the tanks inside.
There were high-explosive and incendiary bombs of various types available, but no combination weapon.
A senior officer in the Royal Engineers poured scorn on the idea and said that it was impossible.
Jock Lewes organized a primitive laboratory in a hut and set to experimenting with various mixtures of plastic explosive, thermite, oil and aluminium filings.
Finally he perfected what became known as the Lewes bomb, and a demonstration was arranged before an invited audience, including the senior Royal Engineer.
Jock set up an old aircraft wing with a tin of petrol inside to simulate a fuel tank, which he propped up on some oil drums.
He then placed one of his bombs on top of the wing and detonated it.
There was an explosion and a flash as the device punched a neat hole through the metal and ignited the petrol inside with a satisfactory whoosh of flame.
His point had been proved with spectacular success.
The bomb weighed no more than a pound and a man could carry up to thirty of them.
The end of all this intensive training was a final exercise as a sort of  passing out examination, to test all the various skills learned:
We were to mount a dummy attack on the R.A.F. airfield at Heliopolis, just outside Cairo, a distance of about a hundred miles across open desert….
Supplies were to consist of four water bottles each, three pounds of dates and a few glucose sweets.
The entire unit set out from Kabrit at night, carrying weights to simulate the bombs which we would have to cart along with us on a real raid.
During the day we lay up in the desert, camouflaging ourselves with pieces of hessian sacking against the R.A.F. patrols who were out looking for us from the air.
The various small patrols converged on the target and on the fourth night out mounted their attack, moving in from different directions.
They plastered a considerable number of parked aircraft with sticky labels marked ‘bomb’: the station commander reportedly was furious the following morning.
His guards had been unable to intercept a single raider, in spite of having been warned of the exercise.
L Detachment was thus judged ready for operations, and to wind down were given a few days' leave to be spent in Cairo.
Previously they had lacked an identity, but the training period had welded them together into a cohesive fighting force with an intense pride in themselves and their unit.
Accounts differ as to when the unit insignia was first worn, but several of the ‘Originals’ maintain that it was at the end of the training period and before the first operation.
The design of the cap badge had been the result of a competition which was won by Sergeant Bob Tait who came up with the winged dagger emblem.
The motto, ‘Who Dares Wins’, is credited to Stirling.
The only fly in the ointment was the headgear which was issued — white berets.
‘Wearing a white beret in among Australians, New Zealanders and every type of nationality out there brought some great wolf whistles, which were naturally not received in the right manner.
It was a question of: You pick your partner and I'll pick mine.’
The offending headgear was soon withdrawn, to be replaced initially by a khaki forage cap and then by the famous sand-coloured beret.
A set of wings was also introduced, said to have been designed by Jock Lewes.
Their pattern was inspired by a fresco of an ibis in the foyer at Shepherd's Hotel.
The right to wear them over the left breast pocket instead of on the sleeve was granted to those who had taken part in three trips behind the lines.
It was quite unheard of in the Army for such a small unit to have its  own self-designed insignia, but some months later Stirling, quite undismayed, wore his cap badge on parade when General Auchinleck came to inspect them at Kabrit.
The Commander-in-Chief returned Captain Stirling's salute with a broad smile on his face, which the latter took to be tacit official approval.
Operation Crusader, Auchinleck's offensive to push Rommel back out of Cyrenaica, was to be the largest armoured operation undertaken by British forces at that time.
It was to be mounted by the Eighth Army, commanded by General Cunningham, and the main objectives were to relieve the garrison of Tobruk and to secure advance airfields from which the convoys to Malta could be protected.
It was to start on the night of 17 November, and L Detachment's role in this was to be small but potentially crucial.
David Stirling's final plan was for his force to embark in five Bristol Bombay aircraft of 216 Squadron on the night of 16 November and drop near their targets.
They would lie up the following day along the rocky escarpment which ran parallel to the coastal plain to observe their targets, the airfields at Timimi and Gazala.
Then that night, just before the offensive was due to start, they would slip down and place their bombs on the parked enemy aircraft.
Once this had been accomplished, the various parties would proceed on foot to an agreed rendezvous in the desert, about forty-five miles inland, where they would be picked up by a patrol of the Long Range Desert Group.
It can be seen that this was essentially the plan put forward by Stirling in his original submission for the attack.
L Detachment was divided into five aircraft loads, commanded by Stirling, Mayne, Lewes, McGonigal and Bonnington.
Captain Thomas went with Bonnington's stick, but there is confusion as to whether the remaining officer, Lieutenant Bill Fraser actually took part.
According to Virginia Cowles, he dropped with Lewes's party, but others say that he was left at Kabrit as a result of injuries during training and met up with the survivors later.
L Detachment, carrying their weapons, bombs and personal equipment, proceeded to the forward airfield at Bagoush in high spirits.
All of them were ready for action after the long period of training, but when they arrived they found that a gale had brewed up.
Stirling, who had come direct from Eighth Army Headquarters, was on the horns of a dilemma.
The most obvious solution was simply to cancel the operation as the weather was totally unsuitable for parachuting.
The men would risk being scattered on landing and the pilots would find it difficult to navigate because of the sand being blown about by the wind.
There  were, however, two very good reasons why the operation had to go ahead regardless.
The first was that Stirling had promised his men that they would never be subjected to the indecisions of the Commando days when operation after operation was planned and then cancelled at the last minute.
Second, failing to take off would give L Detachment's detractors at headquarters just the ammunition they were looking for to disband the unit.
The RAF clearly regarded the group as a suicide squad, but laid on a slap-up meal.
Reg Seekings felt that they were being treated like condemned men going to the gallows, but he did manage to buy a tin of Craven A cigarettes.
Stirling called the officers together and put the situation to them.
The decision to go ahead was unanimous.
Without further hesitation they gathered their sticks together and boarded the five Bristol Bombays, squeezing themselves into the fuselages among the piles of equipment that were to be dropped with them.
The aircraft took off into the darkness.
Inside it was both noisy and freezing.
According to Seekings, the doors had been removed and part of the interior was taken up by a huge extra fuel tank.
After about two hours flying over the sea, they swung in over the coast and were given a welcoming burst of anti-aircraft fire.
The pilots took evasive action which tipped men and equipment all over the place.
Then the red lights came on and L Detachment sprang out into the pitch-black night, unsure of exactly where they were.
The problem was that none of the pilots were really confident of their navigation, the sand storm having obliterated the landmarks they were relying on.
It was a recipe for disaster.
Stirling jumped as the first man of his stick and in the darkness made a bad landing as he could not see the ground.
He was knocked unconscious for a brief period but luckily nothing was broken.
It took him nearly an hour to assemble the rest of the stick who had been dragged all over the desert by their parachutes.
One man could not be found, several others were slightly injured, but worst of all vital supplies were missing.
They had some Lewes bombs, but no detonators, and thus could not carry out their mission.
Then and there he resolved that never again would containers be dropped with essential parts missing from the load.
With deep regret he decided that he would have to abort his part of the mission.
He ordered Sergeant Yates to take the bulk of the party to the rendezvous, while he himself set off to reconnoitre the escarpment with Sergeant Tait.
Johnny Cooper dropped with Jock Lewes's stick, which fared no better.
As it was impossible to see the ground I kept my legs braced, but when I hit the desert I suffered a tremendous jolt right through my body.
Before I could gather myself properly, I found myself being dragged across the desert at more than thirty miles per hour by the wind….
Finally I managed to get out of the harness and, luckily for me, the parachute that was dragging me along got tangled in a camel thorn bush.
I managed to roll clear just as it flew off into the air, never to be seen again.
It also took them an hour to assemble in the darkness and likewise they discovered that most of their supply containers were missing.
Reg Seekings, who was with Paddy Mayne, was also dragged across the desert at such a speed that his arms and face were skinned.
He ended up in a thorn bush where he finally managed to break free from his billowing parachute.
Paddy quickly took command, but with most of their gear missing and two men so badly injured that they had to be left behind, there was nothing for it but to try to make the rendezvous with the LRDG.
They trooped off into the night, short of food and water, but incredibly a freak rainstorm burst, turning the desert into a lake.
It was at this stage that the intensive training in navigation paid off.
When dawn broke, the rain ceased and the various parties were able to take stock of their positions.
Stirling and Tait managed to make it north to the escarpment where they spent some time observing enemy traffic on the coastal road below.
The remainder made for the Trig al Ab, a desert track running inland about thirty miles south of the coast.
Lewes's group found the track, and on the second night out stumbled on the signal lights placed by the LRDG.
They whistled the recognition signal, ‘Roll out the Barrel’, and were welcomed into the camp with tea laced with rum.
Shortly afterwards Stirling and Tait turned up, and finally Paddy Mayne's depleted group.
They waited for another thirty-six hours, but no further stragglers arrived.
There was no sign of either Bonnington's group or that led by McGonigal.
Only four officers and eighteen other ranks survived to fight on.
On the face of it the first SAS operation had been a total disaster.
Early Raids in the Western Desert
It was a pretty despondent group that sat around the fire of the LRDG patrol, each sunk in his own thoughts.
Paddy Mayne was mourning the loss of his close friend and fellow Ulsterman, Eoin McGonigal, and all the others had lost mates with whom they had shared the hardships of training and the pleasures of drinking and rampaging on leave.
It was only later that the fate of the missing aircraft became known.
The one carrying Bonnington's party had been damaged by anti-aircraft fire.
With a defective engine, little fuel and no instruments, the pilot decided to land, imagining that he was back over British-held territory.
With great skill he managed to get the overladen aircraft down on the desert, but at dawn they discovered German traffic on a nearby road.
There was nothing for it but to attempt a take-off and try to make for Tobruk.
The parachutists climbed on board and the Bombay lurched back into the sky.
It was soon hit again by gunfire and the long-range tank in the fuselage caught fire.
With most of the control surfaces shot away, they were easy meat for a Messerschmitt.
The Bombay crash-landed in the desert, killing two of the crew and one of the SAS men.
The rest miraculously survived their injuries in various prisoner-of-war camps.
What happened to McGonigal's stick has never been satisfactorily established.
It is probable that they either crashed or were shot down, although Stirling states that there was evidence that at least some of them may have reached their target.
On one of the target airfields, eighteen enemy aircraft were later found to have holes all over them.
Stirling himself was obviously downhearted, but he did not show it.
Captain David Lloyd-Owen's LRDG patrol also turned up at the rendezvous and he recalls his first meeting with him.
‘My name's  Stirling,’ he said, almost as though we were meeting for the first time outside his Club in London.
‘Have you seen any of my chaps?’’
The remainder of L Detachment finally clambered on to the trucks of Jake Easonsmith's patrol and were taken to the LRDG base at Siwa Oasis, just to the north of the Great Sand Sea.
During that drive there was much discussion about the future, which looked pretty grim.
Such a failure could well result in L Detachment simply being wound up.
But Stirling, the incurable optimist, was already making new plans.
He realized full well that he stood no chance of getting further reinforcements, and anyway he would not have time to train them.
Therefore they would have to carry on with the remaining group.
Several people have claimed the credit for the idea that if the LRDG could pick them up after a raid, it could also deliver them to within easy walking distance of future targets.
It is probable that the actual idea was the synthesis of discussions, but it was the one that Stirling adopted, starting a fruitful partnership with what became known to L Detachment as ‘The Desert Taxi Service’.
The latter had a less favourable nickname for the SAS, whom they referred to as the ‘Parashites’ for a while.
Leaving Paddy Mayne to bring up what he could in the way of supplies from Kabrit, Stirling set off from Siwa to Eighth Army Headquarters, which he found in turmoil.
After initial successes, Cunningham's offensive had been outflanked by Rommel and brought to a standstill.
While he was still at headquarters, the unfortunate Cunningham was sacked by Auchinleck and replaced by General Ritchie.
One slight advantage of all this was that nobody had time to consider the fate of L Detachment.
Stirling had a lucky encounter, however, with Brigadier John Marriott, a Scots Guards officer whom he had known in Cairo.
Marriott's wife, Momo, was a celebrated hostess and a friend of Randolph Churchill, who naturally would have introduced his set of companions.
It was Marriott who suggested that Stirling should make himself scarce for a while and recommended him to Brigadier Denys Reid.
The latter was at Jalo Oasis, in command of a motorized force that was to operate on the southern flank of the Eighth Army.
Thus Stirling took himself to Jalo where he was joined by his depleted force who were flown in.
The oasis lay 150 miles south of Benghazi and the enemy airfields strung out along the Gulf of Sirte.
It had the additional advantage that it was well out of the way of prying headquarters staff and was being established as a forward base for the LRDG.
Jalo itself was a typical Foreign Legion outpost, straight out of Beau Geste.
Rolling white sand dunes surrounded by a large oasis of swaying palm trees with a square fort in the middle.
This guarded a series of artesian wells producing evil-looking but supposedly potable water which had a distinctly salty flavour.’
Reid's column had captured the oasis from the Italians on 25 November, and his orders were to move from there towards the coast south of Benghazi to link up with a new offensive planned by Auchinleck and Ritchie.
Being short of supplies he had to wait, but estimated that he would arrive in his operating area on 22 December.
If L Detachment could eliminate the enemy aircraft on Agedabia airfield the night before, his final approach would be a lot safer.
Stirling was more than happy to oblige, especially as Major Steele's LRDG squadron was prepared to take the raiders out and bring them back.
The existence of L Detachment at Jalo was not mentioned in radio traffic, just in case somebody decided to order them back to Kabrit.
Like a band of outlaws, the men checked their weapons and the officers pored over their maps.
Stirling, typically, was not content with just a small raid to prove the potential of his decimated force.
With his vision of what they could achieve, he planned a whole series of assaults on airfields along the coastal strip.
He and Paddy Mayne, taking nine men with them, would leave first to attack Sirte and Tamit.
Lewes would lead his group to Agheila two days later as they would have less distance to cover.
These raids were planned for the night of 14 December.
Fraser would then leave for Agedabia as agreed to carry out his attack on the night of 21 December.
This was not the concept of a cautious or beaten man.
Stirling was going for broke.
No after action reports seem to have been filed for any of these early raids, which is not surprising considering the impromptu nature of their planning and execution.
Thus the following account is a synthesis of interviews with those who took part and earlier published sources, all of which tend to differ slightly.
The Stirling and Mayne groups left Jalo piled on top of the seven trucks of Gus Holliman's patrol at dawn on 8 December.
His men were all Rhodesians, tough, self-reliant and taciturn men to whom the open-air life was second nature.
The navigator was a young sergeant named Mike Sadler who had emigrated to Rhodesia before the war and who was arguably the best at finding his way around the Libyan desert.
He later joined the SAS, serving with them until the end of the war.
The idea of a small group of men setting off into the desert to travel hundreds of miles behind the enemy lines was not such a hare-brained  scheme as might be thought.
There were no enemy ground forces to contend with except in the immediate target areas and the civilian population was minimal, restricted to the odd encampment of nomadic Arab tribesmen.
The real threat came from air observation, as both the Italians and the Germans flew regular patrols over the desert, especially after a raid had been carried out.
The actual casualties suffered by both the SAS and the LRDG were mainly caused by bombing or strafing when caught in the open desert.
Assuming adequate water supplies and reliable vehicles, it was quite feasible to deposit a five-man raiding team within easy walking distance of their target and recover them afterwards.
All the fighting in the campaign in North Africa by the main armies involved took place along the narrow strip between the sea and the escarpment that bordered the trackless wastes to the south.
The typical LRDG truck of the period was a 30-cwt.
Chevrolet pick-up with two-wheel drive, painted a mixture of pink and light green, which had proved to be the best camouflage.
It was armed with a Lewis gun on the back and carried a vast load of food, petrol, ammunition and other stores, enabling it to remain out in the desert for periods of up to three weeks.
Space for a raiding party was limited, and jolting across the sand perched up on the back was extremely uncomfortable.
The journey of the first group was fairly uneventful until they were within about sixty miles of the coast at Sirte, when the going became more rocky and uneven.
This slowed the patrol down, and they were located by an Italian spotter aircraft which dropped a couple of small bombs wide of the mark.
Holliman decided that they had to take cover, so they scuttled into a patch of scrub and camouflaged themselves with nets.
Inevitably more aircraft appeared, dropping a hail of bombs and then strafing with machine guns for good measure, but, amazingly, no damage was done.
Stirling, however, was worried that their cover was blown and decided on a change of plan.
A recce of the area had shown that there was another airfield thirty miles from Sirte at Tamit.
He decided to split the party, sending Mayne to attack this new target, while he dealt with Sirte itself.
Stirling, accompanied by Sergeant Jimmy Brough and two privates, Charlie Catell and Johnny Cooper, was driven by Holliman to within three miles of the target.
A rendezvous was arranged on the coast road after the attack.
With rucksacks on their shoulders and clutching their weapons, the group of desperadoes trudged up the main coast road, clearly silhouetted by the headlamps of passing enemy traffic.
After a  while, deciding that discretion was preferable, they moved off some distance into the desert parallel to the road.
They duly arrived at the perimeter wire of the airfield and to their left they noticed a pair of Italian sentries manning a roadblock.
It was then that Brough discovered they were in the middle of a minefield.
A commotion ensued when Stirling loudly asked him what the hell was going on, and the alerted Italians began shouting.
Realizing that there was little chance of getting into such a defended area undetected, they decided to make for the rendezvous, contenting themselves with placing their bombs on vehicles parked for the night alongside the road.
They were consoled by the sight of a series of brilliant flashes and explosions in the night sky to the east, which they took to mean that Paddy Mayne had found his prey.
As indeed he had.
His party made their way on to the airfield without difficulty and what followed was a foretaste of Paddy Mayne's style.
They simply wandered around in the dark, placing their bombs on the parked aircraft until they ran out of them.
But then, instead of making a hasty retreat, they lurked around the airfield buildings to wait for the explosions.
Sure enough, the twenty-minute time pencils activated the detonators and up went the aircraft.
It was then that Mayne noticed light coming from under a door.
Kicking it open he saw a group of officers, probably pilots, and emptied the contents of a tommy-gun into them.
As the raiders then slipped away across the airfield, an undamaged aircraft loomed out of the darkness.
There were no bombs left, so Mayne leaped up on to the wing and, reaching into the cockpit, wrenched out the instrument panel with his bare hands.
Still clutching this souvenir, he and his group made their rendezvous and met up with Stirling back in the desert.
They then all travelled back to Jalo in high spirits.
Mayne himself claimed twenty-four aircraft and some bomb and petrol dumps destroyed.
Jock Lewes came in a few days later with a different tale to tell.
Arriving at Agheila they discovered that all the aircraft based there left at night, so something else had to be improvised.
He had taken a captured Italian Lancia lorry along on the trip, as he had heard that there was a roadhouse at Mersa Brega used by groups of officers for meetings.
His idea was to infiltrate the Lancia, which was armed with a Breda machine gun on the back, into an Italian convoy and shoot the place up, with a view to grabbing some prisoners.
‘Gentleman’ Jim Almonds was part of Lewes's group on the raid.
The chief target we came to that night was a staging post for enemy  convoys along the route.
We pulled into the car park alongside the other trucks outside the place and most of the drivers were inside.
Some of the boys got off and placed bombs on the trucks.
The idea was that when that was done, on a signal I was to open up with the Breda and shoot up the café.
But, although we had tested it during the day, the drop in the temperature at night was so great that the oil in the mechanism became sluggish and thick.
I cocked the old gun and squeezed the trigger, and it just went forward too slowly to fire a round.
And so we used the small weapons we had.
After creating the maximum of confusion, they piled into the Lancia and set off back along the road for their rendezvous with the LRDG, accompanied by an Italian whom they had taken prisoner after he had foolishly asked Lewes for a light while the latter was placing a bomb on his truck.
Bill Fraser, accompanied by Sergeants Tait and DuVivier and Privates Byrne and Phillips, arrived back at Jalo four days after the others, able to claim the greatest success.
They had reached Agedabia without difficulty.
Both DuVivier and Byrne wrote accounts of the raid fairly soon afterwards, and although they disagree on details, the main story is clear.
They were left by the LRDG about ten miles south of the target, and marched through the night to a point where they could observe the target during the following day.
Byrne said that they each carried a water bottle, a compass, a revolver, eight Lewes bombs, a tin of chocolate, and a mixed ration consisting of raisins, lumps of cheese and broken biscuits.
In addition, he had a tommy-gun and four spare magazines.
That night they simply marched on to the airfield and set their bombs on a plentiful supply of aircraft.
The first bombs went off while they were still walking around, and although the garrison fired away merrily, in the mêlée no shots came near the raiders.
Byrne says that they added to the confusion by jumping up and down and shouting with glee.
Reluctantly they headed away into the darkness and made the rendezvous rather late, but luckily the patrol had waited for them.
As they drove off, the LRDG boys said that they had heard and seen everything and had just had to stay to the end.
Then, as dawn broke, they encountered the leading vehicles of Brigadier Reid's E Force.
Soon engulfed by the column, they waited until Reid himself came up.
He asked Fraser how many aircraft he had destroyed and when told thirty-seven, he said, ‘I am proud to shake the hand of someone who has done something so well worthwhile.’
Sadly, however, the return tip was  marred by the death of two members of the Rhodesian patrol, killed in an attack by two Blenheims, in spite of their having spread out the correct air recognition signals.
Fraser's party arrived back on 23 December, but there was only time for a brief celebration, as Stirling, Mayne and Lewes were off the following morning for another series of raids.
Celebration was in order, however.
The SAS themselves had suffered no casualties and had destroyed sixty-one enemy aircraft, plus stores, petrol and vehicles.
Put in perspective, that was equivalent to the achievement of the whole of Fighter Command during a day at the height of the Battle of Britain, but with only a handful of men and stores involved.
Certainly David Stirling's theories had been vindicated in a spectacular way, but that was only the beginning.
He was not the man to sit back and boast.
In spite of Fraser having only just got back, he was invited to accompany them, and just as naturally agreed.
The plan was to return to the same group of airfields, on the assumption that the garrisons would hardly expect them back quite so soon.
On Christmas Day 1941, Gus Holliman and his patrol, together with the Mayne and Stirling parties, set off once again into the desert.
It was on this trip that a remarkable partnership came together for the first time.
Stirling's own team included two men, Reg Seekings and Johnny Cooper, who had asked if they could be together.
They were to stay with him throughout the desert campaign.
Several subsequent accounts have referred to Cooper as ‘David Stirling's driver’, but in fact Stirling always insisted on doing the driving himself.
The truth was that Cooper learned the skills of navigation and acted within the team in that capacity in the future.
That particular trip was more or less a carbon copy of the previous one.
They had a relatively easy passage to the escarpment, where they split up.
Holliman agreed to drive Stirling's team down on to the road and along it until they were within easy striking distance of the airfield at Sirte.
Unfortunately they were again delayed by rough terrain, and when they got to the road they found it choked with German armour heading for the front.
Ritchie's Eighth Army had gone over to the offensive and Rommel was in retreat towards Agheila.
Thus they were forced to remain in hiding and at half past two they saw the glow of the fires that Mayne had lit at Tamit lighting up the horizon.
This was particularly frustrating for Stirling, who had yet to score.
By the time the traffic ceased, they were far too late to carry out a proper raid on the airfield and had to content themselves with shooting up transport along the  road.
Paddy Mayne, however, had managed to add a further twenty-seven aircraft to his bag.
The two groups returned safely to Jalo, where they had to wait some time for news of Jock Lewes and Bill Fraser.
When it came, it was bad.
Lieutenant Morris of the LRDG limped into Jalo in the one remaining truck of his original patrol of six, crowded with men.
His tale was a sad one, backed up by the men of Lewes's troop.
They had been dropped near their target, Nofilia airfield, and the following day had hidden themselves to observe the defences.
They got on to the airfield that night and started to place their bombs, but as the aircraft were widely dispersed, this took time in the dark.
Before they were finished, the first charges went off and the place became a hornets' nest.
They were forced to beat a hasty retreat and arrived at their rendezvous with Morris's patrol on time.
From there they set off to the landing ground which was Fraser's target.
On the way they were spotted by an Italian aircraft which came in and strafed them.
Jim Almonds leaped off his truck and set up a bren, but Lewes stayed where he was.
Afterwards his men felt that he had waited too long before baling out.
He was hit several times and died shortly afterwards.
Then further enemy aircraft arrived and bombed and strafed the patrol for several hours.
When the attack ceased they managed to cannibalize parts to get one truck going and set off for the rendezvous with Fraser, only to find nobody there.
The death of Jock Lewes was keenly felt and it meant that Stirling was down to only one officer besides himself, assuming that Fraser was missing.
Lewes had spent only a short time with the unit, but had impressed everyone with his absolute dedication to his work.
Stirling may have laid down the principles, but it was Lewes who had trained the men to put them into practice.
It is a paradox that very little is known about him as a person; although he was respected by the men, he kept his distance.
Often when a member of a close team of people dies, all sorts of incidents and anecdotes are remembered.
Yet when asked, those who served with him find it difficult to sum him up.
John Steel Lewes was buried in the desert and is listed on the El Alamein memorial as having no known grave.
Stirling naturally realized that Lewes would be difficult to replace, and was deeply saddened by his death.
Yet he could return to Cairo with a justifiable sense of pride in knowing that he had delivered what he had promised.
There was a vital need to recruit fresh men and to replenish  stores.
L Detachment headed back to Kabrit for a well-earned rest and some leave.
It is at this stage in the history of the unit that its existence starts to register gradually in official records for the first time.
While they were en route back to base at the end of December, there was a most puzzling exchange of correspondence between staff officers at MEHQ and Eighth Army Headquarters that sheds some light on how Stirling went about his business.
The reference to a proposed parachute operation is strange, because there is no evidence that Stirling was planning any such thing at the time, yet the correspondence is dated 30 and 31 December 1941, when Stirling was in the desert.
The following is the text of a letter from a Colonel M. B. Jennings at MEHQ to Colonel Thirburn at Eighth Army Advanced Headquarters.
We have been in great difficulty during the last thirty six hours over an alleged parachute operation which you have in view.
Stirling appears to have told someone in R.A.F. Ops. about it, but of course not the right man.
Stirling never breathed a word about it to anyone on the Ops. side here.
Stirling's R.A.F. confidant made arrangements for converting the aircraft but did nothing about telling any of his colleagues planning the operation.
The result was that yesterday they turned on us for information as to the number of men to be dropped, the weight of stores and the mileage and so on, all of which was essential for them to know if they were to fit out the aircraft properly.
We all know Stirling's weakness for laying on his plans by the queerest methods.
His ideas of organisation are elementary to say the least.
I have an idea, however, that he is apt to think out his own operations, try to lay them on without any authorisation from your HQ and then come and offer it to us on a plate.
He probably tells you that it is all arranged at this end, whereas in point of fact nothing has been laid on except by verbal arrangement with him, and then we have a frightful period such as is now going on.
I fully realise the need for extreme secrecy in this type of operation.
Nevertheless the present system cannot continue.
I am therefore arranging with R.A.F. that they will not deal with Stirling direct unless he is armed with a written request from GHQ.
This branch in its turn will not cooperate until he can produce a written request from you….
I am sorry to worry you over this but the result of the present system is that John Merer and I are barely on speaking terms.
The reply from the Eighth Army Advanced Headquarters dated the following day was couched in similar terms.
I was very annoyed over the whole business this end, when it transpired that nobody had any information on the subject either.
I realised then what had happened.
When your first telegram arrived at about two a.m. a few nights ago requesting destination for the modified aircraft, I thought that Stirling had spoken to B.G.S. here and fixed his requirements with you.
I am sorry you had all this bother.
We cannot clear the matter up until Stirling returns from his present party in three days time….
I have sent for Stirling to report here on his return when I shall make the new procedures clear to him.
I hope it will work but I have found that his natural impetuousness and importunity make it difficult for him to stick to any procedure!
The only conclusion that can be drawn from the above correspondence is that Stirling must have had some sort of operation in mind using parachutes during the period when he was returning from his second visit to Sirte.
However, he would not have been around to negotiate with the RAF and would have had to rely on a tenuous radio link with the LRDG main base.
He carried out the raid on the night of 24 December and would have taken at least three days to return to Jalo.
There was never any mention of further plans for parachuting after the first operational disaster, and the correspondents agree that he was away in the desert.
The dates on the letters are quite clear, but a vague possibility is that they refer to the first actual parachute operation and that the dates are confused — by perhaps a month.
The mystery remains, but the letters are worth quoting as they reflect the attitude of middle-ranking staff officers to Stirling at the time.
He arrived back in Cairo with an action-packed programme to be fulfilled, leaving little time for the bar at Shepherd's Hotel or for swanning around the night-clubs.
The priority was to get hold of some more men, although they would first have to be trained up to SAS standards before being of any use on operations.
He had little more than a week, as his intention was to return to Jalo by 10 January.
The first call was at MEHQ where Stirling, sporting a full black beard, was shown in to see Auchinleck.
The latter had been informed of L Detachment's successes and was amenable to the further plans for action which Stirling was ready to put to him.
At that time, Rommel was in retreat and the Eighth Army expected to  enter the major port of Benghazi any day.
Stirling, the strategic thinker, had already reasoned that the Afrika Korps would have to re-route their supply lines and that the small port of Bouerat, 300 miles to the west, would become extremely important.
He suggested to Auchinleck that he raid Bouerat and destroy any shipping and port facilities.
The Commander-in-Chief agreed to the plan and also authorized Stirling to recruit a further six officers and up to forty men.
As an added bonus, Stirling was immediately promoted to major.
Incidentally, both Stirling and Mayne were awarded the DSO for the series of raids carried out in December 1941.
In Cairo, Stirling based himself at the flat of his brother, Peter, who was an official at the British Embassy.
From there he sallied forth about his many errands, meeting the usual obstructiveness whenever he asked for anything.
Peter was a few years older and shared David's passion for gambling and the good things in life.
His flat became a haven for a clique of young men of similar tastes whom the war had thrown together in Cairo.
It was presided over by an Egyptian suffragi known as Mo, who was a mixture of hall porter, diplomat, negotiator and general factotum.
The sitting room sofas were a nondescript grey, dotted with cigarette burns and stained with a grimy black line at head level.
Haphazardly placed photographs of King George and Queen Elizabeth, cut from a magazine, had been hastily glued to the wall before the landlord came to lunch — to hide the marks of indoor revolver practice.
On a table in the hall was a pile of letters, addressed to officers who might be dead, or in prison camps, or coming back at any moment….
The bathroom was piled high with uniform cases, captured German ammunition, and a pair of elephant tusks, while a fluctuating assortment of bedrolls, kit-bags and camp beds were strewn about the bedrooms.
…The food was delicious, the drink unlimited; and in spite of the dated dance records and battered furniture, the flat was considered one of the smartest places to be seen in Cairo.
One highly motivated recruit Stirling did manage to persuade to join him was Fitzroy Maclean, who had served as a diplomat in Russia before the war.
By bending the rules which restricted travel to a few miles around Moscow, he had managed to undertake a number of journeys to such places as Samarkand, wonderfully described in his book,Eastern Approaches .
When war broke out, the Foreign Office refused him permission to enlist, so he resigned and stood for Parliament.
Winning  his seat as Member for Lancaster, he promptly joined the Cameron Highlanders and was unemployed in Cairo when he met Stirling.
A group of Free French troops provided a further source of manpower.
They had already been parachute-trained at Ringway near Manchester and were led by the redoubtable Commandant Bergé, whom Stirling later acknowledged as a co-founder of the SAS.
The Frenchmen were keen to join up, but the snag was persuading the French authorities in the Middle East to permit them to come under British command.
Stirling said that he had to fly up to Beirut where he met a very senior French general, who promptly said ‘Non ’.
Stirling expostulated that this was as bad as the ‘bloody English at M.E.H.Q.’, whereupon the general enquired as to his nationality.
Stirling replied that he was Scottish and, in the spirit of the ‘Auld Alliance’, agreement was given.
There was, however, a senior general, Catroux, representing the Free French in Egypt at the time, and it is more probable that it was he who interviewed Stirling.
The French proved to be a highly motivated and very brave addition to the ranks of the SAS, but in some ways they were a mixed blessing.
They were so keen to get to grips with the enemy that they disregarded much of the training in stealth and guile.
As a result they suffered many casualties.
It is interesting that they became an integral part of the SAS, wore British uniform and insignia, yet tended to remain a separate squadron — mainly because of the language problem.
At Kabrit in the meantime the L Detachment men were busily making ready for the departure back to Jalo, from where they were to head for Bouerat.
As he only had one experienced officer left, Stirling had no option but to tell Paddy Mayne, newly promoted to captain, that he would have to stay behind to supervise the training of the new recruits.
Mayne was not at all happy about this, but he agreed with as good a grace as possible.
To cope with instruction in demolition work, Stirling had managed to borrow Captain Bill Cumper from the Royal Engineers.
He was an older man with a bouncy Cockney wit, who later joined the SAS as a full-time member.
Peter Warr was in charge of the parachute course.
The raiding party was to leave by air for Jalo on 11 January, but shortly before this a bedraggled group of men arrived at the base camp.
It was Bill Fraser's party, who had an amazing tale to tell of sheer endurance and the will to survive, in the very best tradition of the SAS.
Their task had been to raid an enemy landing strip at Marble Arch, the British nickname for a vast triumphal arch erected by Mussolini in the  middle of the desert to mark the border of Tripolitania.
However, they were unaware that Lewes's party who were on their way to pick them up had been attacked, and there was confusion about the actual rendezvous point.
In addition to Fraser, the party consisted of Tait, DuVivier, Phillips and Byrne.
The following account is based on Byrne's memoirs.
At what they supposed to be the rendezvous they sat down to wait, unaware that a relief patrol of the LRDG had been sent out to pick them up — from a different place.
At the end of the third day their water was running short, as each man had only had two pints in his water bottle.
On the sixth day, with the water supply exhausted and no hope of a patrol arriving, they decided to walk to the nearest British lines which they thought were 200 miles to the east.
In poor physical condition they set off under the blazing sun, marching for fifty minutes and resting for ten.
We took turns to lead, every one of us setting a cracking pace, determined to match each other 's resolution.
Weary beyond belief, we kept tramping on, stamping our feet into the soft desert sand and lifting them up again like automata, every step an effort….
The sun burned into our eyes from high overhead and was reflected up again from the sand.
There was no escape from it and we longed for the luxury of sun glasses or a peaked cap.
At dusk we dug holes in the sand, curled up in our blankets and tried to sleep.
They carried on in this fashion for another day and a half, travelling at night to conserve energy.
Then they came to an area of salt lakes.
They tried to drink the water, which made them sick, and had a go at their own urine until that too simply ran out.
The next day they lay up in a cave and managed to distil a small quantity of water which tasted vile.
While this was being done, Byrne and Phillips went off on a recce down to the road.
There they managed to capture two Germans who had stopped their lorry for a rest, and obtained a jerrycan full of water.
They turned their captives loose and, with their bottles full once again, the patrol set off, marching for a further two days.
Again short of water, they found themselves after a brief sandstorm in the middle of a group of Italian vehicles.
Creeping up on one, all they managed to steal was some food.
There was no water — even the radiator tap was rusted up.
Marching on that night, suffering terribly from thirst, they came on a track that was not marked on their maps but was used by vehicles.
Letting the first one pass they decided to hijack the next one.
Pretending to be an Arab, Phillips stood in the middle of the track with a blanket over his head.
Sure enough along came a vehicle with its headlights on, a small open staff car with two Germans in it, who stopped to investigate the gesticulating ‘Arab’.
The patrol pounced and grabbed the surprised Germans, only to discover that they also had no water with them.
But at least they had the car and, forcing one of the Germans to drive, they set off along the coast road towards Mersa Brega.
Traffic began to peter out and they found themselves in the middle of extensive minefields.
Attempting to make a detour, the car got bogged down in a salt lake and was abandoned.
Still walking east, the party were aware that they were almost at the front line and had to proceed with caution.
They heard firing from time to time and at one point were challenged.
Some Arabs in a tent gave them a little water and then the exhausted men finally stumbled into an outpost of the King's Dragoon Guards.
That was the first of several epic desert walks carried out by both groups and individuals from the SAS who had become cut off during the campaign in North Africa.
The desert was an unforgiving place, but their training had equipped them to cope, when at any time they could have taken the easy way out and walked down to the coast road to surrender.
As it was, it took them two weeks to get back to Kabrit, to a great welcome from their astonished comrades, who had given them up for lost.
Back in Jalo, Stirling organized his raiders for their trip.
He took a relatively large party with him, including Cooper and Seekings.
A newcomer was Flight Lieutenant Rawnsley who had attached himself to L Detachment and went on several of their raids.
A further addition were two men of the Special Boat Section (SBS), Captain Duncan and Corporal Barr.
They had a folding canoe ( foldboat ) and limpet mines for blowing up any shipping that was in the harbour.
The SBS was another of the ‘private armies’ that owed its parentage to the Commandos.
Lieutenant Roger Courtney joined No. 8 Commando at the same time as Stirling, and during the training period in the latter part of 1940 he organized a small group to train in the Scottish lochs with folding canoes.
Most of them ended up in the Middle East with Layforce, and when that was broken up they attached themselves to Combined Operations in Alexandria.
They landed agents from submarines and carried out a number of successful demolition raids along  the Italian coast.
It was this expertise that Stirling intended to harness on his trip to Bouerat.
They set off on 17 January, carried by Captain Hunter's LRDG patrol and navigated once again by Mike Sadler.
With them they had a radio truck.
Information from aerial photographs would be signalled to Stirling en route to give him up-to-date knowledge of the target.
The outward journey was quite uneventful as far as the Wadi Tamit, a steep defile leading down the escarpment on to the coastal plain.
They were travelling over familiar territory and life on the march had slipped into a routine.
Most of the time we were loaded to do the complete journey which was why we needed well-run-in trucks.
Everything was grossly overloaded.
We'd carry food, water and petrol….
We also carried ammunition.
We needed lots of that….
And we fed well.
We got on to the LRDG ration scale which was different from the rest of the army.
They had tinned fruit.
They were really twenty-four-hour jobs, those patrols.
You were covering as many miles a day as you possibly could, depending on the going….
We were continually mending punctures…
It was really rough going on those jobs.
Good fun.
At all times someone was on watch for aircraft, and the nearer the coast they were, the slower they tended to travel, to cut down the dust plume.
Stops for meals and for the navigator to fix their position were a welcome break from the jolting ride.
A mess tin of McConachie's meat and vegetable stew cooked over a petrol fire was a staple for a bunch of hungry men.
When they stopped to sleep, the whole column had to be as well hidden as possible.
If there was no natural cover, camouflage nets were slung over the trucks, while the men tended to disperse themselves some distance away, preferably in the lee of a rock.
A wise precaution was to send out a party equipped with bundles of brushwood to sweep away the tracks leading to the encampment.
Searing heat during the day and bitter cold at night had to be contended with, and thus regulation dress went by the board.
Photographs of the period show groups of men in a motley collection of semi-uniform.
Many sported Arab headdress, and sheepskin-lined jerkins were popular at night.
In the desert, rank tended to be forgotten as officers were addressed by their Christian names — but back at base it was ‘sir’ and a smart salute.
Navigation was very much a specialist skill and the maps of the desert were more or less blank.
Only the coast, the oases, ridges of hills and the main roads were marked.
For the rest, the terrain was mainly featureless sand with the dunes constantly moving.
You had to travel in straight lines and know in what direction you were going.
You had to be able to fix your position just like a ship at sea, with sextant and star charts.
For plotting a course you had to have an accurate speedometer.
You travelled in a series of zigs and zags, keeping a record of it all in a notebook — the bearing on which you were travelling, the time of the start and end of each leg….
At lunchtime, when everyone was brewing up, the navigator plotted all those little legs on to a map.
On arrival at the Wadi Tamit where Captain Hunter had decided the party would lie up during daylight, the real hard work began.
The trucks themselves had to be manhandled down the steep rock-strewn defile and as the men were sweating away at this in the hot sun an Italian aircraft picked them up.
Knowing that it would call up the fighter bombers, the convoy scattered into whatever cover could be found.
For the rest of the day there were almost continuous air attacks, but as dusk crept over the scene it was discovered that no damage had been done to the LRDG patrol.
The wireless truck and its crew, however, had totally disappeared, never to be seen again.
Stirling would have to do without up-to-the-minute intelligence of the target area.
The whole patrol drove to a position within about sixty miles of Bouerat, and there the raiding party all piled on to one truck which was to be driven close to the port by Hunter himself.
Sixteen SAS and SBS members and four men of the LRDG managed to squeeze on board with the fragile canoe wedged between them.
They set off quite cheerily, but when they were within a few miles of the tarmac coast road, the truck hit a gully and gave a sickening lurch.
With a loud splintering crack the canoe broke, ending all hopes of damaging enemy shipping.
But, optimistic as ever, Stirling realized that there were other tempting targets around.
He suggested that the two SBS men should attack the harbour wireless station instead while his men would concentrate on the actual port installations.
Sadler navigated the party to within a mile of the town, and splitting into groups the men headed off into the darkness laden with their bombs.
Moving cautiously in among the buildings by the waterfront, they discovered that there were no guards whatsoever.
Warehouses were soon liberally festooned with bombs, and on the way out a number of parked fuel-tanker lorries were attended to.
Everyone made it back to the rendezvous where they laid up for the day, returning in the evening to pick up the SBS group which had managed to deal with the radio station.
On the way back, the patrol drove for several miles along the coast road, destroying another fuel-tanker in the process and roaring through an Italian ambush with guns blazing.
In the end the loss of the canoe had not made any difference as there was no shipping in the harbour anyway.
Stirling was puzzled as to why the place was not a scene of feverish activity, but while they had been about their business Rommel was in the process of retaking Benghazi.
On 21 January the Afrika Korps launched a massive counter-attack.
While the SAS were returning to Jalo a battle was raging and the Eighth Army was in retreat back to the Egyptian frontier.
Hearing a BBC broadcast on 30 January, both Hunter and Stirling were worried that Jalo might have been evacuated, as indeed it had.
The LRDG had pulled out, leaving a small rearguard party to destroy the remaining supplies.
Seeing trucks approaching, the latter made ready for battle, but luckily there was mutual recognition before any shooting started.
The patrol then headed off for Siwa, another oasis 200 miles to the east.
This had long been the LRDG's main base with clear water and even a few European houses.
It is chiefly remembered by the SAS because they could swim in ‘Cleopatra's Pool’, a large basin supplied by a spring.
From there the SAS returned to Kabrit, where Stirling found much that was not to his liking.
Mayne, who had retired to bed when they left, still mourning McGonigal, had contributed little to the training programme.
Sergeant-Major Riley was put in charge, and after an altercation with Mayne, Stirling was forced to admit that the Ulsterman's strengths lay in fighting the enemy rather than in dealing with paperwork.
The Free French group, however, had been making excellent progress and were well on the way to becoming operational.
Back in Cairo, Stirling found headquarters sunk in despondency, having lost all the gains they had made in December.
As the next moonless period was in early March, there was some time for reorganization, and with the Eighth Army dug in defensively along the Gazala line there was no major offensive in the offing.
It was therefore decided to mount a series of raids on the airfields in the Benghazi area.
Stirling also had a pet project up his sleeve.
After the successful penetration of Bouerat, he wanted to explore Benghazi harbour, once again taking  some SBS men with him.
This was, however, a target of a completely different order, as Benghazi was a large town which would be well guarded and had a civilian population still in occupation.
Stirling had little patience with the planning staffs' obsession with large set-piece armoured battles in the desert.
He clearly saw that the extended nature of Rommel's supply lines made them extremely vulnerable to attack and that destruction of port facilities would severely limit his ability to wage war.
Stirling envisaged a much larger force of raiders with a permanent base deep in the desert, supplied by air, which could descend at will on the coastal lifeline of the Axis forces.
In the background, the fight for control of L Detachment was still rumbling on.
On 25 December, Brigadier Whitely, Deputy Director of Operations at MEHQ, had issued a lengthy secret memorandum concerning the amalgamation of the various small clandestine units under one commander.
He was referring to the remainder of Layforce which had been formed into the Middle East Commando, the Foldboat Section (SBS) and the ‘parachute personnel’.
His reasoning was that GHQ could not deal with such a large number of small units.
His recommendation was that a commanding officer be appointed with an administrative staff.
Such a man ‘of a certain experience was required for general disciplinary purposes…some unit commanders such as Stirling want to be absolutely independent and directly under GHQ.
Our experience in the past has proved this very unsatisfactory.’
Had this proposal been implemented, it would have had a disastrous effect on the morale and effectiveness of L Detachment.
A martinet of a staff officer in charge at Kabrit would have led to the collapse of Stirling's force and the end of any form of free independent spirit.
The problem remained, however, that they were still only a tiny remnant of the original unit, which severely limited their ability to carry out large-scale operations.
Obviously Stirling had been lobbying hard for new blood.
An unsigned internal letter dated 13 February to the operations staff at MEHQ states that Stirling was making arrangements with the Eighth Army for further raids.
It is strongly recommended that after this operation the unit should be allowed to reform up to strength and be retrained as a parachute unit, and it should not be required to operate again before May.
Proposed additions to the war establishment of L Detachment S.A.S. Brigade will be before the W.E.
committee on 20 February.
It is intended that the unit should consist of two troops each of thirty all  ranks, with first reinforcements equivalent to one troop.
This W.E.
should allow two troops to be kept permanently up to strength for operations.
This must have been agreed, as on 22 February, Major-General Galloway of MEHQ wrote to Eighth Army Headquarters to inform them that after the next series of operations, L Detachment would be withdrawn to re-form up to strength and be retrained as a parachute unit.
It was expected to be ready for operations by 1 May with a strength of two troops.
It was also noted that the Free French would be ready to operate by 1 March.
It is clear from the above that higher headquarters placed great emphasis on L Detachment remaining essential fly as a parachute unit, and this was in keeping with Stirling's doctrine that his men should be able to arrive at a target by whatever means were most suitable.
Although parachutes were not used again by the SAS in North Africa, training in their use continued right up to the end of the campaign.
The whole detachment set off on 15 March from Siwa in the trucks of John Olivey's Rhodesian patrol, heading for the Jebel mountains to the south of Benghazi, a journey of 400 miles.
There were some new faces in the party, including Captain Allot and Lieutenant Sutherland from the SBS.
In Cairo, Stirling had recruited Bob Melot, a Belgian who had been in business in Egypt before the war.
He had become involved with British intelligence and spoke fluent Arabic.
At his suggestion, two soldiers from the Senussi tribe, a local Libyan people some of whom served as auxiliaries to the British Army, were included who could act as guides.
Lastly, there was Gordon Alston who had previously been in Benghazi when the town had been under British control.
Stirling himself was driving a hybrid vehicle that he had obtained in Cairo which became known as the ‘Blitz Buggy’.
This was a basic Ford shooting-brake which had had the windows and roof removed to turn it into an open truck.
It had twin Vickers K aircraft machine guns mounted at the rear and a single one in front.
Further modifications for desert travel included a water condenser, a sun compass and a large extra fuel tank.
It was painted a drab olive grey to look like a German staff car and even had the monthly enemy air recognition panel painted on the bonnet.
The SBS men had a genuine captured staff car with them.
All went well until the patrol reached the area of the Trig al Ab, the old camel track leading into the desert from the coast road where L Detachment had made their rendezvous after the first operation.
The  track had been extensively mined by the Italians and the captured German staff car ran over one, injuring Lieutenant Sutherland who had to be taken back to Siwa.
From there they proceeded to the Jebel mountains and made camp in a pleasant area of trees and plentiful water.
The local Senussi tribesmen were bitterly anti-Italian and provided a sheep to roast as a gesture of welcome.
The two Senussi soldiers were sent off on a recce and reported back the following day that there was no checkpoint on the road leading into the town.
That night Stirling set off in the ‘Blitz Buggy’ with his usual crew of Cooper and Seekings, Ken Allot plus two corporals from the SBS with a folding canoe, and Gordon Alston.
They simply drove into Benghazi, headlamps blazing, and parked down near the waterfront.
The actual port area was wired in and guarded, but the plan was to assemble the canoe outside.
However, the water was extremely rough and quite unsuitable for such a fragile craft.
They decided to unpack it anyway in case the wind dropped.
In order to avoid the hitches of the last trip, they had carried it in its bag, but when unpacked it was discovered that one of the parts was damaged.
With regret Stirling realized that he would have to abandon offensive action that night and decided to withdraw without placing any bombs, so as not to jeopardize a future visit.
In addition to Benghazi, a series of raids on the airfields in the vicinity had been planned, but these proved to be a disappointment.
Stirling went twice to Benina and found it deserted.
Fraser managed to deal with one aircraft and some trucks at Barce, Slonta was too heavily defended and Alston never managed to find Berka Main.
As usual it was Paddy Mayne who achieved the best bag, a total of fifteen aircraft at Berka Satellite airfield.
The only consolation was that a series of valuable recces had been carried out in an area they had not previously visited.
Back at Kabrit there was time for the planned reorganization.
While the unit had been away in the field, the usual correspondence was being exchanged between the various staffs involved, almost certainly without Stirling's knowledge.
On 10 March, Lieutenant-General Arthur Smith, Chief of Staff at MEHQ, wrote to General Ritchie at Eighth Army Headquarters.
The latter had evidently enquired as to whose command Stirling's detachment came under and Smith informed him that it was his, but that L Detachment would revert to GHQ control on completion of their current tasks.
The letter goes on:
It is hoped that this will not be later than approximately 8 April by which time they are wanted back here to get on with parachute  training.
I have heard that Stirling is planning an operation against shipping in Benghazi.
I don't know the details of the plan as it is of course an Eighth Army operation, but I would like to stress the point that Stirling's chief value is that of commanding a parachute force.
We are, therefore, anxious that he should not be thrown away in some other role and I hope that any plan he has made will be carefully examined so as to ensure that as far as possible he does not do something foolhardy.
Handwritten at the bottom is a postscript.
‘He needs restraining and we can't afford to throw him away.’
In the same series of correspondence, General Smith wrote to General Ritchie suggesting that if he had an operation in mind he should consider using the Free French troop as there was a danger of them becoming stale after their period of intensive training.
It is clear that the higher echelons at headquarters regarded Stirling and his men as very valuable, but were also alive to his impetuous nature.
Treated as a wayward child who at the same time was exceedingly precocious, he was considerably indulged as long as he continued to sow confusion in Rommel's back yard.
The problem of recruiting remained, however, and fighting units were unwilling to give up their most enterprising officers and men.
Stirling continued to trawl among acquaintances and friends for likely candidates.
One friend was Randolph Churchill, who had come out to Cairo originally with Layforce and had then been given a job of liaison with the press.
A large, ungainly and abrasive man, he was not the sort of material to make the grade in the SAS in the normal way, but Stirling obviously had his reasons for taking him on.
In spite of his strict interpretation of the principles governing selection, Stirling, as we shall see, was not entirely above using politics to serve his own long-term aims.
A group of recruits was, however, gathered in time to start the formation of a second troop.
Most prominent was Captain the Earl Jellicoe, son of the First World War admiral.
Other officers included Lieutenants Sandy Scratchley, a well-known amateur jockey, Stephen Hastings and Carol Mather.
The expansion also meant a round of promotions for the stalwarts who had been in from the beginning.
Reg Seekings, Bob Bennett and Johnny Cooper were all promoted to sergeant and Pat Riley became regimental sergeant-major.
Cooper has vivid memories of his introduction to the rituals of the sergeants' mess.
Once you were promoted you had to go to the bar on first entering the mess and drink a pint of whatever drink you designated without taking your lips from the glass.
One Saturday morning, Reg and I entered the mess tent and were welcomed by Pat Riley.
To me he said, ‘Well, young Cooper, I know you don't drink alcohol, so you had better have a non-alcoholic drink.’
’ Yes, serjeant major,’I replied, somewhat overawed by the whole occasion.
Pat continued, ‘We have a drink here which is definitely non-alcoholic — it's called cherry brandy.’
A tankard was filled with red liquid and handed to me.
At first it was quite sweet and enjoyable, but then I found it sickly and thick.
I only just managed to get it down before bolting from the tent just in time to get rid of the contents of my stomach.
The opportunity was taken to get in some leave.
Several of the men always stayed in a small hotel in Cairo in Suleiman Pasha Street run by a character they called the ‘Honest Greek’.
He used to keep their pay packets in his safe and only dole out enough money on a daily basis to see them through, to save them from getting robbed.
Stirling himself took over his brother's flat again where the floor would be littered with maps and bits of equipment.
At that time there was evidence that the strain of running the unit more or less single-handed was beginning to tell.
He was suffering from frequent migraine attacks and had persistent desert sores which refused to heal.
His restless mind had returned to the unfinished business of Benghazi and the possibility of destroying shipping which he had so far signally failed to achieve.
This second expedition to Benghazi is not mentioned in any official documents and it has all the hallmarks of a David Stirling private-enterprise job, especially in view of the personnel who were to be involved.
The first thing was to get hold of more reliable boats than the fragile collapsible canoes that were capable of withstanding a desert journey.
Fitzroy Maclean and Bill Cumper, the engineer, managed to obtain a pair of small black inflatables, with the intention that the team would operate them rather than using SBS personnel.
Bill Cumper provided the necessary training in the use of limpet mines and two crews were formed, Stirling with Seekings and Maclean with Cooper.
Hours were spent paddling around in the dark on the Suez Canal until they believed they had mastered handling of the inflatables.
Stirling then dreamed up the idea of a true-to-life rehearsal against shipping at Port Suez, without bothering to inform the Navy.
The four drove to Suez with the boats and some dummy limpet mines, infiltrated  the heavily guarded dock area and launched themselves into the water.
They paddled out into the middle of a large convoy that was anchored there, attached the mines and returned to Kabrit for breakfast.
There was uproar when the Navy discovered the mines and Stirling had to own up, only to be told that they often dropped small depth charges at random into the harbour and if they saw anything suspicious sprayed the area with machine guns.
When told this, Johnny Cooper was not amused.
‘We could all have been killed on this exercise.
David calmly pointed out that the scheme would have been pointless if the ‘enemy’ had known of our intentions.
Reg and I were most vitriolic about the risk to which we had been exposed and hoped that the Germans would be just as inefficient.’
This was typical of Stirling, who was always prepared to bear the risk himself.
However, it is only fair to comment that he did place the lives of two of his most valuable NCOs in jeopardy as well as that of an officer whom he could ill afford to lose.
One of Stirling's problems was that he was not content to let others do the raiding from time to time, though he had proved his own courage and nobody would have thought the worse of him had he decided to concentrate on sorting out the many administrative problems that beset L Detachment.
Taking off on this second trip to Benghazi removed him from Cairo at a time when his influence there was needed.
At the last minute Reg Seekings had to drop out as he had injured his hand when a detonator exploded prematurely.
Somehow or other Randolph Churchill managed to wheedle his way into the party, which otherwise consisted of Stirling, Fitzroy Maclean, Gordon Alston, Cooper and Rose.
They set out from Siwa in mid-May, travelling in the ‘Blitz Buggy’ in convoy with an LRDG patrol led by Robin Gurdon.
The aim was to raid shipping in Benghazi harbour on the night of 21 May.
All went well on the long trip to the Jebel mountains and from there the intrepid raiding party set off for their target.
From then on an element of tragi-comedy gripped the entire enterprise.
The story of the trip is well known, but certainly bears repeating.
They got down the escarpment on to the coastal plain without mishap and drove along a dirt track beside Benina airfield.
Coming to a barrier across the road manned by a pair of bored Italian sentries, Fitzroy Maclean shouted out that they were German staff officers.
Then, with headlamps full on, they joined the main tarmacadam coast road.
Stirling accelerated and immediately a loud screaming noise came from the front of the vehicle.
Something was badly out of alignment which only became  apparent at speed.
They pressed on, with the noise getting worse, and drove into the outskirts of the town.
Alston knew his way around and had therefore taken over the navigation.
David Stirling, who was driving, noticed the lights of a car coming towards them.
As it passed, he realized that it had slowed down, turned around and was starting to give chase.
The faster Stirling drove, the faster the car behind tried to catch up.
Directed by Alston, the screaming ‘Blitz Buggy’ turned off and shot down through the narrow side streets of the Arab quarter.
They parked up among some bombed-out ruins, assuming that they had been rumbled.
David gave orders for the food and water to be unloaded and for bombs to be placed on their vehicle.
There was nothing for it but to try to make their way on foot out of the town and walk back to the rendezvous with Robin Gurdon.
Imagine the scene: the Prime Minister's son, a Member of Parliament and the officer commanding a specialist raiding unit together with their companions, in the middle of the night in a town several hundred miles behind the enemy lines.
At this juncture the peace of the night was rent by the sudden wail of air-raid sirens, and as they started to walk off they bumped into some Italian soldiers.
Fitzroy Maclean spoke to them and discovered that they were not at all suspicious.
Immediately David Stirling ordered Johnny Cooper to rescue their car from imminent destruction.
He had to run back in the dark and make safe the Lewes bomb.
This entailed replacing the safety pin in the ten-minute time pencil and extracting the detonator, which he managed with only seconds to spare.
Casting around they discovered a deserted building with a garage attached.
The car was backed inside and Randolph Churchill and Corporal Rose were left to guard it.
The rest managed to walk into the docks through an unguarded gate carrying one of the  dinghys .
Arriving at the edge of the quay, Fitzroy Maclean attempted to inflate it, only to discover that it had a puncture.
The wheezing noise of the bellows had by this time excited the interest of some sentries on a large freighter moored nearby, but Maclean shouted out that they should mind their own business.
He and Cooper then set off to get the other boat, which they discovered to their fury was also defective.
By this time Stirling had disappeared and they needed to find him as there was only half an hour of darkness left.
They bumped into him as they went back through the wire and held a whispered council of war.
It was too late to do any worthwhile damage and with some regret they came to the conclusion that it was best not to place any bombs.
They all then went back to collect the boats and their explosives, having an altercation on the way with a black sentry from Somaliland who did not appear to speak much Italian.
Gathering up their equipment they marched off again, only to find that two Italian sentries had fallen in behind them.
Maclean realized that their only chance was to bluff their way out of the situation, so they set off for the main gate.
All had several days' growth of beard and were dressed in a motley collection of civilian clothing.
At the main gate they came across a sentry who was upbraided by Maclean for his slovenly appearance and ordered to call the guard commander.
A sergeant then appeared pulling on his trousers.
He received a dressing down for not keeping a proper guard.
What if they had been English saboteurs, Maclean demanded.
That fantastic proposal was greeted with a smirk.
With a final torrent of abuse, Maclean dismissed the man and they simply walked out of the main gate into the town.
Back in the deserted house, which Randolph Churchill had christened No. 10 Downing Street, they made themselves as comfortable as possible for the day.
Corporal Rose had tried to fix the car but discovered a bent track rod end which was beyond his capabilities.
As the day wore on, more and more people came out into the streets.
Looking cautiously out, the intruders found that they had holed up directly opposite the main German headquarters.
In the afternoon, feeling bored, Stirling decided to go for a walk.
Wearing dark glasses and dressed in a polo-neck sweater, corduroy trousers and desert boots, with a towel round his neck, he simply strolled out of the house and down towards the harbour.
There he saw a pair of motor torpedo boats tied up at one of the quays and decided to attack.
As dusk fell they all piled back into the ‘Blitz Buggy’ and, with the track rod end still giving forth its loud protesting wail, drove down to where the torpedo boats were moored.
The aim was to toss bombs into them as they drove past, but when they got there they discovered that the sentries were being changed.
An attack would have been tantamount to committing suicide, so reluctantly Stirling gave orders to leave the town and head back for the rendezvous with the LRDG.
A few days later they were all back at Siwa, somewhat disappointed.
On the plus side, the expedition had proved once again that it was not difficult to penetrate an enemy-held town and carry out a reconnaissance.
However, it was obvious that if they wished to attack moored shipping, they had to find suitable boats from which to do so.
Stirling nevertheless felt that the trip had been English saboteurs, Maclean demanded.
That fantastic proposal was greeted with a smirk.
Expansion and Regimental Status
After his arrival back from Siwa, Stirling was driving from Alexandria to Cairo when he was involved in a serious road accident.
Overtaking a convoy of lorries he struck one of them and his car landed in the ditch.
A journalist who had hitched a lift was killed, Fitzroy Maclean ended up in hospital for three months and Randolph Churchill had to be invalided back to England with a back injury.
Luckily for the future of the SAS, Stirling himself escaped with a damaged wrist — which had the virtue of stopping him from driving for while.
Anyone who knew him will gladly testify that he was a disaster behind a steering wheel.
Nevertheless he had no time to nurse his injury as he was pitched once again into the struggle to recruit more men and to retain the independence of his unit.
Before departing on the expedition to Benghazi, he had written a memorandum addressed to the Director of Military Training at MEHQ on the future of L Detachment.
It had been proposed to form two parachute battalions recruited from Indian personnel serving in the Middle East.
Stirling's stated purpose in writing the memo was to suggest that recruiting his unit up to strength should take precedence over the equipping of these new battalions.
He pointed out that on 3 March 1942, his original recruits were down to three officers and thirteen men, and if brought up to strength they could be far better employed as a raiding force than as instructors for the proposed Indian units.
From this it is clear that the idea of breaking up L Detachment had been floated at headquarters, using the excuse of a shortage of manpower.
Stirling sensibly argued that it was illogical to form two new battalions when the few men he required were being denied him.
He went on to propose that he be allowed to recruit five men from  each infantry and motorized battalion in the Middle East as had been previously agreed by the Adjutant General's branch.
In addition he suggested that he could obtain further men from the SBS and the Middle East Commando, and that the Free French be permitted to expand to the same size as L Detachment.
In this way he could form three detachments, controlled through a slightly expanded headquarters staff.
This excellent piece of reasoning then went into their future operational role.
Stirling naturally stressed, as he had all along, that the SAS must remain outside any airborne brigade, otherwise they ran the risk of falling into the operational vacuum which lay between the small specialist raid and the larger tactical operation.
Here he was stressing forcibly his original principle that his unit should never be used tactically, only strategically.
He claimed that an expanded L Detachment could on the same night simultaneously attack the ten most important aerodromes in Libya and Cyrenaica, the bulk storage points on the enemy lines of communication and the main airfields in Crete, Rhodes, Greece and possibly Sicily.
This would entail at least 30 targets to be attacked by between 120 and 160 men.
Stirling finished by saying that this would be the maximum expansion he envisaged, as any further growth would lead to a lowering of standards.
If the above conditions were not acceptable, then those officers who had recently joined should be allowed to return to their original units as the terms on which they had volunteered no longer applied.
The background to the above was set out in a letter from the Operations branch at MEHQ dated 22 February, in which they proposed the use of L Detachment as parachutists in a tactical role, for seizing and holding ground in co-operation with other forces landing by sea or advancing across the desert.
This went directly against Stirling's concept of the role of his men, which had still not been clearly understood or even accepted at headquarters.
Operational planners viewed L Detachment as a parachute force pure and simple, which should be available to them for short-term aims.
When they got their way, disaster ensued.
The rump of Layforce had been formed into the Middle East Commando, which later became known as I Special Service Regiment.
This included a number of parachute-trained personnel whom Stirling was naturally keen to recruit.
He sent an extract from his memo to the officer commanding the Middle East Commando on 10 May, requesting  the transfer of Captain Schott and the trained men.
Schott was attached to the Raiding Forces Staff G(R) at headquarters, which at the time was led by Colonel Pembroke.
This request was obviously not well received, for at the bottom of the letter is the hand-written comment: ‘At first sight it certainly appears a bad case of body snatching, but I assume this is not so.’
A few days later, Colonel Airey of Middle East Commando wrote angrily to the Operations branch at MEHQ concerning the above.
‘While we are anxious to assist L Detachment in any reasonable way, we feel you will agree that the suggestions contained in the attached letter are unreasonable and cannot be entertained.’
He went on to say that they had been at great pains to build up an efficient fifth-column unit and should not be expected to give up their best men as soon as they were trained.
All that could be agreed would be to loan trained men for a specific operation.
The last paragraph reads: ‘We should be grateful if the suggestions contained in the attached letter could be firmly suppressed.
We also consider that requests for assistance should come through the Deputy Director Operations as arranged and not be dealt with in a haphazard way between unit commanders who are presumably not in the full operational picture.’
One can of course see Colonel Airey's point, although the fact remains that his Commando was unemployed at the time and Stirling was about to be required to undertake an important series of raids.
All Stirling could obtain was the loan of one officer and twelve other ranks.
When he had departed for Benghazi he had left Lord Jellicoe in charge at Kabrit, and on 20 May Jellicoe wrote to MEHQ asking for an order to be issued to the Commando to release the men.
This was granted subject to the firm understanding that ‘they remain a sub-unit and are not absorbed into L Detachment and lose their identity’.
So much for David Stirling's attempts at body-snatching.
He did, however, obtain the services of another small unit of extraordinary provenance, the Special Interrogation Group (SIG).
This had been formed by Captain Buck and consisted of a dozen Jewish immigrants to Palestine, all of whom spoke fluent German.
They had volunteered and were prepared to masquerade in German uniform, knowing full well the risks they ran if caught.
To make sure that their knowledge of enemy military procedure was correct and up to date, Buck had also recruited a couple of Afrika Korps men who had been taken prisoner.
In early March the SIG moved to Kabrit and were put through a hard training programme to fit them to operate in the desert alongside the SAS.
In May 1942, the Eighth Army was dug in along the Gazala line on the defensive.
Churchill had been egging Auchinleck on to attack, and so relieve the pressure on the beleaguered island of Malta which was threatened with starvation unless convoys could get through.
The further west Allied aircraft could be stationed, the easier it would be for them to protect the sea lanes which were vulnerable to enemy air power based in Sicily and Crete.
Malta was the key to the Mediterranean and the only hindrance to Rommel's supply lines which stretched back to Italy.
If the island fell the Germans would have a free hand throughout the area.
Auchinleck claimed that he was not ready to attack, but was ordered by Churchill to do so, to coincide with the running of two convoys to Malta in the moonless period in June.
One was to start from Alexandria and the other from Gibraltar.
Headquarters was fully aware of the need to provide as much protection as possible and Stirling submitted a plan to mount a whole series of raids on airfields on the night of 13 June, mainly making use of the Free French who were longing to get to grips with the enemy.
Only a few stalwarts of the original L Detachment were included, together with Stirling himself and Paddy Mayne.
A subsidiary raid on Crete was to be carried out by Commandant Bergé, Lord Jellicoe and three Free French NCOs.
The various groups who were to carry out raids along the North African coast gathered at Siwa at the beginning of June, aiming to leave for their targets between the 6th and the 8th of the month escorted by LRDG patrols.
Stirling, Mayne, Lieutenant Zirnheld and a Free French group left with Robin Gurdon for their familiar base in the Jebel mountains overlooking Benghazi.
Stirling was accompanied by Seekings and Cooper as usual, and planned to drive to his target in the ‘Blitz Buggy’.
Unfortunately this was damaged on the way when they ran over a mine and had to be abandoned.
As it happened, on 2 June the following was issued by MEHQ: ‘It has been decided that Major Stirling, L Detachment S.A.S. Brigade, will not take part in active operations with his unit until further notice.
The reason for this decision is to enable Major Stirling to train other officers who will be available to take his place should he become a casualty.’
Yet the same day another signal stated, ‘This letter is cancelled.’
Paddy Mayne had Lilley, Warburton and Storey with him.
The three raiding parties laid up in the mountains during the day to observe their targets and descended on to the coastal plain as darkness fell.
Stirling, Cooper and Seekings headed for Benina which they knew from past  experience was a major repair base.
They got on to the field without difficulty in the middle of a bombing raid by the RAF on Benghazi, and sat there while their leader gave them a lecture on deer-stalking in the Highlands.
There was no reason for not talking, and the two young soldiers listened to the tall quietly spoken officer as he explained the skills of silent movement.
Once the commotion had died down, he told them to break the time pencils and get to work.
They placed bombs on two isolated aircraft and then headed for the hangars where they expected to find some worthwhile booty.
Creeping around from hangar to hangar and dodging patrolling sentries they successfully ensured the destruction of several more aircraft, brand-new crated engines and machinery.
As a final gesture they came upon the guardroom.
Stirling kicked open the door and threw in a grenade, apparently saying ‘Here, catch.’
As the bombs in the hangars started to go off they beat a hasty retreat across the field.
Scrambling up the escarpment leading into the mountain ridge of the Jebel, David was forced to call a halt, saying that he was feeling unwell.
The three of them sat down and watched the fantastic firework display on the airfield that they had caused.
The ammunition in the burning aircraft went off, weaving patterns of coloured tracer against the massive fires caused by burning fuel stores.
Then the anti-aircraft guns opened up, firing into the air against an imagined air raid.
Tiny figures in the distance, silhouetted against the flames, rushed about trying to extinguish the blazing hangars.
Johnny Cooper thought it almost impossible that three men carrying only sixty small bombs between them had created such havoc and destruction.
It was at this stage that Reg and I realised that David Stirling was suffering from one of his frequent migraine attacks….
Reg and I each took one of his hands and we led him, staggering and half blind, to the top of the ridge.
There we crawled into a well camouflaged position and Reg managed to find a disused well which was covered by a wooden lid with metal hinges.
Reg tore this apart and produced wonderful cool refreshing water which revived us all.
Back at the rendezvous Stirling felt better after the usual tea laced with rum and was pleased that at last his team had managed to destroy some aircraft.
Paddy Mayne, however, had not had such good luck.
He had headed for Berka Satellite field, whose commandant had obviously taken the lesson of previous raids to heart.
As they headed for the first  aircraft they were fired on by a sentry.
Then others opened up and a miniature battle ensued.
Mayne and his group crept away, leaving the guards to fight it out between themselves.
By then Stirling's bombs had started to go off and Zirnheld was involved in a battle on the nearby Berka Main aerodrome.
All this activity alerted the Germans and they sent out patrols to locate the SAS.
Mayne's party spent the rest of the night dodging the enemy and, as dawn broke, they discovered that they were in the middle of a large military camp.
They split up and simply walked through in broad daylight.
All of them made it back to the rendezvous where they also met up with Zirnheld's group who had managed to account for eleven aircraft.
What happened next was a classic example of foolhardy daring which very nearly came badly unstuck.
When together, Stirling and Mayne had an urge to compete; now the former started to rag the latter about his success.
They decided to drive down to view the destruction and shoot up anything worthwhile along the road to Benghazi.
The transport problem was solved by the silver-tongued Stirling who persuaded Robin Gurdon to lend him one of the LRDG Chevrolets, swearing that it would be returned intact.
Mayne drove with Stirling beside him in the passenger seat.
Crammed in the back were Cooper, Seekings, Lilley, Storey and Karl Kahane.
The latter was one of Captain Buck's SIG men, a Palestinian Jew who had served for several years in the German army.
His job was to talk them through any roadblocks.
At nightfall they set off down the escarpment and in holiday mood were soon bowling merrily along the coast road.
Just as they got to Benina airfield, Lilley shouted out that there was trouble ahead — a sting of red lights across the road.
They came to a halt at a barrier, assuming it was manned by a few nervous Italians.
The reality was a group of at least a dozen efficient-looking Germans armed with machine pistols.
An NCO clutching a grenade marched up to the barrier and Kahane told him that they were coming back from the front and were in a hurry.
In the back, the rest of the group clutched their tommy-guns and eased pins out of grenades.
The German NCO demanded the password.
Kahane gave him the one for the previous month, explaining that they had been out in the desert for six weeks.
He even embellished the story in a flood of fluent German, explaining that they had captured the British truck and had had a hard time of it at the front.
Then, just as the sentry was starting to relax, Mayne cocked his Colt .45 automatic.
This was followed by a series of similar clicks from the back.
The sentry, faced with the prospect of instant death, ordered  the barrier to be opened, and the Chevrolet drove through.
A few miles further down the road they came on a group of Italians with rifles waving at them to stop, obviously having been alerted by the German post.
Mayne put his foot down and Seekings dispersed the enemy with a burst from the Vickers machine gun in the back.
It was clear that they were in a trap but still they went on until they reached a roadside filling station and café.
Men leaped from the back and swiftly placed bombs among the enemy transport parked there.
Then as they roared away they machine-gunned the buildings.
Lights were already showing back down the road along which they had come, and in the distance there was the sound of shots being fired.
It was time to depart.
They decided to cut across the coastal plain and head for a wadi that would provide a route back to the top of the escarpment.
Driving fast, their truck jolted and lurched over the uneven desert towards safety.
Dodging a motorized patrol sent out to cut them off, they made the crossing point and, as dawn broke, managed to shove and coax the truck up the steep track.
Just as they reached the top and comparative safety, Lilley yelled for everyone to bale out.
He had smelt burning and realized that the time pencil in one of their bombs had activated.
They had twenty seconds.
Johnny Cooper still has vivid memories of that frightening moment.
‘I have never left a vehicle more quickly in my life.
I flew over Paddy's shoulders, bounced off the bonnet and rushed away like a madman.
The explosion, seconds later, bowled us all over.
The truck was blown to kingdom come.
Miraculously nobody was hurt.
Once again, Allah had been generous.’
It was said afterwards that the remains of the truck could have been packed into a kitbag.
Somewhat bruised, the raiding party made their way back to their rendezvous on foot, with David Stirling wondering how he was going to explain away the loss of the truck.
They set off for Siwa, arriving on 21 June only to discover that the LRDG was in the process of abandoning the place.
Tobruk had fallen and Rommel's troops were surging towards Egypt.
The Eighth Army had suffered a crushing defeat and was digging in along the Alamein line, only sixty miles to the west of the Nile.
At Siwa they met up with Lieutenant Jaquier, one of the Free French, and his patrol, who had managed to blow up ammunition dumps at Barce, and a solitary Lieutenant Jordan accompanied by Captain Buck.
Their party had set off to raid the Derna and Martuba airfields in a convoy of four German vehicles driven by SIG men with the French hidden in the back under tarpaulins.
They got to their target area  without any great difficulty, the false ‘Germans’ being apparently accepted at checkpoints.
On the night of the attack, Jordan and Corporal Bourmont each with four men set off to raid the two airfields at Derna.
They travelled in a truck driven by a German called Brueckner, one of the ex-Afrika Korps men, who was accompanied by two of the Palestinian Jews.
Once on the first aerodrome, Brueckner stopped and made some excuse about engine problems, saying that he had to try to get a key for the toolbox.
He went off and shortly afterwards the truck was surrounded by German troops.
It was clear to Jordan that they had been betrayed.
He was grabbed by one of the enemy as he looked out to see what was happening, and then one of his men threw a grenade.
As it exploded, Jordan managed to free himself and escape.
He reached the rendezvous safely where he met up with Captain Buck.
Realizing the extent of the betrayal, it was clear to both of them that they could not hang around so close to the target area hoping for survivors.
Both men left hurriedly for their meeting place with the LRDG where they waited in vain for a week for stragglers to come in.
Jordan later discovered that two of his party had managed to get away and had made for the rendezvous point which the group aiming for Martuba was to use.
This too had been given away by Brueckner and was surrounded by a German patrol.
Bergé and Jellicoe had mixed fortunes on their expedition to Crete.
Their party consisted of three French soldiers, a Greek guide and another young Greek who had volunteered.
A submarine took them to the island and the party made a successful landing in rubber boats.
After an arduous approach march they reached Heraklion airfield, but found that it was well guarded.
While trying to get through the perimeter they were discovered by a German patrol, but in a flash of pure genius, one of the Frenchmen feigned a drunken snore.
The patrol marched on and the raiders slipped on to the airfield where they managed to place bombs on the twenty-one aircraft, some vehicles and a fuel dump.
At dawn they were well hidden in a cave and the following night they were able to march to within a few miles of the beach where they were to be picked up.
The next day, Jellicoe and the guide went off to a nearby village, arranging to meet Bergé and his men on the beach.
As the Frenchmen left their hiding place to head down to the shore they ran into several German patrols and, after giving a good account of themselves, were captured when they ran out of ammunition.
Lord Jellicoe and the guide made a successful rendezvous with the submarine and returned safely to Alexandria.
Stirling sent his men from Siwa back to Kabrit and he himself made for Cairo, where he arrived in the midst of what became known as ‘The Flap’.
The air was full of the smell of burning documents, and in some quarters there was talk that the Germans would be on the Nile within a matter of days.
Based at his brother's flat as usual, Stirling launched himself into a feverish round of activity.
He realized that Rommel's lines of communication had become so stretched that they would be even more vulnerable to attack, and every man detached to guard them would be one less to face the Eighth Army at Alamein.
The Luftwaffe was in possession of the former RAF forward airfields in the Mersa Matruh and Fuka area.
It was agreed that the SAS would carry out a series of raids on these airfields in early July, leaving only a week to prepare for departure.
Yet in spite of the rush, all the officers found time to attend the wedding of their engineer, the cheerful Bill Cumper.
The beginning of July 1942 marked a radical change in the operational style of the SAS.
Previously the policy had been to raid during the moonless period of each month, transported by the LRDG and returning to base in between to reorganize.
David Stirling felt that this was a waste of time and resources and that it should be possible for a large group to maintain itself in the desert for a period of several weeks.
His idea was to set up a self-contained base inland from the coastal plain from which they could raid on an almost nightly basis.
To do this, however, they would need their own transport.
During his week in Cairo he managed to lay his hands on a number of newly arrived jeeps, known at the time as Willy's Bantams, and some 3-ton Ford trucks.
He also managed to secure the transfer of Mike Sadler from the LRDG to act as chief navigator.
L Detachment at the time consisted of around one hundred men, most of whom had been through the basic training course.
Stirling reasoned that if the Germans did continue their attack and captured Cairo, the whole unit could retreat south from its desert base, thus avoiding capture.
Everyone worked with a will to equip the expedition and load up with enough food, petrol, water and ammunition for three to four weeks in the field.
The fitters laboured to modify the jeeps for desert travel and to a completely novel specification.
In its final version, the SAS jeep must surely have been the most cost-effective fighting vehicle ever developed.
The basic armament consisted of twin Vickers K machine guns mounted front and rear.
Some versions substituted for the front pair a .5 Browning heavy machine gun, and some jeeps had a single Vickers fitted  in such a way that the driver could operate it.
A water condenser was fitted to the front of the radiator, an extra fuel tank was added and the suspension strengthened.
The entire vehicle was festooned with a bewildering array of kit.
Steel sand channels for getting out of soft ground, water containers, jerrycans, spare drums of Vickers ammunition, camouflage nets and the crew's personal kit and weapons had to be stowed.
Normally three men travelled in the jeep although it was more comfortable with only two.
The jeep's firepower was quite staggering, as the Vickers had a rate of fire of over 1,000 rounds per minute.
The ammunition drums were loaded with a mixture of incendiary, explosive and tracer rounds, which proved to be a lethal cocktail when used against aircraft and road transport.
The convoy of thirty-five heavily laden vehicles left Kabrit on 3 July and drove to Cairo.
For the first time they had a doctor with them, Malcolm Pleydell, who had been posted to L Detachment and had completed his parachute training.
His book, written in 1945 when memories were fresh, gives some wonderful descriptions of life with the SAS.
He said that the departure from Kabrit was a delightfully vague affair with nobody really having any clear idea of how long they were going to be away for, and not giving two hoots anyway.
‘The men were going to see some action, or ‘have some fun’ as they put it, and that was quite enough to render them light-hearted and care-free.’
He went on to describe the drivers swearing as they got snarled up in the midday Cairo traffic.
The men were in great form, however, singing and shouting; and you could not help laughing as you watched them remove certain attractive articles from the stalls of the street vendors.
For you would see the jeep in front of you proceeding along the Egyptian highway in a very dignified manner, when all of a sudden it would swing in to the side of the road near a fruit-barrow, a large brown hand would shoot out, and a succulent water-melon would disappear as the jeep accelerated away again.
The whole convoy parked in the side streets near Peter Stirling's flat where they were to meet their leader.
The place was in its usual chaotic state with people coming and going, discussing racing form or poring over maps.
Outside the men whiled away the time brewing tea on the pavement.
They then drove north to Alexandria for a final briefing at Eighth Army Headquarters, with the Germans only forty miles away.
Stirling was told that the army was about to launch an attack and that the destruction of aircraft on the forward landing fields was vital.
It was also arranged that he would be given accurate intelligence by radio on a regular basis.
To get to their proposed operational area the convoy had to take a difficult route.
The so-called Alamein position ran from the sea southwards to the edge of the Qattara Depression, a deep chasm 150 miles long and with very steep sides.
Robin Gurdon, who met them at army headquarters, was to guide the party through the southernmost part of the British lines as they hoped that by skirting the edge of the depression, they would avoid any main concentrations of German troops.
The first problem occurred when they left the road and moved off into the open desert.
The sand proved so soft that the overloaded lorries repeatedly bogged down.
Sadly, Stirling gave orders for much of the equipment to be off loaded and sent back to Kabrit.
After that they made better progress and managed to slip undetected out into the emptiness.
Three days after leaving Alexandria the whole column met up with Timpson's LRDG patrol, which was waiting for them.
They parked the vehicles and camouflaged themselves for the night, before settling down to cook.
Then Stirling called everyone together to explain his plans.
He intended to carry out six raids the following night, to coincide with the proposed Eighth Army offensive.
Four patrols would head for the coast between  Bagush and Fuka, led by Stirling and Mayne.
Jellicoe and Zirnheld were to go to El Daba, and the sixth group led by Captains Warr and Schott would aim for Sidi Barrani.
The last two officers were both parachute instructors and were on their first operation.
Each party would be accompanied by an experienced LRDG officer to act as guide to the target area.
The next day the whole unit moved to a forward rendezvous point about sixty miles inland from the coast.
From there the various groups would split up and make their way individually.
The largest section under David Stirling, who had with him the repaired ‘Blitz Buggy’, headed for the escarpment above Fuka.
There he proposed to leave a radio truck for communications with the rear.
They drove through the dreadful remains of a recent battle, the desert littered with burned-out vehicles and smashed equipment.
Then to David Stirling's fury they saw a convoy of light armoured vehicles moving across their line of advance.
It appeared to be British and was probably one of the highly mobile units known as Jock’ columns which were used to carry out harassing attacks  on the German flanks.
Stirling had not been told that such a unit was operating in the target area, despite the fact that its presence might stir up the enemy.
Once on the escarpment, a message was received that the El Daba airfield was not being used, so Stirling redirected Jellicoe and Zirnheld to strafe the road instead.
Stirling and Mayne then separated from the others.
They were only about forty miles behind the German lines and were thus much closer to the front line than was usual on their operations.
Accounts differ as to who was present and how many vehicles they had, so what follows is an approximation of what actually happened.
They travelled in three or four vehicles, Stirling in the ‘Blitz Buggy’ and Paddy Mayne's crew in one or two jeeps.
In Virginia Cowles' account they also had a 3-tonner with supplies and extra men inside.
Once down on the road they headed for Bagoush, which ironically was the airfield from which they had taken off for their first disastrous operation the previous year.
According to Cowles, the plan was that Stirling and his crew would set up an ambush on the road, which intelligence had informed him was being used by a stream of enemy traffic.
Mayne's party was to attack the airfield on foot.
Two large boulders were rolled on to the road and they sat down to wait, guns at the ready.
Not a single vehicle passed, but after some time they heard the roar of bombs going off at the airfield.
That was music to their ears as they counted up to twenty-two explosions.
The flames lit up the skyline but there was no sign of Mayne.
When he did appear through the darkness, he was in a foul mood, and told them that several bombs had failed to explode.
Johnny Cooper on the other hand, says that they drove straight on to the airfield.
What is not in dispute is that a new method of attack was discovered that night.
Like warships firing broadsides, the ‘Blitz Buggy’ and the jeeps roared over the airfield blazing away with their twin Vickers K guns.
Several more aircraft were set ablaze, and as they drove back on to the road without a shot having been fired against them, Stirling and Mayne were cock-a-hoop.
On the way back to the rendezvous the next morning, however, they suffered a sad loss.
They were spotted by two Italian CR 42 aircraft which came into attack and managed to destroy the ‘Blitz Buggy’.
Clinging to Mayne's jeep the men made their way safely back to camp.
The other parties had met with mixed success and it was obvious that the enemy were mounting far stronger guards on their airfields.
Jordan  managed to destroy eight aircraft, but Fraser was forced to abandon his attack.
Zirnheld succeeded in placing bombs on a few trucks, while Jellicoe sat beside the road and saw nothing.
The last to come back were Schott and Warr who had had the greatest distance to travel.
They had been guided down to Sidi Barrani by Lieutenant Timpson of the LRDG.
Captain Schott's report of the trip, originally classified ‘Most Secret’, is one of the few after-action reports to have survived from the SAS in the North African campaign.
The following quotations illustrate some of the frustrations and misunderstandings that could hamper the best-laid plans.
The attack on the airfields was carried out as ordered on the night of 12/13 July.
Capt. P. E. Warr in charge of one party, consisting of Sgt. Almonds, Priv.
Meyer, Priv.
Ridler — objective L.G. [landing ground]05; and myself [Schott]with party consisting of Sgt. Brough, Corp.
White, Corp.
Baird, Priv.
Thompson — objective L.G. 121.
We were to be dropped by L.R.D.G. approx. four miles from our objective at 23.50 hours on night 11 July 1942.
Unfortunately owing to errors on maps, Warr's party found themselves some ten miles from the target and myself only two to three miles away.
We had some two hours sleep that night, then proceeded to align our position before first light.
Capt. Warr found an excellent observation post, but our party was not so successful.
We came across an enemy patrol with a L.M.G. [light machine gun]and a dog, before we could reach a point to observe the landing ground.
Owing to this unfortunate meeting and our certainty of being observed, we decided to take up an all-round defensive position and fight it out when a recce. party arrived.
They lay up all the following day, expecting to be attacked at any moment, but no enemy showed up.
Aircraft landing at LG 05 were seen and a recce of LG 121 confirmed that it was only used as a decoy at night.
Captain Schott's party was picked up by Timpson on the night of 13 July, but Warr's failed to arrive.
The following night a recce. party went out to see if Capt. Warr had arrived.
He had not.
In the meantime, Timpson and myself had planned to strafe the road at Bug Bug on the night 15/16 July.
We set out to carry this out and passed through our old rendezvous on route.
There we found Capt. Warr and party, all very tired and  fatigued owing to lack of food and water for four days.
We set out the same night for Bug Bug, but failed to make our objective owing to the bad nature of the ground for the vehicles.
We all returned to the RV and spent next day servicing vehicles etc….
All information re.
enemy transport aircraft was wirelessed back to L.R.D.G. headquarters.
Timpson then went off to strafe the road, leaving Schott with his men, a 3-tonner and a broken-down jeep.
The following day they saw a column of vehicles approaching from the wrong direction to that from which Timpson should have appeared.
Schott decided to make a break for the main rendezvous point with Stirling, and set off in the 3-tonner with his men.
On the way they were strafed unsuccessfully by a Messerschmitt 110.
It was only later that they discovered that the mysterious column, which in the heat haze had looked like twenty-five Lancia trucks, had in fact been Timpson's patrol.
Back at the desert base, David Stirling had earlier been busy on the radio, signalling the deputy director of operations on 10 July regarding jeeps.
Experience in present operation shows potentialities of twin mounted Bantams at night to be so tremendous to justify immediate allocation of minimum fifty Bantams to L repeat L Detachment for modification to be effected immediately on my return.
Fear owing to miscarriage of plan, only forty aircraft and some transport destroyed to date.
This was followed on 13 July by another, similar in vein except that the demand was somewhat scaled down.
IMMEDIATE.
Willys Bantams great success.
Most urgent that twenty five exactly same type be despatched for modification to fix mounts for twin Vickers guns and sun compass.
All gun mountings must be welded, not brazed.
We will require six new Ford three tonners, proportionate desert equipment to look after increased scale of operations.
Withdrawing force from operations to collect Bantams and three tonners 16th.
Operationally vital.
We return here with smallest delay.
Underlying his pleasure at the success of the new methods and the way in which the jeeps had proved their worth, was Stirling's anger at the lack of intelligence received from the Eighth Army.
First there had  been the matter of the ‘Jock’ column.
Then there was the news that El Daba airfield was not being used, though Jellicoe had brought back a couple of German prisoners who freely volunteered the information that this was the most important of their forward airfields.
Stirling sent a blistering series of signals to both the Eighth Army and MEHQ which seem to have had some effect.
On 17 July, Lieutenant-General Corbett, who had replaced General Smith as Chief-of-Staff, signalled the Eighth Army:
1.
The first verbal report of Major Stirling on his recent operations shows that they have been imperfectly connected with other operations of Eighth Army.
First, his plan for the destruction of the bulk of the German airforce was frustrated through his being ordered not to go to Daba or Fuka, when his parties were within striking distance.
Secondly, he states that he was never told that there were indications of German intentions to occupy Siwa and Giarabub.
An omission which might have and may still cost him serious casualties to personnel north of the Qattara depression.
2.
It is considered that his present and future operations should be more carefully coordinated and controlled both in planning and in operations by H.O.
Eighth Army with whom he should have a direct point to point wireless link.
He has been given instructions to this effect.
To be fair, the Eighth Army was in a state of some confusion and was having to plan the defence of the Nile Delta.
The concerns of a small group of desert raiders probably came very low in the order of priorities at the time.
The whole affair, however, was symptomatic of the consistent refusal of planning staffs to understand or even try to appreciate the potential of the SAS, encamped within easy striking distance of the enemy's lines of communication.
Stirling, while battling with distant headquarters, was also busy setting up his next series of raids, designed to rectify the omission of Fuka and El Daba.
Five parties set out on the night of 11 July, led by Martin, Jellicoe, Jordan, Fraser and Mayne.
The bag was a meagre one.
Stiffened defences beat off several parties and only Mayne and Jordan managed to destroy any aircraft — twenty-two between them.
Fraser, trying to emulate the success of the jeep raid, managed to drive into a trench, which alerted the enemy defences.
They fired away with wild abandon, but luckily with little accuracy, and he was able to extricate  himself.
A tragic loss was the death of Robin Gurdon who had been out with Zirnheld and Martin's Free Frenchmen.
In an air attack on the way back he had been killed while firing away at the fighters who were strafing his truck.
After two weeks out in the desert it was time to take stock.
Owing to the forced abandonment of supplies on the way out, food and ammunition supplies were running low.
Stirling thus decided to abandon operations for a while and send a strong party back to base to collect stores and the new vehicles he had requested.
There were no aircraft available for air drops at that stage of the war in the desert, which was a pity when one bears in mind that only two years later SAS parties operated in France for anything up to two months behind enemy lines, totally reliant on parachuted stores.
The Germans had closed off the route to the north of the Qattara Depression which the convoy had taken on their outward trip, so they were forced to make a risky and difficult passage through the bottom of the Depression itself, which consisted of salt marsh.
This had a solid crust generally capable only of bearing the weight of a man, but the LRDG had successfully worked out a route for vehicles.
Stirling and Jellicoe went on ahead in jeeps, leaving Mayne and Scratchley to follow with the 3-tonners.
It was a nightmare of a trip, the trucks constantly breaking through the crust and having to be dug out.
During the day the heat at the bottom of the vast bowl was the most intense any of them had ever experienced, but the whole convoy made it back to the Delta.
The turn-round in Kabrit was a rapid one.
Seekings had been left behind to supervise the equipping of the new vehicles, and by dint of bullying and gentle persuasion, had managed to get them ready for service.
Eight days after leaving, the new convoy was back at the desert rendezvous, much to the relief of those who had been chosen to stay behind.
They were beginning to run short of food and water, but had not been disturbed by the enemy.
Their only foe had been the usual plague of flies who had to be slaughtered on a regular basis.
Otherwise the men had passed the time reading and keeping an eye out for aircraft.
Stirling, who arrived back bearing gifts of tobacco and rum, had made a lightning tour of headquarters, complaining of his treatment by the Eighth Army, and had managed to extract promises of greater cooperation in future.
As will be seen, this proved to be illusory.
He was, however, full of enthusiasm for the resumption of operations as soon as possible and had come up with a new idea.
It had been discovered that the airfield at Sidi Haneish, near Fuka, was in constant use and full of  aircraft.
The following night the moon would be full and he planned to take a force of eighteen jeeps directly on to the airfield in two columns and shoot up anything they found.
A subsidiary raid would be carried out on Bagoush airfield to create as much of a diversion as possible.
Having seen the effect of jeep fire-power during the earlier raid, Stirling was convinced that such a massed attack would achieve spectacular results.
He outlined his plans and, with only a day to prepare, the camp erupted into activity.
The two column leaders were to be George Jellicoe and Paddy Mayne, each with seven jeeps behind them.
Mike Sadler as navigator would travel in the centre and the whole formation would be led by Stirling himself.
His job would be to identify targets and signal them to the formations by firing coloured Very lights.
The columns would be about forty yards apart and would fire outwards.
The night before the raid, Stirling decided on a practice run.
In the middle of the desert miles behind enemy lines, the columns of jeeps drove around in the darkness concentrating on holding formation.
In the front in Stirling's jeep, Johnny Cooper fired off the Very lights, causing the whole formation to wheel right or left, and then they opened fire.
The noise was certainly deafening as the coloured tracer spewed out into the darkness.
The drivers had the hardest job, concentrating on holding their positions and keeping out of the way of the front and rear gunners.
The jeep force set off in the late afternoon of 26 July, with about forty miles to cover to the coastal plain.
They travelled in open formation, picking their way around obstacles and frequently having to stop to mend punctures.
After about four and a half hours of driving, Sadler calculated that they were one mile away from the target, although there was absolutely nothing to see.
Stirling ordered the crews to take up formation and, bumping over the rough ground in the moonlight, they headed for the airfield.
Then suddenly the whole scene was illuminated as the runway lights were switched on.
Above them they heard the drone of engines as a German bomber swept in to land.
They had not been spotted after all.
Without a moment's hesitation Stirling's jeep headed for the runway, the fighting formation behind him.
The guns opened up with a deafening roar, and immediately the lights were switched off.
That did not matter for soon burning aircraft lit the scene as though it were daylight.
On down between the lines of parked aircraft they went, like Nelson's battleships at Trafalgar, firing broadsides to left and right.
The enemy opened up with machine guns, but the glare of fires made it difficult for them to aim accurately.
Stirling's jeep was hit and came to a  stop.
Cooper leaped out and opened the bonnet, to discover that a round had penetrated the cylinder block.
Sandy Scratchley's jeep came past and picked them up.
His rear gunner lay sprawled dead in the back.
In the midst of all this, Stirling calmly called a halt so that he could give orders for further targets.
Then they were off again wheeling around the perimeter shooting up buildings and yet more aircraft.
As they finally drove away from the scene, Paddy Mayne was observed to jump out of his jeep, run across to a parked aircraft and place a bomb on the wing.
Once off the airfield, Stirling gave orders for the jeeps to split up and make for the rendezvous separately, as he was sure that the following morning the sky would be full of angry German fighters out looking for them.
Casualties amounted to one man killed, a few flesh wounds and two jeeps destroyed.
The SAS claimed forty aircraft, many of them Junkers 52 transporters which Rommel relied on for bringing up supplies.
The raid had been a triumphant vindication of Stirling's theory that his unit could operate regardless of the phase of the moon and could get on to heavily defended targets.
His only real criticism was directed at the wastage of ammunition; he felt that some of the gunners had simply blazed away instead of taking precise aim at a target.
A few of the jeeps had run out of ammunition before the raid had finished, which was hardly surprising considering the high rate of fire of the Vickers K guns.
The various crews all made it back to the base camp without difficulty, but they learned that Zirnheld had been killed.
Returning from the raid, the three jeeps of the Free French party had been attacked by Stukas.
All three vehicles continued to function but young André Zirnheld had been hit twice.
He was buried in the desert by his friend and comrade, Martin, who found the following prayer which Zirnheld had written among his possessions.
It is given in translation here as a tribute to a brave man who fought under British leadership for the freedom of his country.
I bring this prayer to you, Lord,
For you alone can give
What one cannot demand but from oneself.
Give me, Lord, what you have left over,
Give me what no one ever asks you for.
I don't ask you for rest,
Or quiet,
Whether of soul or of body;
I don't ask for wealth,
Nor for success, not even for health perhaps.
That sort of thing you get asked for so much
That you can't have any of it left.
Give me, Lord, what you have left over,
Give me what no one wants from you.
I want insecurity, anxiety,
I want storm and strife,
And I want you to give me these
Once and for all.
So that I can be sure of having them always,
Since I shall not always have the courage
To ask you for them.
Give me, Lord, what you have left over,
Give me what the others want nothing to do with.
But give me courage too,
And strength and faith;
For you alone can give
What one cannot demand but from oneself.
Back at base, Stirling had every intention of staying out in the desert and carrying on his raiding operations.
Immediate plans were for four parties to leave for the area directly behind the German lines in jeeps, to attack supply dumps and soft-skinned transport.
On 31 July, he again signalled his frustrations about lack of support from the Eighth Army to the Deputy Director of Operations: ‘As impossible function more than 20% of capacity under existing arrangement with army, I suggest that L detachment comes under temporary R.A.F. control.
…LG.64 confirmed suitable.
Effect landing operation night 4/5.’
Experience had taught Stirling that the RAF were generally much more co-operative about supplying him with reliable intelligence.
Even so it is quite a rarity for the commander of an army formation voluntarily to suggest coming under the command of the RAF.
The latter part of the above signal refers to a plan that Stirling had concocted with the RAF during his last brief visit to Cairo.
This was to use his old friends of 216 Squadron to resupply his force by landing their Bombays in the desert.
There is a lengthy signal in existence from the officer commanding the LRDG to Brigadier Davey at MEHQ which clearly illustrates the  difficulties of communication and the clash of competencies.
As we have seen, the SAS came under the orders of the Commander-in-Chief, but were attached to the Eighth Army for immediate operational control.
Requirements for aircraft had to be dealt with by the Air Officer Commanding Western Desert, and all David Stirling's communications had to be routed via the LRDG, who ended up as piggy in the middle.
The signal is dated 1 August 1942 and states that a stream of messages had been coming in from Stirling in the desert regarding the shipment of supplies by Bombays for delivery on 4 August.
As these messages were ‘not always entirely clear’, they were summarized.
On 30 July Stirling signalled the AOC Western Desert requesting three Bombays to proceed to one of two possible landing grounds on the night of 4 August.
He stated that the loading list would follow.
This was received, but was addressed to Warr at Kabrit via the operations branch at MEHQ.
In case it had become corrupted in transmission, it was repeated.
It included the following, and the list provides an indication of requirements after a lengthy period in the desert: 400 gallons of petrol, rations, 2 tow chains, 2 tins of Lockheed brake fluid, 8 jeep spare wheels and tyres, 200 1 lb. plastic bombs and fuses, beer, cigarettes, rum and 2 crates of lime powder.
The list was a lengthy one.
The summary goes on to say that Stirling had asked the Eighth Army for thirty more jeeps that had already been ordered.
Then a signal for Stirling from Tactical HQ, Eighth Army, said that the RAF component there was unaware of the resupply operation, but that they would endeavour to arrange the aircraft.
The final message in the saga reads:
1230 hours, 01.8.
Stirling to Tac.
Army.
Supply landing operation already laid on to last detail with Mid.
East before departure.
Only initiation of operation to have come from Eighth Army.
Feasibility dependent on recce. by R.A.F. officer accompanying me who has decided L.G. [Landing Ground]to be O.K. Will make further arrangements direct with R.A.F. as Eighth Army by error apparently not informed.
But then the blow fell.
Stirling was told that a new operation was being planned and that he must bring his entire force back to base.
The Bombays would fly in, carrying only enough petrol to enable the vehicles to be driven back to Kabrit, while the bulk of the men would return in the aircraft.
Stirling was naturally furious as he had no idea what was in the pipeline.
He protested, but MEHQ was adamant.
There were major  changes afoot in the nature of the war in the Middle East and, like it or not, the SAS was going to be placed under far firmer control.
The four patrols planned by Stirling were sent out, but only for four days.
When they returned, they discovered that the main body of men had already flown out and that a party of drivers under Scratchley was waiting for them to join the vehicle convoy south through the Great Sand Sea.
Last Days in North Africa
On 30 July 1942, the Prime Minister arrived in Cairo with the Chief of the Imperial General Staff, Sir Alan Brooke.
Auchinleck's attacks against the German and Italian positions along the Alamein line had petered out, and Churchill determined on a change of command in the Middle East.
Auchinleck departed for India, to be replaced by General Alexander.
Montgomery was appointed to command the Eighth Army.
Thus the offensive, in support of which the last series of raids by the SAS had been carried out, was a failure.
Stirling arrived back in Cairo feeling depressed.
He had proved that he could maintain his force in the desert over a considerable length of time, which by air supply could easily be extended.
Yet inefficiency in the command structure had hampered his efforts to keep up the pressure on Rommel's supply lines, and in being ordered to return to base, he felt the grip of official interference.
It is easy to understand and sympathize with his predicament, but he was only a major commanding a very small force.
Jealous eyes were still being cast on the SAS, and various staff departments were determined to bring its activities under far stricter control.
When Stirling found out about the plan in which his unit was to be involved, he was even more furious.
He discovered that he was being hoist with his own petard.
After his two trips into Benghazi, he had submitted proposals for a further expedition to destroy once and for all the harbour facilities.
One of his ideas had been to take a small naval party with him who would attempt to scuttle a ship in the harbour mouth.
He had discussed this with a certain Colonel Hazelden who had been operating as an agent in the Tobruk area.
It would seem that it was Hazelden who sold to the planners at MEHQ the idea of delivering a  final knock-out blow to the two main German supply ports, Tobruk and Benghazi.
This fitted in with the general view that the Eighth Army could hold Rommel at El Alamein but would not be ready to attack before November.
Comparatively large ‘irregular forces’ were earmarked to carry out the raids, which would be commanded by Hazelden for Tobruk and Stirling for Benghazi.
Two subsidiary actions were to be included.
The LRDG would raid Barce airfield as a diversion and the British-led Sudan Defence Force would be used to retake Jalo Oasis to secure a more favourable return route for the raiding parties.
The SAS was to be augmented by a number of men from 1 Special Service Regiment, who were untrained in desert raiding, and also by a naval party and even two tanks.
Such an unwieldy force consisting of some 200 men was to travel to the target area in 40 jeeps accompanied by another 40 3-ton lorries carrying supplies.
The entire plan violated every principle upon which the SAS had been founded, yet Stirling agreed to go along with it.
When asked why, he replied, ‘I was bribed.’
The offer from the planners was that his unit would be expanded and that he would afterwards be given a free hand to harry the German supply lines all along the coast.
The Benghazi raid will be discussed in some detail later.
First though, while in Cairo, Stirling met some illustrious company.
Both he and Fitzroy Maclean were bidden to dine with the Prime Minister at the British Embassy on 8 August.
Among those present were the Ambassador, Sir Miles Lampson, the veteran South African politician, General Smuts, the new Commander-in-Chief, General Alexander, and Sir Alan Brooke.
Why Stirling and Maclean were invited remains a bit of a mystery, but it is probable that Randolph had mentioned them to his father.
After the meal, Stirling had a private conversation with the Prime Minister, and put forward his views about the future of his unit in strong terms.
He also spoke critically about the Benghazi raid, in spite of having been warned not to by an officer in the Operations branch.
Apparently they regarded Churchill as a poor security risk.
The following morning, Major Stirling received a note from Churchill's private secretary, which read:
I have been asked by my chief to ask you to let me have for him without further delay, the short note which he called ‘on what you would advise should be done to concentrate and coordinate the work  you are doing’.
I have been asked to make sure this is in my hands today.
Stirling replied under the heading Most Secret:
1.
I venture to submit the following proposals in connection with the reorganisation of the Special Service in the Middle East.
Special Service may be defined as an action ranging between but not including the work of the single agent on the one hand, and on the other, the full-scale combined operation.
The scope of L Detachment should be extended so as to cover the functions of all existing Special Service units existing [sic ]in the Middle East, as well as any other Special Service tasks which may require carrying out.
Arising out of this, that all other special service units be disbanded, and selected personnel be absorbed as required by L Detachment.
Control to rest with the officer commanding L Detachment and not with any outside body superimposed for the purpose of coordination, the need for which will not arise should effect be given to the present proposals….
The planning of operations to be carried out by L Detachment remains as hitherto the prerogative of L Detachment.
2.
I suggest that the proposed scheme would have the following advantages:
a.
Unified control to eliminate any danger of overlapping, for which there has already been one unfortunate instance.
b.
The allocation to L Detachment of specialists taken from Special Service units would greatly increase the scope of the units' training and thereby augment its value to men who inevitably gain versatility and resourcefulness.
c.
The planning of operations by those who are going to carry them out, obviates delay and misunderstandings which happen to be caused by intermediate stages, and makes for the speed of execution which in any operation of this kind is an incalculable asset.
It also has obvious advantages from the point of view of security.
It is not often that a major commanding such a small force gets the opportunity to present his views to the Prime Minister.
Indeed that evening he was once again invited to dine at the Embassy.
The  background to the document has to be sought in Stirling's fear that he might be absorbed into some top-heavy bureaucracy like Combined Operations or SOE.
That fear was a very real one and, in view of his connections at a high level, it is probable that he was aware of what was going on.
During July, the Chief of Staff at MEHQ wrote to Auchinleck regarding the future of 1 Special Service Regiment.
He defined the need for special forces in the area: first as troops for post-occupational duties in captured territories; second, as ‘small raiding parties of the thug variety, for which we have L Detachment S.A.S. Brigade and the Special Boat Section’; and finally as raiding parties on a larger scale which was the original purpose in retaining the old Middle East Commando.
The Chief of Staff continued by stating that he was convinced that with a short period of special training, an ordinary infantry battalion could be employed in the Commando role.
It was clear to him that 1 Special Service Regiment was unsuitable; the three operations it had carried out had all been unsuccessful.
He therefore suggested that it be disbanded, and that selected volunteers be allowed to join L Detachment and the SBS.
From Stirling's point of view this would have been quite satisfactory, but he smelt danger in the following proposals.
It was that a Special Forces Depot be formed at Kabrit, to be commanded by a lieutenant-colonel.
The latter would have overall administrative control and would be responsible to MEHQ for advising on technical and operational matters.
It was this sort of in-between authority that he could not tolerate as he felt that it would only increase the existing element of confusion.
If there had to be some sort of overall commander, he naturally felt that this should be himself.
During August, life at Kabrit was full of bustle.
New jeeps had to be modified for desert travel, a vast amount of stores had to be sorted out and the new recruits had to be given at least some elementary training.
The remaining original members of L Detachment formed the core of the unit, all by that time promoted to NCO rank, under Pat Riley, the sergeant-major.
Stirling himself flitted between Kabrit and Cairo, becoming increasingly worried about the size of the operation and the number of people who seemed to know about it.
He had a premonition that the enemy might be waiting for them.
To get to Benghazi, the convoy had to travel from Kabrit into Cairo and then head south to El Kharga and Kufra.
From there they would  skirt the south of the Great Sand Sea and cross it at its narrowest point at Zighen.
Then they would head due north, bypassing Italian-held Jalo, to the rendezvous point in the Jebel mountains.
This meant travelling 1,400 miles.
The actual mission was to storm into the harbour area, eliminate the garrison and destroy anything they found there.
The force, as finally assembled, consisted of 231 men, 45 jeeps and an unspecified number of 3-tonners, probably around 40.
The two tanks were from the 10th Hussars and their job was to force a way through any roadblocks.
The unit split up into three convoys for the long march to Kufra.
Paddy Mayne's convoy left first, followed by Sandy Scratchley's and finally the group led by Bill Cumper.
In the latter was the doctor, Malcolm Pleydell, travelling in a brand-new specially equipped medical jeep.
He has left the most graphic description of the Benghazi raid and of some of the personalities involved, including several pages on the trip to Kufra.
I can picture the convoy now: the little navigating jeep in front, the solid three-tonners rolling along steadily, and the jeeps scampering about at the back.
I can remember the long cloudless days when we drove for mile after mile over desert that stretched out around us as flatly as an unruffled sea; the way we would pull the throttle out so that the needle stood up straight at the figure forty, and then would laze back with our legs stretched out across the bonnet….
We were like a convoy of ships, save that our horizon was a trembling yellow band, and there was not even a wake to indicate our movement.
Travelling on that journey, however, was not always so idyllic.
They hit many patches of soft sand and wasted hours unloading vehicles, shoving them up to the top of dunes and reloading again.
The greatest joy was to make camp for the night and savour the smell from the cooks' fires as supper was prepared.
The three convoys arrived at Kufra to find the small oasis packed with men and vehicles, as the other raiding groups had also gathered there.
The Benghazi force again split into three columns and left for the Jebel at intervals from 4 September.
First to go was Paddy Mayne's group which was guided by the LRDG S1 patrol commanded by Lieutenant Lazarus.
All parties managed to get across the narrow neck of the Great Sand Sea and arrived at their rendezvous in the mountains on 9 and 10 September.
They had escaped detection from the air, in spite of the large number of vehicles involved, but had had to abandon the tanks  which had become hopelessly bogged down in the sand.
A number of the 3-tonners were also lost, as a result of mechanical breakdowns and mines.
On arrival, the leading group met up with Bob Melot who had been hiding in the area for several weeks gathering intelligence.
Melot had recruited an Arab whom he proposed to send into the town to find out if the garrison had been alerted.
When the spy returned he stated that there were roadblocks and minefields on all approaches to Benghazi.
This confirmed everyone's worst fears, and Stirling radioed back for instructions.
He was simply told to ignore bazaar gossip and to carry on as planned.
The raid itself was an unmitigated disaster.
Melot's Arab spy was engaged to guide everyone to the Wadi Fetilia which was the only practical route down the escarpment on to the coastal plain.
They set out at dusk on 13 September and soon discovered that they were in the wrong wadi.
Several trucks were damaged by their sumps hitting rocks, and by the time everyone had managed to back out and find the right route, the night was slipping away.
The LRDG patrol which was to carry out a diversionary raid on Benina airfield decided to turn back as there was no longer enough time to drive there and back in darkness.
The main force should have got into the town under the cover of a raid by the RAF, but by the time they were at the foot of the escarpment, this was almost over.
As they picked up speed along the main tarmac road it was already 3 a.m.
They had not gone far before the leading vehicle halted at a metal pole stretched across the road, and the rest of the convoy bunched up behind.
There was no immediate sign of the enemy, but on either side of the barrier there were coils of barbed wire and freshly dug soil.
It was then that Bill Cumper spoke his immortal lines.
All those who were present agree that he got out of his jeep, lifted the pole and said in a mock solemn voice, ‘Let battle commence.’
And commence it did.
The enemy opened up, but their fire was inaccurate.
The SAS replied with their twin Vickers and the night was lit up by tracer.
Jim Almonds' jeep caught fire and several men were wounded.
Silhouetted by the blaze, the jeeps frantically reversed still firing, and Stirling gave the order to withdraw.
It was by then too late to make for the safety of the mountains, and the scattered groups of jeeps had to hide as best they could at the foot of the escarpment.
Higher up the wadi, the doctor was already busy.
A small group had gone to attack a minor fort and in the battle Melot and another officer had been injured.
When dawn broke, the jeeps and trucks were scattered over a wide area, camouflaged under bushes and in the lee of rocks.
Enemy aircraft swarmed overhead, methodically searching each gully and outcrop.
An ammunition lorry exploded with a roar.
When darkness fell, the men drove off up the escarpment and made for the rendezvous, spreading themselves out as widely as possible.
A small section was left behind to pick up stragglers, as there were still quite a number of men missing.
Jim Almonds had become separated from the rest and was taken prisoner.
He subsequently escaped and rejoined the SAS to fight in Europe as a commissioned officer.
The following two days were a continual nightmare of bombing and strafing.
Truck after truck was set ablaze and each fire acted as a homing beacon for more enemy aircraft.
Pleydell and his small group of medical orderlies carried out a number of quite complicated operations whilst crouching under bushes and being machine-gunned from the air.
The plight of the injured was an unenviable one; several of them could not be moved.
They had to lie on their stretchers in the back of a lorry listening to the din of battle all around them.
Finally, as dusk fell, the aircraft departed and Stirling had to take stock of the situation.
He had lost twenty-five trucks and their valuable contents, plus twenty-odd jeeps.
Four men had been killed.
There was also a group of wounded men, some of whom would not be able to make it back to Kufra.
It was a difficult decision for all concerned, but four of the most seriously injured were left with one of the medical orderlies, who was instructed to contact the Italians the following day.
The rest divided themselves up amongst the remaining transport and set off with only enough petrol to cover the 400 miles to Jalo.
If the Sudan Defence Force had been unsuccessful in capturing this oasis, they would be in grave difficulty, stuck in the desert without fuel, water or rations.
The trip took four days but there was no further molestation from the air — just the pangs of thirst and meagre rations each evening.
On arrival at Jalo they found that the battle was still in progress, but enough petrol was obtained to get the convoy safely back to Kufra.
No blame seems to have been attached to Stirling at the time.
The official report states: ‘To have forced his way into Benghazi when the enemy was obviously ready for him would have achieved nothing and would have involved the loss of his force.’
The final tally was given as six killed, eighteen wounded and five missing.
The Tobruk raid had been an even worse disaster and almost the entire force employed had  been wiped out.
Only the LRDG raid on Barce had paid off, with the destruction of a number of aircraft.
Who was responsible for the breach of security that alerted the garrison at Benghazi has never been established.
The leak could have come from any one of a large number of sources, as far too many people knew about the plans.
There was an interesting sequel to this in 1967 when a book written by Len Deighton was published and sections of it were serialized in the Sunday Times .
In the book Deighton quite openly accused David Stirling of having ‘insisted upon talking about the raid during two social gatherings at the British Embassy in Cairo…’
Stirling felt this inferred that he had loosely prattled at a cocktail party, whereas the gatherings referred to were private dinner parties.
He sued the author, the publisher and the Sunday Times , who settled out of court.
Stirling wrote his account of the affair and a refutation which was published in the regimental journal.
Part of the surviving force was left at Kufra, while others were flown back to Kabrit to refit and resupply.
A memo by a lieutenant-colonel on the staff (whose signature is illegible) to the Director of Military Operations at MEHQ gives an insight into what was in the pipeline for L Detachment, ‘which went out on the last operation hurriedly and ill organised.
An attempt is being made to provide them with some form of base organisation without which they cannot develop full effectiveness.
Before further operations are undertaken, it is most advisable to reform the squadron which it is intended to use shortly.’
This is the first reference to what was to become A Squadron, commanded by Paddy Mayne.
According to Pleydell, Mayne was allowed to choose its members and naturally selected the core of the original L Detachment veterans plus a few of the newcomers.
The memo continues by stating that if the group who were to be part of the first squadron returned by road, they would waste too much time and should therefore be flown back to collect the new vehicles and supplies needed at Kufra.
‘Those who are to be returned to unit as unsuitable can come overland together with those who will be required to form a second squadron to operate in a later phase.’
Previously, L Detachment had been loosely organized into troops on a raid-by-raid basis as required, certain men attaching themselves to particular officers.
There had never been enough personnel to form anything as large as a squadron.
On his return to headquarters Stirling discovered there were plans afoot which would have an important  impact on the future of his force.
Throughout August and September, a vicious battle had been waged between the Director of Military Operations and the Director of Combined Operations at MEHQ for control of all raiding forces.
The former won, which was all to the good as far as the SAS was concerned.
Part of the battle was over the carcass of 1 Special Service Regiment already alluded to.
General McCreery, Alexander's Chief of Staff, wrote to his superior in late September regarding the future of special units in the Middle East.
In referring to L Detachment, he stated that ‘it has had conspicuous success in the past and its morale is high.’
His recommendation was that L Detachment, the SBS and 1 Special Service Regiment should all come under one commander.
The personality of the present commander, L Detachment S.A.S. Brigade, is such that he could be given command of the whole force with appropriate rank.
In view of this I make the following suggestion.
That L Detachment S.A.S. Brigade, 1 S.S. Regiment, Special Boat Section should all be amalgamated under L Detachment S.A.S. Brigade and commanded by Major D Stirling with the rank of lieutenant colonel.
The above suggestion was adopted and the additional decision was made to raise Stirling's unit to the status of a full regiment of the British Army, to be known as 1 SAS Regiment.
This was officially announced in MEHQ Operational Instruction No. 14,521, dated 28 September 1942.
However gratifying this may have been for Stirling, one distinct step was taken to clip his wings and stop his independent lobby of senior officers.
The regiment was to come under the Director of Military Operations who would exercise control through a new department to be known as G (Raiding Forces)(G(RF)).
‘No other contact is permitted with the general staff at G.H.O., the naval C-in-C Mediterranean (including his staff) or H.Q. R.A.F. M.E.
unless arranged by G (Raiding Forces).’
The organization of the new regiment was somewhat confused as there were two totally different tables of establishment.
What emerged was an HQ squadron and four combat squadrons — A, B, the Free French (later known as C Squadron) and the Foldboat Section (the SBS, which became D Squadron).
Each squadron was divided into three troops, each with three sections.
HQ Squadron had an administrative  depot troop, an intelligence troop, a signals troop, a parachute-training troop and a light repair section.
The war establishment was initially set at 29 officers and 572 other ranks.
Oddly enough, Stirling might well have ended up as a brigadier with an even larger command.
On 3 October, a certain Brigadier McLean wrote to the Director of Military Operations suggesting that the ‘S.A.S., L.R.D.G. and 1 L.R.S. be combined and that armour, artillery and infantry the size of a regiment should be added for seaborne operations.
C.O. S.A.S. Regiment to be appointed to command.’
This reorganization was all very well, but David Stirling's priority was to find enough men of sufficient calibre to fill all these vacancies.
In the Eighth Army, Montgomery had wielded his axe and a fresh sense of purpose infused everyone from staff officer to private.
He had fought the successful battle of Alam Halfa at the beginning of September, and planning was in full swing for a major offensive at El Alamein to take place in early November.
In charge of G (RF) was Colonel ‘Shan’ Hackett, later to become General Sir John, a soldier with a considerable track record in battle, and one who was sympathetic to Stirling's ideas.
The immediate priority was to keep up an unrelenting pressure on the enemy supply lines.
To do this, Paddy Mayne's A Squadron, largely composed of experienced raiders, would be available to start out from Kufra.
He also took a few new recruits, notably three young lieutenants, Harry Poat, Tony Marsh and Johnny Wiseman, all three of whom went on to make their mark on the regiment.
A second squadron, B, would be formed at Kabrit from fresh volunteers and put through a crash training programme.
At the time, Stirling regarded three and a half months as necessary to train SAS personnel.
One of his key officers departed at around this time.
Fitzroy Maclean was sent off to Persia, and his exploits there fall outside the scope of this book, although he was employing skills learned with the SAS.
Stirling took on a number of officers and men from the disbanded Special Service Regiment and the rest were distributed elsewhere, as few of them were suitable for SAS training.
He then went off to the desert to see Montgomery, accompanied by Shan Hackett, to ask permission to hand-pick volunteers from the various regiments in the Eighth Army.
The name Stirling does not even feature in Monty's memoirs, but Virginia Cowles has written a fair account of what happened.
They were received in one of the general's famous caravans, and Stirling outlined the contribution his unit could make to  the coming battle.
He then said that in order to do so he needed 150 experienced men.
The abrasive new general brushed aside Stirling's request and proceeded to give him a lecture.
He told Stirling that he needed his best men himself and he was not going to allow them to join the SAS after the ‘failure at Benghazi’.
This needled Stirling and the meeting ended on a sour note.
The only redeeming feature was that he and Shan Hackett had lunch in Monty's personal mess and ran up a goodly drinks bill which they charged to the teetotal general.
According to Virginia Cowles they met Freddie de Guingand, Montgomery's Chief of Staff, whom they both knew, after lunch, and he let slip that an Anglo-American landing was planned in Algeria, code-named Torch.
That set David thinking.
On 28 September, a planning meeting discussed the tasks that the Eighth Army required to be carried out.
A Squadron was to be divided into six parties, to attack targets all along the coast between Tobruk and the immediate area to the rear of the enemy front line.
At the same time, the remaining members of the SBS would be landed by boat in the El Daba area to attack supply dumps and motor transport.
After the main battle, A Squadron's tasks would be to harass the retreating enemy forces and signal bombing targets to the RAF.
It was stressed that Colonel Stirling would not take part in these raids owing to the information he possessed.
The basic outline as agreed at the planning meeting was enshrined in an operational order, No. 146, issued by MEHQ and addressed to Stirling.
This laid down specific objectives for each party in A Squadron in three phases, specifying that the squadron would come under the command of the Eighth Army on 16 October.
The first phase was concerned with a variety of raids against the Tobruk-Mersa Matruh railway and other lines of communication, ammunition dumps and road transport.
Phase two envisaged a period to regroup and resupply, with phase three coming into force immediately the main battle started on 23 October.
Then, the patrols were to concentrate on airfields and ambushing retreating traffic on the coast road.
What is interesting is that for the first time individual patrols would have radio communication via jeep-mounted No. 11 radio sets, but in the event of breakdowns they would also each take two pigeons.
There were many subsequent raids, carried out by small patrols, and it is difficult to build up a comprehensive picture of exactly what took place.
Mayne's squadron assembled at Kufra in dribs and drabs by the beginning of October.
There they set up a rear headquarters and  resupply dump.
Mayne's plan was to take his fighting patrols out into the Great Sand Sea and establish a forward base, from which they could sally out and harass the enemy.
Malcolm Pleydell spent most of October and November there, and described the scenery.
Our dwelling place was clean and very isolated; for we were tucked away in a deep hollow, and all around the tumbling sand dunes encompassed us about.
The soft beauty of their symmetrical curves, and the sinuous outlines, accentuated as they were at morning and evening by the glancing rays of the sun, provided an artistry one could not readily forget; and I shall long remember the delicate rosy flush, reflected for a moment from the smooth sand surfaces, as the radiance of the sunset dwindled and died like a funeral pyre.’
They were well placed for taking the offensive, being 200 miles behind the enemy front line and 150 miles south of the coastal plain.
During the whole time they were there, they were not bothered by aircraft.
A handwritten memo in the Public Record Office says that on 30 October Mayne was ordered to leave the railway alone and concentrate on destroying petrol supplies.
His achievements to date were listed: charges laid on the railway in the Tobruk area on the night of 14 October; a failed attempt to do the same near Sidi Barani which resulted in the death of the patrol commander, Lieutenant Shorten; two further breaks in the railway on 24 October; nine breaks on 29 October, and finally another attack on the track on 31 October.
One of the epic stories in the history of the SAS comes from this period of raiding the coastal railway.
A comparative newcomer, David Sillito, was assigned as navigator on a patrol which was sent to destroy the track near Sidi Barani.
They were spotted by the enemy, who attacked, and in the ensuing mêlée, Shorten was killed and Sillito got separated from the others.
He found himself totally alone, with a water bottle, a compass, a revolver and no food.
He could of course have taken the easy option and given himself up, or laid up along the coast somewhere until the advancing Eighth Army caught up with him.
Instead he decided to march south into the Great Sand Sea, a distance of nearly 200 miles, to rejoin his squadron.
He trudged for eight silent days, trying to rest when the sun was at its hottest and using a greatcoat as a tent.
On the second day his water gave out and he resorted to drinking his own urine, until that too ceased.
On the eighth day, with his feet torn and bleeding, he reached the northern  edge of the Great Sand Sea and, following some jeep tracks, came across an A Squadron patrol.
Taken back to Kufra to recuperate, he was fit and well again within two weeks.
The Sillito story had a strange sequel, however, as can be read in a file of signals traffic for the period.
On 31 October, a message was sent from Kufra to the SAS base at Kabrit: ‘Regret Parachutist Sillito died in hospital at Kufra today.
He was brought in by L.R.D.G. suffering from diphtheria.’
On 2 November, a second signal was sent to Kabrit from Kufra: ‘Sillito and Laird arriving Cairo by plane 1530 3rd November, both very ill.
Please provide transport from Cairo, truck not rail.’
The following day, MEHQ signalled Kufra as follows.
‘Sillito arrived Cairo today by air.
Do not understand your message of 31.10. reporting his death from diphtheria.
Signal name and number of parachutist who died in hospital at Kufra.’
The mystery was finally solved in the reply from Kufra.
‘Sillito reported missing when Shorten killed.
He was picked up by patrol and returned to Cairo [untrue].
Sillet died in hospital as per my casualty report at 31 October.
Two different men entirely.’
While Paddy Mayne and his men were busily raiding, Stirling had finally succumbed to his desert sores and had been hospitalized in Cairo.
He was not so ill, however, that he was unable to keep up with what was going on.
As is well known, the Battle of El Alamein was a resounding victory and established Montgomery's reputation.
As his troops advanced to the west, raiding priorities altered.
Sandy Scratchley's patrol was sent out to raid petrol dumps in the El Daba area and found itself caught up in the back yard of the retreating Germans.
The patrol took some prisoners and drove through the lines until they met up with a British unit, who refused to believe they were who they said they were.
As there was little point in returning to the rendezvous now that the pursuit had started, they went back to Kabrit.
El Alamein was really the beginning of the end of the desert campaign.
At the other end of North Africa, on 8 November, Anglo-American forces had landed in Algeria, and Rommel had retreated right back to the Agheila position, where he dug in on the defensive.
Montgomery too had paused to reorganize his lines of communication, but planned a final assault to dislodge the Afrika Korps and drive them right back into Tunisia in December.
Paddy Mayne's veteran A Squadron returned from the Great Sand Sea to Kufra for a few days in mid-November, having successfully raided airfields around Gazala, familiar territory from the past.
They then moved west to a new holding area at Bir Zalten, sixty miles south of  the German positions at El Agheila, which had been recced by Mike Sadler who had flown up there during the first week in November.
In the meantime, Stirling was back in action at Kabrit, preparing to bring up B Squadron, which was formed from the new recruits who had finished a somewhat abbreviated training course.
This squadron was commanded by Major Vivian Street and included few of the experienced operatives from the old L Detachment.
By this stage of the war, Stirling, with his usual grasp of the wider strategic picture, realized that he must plan for the future of the SAS Regiment.
As far as immediate operations were concerned, he and Hackett had agreed that the two squadrons plus some of the Free French would use their new desert base to harry enemy road traffic along a 400-mile stretch of the coast road.
He felt that if they could make travelling at night dangerous, the enemy would be forced to move in daylight, thus becoming targets for the RAF.
But his main thoughts lay elsewhere, as he realized that the desert campaign was coming to an end.
Thus he had already started to make dispositions for the future.
David Sutherland, much to his annoyance, had been left out of raiding activities and was put in charge of training the SBS contingent for water-borne operations in the Mediterranean.
His force had recently been strengthened by a group of Greeks, who became known as the Sacred Squadron, the latest recruits to the SAS empire.
In December, Sutherland took his whole party up to Beirut to continue their training in Greek caiques and other odd vessels.
Stirling had also made arrangements for Paddy Mayne to take his squadron to the Lebanon for ski training, as soon as their operational commitments were ended.
Stirling had always envisaged the Free French contingent as the nucleus of a French SAS regiment which would assist in the eventual liberation of their country.
It is clear even at this early date that he had his eyes on a brigade structure, because his brother William, ‘Bill’, was in process of raising 2 SAS Regiment in Algeria.
In December, the 1st SAS had a total strength of 83 officers and 570 other ranks.
It was no longer a ‘private army’, and was still actively recruiting.
The only component that had faded from the picture was Captain Buck's Special Interrogation Group, ‘owing to difficulties in recruiting’!
In spite of Shan Hackett's protestations, Stirling insisted on accompanying B Squadron to their rendezvous with Paddy Mayne's force, leaving Lord Jellicoe behind in command of the base camp.
They left Kabrit on 20 November and for the first stage of the journey were able to bowl down the coast road as far as Agedabia, by then firmly in British  hands.
From there they headed south into the desert to Bir Zalten where they arrived on 29 November.
The doctor, Malcolm Pleydell, noted that David Stirling did not look well.
The months of dangerous living had taken a savage toll of his health and he had bad conjunctivitis.
On arrival, Stirling divided up the area between the two squadrons.
Paddy Mayne was to concentrate on the road between Agheila and Bouerat, while B Squadron was to move to the west, raiding up as far as Tripoli.
Their supply base had been moved forward to Benghazi, which by that time had been captured by the British, and it was intended to stay out for as long as two months, mounting almost nightly raids.
At the same time, the LRDG would be watching the road, counting traffic and signalling the intelligence back to their base.
B Squadron then moved out to their rear base at Bir Fascia, 200 miles to the west.
They had to travel over extremely bad terrain on the way but by 13 December they were in place.
Stirling divided them up into eight patrols of three jeeps each, with orders to keep up the pressure.
He then returned to Eighth Army Headquarters, accompanied by Mike Sadler.
A Squadron certainly did keep up the pressure and achieved the desired result, mining and ambushing merrily.
Paddy Mayne's veterans were remarkably successful but were soon overrun by the advancing Eighth Army.
The story of B Squadron is a sad one.
Admittedly many of them were hardly trained and lacked experience, and in addition they were operating in a more populated area with often unfriendly Arabs.
Within a few days most of the patrols had either been killed or captured and the enemy occupied their rendezvous at Bir Fascia.
Their very presence, however, unsettled the enemy and forced their commanders to detach valuable troops to round up the raiding parties.
The only officers to avoid capture were the Frenchman Martin, Gordon Alston, the recently recruited Wilfred Thesiger, and Sullivan.
Of the other ranks, it was the desert veterans who made it back to the British lines, including Reg Seekings and Ted Badger, both of whom had been attached to B Squadron.
Alston, Thesiger and Martin holed up in a wadi near the old rendezvous.
They had a radio truck with them which enabled them to keep in contact.
They were ordered by Stirling to stay put and wait for him, as he was on his way back to the desert.
What was destined to be the last series of operations of the desert war was another of Stirling's grand concepts, intended to tie in with Montgomery's attack on Tripoli and beyond into Tunisia which was to start on 15 January 1943.
There were four basic objectives which were  agreed with the Eighth Army.
The first was for Lieutenant Harry Poat to take a jeep patrol to create as much havoc as possible to the west of Tripoli, while the main army attack went in.
The other three aims were much further west and were determined by geography.
Rommel had been forced to base his supply operation well to his rear, using the Tunisian ports of Sfax and Gabes.
At Gabes, the coastal plain narrows down to only a few miles between the sea and a large area of salt marshes.
This was a bottleneck for enemy communications and Lieutenant Jordan was to take a force of jeeps into the gap and raid convoys.
Between Tripoli and Gabes, there was a fortified belt known as the Mareth line which had been built before the war by the French to hinder Italian ambitions to expand their empire into Tunisia.
Montgomery wanted a reconnaissance of this stretch of bunkers and anti-tank ditches to see if it was being put into a state of defence and if it could be outflanked to the south.
Finally, David Stirling intended to take a small party and penetrate right through the enemy lines to join up with the First Army, which had landed in Algeria.
Once there he intend to meet up with his brother and discuss future plans for their respective SAS regiments.
After the long drive up from Egypt, the various parties assembled at Eighth Army Headquarters at Bouerat.
Stirling had Johnny Cooper and Mike Sadler with him, but was minus Reg Seekings who was still out with B Squadron.
It was at this time that he commissioned both Cooper and Sadler in the field, in recognition of their services, an action which was later thought to have been highly irregular.
They had an uneventful journey across the desert to the rendezvous, although the territory was unfamiliar to them and the maps of the area showed little detail.
They met up with Jordan and his men, plus the three officers who had remained with the radio truck, at Bir Guedaffia, where the final plans were made.
Harry Poat left on his mission and Stirling split the remaining force into two groups which would travel independently to a further rendezvous at Bir Soltane, only a few miles from the Mareth line.
He had decided to leave Alston and Thesiger there with the wireless truck to observe any activity in the fortifications.
The two groups set off across the desert westwards towards Ghadames.
At first the going was so firm that they could travel comfortably at 50 miles per hour, but then they had to head north and traverse what is known as the Grand Sea Erg.
This area of soft rolling dunes caused no end of delay, but they managed to make contact with Jordan and join  up at Bir Soltane.
There, Stirling heard by radio that Tripoli had fallen on 23 January, and thus Jordan's mission was vital.
He was to set out with the three French patrols, drive the hundred-odd miles to the Gabes Gap and pass through it as quickly as possible to create confusion in the enemy rear areas.
Stirling had originally intended to skirt south of the salt marshes and then find a way through the mountains to Gafsa where American forces had been reported, but changed his mind.
He decided instead to follow Jordan through the Gabes Gap and mount an attack in the area around Sousse, a harbour being used by the Germans to ship in supplies.
He was running short of petrol and that route offered him the chance to capture replenishments along the way.
They set out on 23 January, Jordan heading straight for Gabes, and Stirling some twelve hours behind, having carried out a recce on the way.
Stirling had five jeeps with him, and as dawn broke the following day they arrived at the road.
In typical fashion Stirling decided on a bluff which had often helped him before.
Johnny Cooper wrote:
Our party of five jeeps with accelerators pressed to the floor, raced for the Gabes Gap.
We passed slap through the middle of a German armoured unit dispersed on either side of the road, savouring their first cups of coffee and stretching in the early morning sun.
Many of them looked at us curiously, but we just stared back and motored on.
By then we thought our bluff had succeeded and after another five miles meeting enemy units on the move, we decided that enough was enough.
Looking back, it seems incredible that five desert-stained jeeps laden down with kit and crewed by ruffianly looking characters sporting beards, could get away with driving among enemy vehicles in broad daylight.
But that was what the SAS was all about.
What they did not know was that their legendary luck was about to run out.
Jordan's patrol, passing that way the night before, had been spotted, and had then shot up some trucks.
The enemy was on the alert.
Stirling's party decided to lie up for the day and, leaving the road, headed into some low hills covered with scrubby bushes.
They camouflaged the vehicles in a wadi and dispersed in search of shade and some sleep.
After the long drive they were understandably tired, yet for some reason Stirling failed to post sentries.
Their hiding place was surrounded by a German unit which began systematically to comb the wadi.
Stirling shouted that it was every man for himself.
Cooper, Sadler  and a Frenchman, Freddie Taxis, were nearest to the top of the wadi and ran for it.
Stirling and MacDermott were trapped in a cave and rounded up, thus ending the wartime career of the man who became known to the Germans as the ‘Phantom Major’.
He managed to escape from his captors two nights later, only to be betrayed by an Arab and retaken by the Italians.
Johnny Cooper and his two companions dived into a small depression covered by camel thorn and lay there miraculously undetected until the Germans retired with their prisoners.
After a whole series of adventures and a long walk they managed to get to Tozeur, a desert outpost held by the Free French.
From there they were handed over to the Americans, who suspected them of being spies and treated them accordingly.
It was only when Cairo confirmed their names and service numbers that they were given the honoured status of the first Eighth Army troops to meet up with the First Army.
Mike Sadler was flown straight back to the Eighth Army and assigned the task of navigating the New Zealand Division around the south of the Mareth line, while Cooper was able to enjoy the pleasures of Constantine with an old friend, Reg Seekings, who had made his way through after the B Squadron attacks on the road.
Jordan's group in the meantime had managed to sow some confusion behind enemy lines, but all of them except Lieutenant Martin and his crew were eventually rounded up.
Once through the Gabes Gap there was no longer any empty desert to escape into and they were trying to operate in a densely populated area that was quite unsuitable for SAS methods.
With the wisdom of hindsight it is easy to say that they should not have tried to raid there in the first place, but success had bred a certain arrogance.
If Stirling had not been captured when he was, he would hardly have survived his planned raid on Sousse, having to approach his target right through the middle of the remnants of the Axis armies who were caught in an ever-diminishing pocket.
Had Stirling been more cautious, he would have followed the route taken by Cooper, Sadler and Taxis, and eventually would have met up with his brother Bill.
As it was, the unit he founded was very nearly thrown to the wolves as a result of his abrupt departure from the scene.
The end of the campaign in North Africa marked the end of the ‘classic’ phase of SAS warfare and the beginning of a period in which Stirling's high-level contacts were to be sorely missed.
The regiment would no longer be a one-man band, but would inevitably become increasingly absorbed into the mainstream of army operations, with  resulting misunderstanding of what its role really was.
The surviving ‘Originals’ of L Detachment still meet every year, by now sadly depleted in numbers.
Their gatherings are always enlivened by Bob Bennett's fine tenor, accompanied by the Revd Fraser ‘Fingers’ McLuskey on the piano.
The latter was the padre to 1 SAS Regiment in 1944–5 but has been accorded the status of ‘Honorary Original’.
Bob sings their own song, a private version of Lili Marlene, the anthem of all the desert warriors.
There is a song we always used to hear,
Out in the desert, romantic soft and clear.
Over the ether came the strain, that lilting refrain,
Each night again, of poor Lili Marlene, of poor Lili Marlene.
(Chorus )
Then back to Cairo we would steer,
And drink our beer, with ne'er a tear,
And poor Marlene's boyfriend will never see Marlene.
Check your ammunition, see your guns are right,
Wait until a convoy comes creeping through the night.
Then you can have some fun, my son,
And know the war is almost won,
And poor Marlene's boyfriend will never see Marlene.
Drive on to an airfield, thirty planes ahead,
Belching ammunition and filling them with lead.
A flamer for you, a grave for Fritz,
Just like his planes, he's shot to bits,
And poor Marlene's boyfriend will never see Marlene.
Afrika Korps has sunk into the dust,
Gone are his Stukas, his tanks have turned to rust.
No more we'll hear the soft refrain,
That lilting strain, it's night again,
And poor Marlene's boyfriend will never see Marlene.