

FEATURES
STOP POISONING OUR CHILDREN: Pamela Stephenson, Twiggy et al are Parents for Safe Food
MY LAST MEMORY OF MY FATHER: Julia Orange tells the heart-rending story of the carer
THE CHEMISTRY OF SEX: Is love all in the hormones?
BRITAIN IN THE DOGHOUSE: Canine controversy
WILL YOUR MATE BE FAITHFUL?
He promises to love only you.
Can you trust him?
By Myron Brenton
CLASH OF THE TARTANS: Check out this colourful home
AN AUDIENCE WITH DAME EDNA: Bill Williamson discovers that there ain't nothing like this Dame
HOW TO WRITE A SUCCESSFUL SHORT STORY: Expert advice
SCHOOL FOR SCANDAL: Your child could be suffering sexual abuse at the hands of her teachers.
Rita Carter investigates
BACK FROM BEYOND: Have we been here before?
Born again SHE readers  tell of their reincarnations.
By Liz Hodgkinson
QUICK QUICK SNOW: Top ski resorts at a glance
THE A–Z OF GOOD SEX: The best of Doctor Delvin  
A great Dame leading a simply gorgeous life.
Royal secrets, political scandal and life after Norm — the not so Everage housewife-turned-megastar from Down Under gets intimate.
Page 114
Sexual abuse in the classroom: can't we even trust our teachers with the safety of our children?
A lesson to be learnt, page 120
Would she stop at nothing to please her toy boy?
Read our short story, page 168
Pillow talk: TV personality Christine Webber, the woman behind Doc D, reveals her position on her wardrobe, life and everything.
Just what do you wear to please SHE's leading sex columnist?
Page 8
Totally devoted to you?
Or will your partner develop a wandering eye?
Page 86
When the laughter has to stop: funny girl Pamela Stephenson protects her family from taking a bite at the poisoned apple.
The British campaign against pesticides takes off, page 16
ALL ABOUT SHE
We are what we eat has become such a cliché that we rarely stop to think about it nowadays.
Yet, even the most unfussy eater must feel uneasy about the effect of what is almost a daily litany against eggs/chicken/ ‘E’ numbers/growth hormones/chemical cocktails and so on.
And without being alarmist, most of us would like to know more about the effect of years of chemical bombardment on our bodies.
It's not so long since we learned the link between eating certain ‘E’ numbers and the behaviour of highly disruptive children.
So you can see why mothers get angry when they discover that even everyday foods such as apples can cause a build-up of unwanted chemicals in their children's bodies.
So what can we do?
A group of famous and highly-motivated mothers — that's a few of them above — decided to band together as Parents For Safe Food to (a) draw attention to what long-term use of powerful chemicals can do and (b) work with government, farmers and all the others in the food chain to try to find a solution.
The task is daunting.
Without the use of chemicals we wouldn't have the range of disease and pest-free foods that we have today.
Josephine Fairley discusses the issues on page 16.
Any SHE reader who wishes to help the group in their region is invited to write to us.
Obviously we'll keep a close watch on progress.
So many of you enjoy Dr. D's column (we have taken an extract from his latest book this month, page 176) that we photographed him at home with his new wife, TV presenter and novelist, Christine Webber, page 8.
We have persuaded Doctor Delvin to sign a copy of his A to Z of Good Sex when it is published at the end of October for all SHE readers who write in.
Those of you who live near the signing sessions (see next month's SHE) can see him in person.
Our last short story competition was so popular, we're running another one: see page 118.
Calling all budding Ruth Rendells…
Thank you for sharing some of your experiences of reincarnation.
Liz Hodgkinson reviews them on page 122.
Would you give chemicals to your children?
Famous mothers, led by Pamela Stephenson, say ‘no’
Two SHE stars in print again, along with best-selling author, Ruth Rendell, Dr Delvin and Liz Hodgkinson
SHE MAIL
SHE MAIL is a forum for your views, not ours.
Send them to us at SHE,National Magazine House, 72 Broadwick Street, London, W1V 2BP .
If possible, give a daytime telephone number.
A bottle of champagne and £10 goes to the writer of the lead letter; £10 to the rest.
Please note that letters must be your own original work and must not be offered for publication elsewhere at the same time.
‘I was too tired of living and too tired to die properly’
Believe me, life can improve for women after 40.
I am 44 years of age.
Five years ago, I had a successful career as a sales representative.
Then I had an accident injuring my back.
I ended up in hospital in a plaster cast, the trauma of which brought about a nervous breakdown which resulted in ten months in a psychiatric hospital.
While in hospital, my company made me redundant.
My weight had by now gone down to six and a half stone.
I then had to have a hysterectomy.
My husband of 24 years wanted out, leaving me in hospital with only my children (aged 22 and 19) for support.
In despair, I unsuccessfully took an overdose.
Four months later, I had to have another operation for cancer — of the lymph glands — and still had trouble with my back.
My 85-year old father died, leaving me with a very distraught elderly mother.
I then had another operation, this time for my back where a piece of my spine was removed and a piece of metal inserted.
Unfortunately the op went wrong and I had to be readmitted.
So there I was, back in plaster and back in the psychiatric hospital.
I took another overdose, but I was too tired of living and too tired to die properly.
Then suddenly something clicked.
I looked at my lovely children and realised the suffering I had put them through.
I had to do something about it.
With the settlement from our house I found somewhere to live and within a week was out of hospital.
I had to restore my faith in myself.
My weight had gone up to eight stone so at least I was looking relatively human.
At the age of 42 I applied to go on a two-year business and finance course and finally, after a lot of readjustment, I have just had the results — pass with a few distinctions and merits thrown in.
Of course I still have to get a job, and I still suffer from depression and back pain, but somehow I'm managing.
So if you feel like giving up, don't.
Help yourself and others will help you.
Ms M Charlton, Northampton
UNWORKABLE
I'd like to emphasis the risks taken by a higher-powered woman when dating an office junior.
Should the man concerned think better of the relationship (probably being more prey to the office gossips), not only is the woman left feeling she's suffered a loss of face, as well as emotional hurt, but also bad feeling at the office may impair her work.
A fair warning, I think, to executive females everywhere.
K Bailey, Essex
DRIVES ME CRAZY
Now that some insurance companies are acknowledging the competence of some women drivers by reducing the premium they have to pay, I wonder how long it will be before car salesmen acknowledge the intelligence of women drivers?
I have spent the last couple of weeks visiting garages with my husband attempting to exchange our shared vehicle.
In all but one, the salesman went to great lengths to explain the engine and its features to my husband and to sell a car to me on the basis of its sleek lines or attractive upholstery.
Alison Chisholm, Merseyside
OOH LA LA
In conversation with my French boyfriend the other day, he said, ‘I am being quite Fred with you’.
I looked at him puzzled and said I didn't have a clue what he was talking about.
He got frustrated and said, ‘You know what I mean, like a boy's name only with two meanings, Fredly speaking.’
Then I laughed and explained that he meant ‘Frankly speaking’.
Lara Fossi, Llandudno
THE WAITING GAME
After reading a letter about youths and unemployment, the gist of which was their unwillingness to work, I was incensed by the statement, ‘Even if they applied for a job in the catering industry, it would be something’.
Such uninformed views do the industry a disservice.
I have been employed in the hotel and catering industry for 12 years.
I started as a junior receptionist and now I am a regional sales manager with a very attractive salary and benefits.
Young people don't want to enter a hotel as a waiter or bar person, because of the demeaning stigma attached to the job, unlike Greece, Italy or Spain where it is regarded as a worthwhile career.
But think of the last time you had a meal out and the service you encountered.
You must agree that you need talent and persona to wait on a table and wit, tact and conversation to serve at a bar.
If you want a career that ensures that you will not be bored, will be stretched to your full capacity every day and allows you to be yourself, as well as earn a good salary at a general manager level — £30,000 a year — you could do a lot worse than the hotel and catering industry.
Mrs V Phelps, North Humberside
SPELLBOUND
The teaching of proper English really has made the headlines recently.
Some local parents were complaining that teachers correct some wrong spellings, while leaving the majority untouched, so as not to upset the child.
It's a matter of balance, as one teacher put it.
It would seem nowadays that we are trying to make life a pleasure trip.
When I was at school, we were given spellings to learn every day and were allowed to get two out of ten wrong.
Woe betide you if you got three or more wrong.
You made sure those words were learnt for the next day.
What is going to happen to our heritage, our beautiful English language?
Barbara Cantrell, Yorks
GREEN BEHIND THE EARS
Two well-dressed women were looking at the greenhouses for sale at a garden centre recently.
A keen young salesman was dogging their footsteps.
Rather irked by this, one of the women eventually asked, ‘How much is this one?’
‘It's £300 including erection,’ he responded eagerly.
She gave him a long, appraising look, then asked silkily, ‘Well, how much would it be — without the greenhouse?’
Blushing, he beat a hasty retreat.
E. Laws, Newcastle-upon-Tyne
In the shelf life section of Val Hennessy's page 147, September, Carl Epstein should have read Carol Epstein.
SHE JUGGLER OF THE MONTH
‘Most women would give their eye teeth to be married to Dr Delvin’
Above: Doc D and Christine on their wedding day, July 6 1988.
Right: Christine often accompanies Doc D to his medical conferences.
She loved the well-cut informality of this outfit.
Wool jacket £205, wool skirt £85, turtle neck sweater £95, all from Mondi; leather pumps £24.99, Faith; tights, £1.25, Berkshire; earrings £5.95, chunky bangle £8.95, both Accessorize
There aren't many things that could unsettle Christine Webber.
She expertly presents an early evening news programme on Anglia TV, she's written one novel and is half-way through the next, she breezes through the kind of daily schedule that would have most of us screaming for mercy by midday.
But when her relationship with SHE's sex columnist Doctor David Delvin started getting serious, Christine became a veritable bag of nerves.
‘I was so frantic,’ she says.
‘He'd written all these books about sex and I thought he'd know all these exciting things and I'd just be so ordinary.
So I read every one of his books from cover to cover.
Since it was swiftly followed by a marriage proposal it must have gone down fairly well.
Christine's been married to Doc D for just over a year now.
It's the second time around for both of them, but they are clearly devoted to each other.
‘David is just the perfect partner,’ says Christine.
‘He's extremely clever, very kind and supportive and always interested in what I'm doing.
Friends of mine who read SHE can't believe that this man who is so outrageous on the page is so quiet in real life.
‘He's a great romantic — I think that comes through in his columns.
He's always sending me flowers, leaving me notes around the house or crazy messages on the answering machine.
He is the favourite of so many women, a bit of a heart-throb.
I know many women who would give their eye teeth to be married to him and I feel that responsibility.
We both work hard at keeping the relationship strong.’
Christine came to television from the stage.
She was lead singer in the Black and White Minstrel Show during the 70s.
Then, after a spell as a ‘not very good actress’ she joined Anglia TV as anchor for their six o'clock show,About Anglia .
She's been their senior presenter for ten years now, handling everything from live interviews to those awful moments when a filmed report is suddenly dropped and she is left to fill time with cheerily improvised observations —‘that's when I really earn my money.’
Christine takes her appearance very seriously: ‘It's part of my job to look a notch up, a bit glam.
I remember on one occasion I dashed out of the television studios to the bookshop in Norwich without a trace of make-up on and these kids fell off their bikes, saying ‘Ugh, in real life you don't look at all like you do on TV.’’
She has very clear pale skin and so is used to having quite strong make-up (‘so that I don't just look a bland mass’).
Judith Pallan, SHE's make-up artist, darkened her fair eyebrows and tried a slightly more natural look.
Christine was a little dubious about Judith using brown eyeshadow, worrying that her eyes might end up looking bloodshot, but she was delighted by the result.
Her clothes not only have to be smart but very carefully chosen because anything fussily frilled, checked or highly patterned tends to look too busy on the small screen.
Luckily a feature she once did for the programme gave Christine some clothes tips which she has followed faithfully ever since.
‘We did this make-over for six ladies in the region.
You know the sort of thing — you get an expert in to show them what they should wear.
And I learned a lot from that session.
The expert told me what colours to wear, and now I buy clothes only in purple, pink, grey and blue.
It's simple and it means most of my clothes mix and match really well.’
Her only other fashion rule is always to make sure her shoes and tights are the same colour, making her 5ft 5 inches seem to stretch up just a little further.
Christine tends to buy designer clothes because, she says, although they are expensive, the way they are cut makes them look better from every angle.
The Mondi pink jacket and black wool skirt (left) was exactly the sort of outfit she prefers, because, once it's teamed with the bright woolly jumper, she can get a look that's well tailored without being too sober.
Her wardrobe is full of tops — from the smart blouses she needs to wear on TV to a colourful collection of jumpers that she can wear around the home.
But even though she is an easy size 10, choosing clothes is definitely not one of Christine's favourite occupations: ‘I hate shopping and all that hanging around.
I'm very decisive.
I see something on a hanger and I know whether it's right or not.
‘There are least three shops in Norwich I really like, and I tend to ring them in advance and say ‘I'm coming in for half an hour.
What have you got?’
It's a sort of challenge, I suppose.
I've only taken David shopping once.
It was in St Andrews and I saw a suit in the window of a boutique.
I'd bought it three minutes later.
I don't think he'd ever seen a woman shop that fast!’
It was on television that the couple met.
Doc D was drafted in to co-present a twice-weekly medical slot with Christine.
‘I'd heard of Doctor Delvin but had no idea how important he was.
So I just rang him up with a very informal ‘Hi, David!’ instead of a more deferential ‘Excuse me, Doctor Delvin’.
He says he remembers this very positive lady at the end of the phone — but I think he just means loud!
Above: Could David and Christine be discussing Doc D's monthly column in SHE?
Striped rugby shirt, £18.95, sweat pants £18.95, suede slippers £29.95, all Dash; pop socks, 69p, Couture
‘Anyway, when I found out how well-known he was, I made sure the first spot was very organised.
It was about how to deal with a road accident and I arranged for a smashed-up car to be towed into the studio, and for actors to sprawl around, made-up to look as if they had appalling injuries.
I think he was quite impressed!’
They worked together for over three years before they fell in love.
‘It was an extremely popular programme and we always saw eye to eye about it.
We both thought there were so many things people ought to know about but were afraid to ask.
We covered topics such as post-natal depression, breast cancer, or how to use make-up to camouflage scars.
I lived and breathed that show.’
Indeed there was a time in Christine's life when work threatened to overtake everything else.
‘The programme was going really well.
I was the best-known face in East Anglia, but I was having a terrible time.
I was desperately unhappy, almost suicidal.
I'd had some terrible relationships, made some bad mistakes, and I couldn't deal with that.
So I just got busier and busier.
I worked every single day and at night too, if I got the chance.
I ended up in hospital I was so exhausted.
‘Then I took my first holiday for seven years and went to Egypt.
I did my usual tap dancing on the table, but actually had quite a good time.
But when I got back to Norwich, I started to cry.
And I cried solidly for four days.
I just couldn't bear it any more.
I took myself off and got some decent therapy and learnt that it was OK just to be — I didn't have to do all the time.
I wrote my first book [In Honour Bound , Arrow, £2.99]which was a very cathartic experience.
I don't think women should look to men to put things right and solve their problems.
We have to solve ourselves first.
‘You know, I don't think it was an accident that, within a couple of years of sorting myself out, I met David.
I knew so many rotters before him, I could have done a degree in them.
I had to wait till I was 40 to get him — but it was worth it.’
Three months ago, Christine decided to restrict herself to two nights a week working at Anglia Television and concentrate on writing and on spending more time with Doc D, thinking up new projects for them both.
SHE JUGGLER OF THE MONTH
Name:
Christine Webber, 41
Job:
Television presenter
DAILY TIMETABLE
9.00
Breakfast with David
10.30
Anglia TV for morning meeting, sorting through post etc
12.00
Gym
2.00
Finalise script, hair wash, make-up
6.30
Programme on air
7.00
Pop in on St John Ambulance, Tuckswood Division
8.00
Home, tea, read David's column, have a bit of a cuddle
9.30
Write, start dinner
11.00
Dinner in the library
Above, left: working on the next chapter of her novel.
Jumper £69.99, Blanc Bleu.
Above: for TV Christine prefers simple elegance.
Jacket £189, skirt £79, both Alistair Blair for Jaeger; top £41, Mondi: shoes, £29.99 Clarks; tights £1.25, Berkshire; earrings £24.95, necklace £9.95. both Adrien Mann
Above: Christine opens the Beccles CAB with Doc D and Mayor Robert Ellwood.
Jaquard jacket £159, skirt £65, Lee Bender; tights, £2.50, Christian Dior; earrings, £15.50, by Angie Gooderham.
Right: at dinner.
Jacket, £280, pants £190, top £105, Caroline Charles, suede shoes £29.99, Clarks; pop socks, 69p, Couture; earrings, £38 Butler & Wilson.
Stockists: p191
‘We don't spent all day in each other 's pockets, but we really value our time together.
He reads my novel and I look at his SHE column, and we listen to each other 's comments.
That's really good support, because writing can be such a lonely profession.
‘Of course if we had children, finding time together would be more difficult but after David's well-publicised vasectomy, that's not a possibility.
I regret it, but if I look coldly at our lifestyle, we wouldn't be able to invest enough time in bringing a child up properly.
You can't always have everything you want.’
Christine and Doc D always make a point of changing for dinner, however late in the day.
‘Dinner's such a romantic way to end the day.
It's a pity too many people stop making an effort after they've got married.
David always notices when I'm made-up or dressed in something new and I like to please him.’
She was sure that Doc D would approve of the Caroline Charles electric blue evening suit (above, right): ‘What a wonderful colour, darling,’ he said as she walked to the table.
Dinner is also the time when schedules are arranged and days planned out.
‘We both love diaries, so we get them out and discuss what we'll be doing in February.
I always try and go with him when he goes to medical conferences — now we hardly ever take work away from home if it means we can't both go.’
Over the years, Christine's popularity with Anglia viewers has meant a steadily increasing flow of invitations to support charities and open garden fêtes.
She is now patron of a long list of local charities and bears the grand title of Divisional President of the St John Ambulance Brigade, Tuckswood Division.
And the very day we were with her she opened a new Citizens' Advice Bureau in Beccles with considerable aplomb — no easy task after SHE fashion team had stunned the locals by setting up an ironing board in the middle of the town car park and giving Christine's purple suit a quick press on the spot.
As a doctor's wife, Christine is naturally careful about her health.
She goes to a gym twice a week to do some weight training —‘I don't enjoy it, but it perks up my bottom and lifts my breasts, so I hope it does me good.’
She says she eats what she likes.
But on closer investigation it turns out that she has trained herself only to like healthy food.
‘When I was 16 I would have died for a cream cake, but how I've brainwashed myself not to want them.’
There is a history of heart disease in her family so Doc D gets her cholesterol checked every now and then and they make it a policy not to keep cheese in the house.
But we're not slaves to healthy eating — it's all a question of moderation.’
As Christine takes us on a final tour of the house she and Doc D share in a village ten miles out of Norwich, I venture the question that must be on every SHE reader's lips.
‘Um, about the Positions of the Month, do you…?’
Alas, we were left to wonder.
‘STOP POISONING OUR CHILDREN’.
Pamela Stephenson is upsetting the apple cart with her war against harmful pesticides in our food.
By Josephine Fairley
Clustered in the corner of an airless photographic studio, five worried mothers are discussing what to give their children for dinner.
Average mothers, with ten children between them, expressing the typical anxiety (shared with parents all over the world) what their offspring eat this evening should be good, wholesome and, above all, safe.
They may indeed be typical, with their everyday badinage about organic beans on toast and the relative nutritional merits of sundry spaghetti sauces.
But this caring quintet are anything but ordinary.
The glam factor alone should tell you that.
Because these five women — with their beautifully made-up, famous faces are the nucleus of Parents for Safe Food, a group founded by celebrities to voice the concerns of an increasing number of men and women about the pesticides and herbicides making their way onto our plates.
These substances, which are used to boost the crop yields and improve the appearance of the food, may ultimately compromise our health.
And, even more crucially, the health of our children.
Forget any accusations that here is a group of self-publicists jumping on the ‘Band Aid’ wagon;(right now, the role closest to these women's hearts is that of motherhood.
Carly's mum (Twiggy) is chatting to the devoted mother of Andreas, Taran, and Charlotte (Francesca Annis), with Hannah and Jessie's mum listening intently — she's Jean Boht, who stars in that matriarchal Merseyside comedy,Bread .
Lara's ma — Rula Lenska — has to rush off to rehearsal as soon as the photo session's wrapped up.
But, like the others, she's been  corralled here by one slightly harassed-looking comedienne rapidly becoming better known for her serious stance on food safety.
She's mother-of-three Pamela Stephenson, the woman who has made the interesting switch from being outrageous to outraged; graduating from wicked impersonations of Margaret Thatcher to delivering petitions to the leaderene's own doorstep.
This famous five have experienced the spectrum of emotions stirred up in many of us by last year's frightening food-related newspaper headlines.
‘First comes the sheer terror,’ Twiggy told me, recalling how Pamela had first warned her about Alar (Daminozide), a potential carcinogen in widespread use on applies.
Alar tops the Parents for Safe Food ‘dirty dozen’ list of worrying agrochemicals.
‘My first thought was, ‘Oh my God, Carly's been eating apples and drinking their juice almost all her life — ten years.
I was frightened to death; I got very depressed about it.
Then I became very angry, because we weren't given a choice about the use of these chemicals.
Nobody told us that these pesticides were being used, they just sprayed away, put the fruit and veg on sale — and we bought it in all innocence.’
Rula Lenska agrees.
‘Having always believed that an apple a day kept the doctor away, the realisation that an apple a day might actually give my child cancer one day was absolutely terrifying.’
Action plan
But if fear gives way to fury — as has happened with the formation of this vociferous pressure group and watchdog — those feelings need no longer be followed by a sense of frustration and impotence.
‘It's almost impossible for individual protests to be heard,’ explains Francesca Annis.
‘But collectively, we have a voice.’
And the group is campaigning in the knowledge that the issue of food safety strikes a chord with almost everyone.
A staggering 20,000 enquiries followed Pamela's debut broadcast on the subject of Alar, which emerged as a potential carcinogen in an independent UK survey on pesticide technology; and enquiries are still flooding in.
It is often sprayed at blossom stage and is therefore impossible to wash off.
A British Cox's apple may have been sprayed 12 times and dipped in fungicide before it reaches your fruit bowl.
‘Now we've got irradiation to worry about, too,’ points out Francesca Annis, shaking her head in disbelief that later this year it will become legal to ‘zap’food with radiation, to kill off bacteria and prolong its safe shelf life.
‘But nobody knows what the long term risks of eating irradiated food will be.
And as far as I'm concerned, any additional risk is one too many.’
One principal target of this non-political group is to capitalise on their public profiles to raise consumer consciousness, while putting pressure on the powers-that-be to reveal the extent to which pesticides are used — preferably through comprehensive labelling of all foods.
‘It seems ludicrous,’ declares Jean Boht, ‘that ‘E’, or additive numbers have to be featured on ingredient lists, yet the law doesn't require similar labelling for agrochemicals.’
At the moment, shippers' only guarantee that their fruit and vegetables have been grown organically, without the use of any chemical fertilisers, fungicides or pesticides, is to buy those packaged with The Soil Association's organic mark of approval.
The trouble is, organic produce is not cheap.
Organic crops are not subsidised by the EEC, and yields are also low, so organic food is sometimes twice as expensive as non-organic produce.
But Parents for Safe Food are lending their support to the Soil Association's efforts to ensure that by the year 2000, 20% of our food will be organic.
And they also believe that would-be organic farmers should be encouraged with financial incentives.
This would help the farmers through the first few difficult years of transition.
Until recently, demand for organic produce has been insufficient to spur most farmers to make the change — but Stephenson & Co, by encouraging us to buy organic whenever possible, badgering supermarkets and greengrocers to offer a wider range of organic produce, aim to encourage more to make the switch.
‘It's naive to assume that every housewife can afford to go organic overnight,’ adds Jean Boht.
‘But ultimately, if demand goes up, prices will come down.’
Meanwhile, to the relief of the assembled celebs (who no doubt speak on behalf of many Britons), irradiated food will have to be clearly labelled, giving the shopper at least a choice of taking any possible risks on board.
‘Even I gave a half cheer when I heard that,’ declares Pamela.
‘What we're campaigning for is to have the choice about our food.
There are undoubtedly people who will still say, ‘I don't want my little Johnny to get food poisoning and that's the end of the story,’— although unfortunately, they would be misled if they were to choose irradiated food for that reason.’
Her gut feeling is that many consumers — like some of the supermarket chains, who have declared their unwillingness to stack irradiated food — will take a stand against irradiation.
Looking after our future
The young are particularly at risk, because the foundation of future health is laid down in childhood.
The US Natural Resources Defence Council predicts that as a result of high exposure during pre-school years to some carcinogenic pesticides used on fruit, 55% of our lifetime cancer risk is incurred before the age of six — and that's pre-irradiation, with its own unquantifiable consequences.
Lest the childless or single feel left out by the cosy umbrella of ‘Parents For Safe Food’ ' however, they've lately been acknowledged by the incorporation of the words ‘And Others’in the organisation's title.
Pamela and the other campaigners have funded initial research from their own pockets.
The group has a random sample of apples and apple products freely available in supermarkets tested for Alar, and had the results analysed by the Natural Resources Defence Council.
It reported back: ‘Levels of Alar we found in apple juices are higher than are being reported in the US and pose a cancer risk considered unacceptably high by US Federal Government standards.’
Test results show that some products which have been publicised as Alar-free by retailers and manufacturers were still found to contain Alar.
Nevertheless, PFSF is anxious not to blind mothers — and others — with potentially frightening scientific surveys.
‘It would be irresponsible to inform the public without also stressing the alternatives, giving suggestions about what people can do to help themselves,’ says Jean Boht.
But PFSF readily acknowledge that not every solution will be easy for busy women — who are still primarily responsible for buying food.
As Jean points out: ‘When I grew up, my Mum did nothing else but cook our food; her contemporaries didn't work.
But the war changed all that.
Women suddenly discovered they didn't want to stay at the kitchen sink all day; they wanted the fulfilment that comes from work, too.
So the fast food industry emerged and we got used to not scraping and washing vegetables, not preparing food from scratch.’
‘We've got to learn to eat food in season again, too,’ adds Twiggy.
‘We've been spoiled by being able to buy a mango whenever we fancy one, but we've got to return to cooking turnips in November and having tomatoes in July.
And not expecting everything to look as if it's been lifted straight from the page of a glossy foodie magazine.’
Francesca interjects with the heartening news that her children's father ‘is fanatical about food preparation — spends hours on it.
So it isn't just a feminine response to the problem.
Lots of men I know are prepared to take some time ensuring their children's food is fresh and safe, once they understand the issues.’
They predict that ultimately, increased demand for organic produce will result in ready-prepared, time-saving but safe meals (which have not been irradiated, either) becoming widely available.
Meanwhile, the collective clout of famous names like Pamela's, Rula's and Twiggy's, heading a list which also features Victoria Wood, Kiri te Kanawa, Ben Kingsley, Ringo Starr and Barbara Bach, Linda McCartney, Shakira and Michael Caine — to name but a handful — means that the women (and the men) in the street who supports Parents for Safe Food's Campaign at last stands a chance of being heard in the food forum.
‘Everyone who believes that we are what we eat will be able to get to the root of what that really means,’ declares Francesca.
Concludes Pamela: ‘Every housewife can feel confident in her own power to change the way our food is grown, prepared and sold.
The average housewife, at last, has a voice.
And when I say average, I include all of us,’ declares the comedienne-turned-crusader, while her famous friends — and now, her supporters — nod in agreement.
Before disappearing to make records, attend rehearsals, lobby ministers — or, just as important, to scrub and peel the vegetables, maybe open a can of organic baked beans, for their children's supper.
Out of the mouths of babes: the Stephenson/Connolly tribe, Scarlett (one), Amy (two), Daisy (five).
Photographs by John Swannell.
Hair by Vicki Partridge for Streeters.
Make-up by Charlie Duffy.
Pamela's jacket by Robina, earrings by Glynneth Barren
What irradiation does to food
Food which is undergoing irradiation is placed in front of an opening in a lead box full of Cobalt-60 or Caesium 137, both radioactive substances.
These substances emit gamma rays, which pass through the food and kill most things, including yeasts, moulds and most forms of bacteria — although they cannot always kill all bacteria, such as those which cause botulism.
If the food is already going bad, irradiation can destroy the bugs that are making it rotten; so, with a low bacteria count, the food's state of decay cannot be spotted.
Irradiation, therefore, can be a ‘quick fix’ method which can cover up sloppy and unhygienic conditions in the food manufacturing industry.
Already there are instances where prawns unfit for human consumption have been exported, irradiated abroad, re-imported and later sold in catering packs in restaurants.
When food is irradiated, various compounds are formed whose effects are not yet known or understood.
Irradiation also presents environmental dangers.
Radioactive poisons with a half life of thousands of years will be routinely handled in all sorts of locations, even some farms.
There is a danger of leakages and the deliberate dumping of radioactive material, with potentially catastrophic results for the environment.
Parents for Safe Food Action Plan
Buy organically-grown fruit, juices and vegetables whenever possible.
Write or talk to your local supermarket manager to encourage the store to stock a wider range of organic produce and to reduce the pesticides used by their suppliers.
Wash all fresh produce before use.
Peeling fruit and vegetable skins will also help avoid some residues.
Peeling is more effective than washing for certain residues, but it will not remove pesticides like Alar.
Unfortunately, through peeling you may also lost some valuable nutrients.
Train yourself to be content with less than perfect-looking produce.
Cosmetic perfection is achieved with pesticides such as Alar.
If you have the time, energy and access to land, grow your own vegetables.
Write to your MP, MEP and the Prime Minister, requesting support for purer food and comprehensive labelling, including mention of all agrochemicals.
Support those organisations which argue for better controls over pesticides.
And join Parents for Safe Food at 32 Galena Road,, London, W6 0LT.
SHE PERSONAL RELATIONSHIPS
‘My earliest memory of my father is of him galloping down a field; my last is of him reaching out to me like a helpless kitten’
When I was a child I believed my father when he said he would live to be a hundred.
He loved life, and for a long time the force was with him.
He was a tall, strong looking man, a Battle of Britain pilot, a fine horseman, a dasher into icy waters.
When we were very small he was sometimes impatient with our toddling footsteps.
‘I can't walk slowly,’ he'd say, ‘I'll fall over.’
He liked us better when we shared his active pursuits.
My first clear memory is of sitting on the front of his horse as he galloped down a ploughed field, of the earth skittering and turning, and being safe in his arms.
The wheel came full circle last year when he suddenly became ill with a bewildering illness eventually diagnosed as amyloid of the kidneys.
He was 68 years old.
Right from the beginning, he fought the signs of ill health which were the first scribblings on the wall.
When, at the beginning of this illness, he and my mother came to stay, I organised what I can now see was an utterly inappropriate marathon of activities.
On the first morning, I arranged for a friend to take him flying.
As he strode off in a pair of pre-war jodhpurs and a moth-eaten jacket (wardrobe was never his strong point), I remember thinking how thin his legs looked.
Later, I took him riding through the woods.
When I turned to look back at him after a short canter, he was winded and scared with barely enough strength to stay on his horse.
Neither of us mentioned it: it would have been intolerable for either of us to accept that he was losing his grip.
In January he was in hospital, hotly denying that anything was really wrong with him.
‘Bit off colour these last few months,’ he'd tell visitors, ‘but I'll soon trot out sound.’
In February, after an exhausting series of tests, the doctor let us in on the secret my father strove to keep until the end of his life.
He was dying.
The illness was untreatable and irreversible; it would be downhill from now on.
All of us — my mother, my sister and I — were determined to spare him any more hospitals: he'd been badly burned during the war and had a horror of them.
But since he was too weak to travel, it was arranged that he would come and stay with my husband and I until he was fit enough to fly back to Jersey where he and my mother lived.
He was delivered in a car by friends and he looked shockingly ill.
As we staggered up the path like a couple of drunks, I kept up a desperate, bright flow of conversation, to mask the slowness of our steps.
When I helped him into bed he said, with some echo of his old authority, that nothing was to change while he was here; that I was to go on with my work; that he would teach me to play chess at last; that he was absolutely thrilled to be out of hospital, and it would be a positive delight to look after himself.
The next day, he got up, sat in the sun, stood up, and fainted so completely I thought he was dead.
When he came round, I had called the doctor.
I sat him up, and said to him in a new voice that he was not to try and move without me.
The old order was changing, and there was nothing we could do about it.
Since I did love my father and regretted that our busy lives had separated us, the chance to look after him, to give back some of the love he had given me, was in many ways terrifically satisfying.
We had some good laughs, and talks, he enjoyed being with my husband, we listened to music, and he was sweet and gentle and appreciative.
There were times during his illness, he told me, when he was happier than he'd been since he was a child.
But it was also a time of exhaustion and tension as I desperately hurtled between work, father and family; and of sorrow to see him suffering.
‘I feel like a whipped dog,’ he said, in a rare moment of candour about his condition.
By far the hardest adjustment for both of us was accepting the reversal of authority.
He now ate what I cooked, and went for a drive when I had time.
It was me who bathed him and turned off his light.
At first it all seemed dreadfully wrong and we did what our family always do in such situations; we were facetious.
‘Right now, Group Captain Sutton,’ I'd say in my most odiously nursey voice.
‘Do we need some help with our washing?’, all the while desperately trying not to look at the forbidden sight of father naked in the bath.
‘Thank you nursie…you old cow,’ he'd say, desperately pretending not to be naked in the bath.
‘You can shove off now.’
At times it got beyond a joke.
One morning, he got caught short in the bathroom and was too weak to clean it up.
He looked up at me after I finished and I saw that whipped dog look.
‘This is awful,’ he said.
‘You shouldn't be doing this.’
In my case, several things made caring for my father easier than it might have been.
First he still had his marbles, was in full possession of a lively and funny mind.
He was very good company.
Second, there was plenty of backup: my husband, my sister who arrived from Australia, and a good local GP.
But, perhaps most importantly, there was an end in sight and soon my mother — who nursed him heroically for most of the year, and on whom by far the heaviest load had fallen and would fall — once again took over from me.
But why are daughters so prone, so programmed to care?
Why do some spend years and years caring for parents they may not even like?
We may think we are an uncaring society but in this matter of looking after our own, we are most emphatically not: for every hundred old people only one is in a home and then often after enormous efforts to help them at home have failed.
Jill Pitkeathley, who recently published a book called It's My Duty Isn't It?
(Souvenir Press, £7.95) on the plight of carers in our society, agrees that the 3.5 million women and 2.5 million men who become carers do so out of an almost instinctive mixture of love and duty.
‘I had no choice,’ they say, or ‘I couldn't let him/her go into a home.’
And sometimes they decide to do so just because the alternatives seem so appalling.
‘Often,’ says Pitkeathley, ‘they become carers with no time to plan, no time to think about the effect on their lives.
A parent becomes ill.
A daughter may start by doing the shopping or going to sit with them for a few hours.
The parent becomes more dependent, and with only small increases in the time and amount of care involved, there is suddenly a multiplicity of tasks until one has progressed unawares to the point of full-time caring.’
The practical difficulties of nursing a sick relative can be very great, but Pitkeathley agrees that it is often the emotional upset of having to bath a previously fastidious mother, or pretend your father has spilt his tea when the bed is wet, or simply having to make all the decisions for a once strong parent, which cases the most upset.
‘It cuts across some of our most deeply held inhibitions and taboos,’ she says.
She is right.
I hated the growing fear my father (and we) shared during his illness, that he would mess the bed, and once suggested to him that all families should be required once a month to show each other the contents of their potties.
For it is the fear of shit and pee and shame and awkward smells which finally makes families crack and pack their relatives off to homes.
Another upsetting aspect of caring, for some offspring, is the realisation that this task can wave no magic wand which will make a bad relationship better.
Indeed like having children, the experience may bring you eyeball to eyeball with some of the thoroughly unpleasant aspects of your own personality.
‘It sounds so silly when I think about it now,’ says a disappointed daughter in Pitkeathley's book, ‘but I used to have this image of us sitting together in the afternoons.
She would have her hair nicely done and I might be doing a bit of sewing.
There would be a nice smell of baking and we'd be chatting about old times or the grandchildren.
I realise now that this is how I wanted things to be when I was a small girl and came home from school.
I wanted mother to be sitting waiting for me with cakes in the oven and ready to listen to my tales of school.
Only she was never there, she was out working.
Maybe I thought we could make up for all those afternoons.
Well, it was a rude awakening.
You can't chat with someone who is senile, and when she wets herself I shout at her as much as she once shouted at me.’
Other women find themselves torn apart by their conflicting loyalties.
Whose call must be the only they obey first: their husband's?
Their father's?
Their children's?
Beryl Cooper brought her 75-year old father home to live with herself, her husband and their two children on the day her mother died.
Her father moved into the marital bed, she and her husband moved downstairs.
Two children from her husband's first marriage were also staying, ‘and if I could have pictures,’ she says, ‘I would have drawn the house with big bulges all over it.’
Her father stayed for five years, during which time he became doubly incontinent and increasingly senile.
‘Sometimes he'd cry about this,’ she recalls, ‘and say he was an awful nuisance to me.
I'd say ‘No, you're not.’
In the end, I'd say, ‘Yes, you are but I love you anyway, '’ In truth the experience had a dreadful effect on her marriage and on her relationship with her brothers and sisters, who fell out with her.
‘I think because they felt guilty because they weren't doing more themselves.’
Finally, after a long desperate battle with her conscience, she agreed, after he had had a small heart attack, to put him into a local hospital.
After that he went into a nursing home nearby.
The move has not been the trauma either had expected.
‘It took my father about a year to settle down,’ she says.
‘Now he's happier, I think, than he'd been for a long time.
I walk the dog up there several times a week.
‘I can walk in there at any hour or the day or night, and best of all, I love him again.
‘I lost the feeling of love for a while.
I was too tired.
I felt more like a mother than a daughter.’
I hope I have not made the experience of caring for the sick parent sound all gloom and sacrifice and bedpans.
It wasn't for me.
In the end all the things I was most frightened of — that we would let my father down, that he would lose control, that he would die in agony — did not come to pass.
He died early one morning with our arms around him, and with the ducks quacking on the beach outside and his dogs lying at the foot of his bed.
It was one of those moments in life, when pure instinct takes over and only love seems important, and one moves far beyond roles.
A few moments before he died he rubbed his cheek against our hands desperate for our touch, like a kitten or a very young baby; in the next he was once again the brave young fighter pilot, and, in a curiously jaunty gesture he put his thumbs up, as though telling control tower he was ready now for take off.
We correctly anticipated how much we would miss him, but the manner of his passing became him well.
I'm so glad I was there.
Julia and her father: ‘The hardest thing for us both was the reversal of authority’
Below: Group Captain Sutton in his cockpit.
Far left: riding high
The problem page
Audrey Slaughter has led the sort of varied life that gives her the experience and understanding for dealing with SHE readers' personal problems.
She married young, and was divorced when her children were just two and five.
Throughout her marriage, and during a long period as a single parent, she was a journalist, editing magazines such as Honey ,Over 21 , and Working Woman , as well as being Woman's Page Editor on the Sunday Times and The Independent .
In 1979 she married again, acquiring four grown-up stepchildren in the process.
She has just sold her first novel to Doubleday, and she is at work on another.
Recently she became a proud grandmother.
Q
At 29 I realise that I'm never going to get married, for the simple reason that no man has ever looked at me twice.
When I see myself in the mirror I realise why; I am very unattractive.
I am being objective, not self-pitying, because quite honestly I am not much interested in men anyway.
But I yearn for a child or even children.
A young married woman my office has tried to adopt a baby since she had a hysterectomy, and she is still waiting after a year.
Apparently babies are in short supply.
If even she has difficulty, the chances of me adopting a child are negligible, I suppose.
I have a well-paid, secure job and my own, mortgage-free house inherited from my parents, so I am quite economically secure.
Since my firm gives us all private health insurance, which involves an annual check-up, I know I am in good health.
I fear if I don't make an effort soon I'll be considered too old to adopt, but if you think I have no chance at all, I won't bother risking disappointment.
A
The key word here is babies.
Babies are in short supply, but children are not.
If you don't mind older children, or a family (adoption agencies like to keep brothers and sisters together if possible) or a handicapped child, then there is no barrier to you.
But adoption agencies, quite rightly, put the child's interests first.
They wouldn't be keen on anyone with psychological quirks — like an entrenched hatred of men, for instance, or someone who is adopting a child merely because they want to be loved by a child.
Each case is considered very much on its merits — there are no hard and fast criteria — but they would need to be very sure of your motives in adopting.
So provided you feel you could give a happy, stable home to a child and, like the adoption agencies, put the child first, there is no reason why you shouldn't go ahead.
Presumably you have worked out the cost of someone caring for the child while you are earning a living.
There is a North Region branch of the British Agency for Adoption and Fostering in your area, and I suggest you contact them in the first instance.
The address is MEA house, Ellison Place, Newcastle on Tyne, NE1 8XF (tel: 091 261 6600).
Q
My husband is very clever and hardworking, but totally underrated in his job.
Other people with less ability have overtaken him on the ladder and it makes me so cross.
He says simply that he enjoys what he does (he's in research) and is not ambitious — that he'd be unhappy on the managerial side.
I think it is just because his is too mild and won't make an effort to assert himself.
He gets annual increases but never a big salary jump, which he would if he were promoted.
I seethe with frustration, but he simply smiles and tells me not to fret.
How can I make him see his colleagues will look down on him if he says in the same old rut?
A
Perhaps the one who is looking down on him is you.
You say he is clever, clever enough to know what he wants to do and what makes him satisfied.
His company must appreciate him, or he wouldn't rate a yearly raise.
But you feel slighted and frustrated because you want the promotion and the higher salary and any other perks that go with it.
Be very careful.
You may turn into one of those driving, ambitious wives who are not glad of their husband's contentment but want to change him into something he is not.
More money and more promotion won't bring him happiness and, I suspect that at the end of the day, neither will they satisfy you.
Why not channel your own ambition into a career of your own?
Q
I hope you don't mind answering a letter from a man, but I don't know how to cope with this woman in my office.
She was going out with a friend of mine, but she came on so strong that she frightened him off.
She was so obviously upset by the break-up that I asked her out to lunch to cheer her up, and I asked her home because I thought my mother and sister might help her.
Unfortunately she now clings to me all the time and I find it terribly embarrassing and uncomfortable.
She somehow manages to put invitations so cleverly that I can hardly refuse them — will I advise her about a job move, will I try out a new restaurant with her before she entertains a client there?
Then she drinks too much and gets maudlin about this ex-boyfriend.
Once I drank too much and spent the night with her, which was a terrible mistake.
She expects it every time and though I still feel sorry for her, I don't fancy her.
She sends my mother presents and letters and once confessed to me she wished she was a lesbian.
I don't know what to do and I wish I'd never become involved.
A
She sounds an emotional mess, and is using you as a substitute for her lost love.
She obviously knows you are not keen, which is why she uses blandishments of one kind or another to keep you by her side.
She sounds desperately unhappy, poor thing, and perhaps she should talk to a psychiatrist.
Tell her firmly that you fear if she doesn't pull herself together soon she'll have a drink problem and suggest she seeks help from her GP who can refer her to a psychiatrist.
I think you have done enough and must distance yourself from her possessive embrace.
You will have to be a little cruel to be kind or she'll never regain her stability or independence.
Q
My sister is far more attractive than I am, and as soon as any of my boyfriends have met her, they have gone off me.
I moved away from home to work in another town a year ago, and have met a man who, as far as I'm concerned, is Mr Right.
I love him dearly and he tells me he feels the same, and we have talked of marriage.
But I am terrified of taking him home to meet the family and particularly my sister, in case he goes the way of all the others.
A
You have to expose him to the temptation, don't you?
Because you can't keep him under wraps for ever, and if you did marry him, you'd have to be sure he wouldn't stray in your sister's direction.
Perhaps in her company you fade psychologically — you are so used to believing that she is more attractive that you cease to believe in your own abilities.
Looks aren't everything; often one ceases to notice them and it is the warmth, the character, the personality that holds another person in thrall.
Start believing more in yourself, and less in the all-conquering power of your sister.
Q
Nearly eight months ago my boyfriend left me.
We had known each other for five years and were lovers for three, although we didn't live together.
He is the main financial support of his widowed mother and I have very strait-laced parents.
Since we had to make love where we could, it was always furtive and not always satisfactory.
But still, we did have several holidays together and I had assumed that one day we would get married.
The shock of him going off was like a physical blow.
I wept buckets, wrote to him, telephoned his mother — did everything I could to explain how devastated I felt.
All he would say in return was that he didn't think it was working out!
He wouldn't say what wasn't working out, though I guess it was the sexual frustration and not being able to put a date on setting up home together.
I still love David, I miss him and want only him.
Should I make fresh efforts to get him back?
A
David might simply have been overwhelmed by his financial responsibilities towards his mother, and could see no immediate future for a life with you and didn't want to tie you down.
On the other hand, his feelings may have simply waned — sometimes and affair that doesn't move on fizzles out as time passes by.
Write him a friendly letter, saying you often think of him and wonder how he is.
That it seems pointless not to remain friends after so long, and ask him to have a meal with you.
Keep it short, light and friendly, and tell him something positive about yourself.
Don't sound moony.
If he responds try to keep the same tone.
You mustn't be heavy and frighten him.
But don't raise your hopes.
In the meantime, try to keep up a social life and meet other people.
It will help rebuild your morale and self-confidence.
Q
I am terribly shy and as a result, very lonely.
I am the only child of elderly parents and I suppose when I was young they were over-protective and old-fashioned.
We lived a fairly isolated life, and I don't think I've ever learnt how to be at ease socially.
When I was at college I used to bury my nose in a book rather than join one of the societies and almost rebuffed overtures, as I was so scared of not knowing what to talk about.
My parents are dead now, and I moved away from our village to quite a big town in the hope that I would make friends.
I am a librarian, and it seems books are going to be my only companions.
I still freeze if people talk to me and can't get out one amusing response.
Yet I desperately want to have a friend or two to socialise with.
A
I have a theory that most people believe that they are shy and you hear the most extraordinarily extrovert people being interviewed on television and radio and confession they are really shy!
You are most interested in how you come across to other people, whether they think you are witty or pretty, rather than having a genuine interest in them and their views.
Like you, I used to be overcome with shyness and would hover outside a roomful of people rather than go in and meet them.
A fierce aunt shocked me by telling me shyness is a form of rudeness and selfishness, and that I had to be the first to talk to two people.
I was still terrified, but even more frightened of my aunt, so I worked out something to say in advance and blurted it out.
I couldn't believe the mild, interested responses — before long I was actually having what amounted to a conversation.
I wasn't memorably arresting or amusing, and I dare say I fell back on the weather like everyone else, but it worked.
Try it.
Ask the next person returning a book what she/he thought of it; say what you think of the author.
Make an effort to be interested in them — have they read any others by the same author, have they seen the play/film/TV series of the book?
When you find that your head hasn't actually been bitten off and that you can actually speak, join one of the local societies whose activities are bound to be plastered all over your library's noticeboard.
Then paste on a smile, go up to someone who looks shy and lonely and be the one to draw them out.
Forget yourself and your reactions.
I bet it works a treat.
SHE HEALTH NEWS
Some like it not
What did Marilyn Monroe have in common with Shula Archer?
Endometriosis is the answer: a condition in which tissues resembling the endometrium, or the lining of the womb, grow either within the muscular walls of the uterus or even outside the uterine cavity altogether — in the ovaries or the bowel, for instance.
The causes of endometriosis are not completely known, but seem to be linked to an abnormal flow of menstrual blood.
Depending on the site of the condition, symptoms can include backache, rectal pain, period pain, irregular periods, painful intercourse and subfertility.
And about one British woman in ten is estimated to be suffering from it.
It is a condition that can be cured by hormone treatment, or if necessary, by surgery, and some women have found that it disappears altogether during pregnancy and never returns.
But although it is such a widespread condition, endometriosis is often overlooked because it can only be diagnosed by a minor surgical procedure called laparoscopy (the insertion of an illuminated instrument through a small incision in the abdomen) and many suffers do have problems getting their GPs to refer them to a specialist who can do the these for them.
However, The Endometriosis Society has tackled the problem by launching a guide book, the first of its kind, for women and their GPs.
It gives details of the treatment available, and draws on the experiences of the 2000 women who belong to the society.
Understanding Endometriosis by Caroline Hawkridge, has been published by McDonald Optima and costs £5.99.
The Endometriosis Society can be contacted at 65 Holmdene Avenue, London, SE24 9LD (tel: 01-737-4764).
ON THE DEFENSIVE
Being sued for negligence is now a growing worry for doctors in this country.
According to a recent survey conducted by two lecturers in law at Liverpool University, 82% of the 160 doctors they questioned in the UK admit to subjecting their patients to entirely unnecessary drugs, blood tests or X-rays.
Some doctors have even put their patients through operations they didn't need.
Lawyers are currently handling a record number of claims against doctors, and the result has been a dramatic shift towards ‘defensive’ medicine US-style.
Doctors protect themselves against even the remote possibility of failing to spot a disease and being sued for it by sending their patients for every test in the book.
But all this defensiveness is not necessarily good for the patient.
Apart from the waste of resources, some tests, for example X-rays, may themselves be bad for health.
So it could be worth asking your doctor one extra question next time he recommends a course of treatment: is it actually necessary.
RELAX THE REGIME
Pregnant women who take too much exercise could be robbing their babies of essential nutrients.
Studies at King's College School of Medicine show that even a short period of hard pedalling on an exercise bike diverts blood flow from the uterus to the legs, ‘stealing’ oxygen from the foetus.
Exercises such as straight sit-ups and weight lifting should be avoided in the last three months of pregnancy during which period a hormone called relaxin is produced.
This causes temporary softening of the ligaments in preparation for the birth.
Too much strain on the relaxin-softened tissue can cause permanent damage.
The King's College researchers say three to four weekly sessions ‘getting mildly breathless’ is about all that's needed to keep mother and baby fit before the birth.
PILL POPPING
New uses for aspirin keep emerging and it's now thought to help prevent heart attacks, strokes, arthritis and even some forms of cancer.
But be warned: the Hearing Research Trust point out that occasionally aspirin has been known to cause hearing loss, particularly if pill-taking is combined with exposure to persistent loud noise.
So, if you're popping down a daily aspirin, keep the pop music down too.
ANOTHER PINT OF THE SAME
About ten per cent of patients who receive blood transfusions suffer liver inflammation (hepatitis) as a result.
Usually it is very mild, but if you are due to undergo surgery and want to rule out any risk of infection from infused blood, it is worth asking the hospital if they will allow you to donate your own.
Some hospitals allow patients to keep their own blood in store several weeks in advance of surgery.
MEDICAL NOTES…
The Margaret Pyke Centre need volunteers for tests to find out of a diaphragm used with spermicide is more effective.
Write to: 15 Bateman's Buildings, London W1V 5TW.
Huddersfield police have painted one of their cells pink on the advice of colour therapists who claim it gives off anti-violence wavelengths The Amarant Trust has a cassette about Hormone Replacement Therapy.
It costs £5.99.
From: 16–24 Lonsdale Road, London NW6 6RD.
Marilyn Monroe's smile concealed the pain of endometriosis
Ease down exercise when you're pregnant, say the experts
SHE PERSONAL RELATIONSHIPS
THE CHEMISTRY OF SEX
Scientists say passion has a chemical formula.
Anne-Marie Smith lists the ingredients
‘Why, oh why, oh why,’ bemoaned a friend, sounding remarkably like a Gilbert O'Sullivan son, ‘does Nick always want to make love in the morning, which is exactly when I don't feel like it?
And when I do he's always watching the cricket.’
There was an instant chorus of recognition around the (all-female) table.
One the first flush of passion is over, sex often seems to become infrequent, not because you don't fancy each other, but because you don't fancy each other at the same times.
Surely if Nick finds Clare attractive first thing in the morning, then nine o'clock at night out to be just as good (or even better if you're Clare)?
The answer is sexual chemistry.
Anyone who's followed the antics of Wicked Willie, Man's Best Friend (the hilarious depiction of the male member by cartoonist Gray Jolliffe) will recognise the perversity of sexual chemistry.
Willie leads his Man a merry dance at any party, chasing any woman in sight.
But when he is called to perform later on that night he curls up in a limp ball and refuses to move.
The latest scientific research has revealed that there is a delicate interplay of hormones that affects our sexual desires.
It's the rise and fall in these hormone levels which govern when you feel attracted to someone and how compatible you are with your partner.
According to Barbara Sherwin, research psychologist at McGill University in Montreal, testosterone, the male hormone, also controls women's sexuality.
She found that when women with hormone deficiencies were prescribed a little testosterone along with their oestrogen they experienced increased sexual desire, and were more easily aroused.
Women naturally have some testosterone — around one tenth of the amount that men have.
That doesn't mean that men are ten times as easily sexually aroused, but it may contain clues as to why women and men have different patterns of arousal.
According to Dr John Bancroft, clinical consultant at the Medical Research Council's reproductive Biology Unit in Leicester, maximum sexual activity does seem to match maximum testosterone levels throughout the year.
Both rise around late summer and autumn, and there is a traditional peak of births around nine months later.
However, he points out that the effects of the testosterone rises appear to affect men more than women — in a study in the United States it was found that teenage boys felt sexier when their testosterone levels were high, whereas their female counterparts were more affected by peer group activity (ie what their friends were doing).
So one reason why many women are less easily aroused in the morning may well be because social factors are more important for them than they are for men.
Both women and men have a surge of testosterone in the early morning, but as women have a lower level to surge to, they are more likely to be overwhelmed by thoughts like ‘What's for breakfast?’ or ‘Did I ring the plumber?’than by passion.
And evidence shows that women feel more inhibited by things like not having cleaned their teeth or feeling grubby.
This throws a new light on the advice about spicing up your sex life by wearing an especially attractive dress or dining by candlelight.
Rather than enticing your man, its real value may be that it makes you feel sexier and therefore more likely to initiate or respond to his overtures.
For the same reasons sex is better at weekends or on holidays because your sexual desires are not being swamped by the trivia of everyday life.
Uncontrollable beasts?
This doesn't mean that we should revive the Victorian myth that women by nature aren't really interested in sex, while men are uncontrollable beasts.
In fact some British researchers believe that it's our oestrogen which governs our sexuality.
Professor Steven Franks of the department of reproductive endocrinology, St. Mary's Hospital, west London, says:
‘There have been claims that giving women testosterone in hormone replacement therapy increases their libido, but this isn't proved.
it is restored with oestrogen alone.’
Similarly, other experts say that the peak in testosterone which happens in women around mid-cycle when they are ovulating — and the very time they are likely to get pregnant — is very slight and unlikely to result in your pursuing your mate with greater passion.
On the other hand it would make sense for nature to endow us with greater sexuality at a time when we are most likely to become pregnant.
Added testosterone as a treatment to restore your sex life is fraught with difficulties, however.
Dr Andrew Macleod, specialist in endocrinology at St Thomas's Hospital, London, says: ‘It is known that increased testosterone improves the libido, but it's unlikely it will ever be used as a treatment.
Women whose ovaries produce too much suffer from hair on the face and chest, which they find very upsetting.
Women treated with testosterone would get increased facial hair, and they wouldn't thank you for it.’
There could even be real health risks in such therapy.
No-one really knows the mechanisms which cause women to live longer than men, but the clues are generally considered to lie in our hormones.
Dr Macleod points out that ‘If given continuously, testosterone could shorten women's lives.
It may influence lipid levels and introduce all the risks men have, such as heart attacks, which makes it, by and large, unacceptable as a treatment for low libido.’
Passion killer
Stress, as everyone knows, is a real passion-killer in both women and men.
As one friend complained: ‘One doesn't just suffer from one's own stress — as soon as our man's job is going badly we're the ones who get the backlash and that always seems to include no sex.’
Now evidence shows that it's more than the fact that he has something on his mind to distract him from sex — it's an actual physical phenomenon.
Dr Estelle Ramey, professor emeritus of physiology at Georgetown University School of Medicine, USA, explains that ‘your system is so delicately balanced that it's very difficult for your body to make two types of hormones at once.
So decisions are made in a bio-chemical fashion as to which is more immediately necessary.
When the brain starts signalling production of stress hormones it begins to inhibit sex hormone secretions.’
So worry overcomes desire.
Pheromones are another chemical influence on our sex life.
When Wicked Willie explains to his Man that ‘it's no good, I don't fancy Caroline and I never will’, he means that in spite of Man's liking and respect for the girl, and even her physical attractiveness, there isn't that subtle sexual aroma exuded by pheromones.
Dr Macleod explains that these are ‘chemical substances emitted by an animal or person and they act via the sense of smell.
Male emperor moths can pick up minute concentrations of female moth pheromones from many miles away.’
Studies a few years ago showed that by spraying pheromones onto chairs in a doctor's waiting room, there was a marked difference in the way people chose to sit on them.
The chairs sprayed with male pheromones were shunned.
However so far, all attempts to bottle this ‘smell’ satisfactorily have failed, and how to use this aspect of sexual attraction still remains largely a mystery.
Pheromones are the reason why women who live or work together often find that their periods coincide.
Once again no-one knows why, or if one woman is the ‘leader’, but experiments have shown that male pheromones influence women's periods too.
Dr Winnifred Cutler, director of the Athena Institute for Women's Wellness in Philadelphia, discovered that if male pheromones could be attached to women who weren't having regular sex (by extracting them from men and taping them to women's upper lips) then this worked to regulate periods almost as well as regular sex.
Tuning in and turning on
You can boost hormonal activity with your lifestyle.
Sex actually raises testosterone levels — so perhaps that's why sexual drive seems to accelerate with the more sex you have, and partly why people who stop having sex forget about it.
Testosterone also seems to rise with success — winning a game or getting promoted.
So getting fit or setting yourself achievable goals could have the pleasant side-effect of so improving your self-esteem — and hormone levels — that your sex life perks up markedly.
Dr Ramey also explains that when couples are together for some time their hormone levels often begin to co-ordinate in the same way, so regular sex — say on Saturday nights — mean you tune into each other 's hormone levels.
On the other hand the boredom factor can then set in, and hormone levels may drop because they are no longer stimulated.
She suggests you cheat your hormones by including the element of surprise — black stockings or a weekend away, for example.
So at last— science has discovered the reason why agony aunts always give you the same advice: if your marriage has got stale, brighten yourself up, get fitter, take up a hobby or surprise your husband.
It's all a chemical reaction.
SHE PERFORMANCE
Strangers in the night
If your marriage is on the rocks, the thing to do is throw a wobbly on a motorway at night so that your husband will put you out at the next lay-by.
There you will meet a tall, rugged stranger taking his car engine to bits with no hope of reassembling it.
It is raining and he is hostile but beauty always moves the goal-posts; no sooner has he said, ‘Go away.
You smell,’ than his antipathy turns to obsession.
The only problem with the plot of Strange Place to Meet is that in order to win Gerard Depardieu you need to look like Catherine Deneuve, palely gorgeous in a sable coat.
‘You see a woman like her in the street and you imagine she is very much at ease with life,’ Catherine told me recently.
‘But inside she is only dust.
She has built all her emotional life on one period.
I can't say I know many women like that but I find it interesting.’
And it is.
Francois Dupeyron, first-time writer-director, is a natural talent; his images linger in the mind long after you have left the cinema.
Strange Place to Meet (15) opened in London on September 8.
BRIEFLY…
Oliver Stone attacks US institutions in Talk Radio (18).
Outspoken but unsatisfactory look at chat shows that overdose on bigotry.
Opens September 22.
Carol Woods takes the lead as the legendary blues singer in Ma Rainey's Black Bottom , Cottesloe Theatre, from October 19.
A controversial return to the Falklands War in Resurrected (15).
Opens Sept 29.
THE TROUBLE WITH SEX
Further and rather more amusing variations on the perennial theme of marital discord occur in Sex, Lies and Videotape , the winner of the Palme D'Or at this year's Cannes Film Festival.
James Spader has come to prefer impotence to sexual deception.
In the belief that it is better to abuse himself than others, he gets his kicks from watching his own videotaped interviews with women about their sexual preferences.
When this honest but somewhat unusual messiah delivers his message to a neurotic undersexed housewife (Andie MacDowell) whose husband is having an affair with her sister, fur flies.
Funny, sophisticated.
Sex, Lies and Videotape (18) opened in London on September 8.
WHEELER DEALING
It may be impossible to catch up with history, but no-one could accuse the entertainment mongers of not trying.
The result, as inflation rises and employment levels in the City of London fall, is a rash of slightly dated fast-lane brokerage dramas.
Paul McCann and Rebecca DeMornay are already doing it their way nationwide in Dealers (15).
Now the suits get into our very parlours in Capital City , a long running television saga of banking folk.
They come from Finland, America and Germany and they fight over mergers and acquisitions and venture capital.
Hang on a minute.
Isn't that what most of us do most of the time?
Maybe merchant banking is the ultimate microcosm for life after all.
Capital City is a 13-part ITV series starting in the autumn.
THE POWER OF LOVE
We Think The World of You is about the class wars as they were waged in the 50s before the rules were changed for ever.
In Colin Gregg's film based on the autobiographical novel by Joseph Ackerley, the great divide comes between the gentleman (Alan Bates) and the players (Gary Oldman, Liz Smith, Max Wall and Frances Barber).
Only the dog is neutral.
Bates is intense as the lonely homosexual whose obsessive selfless love is only reciprocated by a dumb animal.
We Think the World of You (PG) opens in London on September 22.
RENAISSANCE MAN
Is Kenneth Branagh Britain's answer to Woody Allen?
No, he's far too earnest, but he sure is multi-talented.
His film of Henry V, with himself as the rabble rousing monarch backed by a troupe of glittering British heavyweights, opens on October 6.
His autobiography was published on September 28 and, on October 2 he gives a talk at the National Theatre.
Top: Depardieu meets Deneuve; above left: Spader and video; right: Branagh
SHE DIET NEWS
DOES FAT RUN IN THE FAMILY?
Children born to fat parents often have a tendency to become fat as well.
but is this because of the family's bad eating habits, or is there a genetic factor?
Professor John Durnin, of Glasgow University's Institute of Physiology, thinks there probably is a slight genetic factor involved, meaning that if your mother is overweight, the scales are tilted a little towards you following suit.
It's all a question of the rate of your personal metabolism.
‘The rate at which you burn up energy varies quite a bit between individuals.
Average-sized people use up about one calorie a minute while at rest, a little bit less if you're bigger,’ says Professor Durnin.
Your basal metabolic rate (ie when you are resting) has an influence on how much energy you expend when you are doing anything that doesn't involve very much physical activity.
So, if you have a low metabolism when you sleep, it will also probably be low when you are sitting or standing.
If you are born with a gene that results in your having a low metabolic rate, you need relatively smaller amounts of energy — and that means a smaller quantity of food — to keep yourself going, than people with a higher metabolic rate.
Unfair?
Yes it is, alas.
And you cannot safely ginger up your metabolic rate with drugs because of the risk from side-effects.
The only alternative, says Professor Durnin, is to try to burn up more energy by being physically active.
Grab those training shoes…
If you ever get the chance, take a fitness test and have your fat level checked out.
Women have, on average, about 25% fat.
If your fat levels are over 30%, you know you have something to lose.
BANGERS AND TRASH
Eating sausages means eating a lot of added fat, salt, preservatives and colourings, says Dr Tim Lobstein of the London Food Commission.
‘The Dept of Health is urging us to cut back on fatty foods, yet here is just that sort of food promoted as really good value.’
He was referring to ‘prime’ and ‘premium’sausages in which you might expect leaner meat, less filler material, or less fat.
But recent analysis of leading brands found their average fat level was 25%, compared with 22% in regular sausages.
Even the best ‘low fat’ sausages had only 59% lean meat.
FATTENING HABITS
Losing weight requires relatively slight but lifelong changes of your eating and activity habits, according to Dr D A Booth of Birmingham University.
He says that getting fatter may be the result of a build-up of eating even as little as 200, 100 or 50 calories a day more than you expend as energy — over a period of months or years.
Those persistent but slightly fattening habits which are the key to your weight problem could be: having ‘densely packed’ calories at meals (that means having a lot of fat, either visible such as butter on your bread or invisible like butter in a cake); snacking in between meals, especially if those snacks include cream, alcohol and sugar; and not expending energy with exercise to use up the calories.
DRESSING FOR DINNER
Restricted choice is what makes most diets boring — so any new range that increases choice is always welcome.
Hellmann's have introduced five new salad dressings to tickle our tastebuds which compare favourably calorie-wise with lower calorie mayonnaise.
This is good news as mayonnaises and salad dressings are usually on the no-go, high calorie list for slimmers.
Although mayonnaise can give spice to sandwiches, pancake fillings, dips, jacket potato toppings as well as salads, dieters usually resist as just one tablespoon (15g) of ordinary mayonnaise contains 108 calories.
But one tablespoon of Hellmann's new range is less than half that — just 47 or 48 calories depending on the flavour.
Choose from Kashmir (mild curry), St Jacques (garlic, cheese and black peppercorns) Tijuana (avocado and; smoked gammon with a hint of chilli), Thousand Island (tomatoes and peppers) and Blue Royale (blue cheese with a hint of celery).
They cost 75p each.
CHANGE FOR THE BETTER
You can lose weight just by changing the type of food you eat.
By halving fat intake to 20% of total calories and cutting out sweets, 12 women in a study by Utah University lost an average of 13 lbs.
in 16 weeks.
They were allowed unlimited fruit, vegetables and starchy foods like bread and potatoes.
Yet they still ate an average of 400 calories a day less than usual.
PERSONAL SERVICES
Finding the motivation to do a lone workout session is half the challenge with exercise.
So in Britain, an increasing number of people with hectic schedules are following the example of America, and calling in personal trainers for workouts in their own homes or offices.
Trainers can help to make exercises more exciting, safe and enjoyable than a solitary routine, and can vary and intensify your exercise programme to suit your enthusiasm and fitness level.
The fees vary from about £10 to £40 per session, depending on the trainer's skills, how much in demand he or she is, the distance travelled and what some trainers assess you can afford.
In London, Dave Prowse, the six foot six inch, 19 stone former director of the National Sports Centre at Crystal Palace and Darth Vader in Star Wars , offers one-to-one training in your home, office or at his private studio, the newly opened Club Royale at 11 Whitehorse St, London W1Y 7LB (tel: 01-493-1977) or at The Dave Prowse Fitness Centre, 12 Marshalsea Road, London SE1 (Tel: 01–407 5650).
Jamie Addicoat, who manages the gym at The Fitness Centre, 11 Floral St, Covent Garden, London WC2 (tel: 01–836 6544), is personal fitness consultant to many celebrities and executives.
But if he likes (or doesn't like) you, status and money are nothing to Jamie.
‘I train who I want to,’ he says.
A personal recommendation is best when you are looking for a trainer, but try your local gym, health club or leisure centre and do ask about qualifications.
DANGER DRUGS
Slimming pills containing high levels of guar and locust bean gums are to be banned as potential health risks, the Ministry of Agriculture has announced.
The ban has been welcomed by doctors.
The gums cause the pills to swell in the stomach, allegedly dulling the appetite, but cases have been reported from West Germany, Australia and Sweden in which the pills swelled in the throat and caused an obstruction.
DOING PORRIDGE
A breakfast that leaves you feeling full gets your diet off to a great start.
For staying power nothing beats a bowl of porridge and, as a bonus, oats are great health value, too.
Soluble fibre, found in oat bran, beans and fruit pectin, is thought to reduce serum cholesterol levels and so protect against heart attacks.
More than 50% of oat bran fibre is water-soluble compared to eight per cent of what bran fibre.
You can now buy porridge oats enriched with extra oat bran (Quaker Oats) which gives ten per cent more soluble fibre than regular oats, which still have the highest soluble fibre content of any other breakfast cereal.
Have your oats with skimmed milk, and use granulated sweetener instead of sugar to save on calories, and you will feel so replete you won't want to nibble until lunch.
SHE ALTERNATIVE HEALTH
Down in the mouth
According to ancient Chinese medicine, individual teeth are connected to different body parts through a series of meridians.
So someone suffering from repeated infections in their gums may actually need to tackle other health problems rather than just relying on improved dental hygiene.
In the US there is a general call for dentists to become more holistic and to see dentistry as an integral part of health rather than treating patients as walking sets of teeth.
Even acute fear of dentistry may be more than just fear of the drill: California dentist James Rota says that women who are most frightened of dentists are those who have been sexually molested as children.
This is because the mouth is a primary erotic zone of the body, and dentistry can trigger off hidden memories of sexual abuse.
Meanwhile the debate on whether to replace mercury amalgam fillings continues — the American Dental Association has gone on record as saying that dentists who recommend replacing fillings may do so because of the often hefty fees they can charge for the work.
However, many multiple sclerosis victims have reported improvements in health since changing fillings, and there have been rumours that even Princess Diana has had hers done.
Jack Levenson, President of the British Dental Society for Clinical Nutrition, says that those suffering from mercury toxicity from fillings can benefit from nutritional supplementation.
He has devised a vitamin and mineral supplement called Ultra-Detoxi for the Nature's Best brand: £16.50 for 30 days' supply.
CLEAN LIVING
We're all seeing a great deal of concern about dioxins in tampons and nappies, but did you know that incinerators and leaded petrol are also major contributors towards the levels in our environment?
It is estimated that as much as 98% of dioxin intake by humans comes to us through the food chain, notably meat, milk, fish and eggs.
(Grazing animals ingest dioxins through eating contaminated plants and soil.)
And, according to Government scientists, breast-fed babies can be exposed to up to 100 times the guideline level.
Dioxins get into mothers' milk through contaminated food and as babies consume large quantities relative to their body weight, their intake is temporarily very high.
However, the advantages of breast feeding outweigh any health risks from dioxins.
Government action
It will take several decades to reduce dioxin levels in the environment by a significant amount.
Current Government steps include:
Advising product manufacturers to change to unbleached or non-chlorine bleached paper packaging.
Cutting levels of dioxins produced through industrial (including hospital) incinerators by 90%.
What can you do
Stop smoking.
Though cigarettes make a relatively small contribution to overall levels, they do man increased exposure for the individual smoker.
Choose unbleached or non-chlorine bleached sanitary protection products, nappies and tissues.
Domestic coal and wood fires contribute greatly so a reduction in this area can help.
Switch to unleaded petrol, which reduces dioxins from exhaust fumes by up to 80%.
A SUCKER FOR MEDICINE
The leech is making a comeback in medicine, according to Roy T sawyer, whose company Biopharm in Swansea has developed medical applications for leeches.
They're useful in surgery to keep blood flowing at the right speed and sucking old blood from re-attached parts so new blood flows in quickly.
Sawyer runs the world's only leech farm and 75% of them are sold abroad, to hospitals, schools and universities.
They cost £4.50 each.
Biopharm can get leech to anywhere in the world in a day.
They're also developing Hementin, an enzyme which can dissolve blood clots, derived from the Amazon leech which is 18 inches long.
HEALTH NOTES
Royal Jelly enthusiasts endow it with almost magical medical properties.
Now there's a new book,Royal Jelly — the Guide to the World's Richest Health Food (Thorsons, £4.99) by Irene Stein, whose enthusiasm for the miracle supplement extends to selling it through her company.
Some of the case histories seem scientifically a little scanty but there is sufficient evidence of its effectiveness in the treatment of arthritis for sufferers to give it a try.
Women who grow excess facial and body hair often find that their confidence is so destroyed that they would benefit from psychological counselling, according to the Drug and Therapeutics Bulletin .
Even if the amount of hair seems small to doctor, all patients need sympathetic help, it continues.
As for the remedies — try waxing, bleaching and shaving.
Electrolysis is the only permanent method but sometimes hormonal treatment is necessary.
The combined oral contraceptive is one option.
Pegged out: dental problems may be a symptom of other illness in the body, above.
Below: royal jelly — myth or medicine?
Bloody minded: the leech, below, is making a medical comeback
SHE BEAUTY NEWS
Perfect HARMONY
As we approach the third millennium, women will become less materialistic and more spiritual.
This prediction comes from Guerlain, whose perfumes have been worn by beautiful women such as Catherine Deneuve, Joan Collins and Ursula Andress.
This new spirituality is reflected in Guerlain's new perfume Samsara (left), which is based around a concept of harmony and balance.
It takes its inspiration from the Eastern idea of nirvana, ‘a few drops of serenity’.
The fragrance is beautifully crafted — a subtle blend of jasmine and sandalwood — and the bottle takes its theme from a dancing Buddhist goddess.
It makes a refreshing change from some of today's more powerful and aggressive perfumes, and like Guerlain's other fragrances, Samsara should become one of the great classics.
BEAUTY BOOSTERS
Recent research by La Roche has shown that vitamins and minerals can be beneficial in skin and hair products.
Vitamin A: renowned for its healing and anti-ageing properties; Vitamin A Palmitate shows promising results in after-sun products.
Tests show less wrinkling and repair to sun-damaged skin.
(Arden's Visible Difference contains Vitamin A.)
Vitamin E: research shows that it interrupts the free radical chain of destruction and so can slow down the ageing process.
Some suntan products (including Coppertone, RoC and Biotherm) contain it.
Panthenol (Provitamin B5): benefits hair and skin.
It reduces the likelihood of split ends by 30–40%, slows down hair ageing, is a penetrating hair moisturizer, conditions without build up and reduces tangling.
Acts as a powerful skin moisturizer and is anti-inflammatory (especially with sunburn).
BROWNIE POINTS
A new autumn hair shade for a hint of rich brown is Crystal (above) from L'Oréal's ‘Precious Naturals’ range.
It combines earth tones with gloss and natural movement.
FREE OFFER
Hands, knees, elbows and feet are particularly susceptible to dry skin through everyday hazards such as detergent, friction, wind and cold.
Dry Skin Relief conditioning lotion by Revlon is a natural solution to this problem.
It contains honey, almond oil, protein, silicone and organic herbs.
We have a 100ml sample size of Dry Skin Relief to give away absolutely free to the first 2500 readers whose names are drawn from the postbag.
Send your name and address on a postcard to reach us by October 31 1989 to: SHE/Revlon Offer, PO Box 98, Carshalton, Surrey, SM5 2DB. 500 have been put aside specially for SHE subscribers, so if this applies please mark your postcard ‘subscriber’.
SHE BEAUTY TECHNIQUES
LIP SERVICE
We bought over 61 million lipsticks last year in the UK alone.
It's the single most popular type of make-up available, and even women who were no other cosmetic will buy lipstick at some stage in their lives.
The nation's best sellers are all pinky plum shades: ‘Plum Beautiful’ by Boots No. 7, followed by Rimmel's ‘Heather Shimmer’and third comes Max Factor's ‘Orchid’.
Part of the appeal is doubtless the ease with which it can be applied with great effect.
Take our three tips for long-lasting gloss on beautiful lips.
For extra night-time glamour add clear gloss to the lower lips — and pout.
1 LIP CARE:
Extreme weather is the greatest enemy of lips, so keep them protected from the elements with lip salves and creams.
For quick relief from chapped lips try Blisteze (89p), a medicated cream.
Cold sores are triggered off by an increase in body temperature such as when sunbathing or skiing.
If your susceptible use a total sunblock like White Lips by Hawaiian Tropic (£2.95), which contains zinc oxide.
2 HOW TO APPLY:
First, when applying your moisturizer, foundation and powder, also include the lip area for a matt base.
Working with a lipbrush and pencil is the key to perfectly applied lipstick.
Outline, using a sharp pencil slightly darker than the shade of lipstick being used.
Fill in using a lipbrush, blending carefully so the pencil-line doesn't show.
Blot with a tissue, powder over again, re-apply lipstick and blot.
NEW COLOURS:
Today's lipsticks have more staying power and smoother texture than their predecessors.
Such technologically advanced ranges include Clinique's Super Lipsticks, and Estée Lauder's Perfect Lipstick which contains Hydramoist Complex to rehydrate.
Make-up artist Barbara Daly says that for a ‘lipstick wardrobe’ try: a pinky/brown (this will go with anything); a sheer mid-apricot to match warm tones; a paprika/copper red (as opposed to scarlet) to wear with black, red, white and navy: and a bright pink which goes brilliantly with red.
Rosy pinks, rich coppers and deep plums are the big fashion news.
SHE's pick of the bunch are: Boots' No. 7 ‘French Almond’(–1.95), Sensiq's ‘Terra Firma’(£2.25), Bourjois' ‘Charade’(£2.95), Chanel's ‘Rouge Marquise’(£7.75), and Shiseido's ‘Golden Sienna’(£7.50).
Estée Lauder's ‘Perfect Garnet’ and Guerlain's ‘Lacque De Shine’
Britain in the doghouse
Rampaging strays, rabies, irresponsible breeders: is anyone doing anything about our dog crisis?
Soon after SHE's June issue hit the streets, your letters began to pour in.
You were responding to our article about dog licensing and welfare (License to Kill ), and your angry, passionate letters (‘tears are running down my face as I write’) clearly showed that dog welfare, and the tremendous problem of strays, are issues which occupy many minds.
So why is nothing happening to solve the crisis in dog control?
The RSPCA confidently state that ‘Dog Registration has become a political hot potato — the Royal society, along with other allied organisations and the majority of the general public, are convinced that national, compulsory registration for all dogs is the only way to solve the UK dog population explosion.
But despite the biggest backbench revolt that this Parliament has seen, the Government has dug its heels in a refuses to acknowledge the public call for action.’
As SHE went to press, the campaign for registration was debated in the House of Lords to whom we sent the results of the SHE survey.
But, while the legislators ponder on ‘the rights and freedoms of the individual’(is that the right to throw your Alsatian out onto the motorway because he's grown too big to handle?) we are all left to contemplate statistics like 1000 stray dogs put down daily by the RSPCA, or 58,000 road accidents (many involving death and serious injury) caused by stray dogs.
And what mother of young children, whether she owns a family pet or not, has not felt even more frightened of neighbourhood Rottweilers and Dobermans when she reads of the horrific savaging and killing of children by uncontrollable animals?
We are not just talking about an environmental nuisance here — we're talking about a real threat to life.
And behind these factors looms another terrible threat — rabies.
Recent newspaper reports have highlighted the potential threat to Britain when the Channel Tunnel links us with the Continent.
It costs the French £20 million a year to fight rabies, in vaccination, surveillance and research.
All pets are inoculated and all strays ruthlessly destroyed.
And while we have a large, uncontrolled and unregistered dog population, with many thousands of strays, we are increasing the risk to ourselves.
However, not everybody is in favour of national mandatory registration.
The Kennel Club have made clear their objection to a compulsory scheme based on tattooing or branding, a scheme favoured by many (including over 80% of SHE readers).
Martin Sinnatt, Club Secretary of the Kennel Club, explained that they object to this on the grounds of potential cruelty — not because indelibly marking a dog would hurt, but because they fear unscrupulous owners would try to remove the mark before dumping an unwanted pet.
‘If every dog is marked at birth and registered, the kind of person who wants to throw out a dog onto a motorway will seek to remove the identifying mark — it doesn't take a moment with a Stanley knife to remove an ear tattoo, or to use a drop of acid to burn off a brand.
That's what we're afraid of.
The Kennel Club defend themselves against accusations that they do not do enough to curtail irresponsible breeding.
A Kennel Club Working Party recently published recommendations that the law controlling the indiscriminate breeding and selling of dogs should be tightened up — the two activities should be linked and controlled under one act of Parliament.
At present anyone who is breeding commercially is required to register with the local authority, who send an Environmental Health Officer to check the premises.
The Kennel Club have also drawn up a code of ethics covering the sale of dogs in an attempt to control the so-called ‘puppy farmers’ who produce hundreds of animals purely for profit, and they offer a Canine Code, freely available to owners.
‘We are not a high-profile pressure group like the RSPCA, who can afford to spend thousands on shock-tactic campaigns, but we work constantly to promote responsible dog ownership through putting on political pressure,’ says Martin Sinnatt.
‘Our own registration scheme is the largest in the country, with over two millions dogs registered, so we say to owners, why not join ours?
We want to make sure people get the dog that's right for them, for the right reasons, that they fully understand their responsibilities regarding training, controlling and welfare.’
The Wood Green Animal Shelter (who kindly took on the SHE Dog Club when it grew too big for a magazine to handle!) run a highly successful registration scheme which, for those in favour of a mandatory system, could be a model for a national scheme.
Their registration system relies at present on collar tags, although they are hoping to introduce the revolutionary electronic ‘transponder’ method.
This transponder, about the size of a grain of rice, is injected painlessly into the back of the dog's neck, and when a reader is passed across the skin the reference number can be taken.
The scheme is growing by the thousands, and costs members £5 for life.
The dog's tag gives the Shelter's number — they operate a 24-hour, 365-day-a-year computer-search service — to reunite owners with lost pets, and are proud of their staggering success rate.
Members of the scheme also benefit from a third party insurance, for a premium of £2 a year.
While they may not realise it, owners can be held liable if their dog attacks someone, or causes an accident or damage, and this policy covers them up to £1 million.
The Shelter hopes that this attractive rate (a result of some hard bargaining with underwriters Lloyds!) will encourage more people to register their pets with the scheme.
The Shelter's three centres (in north London, Hertfordshire and Cambridge) are some of the most up-to-date in Europe.
They take in over 16,000 animals a year, ‘nothing is ever turned away’, and have one of the highest re-homing rates in the country.
They are also in favour of mandatory neutering of strays, unlike the RSPCA, and every stray animal is neutered before being rehomed.
But while many potential owners enjoy visiting the Shelters, it is not that easy to walk away with a new pet.
The centres conduct selection procedures, which involve an interview, and in the case of large dogs, make an initial visit to make sure the home is suitable, plus a follow-up once the dog is settled in to check that all is OK.
The Shelters, which are all run on voluntary donations from the general public, offer free advice on any aspect of pet care.
Contact: Wood Green Animal Shelter, Highway Cottage, Crishill Road, Heydon, Royston, Herts SG8 8PN (tel: 0763 838329).
WHAT YOU THINK
Is this a nation of dog lovers who want to combat the problem of strays?
Yes.
Judging by the results of our survey, you do want to help solve Britain's dog problem.
97% agreed with paying an annual registration fee, and 74% felt the sum should be between £10 and £30.
(Many of you suggested that OAPs and the handicapped who rely on their dogs should pay a smaller amount.)
The majority of you agreed with neutering stray canines. 97% felt bitches should be  spayed .
There is no medical evidence to support the idea that a bitch needs to have a litter before she is  spayed .
(In fact, spaying before the bitch has had three heats can eliminate the chance of mammary cancer.)
65% of the 455 of you who responded to our survey are either dog owners or have been.
97% want those who abandon their dogs to be prosecuted.
You suggested heavy fines and a life ban on owing dogs.
92% thought the RSPCA's advertising campaign was good.
80% thought dogs should be marked when registered.
81% want breeding to be confined to registered organisations and breeders.
And 96% want the breeder to be controlled more stringently.
Reducing the number of litters per bitch and banning puppy farms were suggested.
Few people would be sold a new car without a handbook, or even attempt to grow cabbages without reading up about it first, but the same people will on impulse buy a new puppy without the foggiest idea of what is involved
ONE VET'S VIEW
One of the most outspoken letters we received, and one which expressed much of the anger you all felt, was this from practising veterinary surgeon Kendal Shepherd.
I am a veterinary surgeon of ten years' experience, and feel strongly about the stray dog problem.
While I support fully the RSPCA campaign and their use of ‘shock’ tactics, I feel that the horrifying sight of a heap of dead dogs is no more likely to stir people to action than the sight of a pile of dead cows will turn us all into vegetarians.
I believe the solution lies in identifying why the wrong dogs come into the hands of the wrong people.
Without wishing to detract from the impact of the number of dogs put to sleep weekly by the RSPCA, it must be realised that this number would be much higher if vets themselves did not also spend much of their time carrying out euthanasia.
On some days (not enjoyed by any of us) perhaps as many as a quarter of our cases will be requests for euthanasia.
In cases where the dog is healthy or where surgical or medical intervention stand a good chance of success, most veterinary surgeons would try to dissuade the owner or offer rehoming.
Back to the RSPCA campaign — while admirable, it does give the impression that the 1000 dogs destroyed daily are all good-tempered, potentially healthy young dogs who happen to be without a home.
This is not so.
A large number of dogs who end up in the rescue homes would be on the vet's euthanasia list if they'd had different owners.
Many are incurable strays which wander off time and time again, many are untrustworthy or dangerously aggressive dogs who may have been thrown out or dumped for this reason.
To see a disturbed animal rehomed several times and to witness the disastrous consequences and schizophrenic mess of a dog which results, one soon realises there are worse things which can happen to a dog than to be humanely destroyed.
Rescue societies should play more of a part in matching dogs to owners.
Admittedly they suffer great pressures on time and space, but the case of my client who had ‘rescued’ three large dogs, only to discover he couldn't afford to have any of them vaccinated, is surely not an isolated one.
A common failing of doubtless well-meaning staff is to wildly underestimate the age of an animal when offering it for adoption.
This may be done with the best intentions and will help empty the overflowing kennels, but mistakes can cause new owners some shocks.
In my opinion, all dogs leaving rescue homes should be neutered, vaccinated and insured for at least 30 days for third party damage and vets' fees.
Those who sell dogs in the first place have a great deal to answer for when it comes to explaining why the human-dog relationship is so often a disastrous mismatch.
Vast sums of money are spent on pedigree dogs, and one would imagine these valuable animals will enjoy a secure home for life.
Why, then, are pedigree dogs seen as frequently as mongrels in rescue homes?
Because not enough information is given to buyers on the sheer expense and time needed to feed, train, groom and generally care for a dog.
Before the Kennel Club and the dog breeders they represent can make a start in ensuring their breeds are not sold to unsuspecting and unsuitable owners, they must abandon their lofty assumptions that all dog breeders are ‘responsible dog owners.’
If, as Club Secretary Martin Sinnatt, has claimed in print, breeders are undeserving of ‘attack’ by the RSPCA, then why have I seen:
Twelve-week-old poodle pups, with hair and ear mites, sold directly to, or even worse, given as presents to frail OAPs who were given no idea of the amount of care the dogs' ears will need every two or three weeks for the rest of their 16 year lives?
A £350 Rottweiler pup sold to a family who already have to rely on the People's Dispensary for Sick Animals for treatment on the Great Dane some other twit sold them, because they can't afford the vet's fees?
An Old English Sheepdog needing a minimum of an hour's grooming a day sold to a mother of four children who barely has time to brush her own hair?
This list is depressingly endless.
And if the breeders reply that it is the puppy dealers' fault, how could any self-respecting breeder sell puppies to dealers in the first place?
Any scheme devised to reduce the number of unwanted dogs will automatically involve reducing the total number of dogs and hence breeder sales.
One doesn't have to look far, or even be as cynical as I am, to see the true reason for the Kennel Club objection to registration.
The Club claims they are opposed to registration by permanent marking by branding or tattooing as ‘unkind and inconvenient’.
How can anyone take this seriously, when the same people endorse the amputation of tails and toes in conscious pups up to the age of seven days?
But vets are not without blame.
If we cannot take the initiative in refusing to dock tails, and are unable to so much as raise an eyebrow at what we suspect are dog fighting injuries, then why should we care how many dogs are killed weekly by the RSPCA?
We vaccinate new puppies in the arms of totally unsuitable and unprepared owners, and make a mental note of all problems which will occur in future, hoping that the owners will come back to us instead of the chap along the road.
Ailing animals, so long as they have a solvent owner in two, are our bread and butter.
Are we really all like this?
I sincerely hope not, and it's time we proved it.
I would like to see some kind of control scheme entailing the reliable and permanent marking of dogs for future identification.
Tattooing is a simple procedure, no more painful than for humans, and considerably quicker to carry out.
If such a procedure were made law, vets could well afford to offer the service at a minimal cost, if not free, at the same time as the first vaccination.
Puppy vaccination would then in effect also be compulsory, to the dog's benefit as well as to the veterinary surgeon's pocket.
Any fee charged for registering a marked dog must also have some immediately obvious benefit to the general public.
The answer is for registration to be linked to compulsory dog insurance.
A fee of £25 would buy adequate insurance cover and provide a contribution towards the provision of dog wardens.
As the insurance companies could expect a huge increased revenue, they in turn could be expected to bear a large proportion of the cost of implementing the scheme.
They would be responsible for reminders when premiums became due, and could trace owners through their records.
The additional expense incurred in the purchase of dog will only deter the less enthusiastic.
If the demand for pedigree dogs and the size of the dog population in general falls as a result, this is the price that all whose livelihood depends on pet dogs will have to pay.
It is only a shame that this outcome will have been brought about by market forces and legislation rather than by any innate concern for dog welfare.
LICENCE TO KILL
‘The reasons behind the requests for mercy killings are varied.
Except for cases of incurably ill pets, where owner and vet agree that euthanasia is best, the reasons given are as follows, in order of frequency: a) The client wants the vet to agree that the animal is terminally ill/suffering/too old to treat.
These are often animals not seen by the vet for years, who could have been saved, if seen earlier.
b) The animal needs expensive treatment or tests.
c) Viciousness. d) Senile degeneration — owners differ tremendously over the point they consider a dog to be no longer‘enjoying life’.
Often the request is based on the enjoyment the human is deriving from the pet.
e) Destructiveness in the home.
f) Wandering, leading to the risk of outside damage either to the dog or to a third party.
g) Change in owner's circumstances, ie moving house or allergy.’
SHE STYLE FILE
FASHION FINDS
Get smart and take the hassle out of buying and co-ordinating your wardrobe by making a bee-line for this month's best buys.
There is one golden rule to remember — accessories make the outfit.
So boldly mix mod with trad for eyecatching results and maximum flexibility.
LOOK
SHE'S GUIDE TO WORK, LIFE AND EVERYTHING
CHILDREN MEAN BUSINESS
‘Childcare facilities will replace the company car as the career perk of the 1990s.’
A bold new claim, bandied about with some confidence by those in the know — those who have studied the demographics, who foresee that 80% of new jobs in the next five years will be taken by women.
They are right: employers desperate to attract women to fill the shortfall in school leavers will certainly have to make provisions for childcare.
But what of quality?
While a new BMW 325i is clearly a finer reward than a cheaper ex-pool car, good quality nursery provision is harder to quantify.
In the rush to install childcare facilities, there are those who fear that such provisions will be badly planned and hastily constructed, with little thought for the children's needs.
‘It's no use levering a Portakabin down off a lorry, filling it with children and assuming that a child's day will be enriched — it won't,’ warns Gordon Sturrock, marketing manager of Interplayce, a young, innovative company which designs and builds new generation workplace nurseries.
The model which Interplayce has designed is a result of thinking from ‘the child in, rather than the building out.
Children's needs are always the last to be considered by architects and planners,’ says Gordon.
But while working mums might sigh at another guilt burden, Gordon stresses that they will benefit from raising the childcare issue.
‘Businesses are forced to become more aware of other problems of family responsibility But let's make sure that these childcare provisions are not merely cosmetic.’
Children enjoy the range of play opportunities offered by Interplay's ‘Midi-Mod’
SIGN UP FOR SHE'S CONFIDENCE COURSES
Would you like to be more assertive, to dress with style and authority, to break down the confidence barriers standing between you and a return to work, or a new job?
Then try our SHE Fresh Start courses, launched by Edwina Currie.
Each course comprises a morning of sessions in careers, training and confidence, and an afternoon's expert advice on hair, make-up and dressing for work.
Each course costs £50 (including lunch) and will take place in centrally-located hotels: Oct 21 in Glasgow, Nov 4 in Leeds, Dec 2 in Cardiff, Dec 9 in Birmingham or Dec 16 in Southampton.
Write to Fresh Start, SHE Magazine, National Magazine House, 72 Broadwick Street, London, W1V 2BP.
BOTTOM OF THE CLASS
Britain ranks lowest in Europe when it comes to childcare provision.
Statistics from the Workplace Nurseries Association (tel: 01–700 0281) show how badly we need more nurseries:
There are only 100 workplace nurseries in the whole of the UK.
Of the 3.5 million under fives in this country, only 1% can be placed in local authority nurseries.
Lack of childcare provision means only 28% of British mums with under fives go out to work, compared with Denmark (44%), France and Belgium (50%).
In Europe as a whole, mums with under fives work an average of 30 hours a week, while UK mums can only manage under 20 hours a week.
Best workplace nursery provision is to be found in the public sector — local authorities, hospitals and colleges.
Since 1986, ten councils have opened nurseries for their staff.
RING FOR ACTION
COULD YOU MANAGE
Try a new foundation course, devised by the Institute of Chartered Secretaries and Administrators, Institute of Personnel Management and Institute of Administrative Management.
NEVER TOO OLD
From October 1 1989, the Tax Inspectorate will consider candidates aged up to 52 who want to train with pay as Tax Inspectors.
D-I-Y DEGREES
Ever wish you could make up a degree course to suit your own needs?
Sheffield City Polytechnic starts just such a scheme this autumn.
FREE JOBS LIST
Those in the health sphere who want to retrain in health care sales can get free details from the Talentmark agency.
LOOK AT COURSES…
CALLING ALL RETURNERS!
FREE SALES TRAINING
It is cheering to discover that there are some enlightened employers who value personality above experience or qualifications (and age) when it comes to recruiting.
This is particularly good news for women returners.
Pendle Consultants Ltd, the Yorkshire-based training and recruitment specialists, have made a great success of recruiting inexperienced staff after putting them through an unorthodox interview procedure, designed to reveal personal strengths and weaknesses of potential sales personnel, rather than stressing their previous experience.
Does this sound more your sort of job interview?
If so, take advantage of Pendle's offer to SHE readers considering a return to a sales-orientated career.
Pendle are offering 20 places on one of their unique training courses.
This offer is an exclusive — Pendle normally run in-house training sessions for businesses only.
On the three-day, residential course held on December 4–6 at Pendle's training centre in the heart of the beautiful Yorkshire Dales, you'll learn preparation for returning to a changed work environment: Assertiveness Training, Personal Development plus two basic sales training sessions.
To help them pick the 20 readers who will benefit most from the course, Pendle have drawn up a questionnaire.
If you'd like to be considered for selection, answer the following five questions clearly and concisely (please type double-spaced on A4 paper) and fill in the entry form below.
Cut out and send with your entry to Mr Greg Rigby, Managing Director, Pendle Consultants Ltd, Pendle House, Long Preston, North Yorks BD23 4PU (072 94615) to reach him not later than Monday October 16.
Good luck!
1 You work in an estate agency and someone is looking for a property for £30,000.
The cheapest property you have is £56,000 — what do you do?
2 You are selling cars; you have gone out to look at a customer's part exchange.
The milometer says 31,000 miles, but the last MOT certificate says 57,000 miles.
The customer has told you that he wants £3000 for the car — the actual value at 57,000 miles is half that.
What do you say?
3 Given the option of £10,000 per annum basic salary plus ten per cent of the profit (where the anticipated profit from your sales is £200K), or no basic plus 20% of the profit, which would you choose?
4 You work in a bookshop, someone has telephoned to ask you to put the last copy of a particular book (which will be difficult to replace) on one side.
The person has promised they will get in before the end of the week.
Then someone else wants to buy the same book — what do you do?
5 Of the 29 works below, list the five you believe to be the most important qualities for a saleswoman:
Aggressive, Assertive, Cool, Sympathetic, Generous, Understanding, Determined, Knowledgeable, Memorable, Good-looking, Quick, Outgoing, Reliable, Honest, Trustworthy, Helpful, Friendly, Colourful, Warm, Beguiling, Persuasive, Genuine, Articulate, Numerate, Sincere, Hard, Thorough, Professional, Decisive.
LOOK AT SKILLS…
I HEAR, BUT DO I LISTEN?
Not many of us consider ourselves to be good listeners.
Studies reveal that people asked to rate their own abilities on a scale of 1–100 pitch themselves at around the 55 mark.
I wanted to improve my skills, so I joined a weekend course in ‘Listening Techniques’ at the Earnley Concourse in Sussex.
It was run by Kathryn Redway, a freelance consultant who specialises in teaching listening and other skills to groups in industry and education.
‘Listening is the first skill we learn in life and is our principal method of communication,’ Kathryn stressed.
‘Yet it is the skill we are taught the least.
As a result, we are generally rather poor listeners, tending to build blocks to good listening, such as allowing our own ideas and opinions to obscure the message.’
Throughout the course we were given tests to help us analyse our weaknesses as listeners.
Her is one that you may like to try for yourself — but for maximum effect,don't read the following paragraph.
Get someone to read it to you once only, then get them to ask you the questions which follow.
(Nb: Note-taking is not allowed!)
(Message from a Deputy Head to a pupil for a PE teacher):
‘Please tell Mr Reynolds that as Mr McGregor has had to go into two to collect cricket bats he will not be able to take class 4B at 11am today.
Mr Thompson would have taken his class, but he has to deputise for Miss O'Neill who is ill.
Therefore, would he take class 4B?
I gather they are working on vulgar fractions.
He stop as far as page 118 of McCann.’
1 What is the name of the man replacing the maths teacher?
2 What is the name of the maths teacher?
3 Why is the maths teacher unable to take his class?
4 Who would normally replace the maths teacher?
5 Why is he unable to go?
6 What class is to get the replacement teacher after the break?
7 What book are they using?
How did you score?
Apparently, most of us only remember two or three details.
Contact The Earnley Concourse, Earnley, Chichester, Sussex PO20 7JL, tel: 0243 670392.
Courses cost from £92.
YOUR SAFETY COMES FIRST
Is your company alert to the fact that the fear of physical violence at work can seriously undermine efficiency and morale?
This month the Suzy Lamplugh Trust is launching a training scheme for companies so that staff can learn how to deal with potentially dangerous situations.
Since estate agent Suzy Lamplugh (right) disappeared while showing an unnamed client around a house in west London, the Suzy Lamplugh Trust has been involved in a scheme to prevent this from happening again.
While the possibility may seem remote to you, around one in 12 people — men and women — may have to face actual physical attack of work.
Reducing The Risk , a leaflet sponsored by British Telecom and published by the Trust, emphasises that if you feel frightened, you should listen to your instincts and speak calmly, gently and slowly.
Never touch someone who is angry, and don't hesitate to ask for help.
Reducing The Risk and training course details available from the Suzy Lamplugh Trust, 14 East Sheen Avenue, London SW14 8AS (sae please).
Susan King is a journalist and adult education tutor.
She lives with her husband, labrador and bossy cat
LOOK AT LIFE…
DIVIDE AND CONQUER!
Are you tired of wondering what to give the family for dinner.
Or, having decided on a day's menu, discovering that you don't have the right ingredients to hand?
For years I too had these problems.
The family were of no help.
Whenever I'd ask them what they wanted to eat the reply was always the same: ‘Anything, you choose, Mum’.
Eventually I decided that what was needed was a little organisation — a systematic approach to make my busy life a little less fraught.
And so I came up with the following idea, which works extremely well for me.
Why not give it a try yourself?
All that's needed is a little time and a box of index cards with dividers.
You can buy these for a reasonable price in any stationery shop, in a range of colours.
(If you're interested, I chose red to match my kitchen decor!)
First I gave the divider cards headings: Snacks, Starters, Main Meals, Desserts.
Then it was time to involve the family.
I noted all their favourite foods and mine.
Each person's choice was recorded on an index card.
These were then filed behind the corresponding divider/heading card.
Now when a mealtime approaches, all I have to do is pluck a menu card from the appropriate section and, hey presto, an instant meal suggestion!
The cost of the system is minimal, because the cards last for such a very long time.
I've been using the same box for several years now.
With only one item per card, there is plenty of room to make notes of recipes, cooking times or whatever other information you feel would be helpful.
Once I had begun to reap the benefits from my new system, I decided to enlarge on it and make it work even harder for me.
I opened a new section headed ‘Freezer Stock’ and compiled and inventory of freezer contents, again allowing one item per card.
These cards I filed in alphabetical order, and I noted on each one details of new purchases and quantities.
Never content, I began another section.
This one is headed ‘Replacement Items’, of items not covered by ‘Freezer Stock’.
I calculated their expected duration and noted this information on an index card, arranging my listings in alphabetical order.
I keep a notepad too, in the kitchen, each page representing one week.
On opening any packet etc, I can see from the index card how long it is likely to last and then record it on the appropriate page of the notebook.
To give you an example: in our house a two pound bag of sugar lasts six weeks.
Therefore, when I open a bag of sugar, I write on the sixth page o f my notebook ‘2lb sugar’.
Each week, on shopping day, I tear out the first page and have a ready-made shopping list.
No more trying to remember what's needed or forgetting some vital ingredient and having to trudge back to the shops.
Granted this system takes a little planning.
But for me it's been well worthwhile.
It has saved much time and effort in the long run.
In fact, it's been so effortless that I'm now wondering what else I could organise.
Any suggestions?
LIFELINES FOR WOMEN WHO JUGGLE THEIR LIVES
ALL FOR ONE!
If you're a single parent and sick of being written about as a problem, rather than written for as a reader,One Parent Plus (Jane Ward, Optima, £4.99) should be a refreshing change.
SUNDAY STROLL
Take the family for a walk on the wild size.
Heinz Wildlife Walks (Ebury Press £5.95) is being published to tie in with 250 fund-raising World Wildlife walks on Sunday, October 8.
Ring 04868 27269.
EASY READING
If a book you especially wanted to get hold of is out of print, try the Out of Print Book Service on 0222 627703.
MATCH POINT
Do you have a wardrobe full of skirts and tops for work — none of which coordinate?
Why not invest in a few Units — new interchangeable separates in black, white, navy and red and a variety of shapes?
Units are currently stocked at 356 Oxford Street, W1, Whiteleys of Bayswater W2 and The Ashley Centre, Epsom.
LOOK AT JOB ADVICE…
BY MARGARET KORVING
SHE'S JOB ADVISOR
Q
This autumn the last of my children is off to university and I'm wondering if it's realistic to consider entering the job market, since it's 29 years since I worked.
People say maturity is valuable, but most of the advertisements in our local paper ask for applicants aged 25–35.
I often see people who look about my own age working in shops or making appointments at the optician's even sitting at desks in estate agency showrooms.
Perhaps, thought, they're people who have been working there all their lives?
Be truthful Maggie — is 29 years too wide a gap to bridge?
A
It depends first on what you've been doing in those 29 years, whether you're willing to get new skills if necessary, and finally, how persistent you are in your job search.
As you've found out, optimistic employers often do put a ‘25–35’ tag on their vacancy advertisements, but newspapers are not the only source of opportunities.
Jobcentres, commercial agencies, hospital noticeboards, shop windows and vacancy boards on industrial estates are sources of vacancies for all ages.
On the subject of that 29 year gap, I'd be surprised if you had spent all your time doing housework, shopping and laundering.
No evening classes for pleasure?
No voluntary work?
No helping at school events?
No membership of a local club?
Your 29 years at home have probably seen you develop into a good conversationalist, able to strike up a relationship quickly (which could help in selling or market research interviewing), or a natural organiser (valuable in a hospital appointments department, booking car hire or reserving hotel rooms).
Or could it be that you are deft and capable in practical ways (needed by a care assistant in social service, or as a nursing aide)?
If you add keyboard skills, you could widen these horizons.
Ask at your local college if they run a ‘New Opportunities for Women’, or a ‘Wider Opportunities Scheme’.
These are intended for returners and will help you develop confidence as well as introduce you to a range of jobs where ‘late starters’ are needed.
(Or book for a SHE Fresh Start Course — See Information Sources).
Q
Can you tell me the procedure for getting a book published?
Since giving up work to start my family, I have been working on two books — a novel and a cookery book related to my former job (I was a home economist).
Do I send a sample chapter off to a number of publishers?
Or is it best to write first and see if they are interested?
I am enjoying my writing career and would like to develop it into a full-time career if I can earn enough money.
A
It's a rare individual who can make a living from writing books; the Jeffrey Archers of this world are few.
You usually find that people who write books earn their main living in some other way.
To take someone well-known, Claire Rayner has written a host of very successful novels as well as a range of medical and home health books, but she's known best for her work as an agony aunt in newspapers, magazines and on television.
You'll need to spread your talents if you hope to make a living from writing and I'd recommend reading Thirty Ways to Make Money From Writing by Jennie Hawthorne (Rosters, £4.95) which covers markets as diverse as working for the trade press, humour and writing for children.
For most writers, books are the jam on their bread and butter.
They are good for your career, if you write on a specialised topic, ie in your case, related to home economics.
Not only does it look good to have ‘published works’ on your CV, the process of researching and creating something new keeps you in touch with developments in your field, and you may make contact with experts.
You may be invited to write for professional journals if you have a book published related to your career area.
With a specialised market it's quite appropriate to approach any publisher you think is likely to be interested (your training should have taught you which publishers specialise in your field) with a synopsis and sample chapter.
Novels are much more difficult to place and from a new writer, publishers normally want to see the whole book.
It's less easy to match a specific publisher's market with fiction than with factual writing, but you can at least make sure that you don't send a modern comedy to a publisher of historical romances.
Spend some time in a library, studying the sorts of books published by named firms.
Q
I recently moved jobs to a firm which encourages all staff to improve their qualifications.
They'll finance me through a part-time degree or a correspondence course in accountancy.
Which is the best long-term choice?
A
This is a bit like asking ‘which is the more useful, a washing machine or freezer?’ because both qualifications are likely to be of lasting value.
You may yet find a way of getting them both.
For example, a part-time degree in business studies (if that's on offer) often gives you a partial exemption from some accountancy professional exams.
If you feel you'd like to concentrate on the accountancy, it's worth knowing that the Open University reduces the number of credits needed for a BA degree for people with ‘advanced standing’ through certain professional qualifications.
Other factors to consider: what are your promotion prospects with either qualification?
Your company personnel officer should be able to tell you.
And are you likely to have to move jobs or areas for any reason?
Continuing a correspondence course is easy; finding another part-time degree may be less so.
Do you have the staying power to study alone at home?
Can you keep up regular attendance at college if you pick the part-time degree?
Your own temperament is a good guide to which course you are likely to complete — and this is what you should focus on.
INFORMATION SOURCES
New Opportunities for Women/Wider Opportunities courses: ask at your local college, Jobcentre or educational guidance centre.
SHE Fresh Start Courses: Write now to SHE Magazine, Fresh Start, 72 Broadwick Street, London W1V 2BP.
Accountancy:Approved Courses for Accountancy Education free from the Board of Accreditation of Educational Courses, PO Box 686, Central Milton Keynes, MK9 2BP.
Part-time degrees: Part-Time Degrees, Diplomas & Certificates by Malcolm Tight (CRAC/Hobsons, £7.95).
SHE LOVE TEST
WILL YOUR MATE BE FAITHFUL?
Trust and fidelity are essential for a lasting, successful relationship.
But has your partner got what it takes?
By Myron Brenton
Most of us begin married life filled with hope and resolve.
We want our marriages to last and our love for each other to grow.
We hope an expect to be faithful to each other.
Surveys show that even in the most sexually permissive of times, fidelity is a value most of us hold dear.
Even when the idea of ‘open marriage’ enjoyed a degree of popularity about a decade ago, only a handful of married couples actually took on lovers with mutual consent.
Then, as now, most people wanted to be able to experience the constancy and trust that comes only with faithfulness in a relationship.
However, we don't always practice what we preach.
About half of all married men engage in extra-marital sex at least once in their married lives — a statistic which has remained more or less constant for many decades.
Far fewer married women have extra-marital involvements — about 18% — but among younger women, 25% are unfaithful; a change from earlier decades.
Even people who swear they'll always be true can stray.
But are some marriages less — or more — vulnerable than others?
Are some spouses more likely to stray than others?
Social scientists have been looking at extra-marital sexual patterns to understand why it is some men and women have affairs and others don't.
And while no-one can predict with certainty who will actually stray and who won't, these scientists are now able to make some fairly educated guesses.
If you've ever wondered whether your mate might stray, here are some questions to ponder.
Is it easy for your mate to feel and express feelings of intimacy towards you?
If the answer is yes, he or she isn't likely to seek sex on the outside.
But people who have trouble with emotional intimacy often use extra-marital sex as a way of keeping some distance from their mates.
Difficulty expressing one's emotions often stems from unresolved childhood conflicts.
One young woman is still as attached to her parents now as she was when she was small.
Her affairs, which began shortly after she married, are her way of avoiding a full commitment to her husband.
Some husbands, still angry with their mothers for childhood hurts, cheat on their wives as an expression of hostility towards women — and as a perverse way of getting even with their mothers.
Where do you live?
Researchers who studied attitudes towards extra-marital sex, relative to the size of the community, found that in general, people living in rural areas are less tolerant of extra-marital sex and are less likely to engage in it than people living in large cities.
How well does your mate handle major life changes and crises?
Paul, 33, an accountant, had a brief affair shortly after his wife gave birth to their first child.
Twenty eight-year-old Laura, a married schoolteacher, had a six-month relationship with a former boyfriend shortly after her mother died.
Psychologist Dr Evans of new York calls events such as birth, death, job loss, moving house, or retirement ‘maximal stress points’.
Some people handle them well, others don't.
The ones who don't may retreat into depression, turn to alcohol and drugs — or to an extra-marital relationship.
Though Paul had wanted a child, he wasn't emotionally ready for it.
After the baby was born and he was no longer the sole focus of his wife's attention he felt insecure and displaced.
Instinctively, he turned to another woman for comfort and closeness.
Laura found the pain of her mother's death nearly unbearable and thought her husband wasn't supportive enough.
When a sympathetic ex-boyfriend came along, she allowed herself to be seduced by him.
Does your mate feel secure in himself about his attractiveness and potency?
The more adequate a man feels, the less likely he is to seek an outside sex partner in order to prove something to himself.
Husbands who feel insecure about their masculinity, or wives about their femininity, are especially vulnerable to extra-marital sex.
Thus, the so-called midlife crisis, which can strike men and women as young as 35 or 40, is often the spur to infidelity.
Some people become panicky about losing their looks, their youth.
Finding new partners reassures them that they're still attractive and desirable.
How impulsive is your mate?
‘Look before you leap’ is a maxim impulsive people fail to follow.
People who aren't impulsive think through the consequences of their actions before taking decisive steps.
They can resist temptation long enough to make decisions based on good sense.
Impulsive people are just the opposite.
They do things rashly.
They make snap decisions.
They lack self-control.
They have a very hard time saying no to momentary pleasures, regardless of the risks or consequences.
Take this example of a man who suddenly decided he didn't like his job any more and walked out that same day.
Predictably his wife was very upset about his resignation.
Marital tension mounted.
When her complaints got too much for him, he began going to pubs and picking up women.
Today the couple are having counselling but the marriage is very shaky.
Where your mate's parents faithful to each other?
Mothers and fathers are role models, exerting a strong, yet subtle influence over their children.
When parents are faithful to each other, it's more likely that their children will grow up to be true to each other , too.
How good is your marriage?
No matter what a spouse's background may be, another factor frequently plays a strong role in determining whether or not the partners will stay faithful to each other.
That factor is the quality of their relationship.
As you might expect, studies show a strong correlation between marital dissatisfaction and infidelity.
In such instances, the partners have trouble talking meaningfully to each other or solving problems together.
Often emotional problems lead to sexual ones.
(Women are more likely to seek outside partners when they feel emotionally deprived; men when they feel sexually deprived.)
Husband and wife may no longer find each other exciting — and aren't bothering to do anything constructive about it.
Often, too, husband and wife have become so caught up in their work, their children or their respective outside interests that they devote less time to each other.
‘Then resentments build up and aren't balanced by any real sense of pleasure, companionship and intimacy,’ says Dr Evans.
A partner may feel that an affair will give him or her the sense of shared interest that is lacking at home.
The two partners in troubled marriages are frequently locked into a vicious cycle, Dr Evans says.
The wife does something the husband doesn't like.
He withdraws.
She reacts by being more demanding.
The more she demands, the more he withdraws.
Their conflicts never get resolved.
Some husbands and wives know their mates are unfaithful to them, but they don't confront the issue.
They don't want to risk a break-up — perhaps for the sake of the children, or because it suits them to be married for other reasons.
Some people who don't enjoy sex with their partners are relieved.
‘It gets them off the hook,’ explains one psychotherapist.
Far more often, though, the discovery that one's mate is unfaithful leads to a lot of pain.
There's an acute sense of having been betrayed or wronged.
To the professionals who work with troubled couples, however, there's no such thing as the wronged spouse.
There are only marriages in which there's a conflict.
One person's unfaithfulness is a manifestation of that conflict.
Generally both partners play their role in the situation; both need to take responsibility to resolve it.
Will your mate be faithful?
It's clear that there is no simple answer to this question.
Nobody can ensure faithfulness.
But all couples can enhance their own relationships, making their marriages so solid that infidelity is unlikely to occur.
The suggestions that follow — based on studies and observations of people in happy, enduring marriages — can serve as a useful guideline for all couples.
Make it clear that fidelity is important.
Some couples dodge the whole issue of fidelity; they feel uncomfortable talking about it.
In a good relationship both husband and wife are open with each other about their feelings, needs and expectations about this aspect of marriage, as about others.
Give your mate some leeway.
At certain times everybody feels depressed, grumpy or moody.
At times, one partner is bound to irritate the other.
In happy marriages the partners don't make a big deal of minor irritations.
Work on marital conflicts.
If you do identify important problems, discuss them with your spouse as soon as possible — not in anger but in an atmosphere of openness and goodwill.
Don't give problems a chance to grow and fester.
Enhance your partner's self-esteem.
Be positive: praise your mate's good qualities, treat him or her with respect.
A survey of more than 300 marriage counsellors showed that ‘confirmation’— treating the marriage partner's words and self as worthwhile — was considered to be the most important factor in a healthy relationship.
In other words, make your partner feel important and special.
Take a genuine interest in each other.
Too many couples don't make each other a priority; work, kids, everything else comes first.
The intimacy between couples who take an interest in each other is an essential ingredient of a lasting marriage.
That means taking an interest in little things as well as big ones.
Think of ways to make life more fun together.
When both partners work to make life more delightful, a marriage is constantly revitalised and thoughts of straying aren't likely to arise.
Convey a sense of trust in your partner.
Trust is essential to intimacy, and intimacy is at the core of a successful marriage.
Yes, trust is sometimes betrayed, but much more often it is fulfilled.
Believing in the other person — extending trust — helps to create and sustain constancy and trustworthiness.
High fidelity: ‘Couples can enhance their relationships, making their marriages so solid that infidelity is unlikely to occur’
Clash of the TARTANS
Plates, tiles, carpeting, chairs: everything in Anne and Lachlan Stewart's home is tartan.
By Maureen Walker
Tucked away in a small street off London's Spitalfields Market is a house that is not all it would seem from the outside.
The old faded lettering on its façade advertises a business long-gone and a characterful history which is all too quickly being obliterated elsewhere in the area by redevelopment.
But where other people would probably have covered the past in a coat of paint, the building's new young occupants, the Stewarts have happily let it be and turned their decorative attentions to the interior instead.
Anne and Lachlan Stewart are Scots, and their business, Anta, revolves around that most instantly recognised and loved of Scottish exports — no, not whisky, but tartan.
From their showroom on the ground floor, up through the offices, kitchen, living room and bedrooms, the house is aglow with colour and with tartan.
But tartans which, though traditional in pattern are designed for contemporary interior decorating tastes.
‘We've recoloured tartans and taken the black out.
As originals they're pretty gaudy,’ says Lachlan.
An architect by profession, he took six months off work to help the builders make the house habitable, and then he and Anne painted it from top to bottom in a vibrant range of colour schemes, theirs is the tonic to take: the narrow winding staircase is an orangey red, the kitchen a pale blue, the living room a shade of yellow, the conservatory woodwork a blue-green, and so on.
Nearly all the walls and woodwork in the house are washed with colour — a technique which produces are more gentle effect than straight painting.
You mix colour pigment with a glaze and ‘drag’ it over an eggshell undercoat.
When dry it is sealed with a coat of matt varnish.
After the painting they used their own products to furnish the house, surrounding the old ranges and fireplaces, and covering the floor of the glazed backyard with tartan ceramic tiles.
Tartan tableware overflows the large kitchen dresser and the showroom shelves, tartan furnishing fabrics cover upholstery, hang at windows and even stretch across the floor as carpeting.
Not an unusual thing to do, apparently.
‘The practice was common in the 18th century or even before,’ says Lachlan.
The carpet has been there for three years and is still in good condition — the only signs of wear are the marks left by ‘wee Lachie’, the Stewarts' three-year-old son.
Flying Colours
Anne's background in painting, textiles and fashion has given her a sure eye for colour.
Mixing different tartans is not easy and probably the best advice is to keep one colour common throughout.
But in their Spitalfields Tartan Collection, the Stewarts have done the work for you; silks, cottons, wools all match up so that it is possible to choose as much or as little tartan as you like, whether it's for a few cushions or for some big and bold project.
Doing up an 18th-century house is small beer compared to the Stewarts' next project.
The call of their homeland has proved too strong and they have just acquired a 16th-century ruined castle on the Scottish coast which, one day, will be home.
In the meantime, Caledonia reigns in a corner of the City of London.
The Stewarts' house in Spitalfields
Above: Anne Stewart in her living room (with ‘wee Lachie’ just crawling out of sight).
The Stewarts have kept the original build-in cupboards and simple workmanlike fireplace, but the comfortable furniture covers and floor carpet are made from Anta fabrics.
Left: to tile a fireplace in a similar fashion would cost about £170.
Right: the small backyard with outside lavatory has been transformed by adding a glazed roof, a coat of paint and a tiled tartan floor
Above: ‘Wee Lachie’ in the kitchen where a deliberately random wash of blue glaze over white eggshell paint produced this shade of soft blue covering the walls, wooden panelling and window frame.
Above right: a detail from the living room where the inevitably tartan curtains have been attached in a very attractive way to the curtain poles.
Right: Anne in the Anta showroom with an appropriate reminder of the Highlands of home.
The room is stacked with bolts of cloth, and lengths of fabric hang from poles which have thistle-shaped finials cut out in wood (two are on the mantelpiece)
Highland THINGS
If you'd like to add just a touch of the tartans, check out these suggestions for your home.
SHOPPING FOR STYLE
CHILD BENEFITS
Bringing up baby could have extra charm in a room decorated with a new range of children's fabrics and wallpapers called Merry Go Round by Designers build.
Fabrics £11.90 to £14.90 per metre, wallpaper £12.90 per roll and friezes £6.50 per roll.
From Designers Guild, 277 King's Road, London SW3 and selected stockists (tel: 01–351 5775).
ON THE BOIL
For those who shun the electric jug kettle in favour of a more traditional way of making a nice cuppa, here's a kettle with a difference.
Winner of last year's European Design Award, it boasts a colourful anodised aluminium exterior and a harmonica whistle.
(The interior, too, is aluminium, but the manufacturers say that there is no danger of the aluminium ‘leaching’ into the water.)
It costs approximately £45 from John Lewis stores, Harrods and Selfridges in London; or, for local stockists, telephone Lubkowski Saunders on 0932 789721.
CRAFTS ON SHOW
Ceramics, jewellery, glass and textiles made by some of Britain's top craftspeople will be on show at this month's tenth Chelsea Crafts Fair, Chelsea Old Town Hall, King's Road, London SW3.
With so many people eager to show their wares, the exhibition has been split, with different people showing each week.
October 9–14 and 16–21.
INDIAN ELEGANCE
The Bright Lights of India is an exhibition of all sorts of mouthwatering things from that country, which is being staged by Liberty, Regent Street and all of its 21 branches.
It's a more sophisticated Indian look than we've seen before — ethnic but elegant.
There are carved wooden picture frames, fabrics, sandalwood garlands, screens, antiques, basketware and much more for sale, as well as the items shown here: tobacco boxes from £34.95, camel pots from £25 and a huge selection of jewellery.
From September 28-October 21.
USE YOUR MARBLES
The art of making hand-marbled paper with oil paint and water is fascinating to watch, the results a treat to won.
Compton Marbling supplies its wares to the trade for use in books and so on, but also sells direct to the public via its catalogue.
It features patterned papers to buy by the sheet: 20in by 25in is £4.83 (first quality), £2.41 (second quality): or you can buy it made up into boxes, albums, desk sets, lampshades and photo mounts.
This box holds ten 10 inch candles and costs £21.40 (hand-marbled) or £15.95 (printed-marbled) including p&p.
Compton Marbline, Tisbury, Salisbury, Wiltshire.
SHE OFFER
Well, love a duck, here's a bargain: a beautiful soft cotton chenille rug for just £10.95 including p&p (sorry, the baby isn't included).
Choose from three cheerful patterns: shells (aqua green), boats (cream) or ducklings (pale blue).
It measures 60cm by 105cm.
Tempted?
Turn to page 183 and fill in the couple to reach us no later than December 22.
Maureen Walker is a ‘design writer and stylist’— after ten years as Home Editor of the Sunday Times and writing a book on interiors, she has a wealth of experience to call on.
Maureen says her priority for homes is comfort and light — her own abode is a ‘mixture of old and new’— and she champions individual taste over trendiness.
SHE FASHION
AUTUMN Sonata
Autumn is a symphony of texture and pattern, with the coarse comfort of tweed, caress of cashmere and rich luxury of suede and velvet.
Colours echo with overtures of country lane rambles, windswept beaches and wild flower-filled meadows.
Go to own in the best of British tradition and spend a month in the country.
SWING OUT SISTER
Folds of rich berry-coloured tweed make a sweeping statement for autumn style.
This shawl-collared swing coat falls flatteringly from the shoulder and is roomy enough to envelop the chunkiest of knits.
A ROSE IN WINTER
Agatha Christie's Miss Marple moves with the times, staying in tweeds but shedding her dowdy image.
Rich forest hues blend with autumnal browns.
A cropped and fitted jacket nips in to show off a neat waist and looks trim with a long line skirt.
EASILY SUEDE
Suede is this season's re-discovered fabric.
Here softest suede contrasts with the rough comfort of tweed.
Our long, straight skirt in nutmeg brown flatters the silhouette and looks smart and stylist worn with a waistcoat and loose jacket.
Or add a crisp white shirt and waist-spanning belt for the office.
BEACH-COMBER
Enliven an autumn palette with shades of citrus and spice, then indulge yourself in cashmere.
A long-line jacket with tapered trousers skims over any figure flaws.
MEADOW BRIGHT
Look fine and distinctly dandy, teaming your tweeds with a waistcoat and jodhpurs.
The sumptuously coloured corduroy tones with the waistcoat and reflects the weave of the tweed.
SEA DOG
Girls will be boys in the long, lean lines of a mannish jacket.
The jacket's cord trim is complemented by the cord jodhpurs.
Add a silk scarf for femininity.
AN EDWARDIAN COUNTRY LADY
This classic tweed suit looks demure with lace collar and velvet waistcoat.
For a more relaxed look swap the long-line skirt for jeans and add a polo neck for European chic.
AS I WALKED OUT
A tweed jacket with a toning waistcoat for casual country elegance.
A floral shirt softens this masculine look and a riding skirt flatters fuller figures.
UNDER THE GREENWOOD TREE
The English country look is epitomised in this genteel fitted suit with its Edwardian-style walking skirt, topped with a plumed hat.
The heather and heath tones of the jacket complement the honey-coloured suede waistcoat and the white tie neck blouse adds a touch of elegance.
TAKE A BOUGH
Tweeds look traditional teamed with twinset and pearls.
Loose-fitting tweed pants could look equally good with a tailored jacket for town.
ENTERTAINING PEOPLE TALK TO SHE
AN AUDIENCE WITH Dame Edna
The Melbourne megastar reveals her intimate parts to Bill Williamson
‘Look at this skin!’ commands Dame Edna Everage, grabbing my hand for an exploratory stroke.
‘Isn't it gorgeous!
Notice, possum, how little make-up I'm wearing.
Don't need it.
People rush up to me in the street, and ask to touch me.
Feel away, I tell them, just stay off my erogenous zones — wherever they may be.’
We are in the salon of Dame Edna's Mayfair penthouse, slightly smaller than Versailles and banked by more floral tributes than a Mafia funeral.
Dame Edna is miffed that the Dorchester is closed for redecoration.
Like the Duchess of Argyll, you sense she is not au fait with the basic tenets of a tea bag, and, loyal souls though they may be, finds her live-in staff more than a trial.
Madge Allsop had just crept in like a beige dormouse and deposited a salver of tea, though Dame Edna had dismissed her with a beady look when she attempted to sit in our chat.
‘I adore little Madge,’ said Dame Edna, glaring after she closed the door and looking as if murder was more on her mind, ‘but frankly, she gets too big for her boots sometimes.
She wouldn't be as popular as she is today if I hadn't guided her career.
This woman appeared on television with me and now she's being asked to open supermarkets.
She's become a bit of a star herself and I'm very happy for her.
But she's been approached by the gutter press to sell her story of her life with me and I've had to intercept certain envelopes that have been sent in.
Cheque book journalism has been pointed at Madge but luckily she's weathered the storm or else,’ Dame Edna paused dramatically, ‘she'd be back on the streets.’
Heaving bosom
Dame Edna, I ventured, referring to her forthcoming autobiography, is the public really ready for the frank disclosures of your life?
Dame Edna pursed her lips, the Coalport cup of Earl Grey halfway to her  vermilioned slash of a mouth, and leaned forward, confidingly, offering a tantalising glimpse of heaving bosom appropriately cantilevered for the occasion.
‘There are many who would gloss over their less successful moments, possum, but I don't.
My life isn't all sweetness.
There's a little vinegar there and that's how my readers like it.
Mine,’ she cried, ‘is a warts and all story.
And of course,’ her eyes narrowed shrewdly, ‘with women's magazines these days warts have taken on an entirely new dimension!
‘You're an observant little possum,’ said the Dame approvingly, noting my interest in the valuable art treasures scattered around the room.
I had also just complimented her on her dress.
‘Actually,’ she said, ‘you'll notice I'm wearing rather a long dress.
They used to be called tea gowns many years ago.
It's a beautiful crêpe de chine with a ruffled neckline designed by my son.
Almost a brunch coat but that's too crude a description.
Kenny's thinking of calling them Ken Coats after himself.
Florals are very much back and I just float about the place in them.
If I cut my cloth to suit popular taste I wouldn't be the megastar I am today.
I call the shots, possum, and I think that's how the public like it.’
Not a lot of people know this, but Dame Edna is a close confidante of the Queen.
I wondered how I should broach this subject but as it happened, Dame Edna opened her heart.
‘I must be careful,’ she said, peering fearfully around as if Nigel Dempster were lurking behind the peonies.
‘But just between you and me and SHE magazine, her Majesty and I are like that , ‘said Dame Edna, indicating a royal chumminess that went beyond mere Commonwealth ties.
‘A dear little woman.
Touching, really.
Just a mother concerned and full of love for her children.
The most beautiful moment was when she asked me for my recipe for Pavlova cake.
Then we discussed Diana's stretch marks.
I make up my own recipe for stretch mark ointment and of course she was thrilled to have it.
Funny thing is, Madge Allsop is covered in stretch marks and she's never had a kiddie.
As a matter of fact, I'm thinking of offering her to The Lancet .
‘She was wonderfully supportive in my problems with Valmay.’
(Dame Edna's radical thinking daughter.)
‘Valmay is a DELINQUENT, no doubt about it, and many women will feel sorry for me when they read how she's treated me.
‘Incredible, isn't it, how the papers still have such an interest in the Royal family — and print so many lies.
Recently, the Queen invited me to the Windsor Horse show along with my little friend Mohammed Al Fayed, who has a shop in Knightsbridge, the name of which escapes me.
‘However, I went along and the cameras were pointing.
She gave me a little wink, because, of course, they were pointing their telescopic lenses mostly at me.
I said, ‘Oh!
Your Majesty, how rude!
They seem to want to get a snap of me rather than you at the moment,’ and she said, ‘Oh, I've had my innings and it's been a good innings.’
Wasn't that a sweet thing to say?
Then, later, there was all that fuss in the papers about Mark and Anne.
She said it was all just paper talk because she'd just had a gorgeous postcard from Mark but it gets to them, I can tell you.’
Weren't there also rumours of a tendresse between her and Mrs Thatcher?
Dame Edna sighed.
The probings of your reporter were too ardent to be denied.
‘Just between you and me,’ said Dame Edna cosily, ‘I'll tell you something about that woman.
She's not all the Iron Lady she's cracked up to be.
She has…feelings.’
‘No!’
‘As I live and breathe, possum.
I've been working on her image for some time now.
Indeed, it's pretty openly referred to around No 10 as the Ednaisation Process.
I'm her guru.
She said to me, ‘Frankly, like you Dame Edna, the physical aspect of interpersonal relations has never been a big thing with me.’
I had to reassure her.
It's the same with most women I said, and it's all paper talk.
‘Women's magazines, not this one, are always emphasising you're supposed to feel this or that when someone does this or that to you.
Lot of twaddle, really!
She said, poor soul, ‘I'm a bit chilly, Dame Edna, if you know what I mean.
Tell me the secret,’ she said, ‘of your approachability.
How is it, even when you're stern with women in your audience they still adore you?
In my job I have to be stern.
I'm like a headmistress a lot of the time.
And as she spoke, I looked into the troubled face of our Prime Minister and her eyes were filled with tears.
Filled with tears!
‘I reached out and touched her hand and she fell into my arms sobbing.
Fell sobbing into my arms, her hands pretty well gliding all over my body.
Looking for something — goodness knows what — comfort, I would have thought.
I put her down on the couch and said, ‘Just put your head back,’ and told her some Alexander Principles.
I put her on the floor with a book behind her head —Bonfire of the Vanities — and said, right up with your knees (to give her some simple breathing exercises).
‘While I'm doing all this,’’ she said, ‘have a look in my wardrobe and see what you think.’
Frankly, I hurled most of the things out.
‘This is for Oxfam,’ I said, and now I've got Kenny running up some things for her.
People will be amazed in the next few months at the change in her image, but they should realise that first and foremost she is a caring, sharing woman .
‘She said inflation's worrying her, and Nigel quarrels a lot.
Actually, he burst in on us.
No manners.
There she was lying on the floor with Bonfire of the Vanities under her head and me giving her a gentle kneading — spelt with a ‘k’ dear — and we were getting quite absorbed when all of a sudden the door flew open and in he came.
He said, ‘Oh, I'm terribly sorry, Prime Minister’, gave me a funny look and left.
I mean, there it is.
Funny things going on in his place, too, I shouldn't wonder.
She's not got a lot of time for him now, I can pretty well reveal that.
I was just glad in a way I was dressing the Prime Minister and not Mrs Lawson.
Her First Experience
‘Then Kenny arrived and took her inside leg measurements — for some slacks for Chequers.
It was lovely.
She said, as she was lying there, ‘I feel, Dame Edna, I can talk about anything to you and I've never had this experience before when I've tried to talk to people.
Apart from anything else you can't trust half of them because it all goes into interviews.’
‘Then she told me all her hopes and fears and about her First Experience — I'll say no more than that — but she remembered it vividly.
Remembered it VIVIDLY — as if it had been yesterday.
And apparently it had been.
Which was probably why it was so vivid.
It was a fascinating discussion.
Mind you, I didn't tell her I was talking to SHE magazine immediately afterwards but I don't think she would have minded because SHE readers are different, aren't they?
So PLEASE readers, this must go no further.
Don't give this copy away to Oxfam or when they collect for the hospital.
Keep it to yourself and shred it when you've read it.!’
This last year has been a tumultuous one for the Dame.
Poor Norm's passing was bad enough but she then found shocking goings-on at Dunraven, the Twilight Home for the Partially Confused in which her mother had been incarcerated — sorry — hospitalised.
‘Oh horrible creatures,’ cried Dame Edna with feeling, ‘to think my darling mother was being looked after by those fiends.
For the benefit of your readers, my mother resides in the Maximum Security Wing in this rest home on the outskirts of Melbourne.
All the wards are named after female achievers, like Virginia Woolf and Dora Carrington.
Mummy is there and I'd thought she was in good hands but of course I couldn't visit her as often as I'd like while earning my megamillions.
And what do I find when I get there?
It's like some clip from Prisoner Cell Block H .
This odd couple Thelma Choate and her friend Upjohn, Fran Upjohn.
Dresses like a man and smokes a pipe!
And looking after my mother!
‘I was so incensed I bought the hospital and I just haven't got around to firing — restaffing it.
Plus my Uncle Vic is in there now.
Lovely little man.
He was called the Butcher of Borneo during the war on account of the numbers of Japanese he despatched.
I think he went to visit my mother and got incarcerated by accident.
Some neighbour noticed the meals on wheels piling up on his doorstep.’
It's obvious, Dame Edna, I said tactfully, that you understand the problems of the elderly.
‘I am a MARTYR to my responsibilities,’ cried Dame Edna, topping up the teapot.
‘But I don't gloss over them.
My mother, for instance, has a touch of Oldtimer's disease and I come right out and say so.
Even with myself, I'm all for painting a frank portrait.
Let's face it, possum, there are some who would put me on a pedestal.
Sometimes, when I'm doing my shows, I see people in the audience slipping from their seats into a kneeling position and I say, ‘Get up!
Off your knees!
Back into your seat!’
After all, I'm just a megastar, no more than that.
I'm frail.
I have my weaknesses.
Above all, I want to show my human side.’
Her gorgeous life
‘My new book is long, not just a little pamphlet.
I looked at what all those other glamour pusses produced and I thought, Edna, you can knock them into a cocked hat.
It's what used to be called A Good Read.
I thought of calling it that, in fact.
I'll tell you some of the titles I thought of calling it.
Call Me Old Fashioned , I thought was a good title, and A Licence to Print Money would have been another good title for a bestseller, but it had rather a rapacious sound don't you think?
Or mercenary?
‘Then I thought,My Gorgeous Life , because I've had a gorgeous life and I'm still having one.
I was talking to Ursula Andress the other day about toy boys.
I said, do you think I should take one on?
I don't know whether I could afford all those leather jackets.
Then, of course, they'd make me a mother figure getting up asking me for a glass of water in the middle of the night.
I don't think I'd like it.
‘I really prefer the idea of an older man or even a bedridden man — even a person totally incapacitated — because at least when you bought him a watch you'd know you'd be wearing it in a week or two yourself.
I bought Norm the most beautiful Rolex shortly before he passed away.
See, isn't it gorgeous?
Waterproof, too.
He was a bit suspicious I must admit when I bought him those Janet Reger nighties but I knew he'd never get the chance to wear them.
Norm's pyjamas
‘We still don't know what caused my husband to pass away.
They're still looking for his black box.
Thought it had slipped down the bedclothes somewhere.
When my Norm passed, people descended on that hospital like locusts.
I think probably Norm's pyjamas will be coming up at Sotheby's pretty soon.’
Changing the subject quickly, I wondered how great an inspiration she had been to all those women out there in their 40s who lacked her drive to embark on a new career.
‘First and foremost, possum, let me say that I am a housewife and don't pretend to be anything else [some mistake surely — Ed].
Of course, I'm also a social anthropologist, swami, diseuse, chanteuse, children's book illustrator but, at heart, an unspoiled little housewife from the suburbs.
‘Then came the day when I snapped off my Marigolds, flung them in the marbleised  pedal bin — well it wasn't marbleised then, but it is now — and set off on this glittering career.
‘I've had a little help from Barry Humphries in this, and I hope I've paid him due credit, thought he did start that nasty rumour that he was me or I was him.
I mean, when you start a silly rumour that a famous woman is really some silly actor dressed up — well senior citizens reading it can be HEARTBROKEN.
‘But my book, darling, is INSPIRATIONAL.
Of course, I don't expect all the little people reading it to attain the heights I have — and I mean, literally, the heights.
A penthouse here in Mayfair, a beautiful home in Montreux, a villa in Mustique, a mansion in Malibu and of course, my old home in Melbourne, which is, of course , now a National Trust Museum.
‘I want women reading this to feel there is hope, there is light at the end of that drudgy old tunnel.
For a long time it was felt that having kiddies was the answer to a woman's complete fulfilment.
But I can say there are other things you can do.
Remember, I've never thought of myself as anything other than an amateur.
And I feel that's part of my charm.
Show me a professional, possum, and I'll show you a pompous type of person.
‘Sometimes I think I give and care too much.
In fact my gynaecologist looked up the other day and said, ‘Dame Edna, when will you stop giving?’
A funny thing for a gyno to say out of the blue — and the first time he's ever looked me in the eye.
‘It's the same with my relationship with Madge.
People who feel sorry for my old bridesmaid and travelling companion are barking up the wrong tree.
I know for a fact she's had her eye on my mother's matinée jacket collection for years and when I once, in passing, said I wondered what happened to those old prosthetic devices in the estates of deceased senior citizens, Madge let it slip that she knew a way of turning a Zimmer frame into an attractive lamp!’
At five o'clock precisely, it was time for Dame Edna to catnap before changing for the evening for some glittering social round.
‘Purification, possum,’ said Dame Edna, ‘will show you out.’
A strange woman all in black bobbed a grim curtsey, obviously the Mrs Danvers of the Dame's entourage.
‘Lovely little  person ,’ said the Dame in a stage whisper.
‘Spanish.
From Andalucia.
Purification Lorca — after the poet.
Very religious.
Though that top lip moustache will have to go.’
Have you a final little homily, I asked Dame Edna, especially for SHE readers everywhere?
‘Just the one I live by, darling,’ said the megastar of Moonee Ponds.
‘Life's a melody, if only you'll hum the tune…’
My Gorgeous Life , by Dame Edna Everage will be published on October 16 by Macmillan, £12.95.
‘A revolutionary French number with a touch of the gay Parisienne about it, don't you think?
It was designed for me by that spooky little twosome, the Emmanuels’
‘I reached out and touched her hand and she fell into my arms sobbing, her hands gliding pretty well all over my body’
‘A lot of women wouldn't have the nerve to wear this, possum (how they wish they'd had my recipe for stretch-mark ointment) but I feel I have to thrust ahead at the forefront of fashion.
If I cut my cloth to suit popular taste I wouldn't be the megastar I am today’
SHE TELLS TALES.
HOW TO WRITE A SUCCESSFUL SHORT STORY
Read the experts' advice: then enter the SHE/Pandora Short Story Competition and you could win £1000.
By Jane Hardy.
As W Somerset Maugham once pointed out, short stories have been around for a long time.
‘It is natural for men to tell tales, and I suppose the short story was created in the night of time when the hunter, to beguile the leisure of his fellows when they had eaten and drunk their fill, narrated by the cavern fire some fantastic incident he had hear of.’
That definitely describes Maugham's own descriptive short story, which is an anecdote grown up.
The other main type of short story is the poetic kind, which Katherine Mansfield wrote to perfection, and which leaves a mood in the mind.
Whichever kind of story you choose to write, it won't be easy.
But the tips from Kingsley Amis, Wendy Perriam, Ruth Rendell, Maeve Binchy, Malcolm Bradbury et al below should be helpful.
Keep it short is one obvious piece of advice — the SHE-Pandora short story competition has an upper limit of 5000 words, which works out at roughly 15 pages of A4 typed with double spacing.
Ruth Rendell and others advise plotting your story carefully in advance so that you don't get carried away by unnecessary detail or a minor character.
Write about one main incident or object (Chekhov said you could select anything you saw and write about it, but don't sit down at the typewriter before the idea has gelled in your mind.
Be careful that you don't end up writing a novel or get bogged down in pseudo poetry with no end in view.
One good idea is to analyse a few stories by your favourite authors before you begin, not to begin, not to copy their style, but to find out how much plot you need for 5000 words or less.
And remember that change is the essence of the short story — by the end, something significant must have altered in character or plot.
In fact, the best stories work like a toppled pack of cards: you realise at the end why the man couldn't have bought the pornography from the dodgy book-seller (he was blind) or why the couple shouldn't have wasted their savings on replacing the diamond necklace (it was paste) and think, Aha.
Suddenly the story's landscape is completely different.
Sylvia Plath once said that a story should begin with your main character up a (metaphorical) apple tree being pelted by someone — and then you deal with the problems arising.
So make the storyline move.
And good luck.
Be it an O.Henry squib with a sting in its tail or a Chekhov mood piece, a good short story remains in the mind like no other form.
Here is some detailed advice from the best current practitioners.
KINGSLEY AMIS
Novelist (Lucky Jim, Take a Girl Like You, The Old Devils), short story writer, poet, and one of the judges of the SHE/Pandora Short Story Competition.
‘What Philip Larkin said about short stories was very useful, and those that were poems.
I think you can see what he meant.
Some stories give you in one or two pages exactly enough information about why two people won't ever get on, the divisions between them and so on.
Angus Wilson was very good at that type.
So were Somerset Maugham, whom I admire, and Elizabeth Taylor.
Then there are stories like Sally Bowles [by Christopher Isherwood]which aren't novels or poems; it's just a marvellous evocation of a person.
the danger with a short story is self-indulgence.
One simple rule to follow is that you shouldn't ever introduce matters which are not made perfectly clear in the course of the story.
Otherwise the reader is left wondering ‘Who on earth is she or he?’
It is also important to leave the reader in no doubt as to what kind of story he is reading.
Ghost stories, which I've written (The Green Man , for example), do not have special rules.
But surprise endings are very hard to do.
On the whole I hate spoofs and I like everything played straight.
Stylistically, as you might imagine, I am conservative.
I like sentences to be proper sentences, paragraphs proper paragraphs.’
WENDY PERRIAM
Best-selling novelist (Sin City, Penguin, £3.99), poet, short story writer (her story Hot Ice Cream first appeared in August SHE), Wendy is famous for the intensity of her prose and her frankness about sex and religion.
‘I started short stories long before I wrote any novels.
And before that, I'd written poetry.
I think of the three forms — poems, novels, short stories — and the short story stands mid-way between the other two.
Short stories have to be poetic.
By that I don't mean like a sonnet or something, but concise.
In a novel, you go up byways and can't keep that single mood.
You can also be more experimental in a story, write in the person of a ghost or a cat, do things you couldn't get away with in a novel.
I think it was William Trevor who said the novel was more difficult to get down, the story needed much more polishing.
I agree with that.
A short story can use a crisis, the piece of a life where something is happening.
That's why I enjoy writing them — they are play, where novels are more plod.
D H Lawrence I admire, especially The Horse Dealer's Daughter , and Chekhov and Graham Greene.’
KATE PULLINGER
Twenty-seven, Canadian enfant terrible who came to London five years ago for the smell and ‘the dirt, history-dirt’.
Author of the collection Tiny Lies (Cape, £9.95), Kate recently published her first novel, When the Monster Dies (Cape).
‘How do you begin?
The character comes first for me.
Or an idea, an instant.
The story I'm working on started with the idea of what it would be like to break your glasses on holiday.
I am short-sighted, and I'm sure that when war breaks out, the first thing that'll happen is that my glasses will break.
I produce an enormous number of drafts of my stories, that is important.
But then you have a different problem, how to tell when the story is finished.
It is easiest to write the first draft all in one go — then you sustain the mood of the short story.
I feel the short story has to be cohesive; in a novel, there's more room, the tone can change.
So when I've finished the first draft, I go back to the beginning to check that it all hangs together.
You definitely have to read other people.
I like all Angela Carter's stories, and John Cheever.
The main problem is how to be your own critic.
Before I had an editor, it was difficult.
Showing your story to friends doesn't usually work.
That is partly why I enjoyed going to different writers’ groups.
I really like the group I joined at Morley College in London — it contained a mixture of people and I liked getting to know them.
Good copy, too.’
MAEVE BINCHY
Best-selling novelist, short story writer, occasional teacher of creative writing ‘insofar as it can be taught’.
Her novel Firefly Summer is being adapted into a T.V. mini-series.
‘Stories are much easier to write in the sense that you don't have to retain interest for 500-odd pages.
But you do have to have a glimpse of a character, and you have to have change.
I read somebody once who said by the end of the short story, something had to have changed.
I thought that was good.
You also have to put enough detail in to make the people real, but don't dally with subsidiary characters.
I like the Katherine Mansfield type of short story, which has marvellous mood, but where not so much happens.
Yet by the end things have shifted, as in The Doll's House where the children are too poor to be brought in to see the house.
One exercise I give classes in creative writing is to think of someone, Miss or Mr O'Connor, standing by a window reading a letter.
That's good because the letter could contain blackmail, be a love letter or anything.
We go round the group deciding on whether he/she is happy or unhappy, old or young, what they do, how they feel.
My favourite story of my own is Father Hurley from Civil Weddings (Arrow paperback, out this autumn).
A priest has a nephew whom he loves and wants to do well.
But the lad commits a crime, then the father covers up.
It came after I saw a priest in a London restaurant with a louche young man.
I didn't even hear them talk, just saw them, and the story came.
These innocent people have no idea that they're the basis of fiction.’
RUTH RENDELL
Mistress of the shorter form as well as the long haul, Ruth is famous for her Wexford mysteries and crime-plus novels.
Her Collected Short Stories are published by Penguin, –4.95.
‘I don't think you can do better than follow the great masters, even if you can't hope to emulate them.
My story,A Pair of Yellow Lilies , came from looking at a double-stemmed lily in our conservatory.
Then I thought that if someone wore embroidered lilies on jeans, it would be noticeable, and so on.
My advice to a beginner is read.
Most people understand the need to express, but not what you have to take in first.
Then have a go.
There's no formula.
Beginners sometimes see the short story as a novel in capsule, but it isn't.
The essence is atmosphere, one which lingers.
I don't think there's any special approach to a crime story.
You have to plot carefully to achieve the surprise at the end.
The reader has to be led up the garden path.
In Dying Happy , which is only 1500 words long, I used a man in a hospice as narrator.
He's telling the tale from his bed, all about the fact that he asked his wife if before the end he could see another woman from his past.
There's a fearful row, but eventually the woman does come.
And then she and the wife discover they have a lot in common apart from this man.
At the end, he's left out slightly, watching this passionate friendship develop between the two women.’
MALCOLM BRADBURY
Novelist, short story writer, critic, editor of the Penguin Best Modern British Short Stories.
‘The difference between the novel and the short story is one of length but also of atmosphere.
The short story is concentrated with a whole, complete atmosphere, whereas the novel is discursive and takes on more.
You can always tell when a short story is drifting towards a novel, and that's when it doesn't work.
I like the short story as a form, although most of the ideas I get are too big to fit into one.
I like Ian McKewan, Martin Amis, and going back in time Victor Pritchett, Elizabeth Bowen.
There are two different kinds of short story — one of the type I've described, with a single narrative idea, the other post-modernist.
This is very often a kind of prose poem where narrative is not the issue; it develops images and phrases, for an example read Beckett's short stories.
You need a philosophical position to do this, you can't just say ‘I'll write experimentally’, that doesn't work.
My advice is to remember that the short story is about one thing and one thing only, which often reveals itself in a single situation.
Forget the idea of spreading material over a period of time or developing a number of different characters.’
SHE/PANDORA COMPETITION
You've heard the theory — now put it into practice, and you could win £1000 and the chance to have your short story published.
The SHE/Pandora short story competition will be judged by Kingsley Amis, Booker Prize judge Sebastian Faulks (Literary Editor of the Independent , Kate Figes from Pandora Press, and SHE's Fiction Editor Jane Hardy.
It will of course be published in SHE, subject to the Editor's approval.
Pandora is a publishing house which made its name by encouraging first-time writers — successes include Jeanette Winterson, authors of Oranges Are Not The Only Fruit .
Pandora also promote short story writers by publishing Storia , a twice-yearly short story magazine.
Storia Two , published last spring, was on Love, while Storia Three is based on a game of literary consequences.
The winner and 100 runners-up will each receive three books from the Storia series, each worth £5.95.
HOW TO ENTER
You can choose any theme, but it must be original and not previously published.
Entries (one per person) should not exceed 5000 words, and should be typed on A4 paper, numbered, double spaced, with your name and title on each page.
The first page should give your name, address and telephone number, along with a competition entry token (see page 183).
Entries cannot be returned.
Send your entry to SHE/Pandora Short Story Competition, SHE, National Magazine House, 72 Broadwick Street, London W1V 2BP, to reach us by October 31 1989.
‘Short stories have to be poetic.
By that I don't mean like a sonnet or something, but concise.’
‘I produce an enormous number of drafts of my stories, that is important.
But then you have a different problem: how to tell when the story is finished.’
‘You have to put enough detail in to make people real, but don't dally with subsidiary characters.’
SHE INVESTIGATES
SCHOOL FOR SCANDAL
Classroom seduction is rife in our schools.
Yet it's seldom reported, and rarely punished.
Why?
By Rita Carter.
There are two ways to tell when an age-old phenomenon becomes a ‘social issue’.
It becomes the subject of countless official reports, inquiries and learned articles, and it starts to crop up in the soaps.
Sex between teachers and their pupils hasn't made ‘issue’ status yet — but it is clearly on the way.
It has already had its first prime-time telly airing (Brookside — Tracy Corkhill and her form master) and like incest, pre-Cleveland, it is being talked of as a hidden social scandal.
Officially, though, it hardly exists.
There have been lurid headlines, of course.
‘Randy Maths Master in Schoolgirl Sex Romps’ is a hardly tabloid perennial.
But the shock and outrage simulated by those who write these stories only perpetrate the idea that such goings-on are rare and extraordinary.
Not so, according to psychologist Dr Celia Kitzinger.
She reckons that more than 70% of schoolgirls are subjected to some form of sexual harassment by their male teachers, and that a significant number are physically exploited or even raped.
Her startling assertion is made mainly on the basis of a three-year research project carried out by her for the Centre For Social and Moral Education.
The aim of her survey, of 2000 schoolchildren in four schools ranging from a large inner-city comprehensive to as single-sex public school, was to find out how children perceived the idea of ‘fairness’.
She didn't set out to uncover sexual shenanigans.
Making no mention of sex, she asked the children to tell her about anything that had happened to them at school which they thought was unfair.
To her amazement more than 100 children — five per cent— responded by citing incidents in which teachers made some sort of sexual advance to them.
(All the stories came from girls — Dr Kitzinger thinks boys probably suffer similar things but are too embarrassed to admit it).
Examples from the survey included a teacher who would take underwear catalogues into the class and say things like, ‘You'd look nice in this one, Sarah’ or ‘This would suit a big girl like you, Emma’; a gym master who would have a quick feel while helping girls over the vaulting horse, and several who were said to ‘rub up’against girls and generally leer and lech.
There were cases of teachers following girls home, and one who exposed himself.
Because of the way Dr Kitzinger's study was set up, she was not able to do anything about the stories she was told.
‘I felt very bad about that,’ she says.
‘Time and again, they said things like: ‘I can't tell my Mum because she wouldn't believe me’ or ‘I told another teacher but I just got told off for telling lies’.
It's like child abuse in the family — people refuse to believe it happens because it's too difficult to deal with.
So it gets pushed under the carpet.’
Fear of retribution
It is indeed very rare for a case of sexual abuse by a teacher to surface publicly.
Most Chief Education Officers say they come across fewer than one case a year, thus supporting the official line that it ‘hardly ever happens’.
And, of course, the CEOs tell the truth — the number of cases of sexual misconduct by teachers that reach education authority levels is minute.
Few children ‘tell’ because they are scared of punishment or of not being believed.
The pupils who do complain usually retract their allegations long before they get to the state where the teacher might be held to account.
Practically everybody involved has a vested interest in making the child drop her claim.
The teacher himself, of course, has his job, his reputation and possibly his marriage at stake.
The head teacher has the reputation of the school to protect, and might not want to lose an otherwise good teacher.
And quite often the child herself is frightened that if her complaint is known she'll be labelled a ‘slag’.
The process usually employed to deal with allegations of teacher/pupil sex seems to be designed to protect those interests.
First the head teacher asks the girl to put her allegations in writing.
Lots of pupils give up at this first hurdle.
After all, it's difficult for anyone to write a clear account of an incident that is traumatic and embarrassing.
For a 13-year-old who may not be too hot on writing at all, it's asking a great deal .
Children who do put their claims in writing are then told that what they have written will be shown to the teacher they are accusing.
At this stage, more girls drop out for fear of retribution.
Those who persevere are nearly always told that the teacher has denied their claims.
In a straight word-against-word contest, the girls usually cave in.
Even if the head teacher believes the pupil, most prefer to deal with the matter by having a ‘quiet word’ in the ear of the offending master.
Depending on the nature of the offence, he is either warned to lay off, or to look for a job elsewhere.
Only when the Chief Education Officer becomes involved does the case register as an official statistic, and even then most CEOs apply the same ‘quiet word’ technique.
The teacher's conduct has to be obscene or criminal before sterner measures are employed.
Last year's crop of court cases at the Old Bailey reported in national newspapers included: a French master who had a store of pornographic photos of teenage pupils dating back ten years; a religious education master who simulated sexual intercourse in front of his pupils (the Old Bailey heard he had done this little party trick dozens of times at different schools); a primary school teacher who was allowed to go on teaching after being found guilty of ‘lewd, indecent and libidinous practices’ against ten- and 11-year old boys; and a music teacher in Sussex who had raped, attempted to rape and indecently assaulted hundreds of girls over many years.
During the trial, prosecutor Richard Brown said: ‘East Sussex Education Authority chose to brush aside the girls’ cries for help.’
In 1985, a primary school headmaster in Cornwall was found, in an inquiry published by the County Council, to have been sexually molesting his pupils for more than a decade.
He would simply to go a class, tell the teacher he wanted to remove a pupil, then take the child to his study for a sex session.
He made sure he was not disturbed by putting on a red light outside his door — a signal to the staff that no-one should enter.
He was finally exposed when a parent became suspicious of the head's refusal to show the children a police video about sexual abuse.
An inquiry into that case showed that the head's activities had probably been common knowledge among the staff for years.
The inquiry recommended that an independent, trained, impartial person should be employed to invite and investigate allegations of sexual abuse in schools.
Cornwall County Council is now acting on that recommendation, but there's little sign of other counties following suit.
The apparent reluctant of Education Authorities to take firm action against sex abuse is, in a way, understandable.
How can you frame a policy which can be applied to blatant perverts at one end of the spectrum, and genuinely romantic liaisons between teachers and mature students at the other?
Danger list
The vast majority of classroom liaisons involve girls who are only too willing to take part.
They may be too young to know their own minds and the teachers may be taking advantage; but is it really an area where the authorities should intervene?
If the girl is under 16, sex with her is a crime.
But most teachers with amorous intent are wise enough to wait until the girls are in the sixth form.
The Lotharios who seduce their pupils are at the very least guilty of irresponsibility.
But what of the teachers who are victims?
Every school has an unofficial ‘danger list’ of girls who should be avoided.
One teacher found one of his pupils waiting for him, half-naked, in the back of his car.
The gymslip Lolita is not entirely a figment of the male imagination.
The teacher's greatest terror, though, is the pupil who claims sexual abuse unjustly.
According to the Professional Association of Teachers, false accusations have become a ‘devastating problem’.
PAT officials say the number of cases has shot up dramatically in recent months, and is now running at about one case each week.
Buckinghamshire teacher Kieran Salter believes it is a ‘sinister side-effect’ of the publicity about child abuse generally.
He tells of one teacher who was interviewed by police for 12 hours, and then suspended from work for six months after one of his pupils accused him of touching her up.
Eventually the charges were dropped, but the teacher's career was ruined.
Luton headmaster Brian Round tells of a case where a teacher was accused of rape.
The girl later admitted she made the story up to get back at the teacher for punishing her boyfriend.
Mr Round believes such children should be expelled, and kept out of main-stream education for good.
Mr Round, and his colleagues in PAT, seem to think that all accusations of sex abuse are malicious fabrications.
Most education officers seem to think about four out of five claims are false.
But Dr Kitzinger believes all but a handful are true.
It's the numbers game — like that played out so tragically in Cleveland.
The comparison can be taken further; as with child abuse in the home, people either believe it happens the whole time or not at all.
Such prejudices will flourish so long as hard facts are unavailable, and facts about sex in schools are practically non-existent because no education authority is likely to commission research on the subject.
The truth usually only starts to emerge in the reports, inquiries and learned articles that follow the trial that follows the scandal that heralds the emergence of a new ‘social issue’.
TAKING ADVANTAGE
’ Me and Harriet have a teacher called Mr P, and he's perverted.
He keeps touching me and Harried up and once he took us both off into a little room to tell us off and stroked Harriet's leg.
He's a bastard.
I hate him.’
13-year-old girl
’ One day a teacher made a pass at me.
He wanted to take me to a disco but I said no.
After school, he was waiting for me and he exposed himself to me.
I ran out of the room but he followed me.
I told my Mum what had happened and she had a word with this teacher.
But he is still at the school.
I think they should fire him.’
14-year-old girl
’ This teacher, he keeps looking at us up and down — it's really revolting.
Once when I was in design and technology class, I asked him to give me a screw and he said, ‘See me after school and I'll give you one.’
It was really embarrassing.
But I didn't know what to do about it.’
15-year-old girl
’ I was in one of the school mobiles when this gang of boys came in and started sitting on me and trying to pull my knickers off.
A teacher came and saw what was happening, but he didn't try to stop it.
He just watched.’
15-year-old girl
’ In the end he was having sex with me nearly every day, in the music room mostly.
He warned me that if I told anyone about it, he would just deny it outright.
I didn't object at the time, but afterwards I felt dirty, exploited and used.
The whole thing has left me bitter — and tough.’
23-year-old former pupil 
Often the child is frightened that if her complaint is known she'll be labelled a ‘slag’
BACK FROM BEYOND
Reincarnation: fact or fantasy?
We asked for your experiences — and the letters flooded in.
By Liz Hodgkinson.
Have you ever had a strong feeling that you may have lived before?
After our article on reincarnation, ‘You Only Live (At Least) Twice’(May SHE), dozens of you wrote to tell us of your experiences of past lives.
And what emerged from the response to the article is that reincarnation is no longer seen as the domain of cranks and weirdos.
All the readers who wrote to us were ordinary people doing ordinary jobs, people of all ages and professions.
Here is a selection from the very varied past-life experiences of some of you who wrote it.
Psychologist Mary Russell never even thought about reincarnation until she was in her late 30s, when her life seemed to be a complete mess.
She had a growing conviction that conventional psychology could not hold all the answers — and that there was a missing link which meant that, very often, people's problems remained unsolved.
Mary, who now combines her psychology practice with astrological counselling, said: ‘As a psychologist, for a long time I had been aware of a lack, that this science did not give the whole of the picture.
‘But it wasn't until I went to India that I cam to feel that humans were more than just mechanical responses.
So when I came back to England, I consulted two elderly ladies, one a doctor, the other a spiritual medium, who work together, and who told me about the past lives I had had.
These were very varied.
According to these ladies, I had been at certain times a pirate, a builder, a healer, a spiritual teacher, a red Indian and a nun.
Of course, I had no idea whether these ladies were right or wrong, but the revelation of fragments of past lives helped me come to terms with my true nature, and to understand why I had been troubled in the past.
‘Not long after this, I landed a senior position with a large company.
I began to have a series of nightmares where I experienced painful sensations up and down my spine, weird chanting and a feeling of terror.
In consulted the ladies again, and was told that these nightmares were caused by an incarnation in Ancient Greece where I had been sacrificed to the Sun God.
They explained that only the brightest, best and most talented young people were chosen for this sacrifice and that ever since, I had associated success in life with being sacrificed.
The nightmares stopped instantly after this explanation, and I was able to give lectures, stand up for myself and speak in public— all of which I had never been able to do before.’
Mary says now: ‘Accessing my past lives has been of great benefit and I'm sure that if I'd gone to an ordinary therapist, nothing would have been sorted out.’
Grim death
Simone Lantain, who lives in London, went to see a healer who could see into past lives.
She told us: ‘The first time I saw this lady from the Foundation for Global Unity in Canterbury, she told me I had been a young boy in one of the Balkan countries, where slaves were being used to cut down all the trees.
A very early type of chainsaw was being used, and the slaves were being cruelly treated.
One poor man was bleeding to death, and I ran out to try and help him.
But I got caught, along with my father, and I was knocked unconscious.
When I came to, I was used as one of their slaves and one of the men tried to kill my father.
I tried to prevent this, but I was thrown onto the ground and fell onto a sickle.
This ruptured my left kidney.
Just as I was myself going to be killed, the village people managed to save me and take me up to the mountain, but I had lost too much blood and died anyway.
‘I was born in Holland, and have always been terrified of chainsaws.
After all those years it was at last made clear to me why I had this fear.
Also I have always felt very strongly against the cutting down of trees, and as a teenager in Holland, I started a campaign against the destruction of woodlands for a motorway.’
None of these facts, Simone pointed out, could have been known to the healer she consulted in Canterbury.
After consulting this same healer on several further occasions, Simone decided to join a small team of people specialising in past-life therapy, and now helps others to come to terms with traumas in the past which are blocking present progress or happiness.
‘There is no doubt in my mind,’ she says, ‘that we have all lived many lives before and that we have an individual life-force which never dies but chooses to come into incarnation at various times.
We also choose the environment and experiences we will go through.’
But not all past-life experiences occur when people are regressed by therapists.
Very, very many are completely spontaneous, and most often, according to our readers, they have happened during childhood.
Lorraine Herbert, of Flaxton, Yorkshire, was intrigued when her young daughter Joanne started talking about her friend, Dohti.
Mrs Herbert naturally thought that Dohti was an imaginary playmate.
Now she's not so sure.
‘It all started as soon as Joanne could speak,’ she said.
‘She would go behind a chair or settee and talk to this friend.
When we asked her more about her playmate, she told us that Dohti lives in a gypsy caravan, had black hair and eyes and was 11 years old.
Joanne described the gypsy caravan perfectly, even though she had never seen one, even in a picture.
She carried on talking about Dohti for around six months, and then it stopped.
‘I don't think I would have ever thought any more about it, except that years later my mother was reading a novel about gypsies and discovered that Dohti was an old Romany name.
Now I can't help wondering whether Joanne did live before, in some kind of gypsy world.’
Joanne, now 17 and doing A-levels — she wants to be a doctor — still vaguely remembers Dohti and, according to her mother, keeps an open mind on the subject of reincarnation.
‘In those days,’ said Lorraine, ‘when she was a small child, nobody spoke about such things much.
But when I read the SHE article, everything Joanne had said seemed to fit with the studies on children and reincarnation.
A sad yearning
Kathryn Cullen of Swansea is sure that she lives in some capacity in World War II.
She told us: ‘Although I am only 27 years old, I have very strong feelings regarding the war.
If someone mentions things like ration books, powdered egg, air raids and so on, my stomach turns over and I feel quite depressed.
When I was younger, I had recurring dreams, in which I and others would be constantly pursued by uniformed German soldiers.
In one very vivid dream, I remember being shot in the lower back and although it was only a dream we had to swim under a sort of submerged wall in order to escape.’
Kathryn, who is married with an 18-month-old daughter, said she was just curious to know whether these experiences could be connected with reincarnation and says that at times: ‘I feel restless, a sort of sad yearning for what could have been a past life.’
Priscilla Whiting had her first past-life experience at the age of three, when she remembers looking at her mother and thinking: ‘You are not my mother.
Where is my real mother?’
On another occasion, she wrote: ‘We were in the bedroom and I said to mother: ‘What is that?’, referring to an overmantel mirror.
She said, ‘That is a mirror and if you look at it you can see yourself.’
‘She went out of the room and I dragged a stool over to the mirror.
I looked in and had the biggest shock of my life.
The fact in the mirror wasn't my face.
For a fleeting moment I saw the face of a young boy, about 15 years old, with a fresh face and golden curls.
I am now sure I was that boy in an earlier life.
‘When I was very young I had frequent dreams of Israel and the River Jordan, although I had never been there, and the first word I spoke was ‘Abba’— the Jewish word for father.
We are not Jewish, so where did I learn this word?
I later read a book on astrology which told your former lives, and I learned that 2000 years ago I held an important post as a male.
‘I definitely think that reincarnation must exist.
I don't have any proof, but I often get strong feelings of having met people in a previous life.
‘Just recently I met a woman in somebody else's house and she said, ‘I'm sure I've known you before’.
I had exactly the same feeling about her, although we had never met.’
None of these letters offers any proof, of course, that reincarnation is a reality.
The readers who wrote to us could have read a book, heard a story, or seen a film, and then forgotten about it.
But there is not single convenient explanation which covers all the cases.
If these people are not remembering, or being helped to recall, past lives, then what at they remembering?
The huge postbag on the subject from SHE's readers shows us that the subject needs far more serious investigation, and can no longer be dismissed as fantasy or wishful thinking.
Liz Hodgkinson's book, Reincarnation: The Evidence, is published on September 28, Piatkus Books, £10.95.
THE EARTH MOVED
PACO RABANNE (below) talks to Alexandra Campbell about his past lives.
Paco Rabanne has had two lives in his present incarnation — that of the revolutionary 60s dress designer, and then as the name behind one of the world's most successful men's fragrances.
But that's nothing compared to his previous existences — he has been one of the 12 priests who murdered Queen Nefertiti's husband, a minor Basque priest in the last century, and Ivan the Terrible.
He has always been aware of his spiritual nature: ‘When I was seven I was visited by 40 judged — beings of light — who spoke to me about my role here.
Everyone has a role.
When you die you find yourself in the World of the Dead.
Then the judges come before you and tell you that if you wish to ascend you must erase your karma, and do penance for crimes in your life.
You then choose the most suitable next life to do this.’
The way to find out about your past lives is to pray: ‘Create a void in yourself.
You will remember the lives that have marked you the most, first.
When I arrive somewhere I have been in a previous life, the ground greets me.
I have a very close relationship with the ground.
The first time I made love it was with the ground.
I made a little hole, and when I reached orgasm the earth made some very heady smells — of flowers and rosemary.’
Paco has only just begun to speak openly of reincarnation: ‘The time has come when the Seventh Sea is going to open.’
I asked what he meant by this.
‘What are you asking me?
You already know.
Amongst your past lives you were a High Priestess of Merlin, and you have the power of all magicians.
I can see it in your features.’
As well as being near the time of the Seventh Sea, it is also the year in which Paco's latest men's fragrance, Teneré is launched: ‘Teneré means ‘to possess the hidden power of the sun’.
Every name has great importance.
Nothing comes by chance.
My real name is not Paco Rabanne but Fransisco Rabaneda Cuervo.
Cuervo is the Spanish for crow, which is the Celtic bird sent in by the Gods on the eve of battle.
Paco Rabanne is easier to remember.’
‘The revelation of these fragments of past lives helped me to come to terms with my true nature, and to understand why I had been troubled in the past.’
—Mary Russell 
‘There is no doubt at all in my mind that we have all lives many lives before and that we have an individual life-force which never dies.’
—Simone Lantain 
‘Although I'm 27 years gold, I have strong feelings regarding the war.
If someone mentions things like ration books, my stomach turns over.’
—Kathryn Cullen 
‘The face in the mirror wasn't my face.
For a fleeting moment I saw the face of a young boy, about 15 years old, with a fresh face and golden curls.’
—Priscilla Whiting 
SHE/BARBARA DALY WORKSHOP
From start to finish…
Barbara Daly waves her magic mascara wand and transforms five SHE readers
When we invited SHE readers to apply for a beauty lesson with top make-up artist Barbara Daly, we were flooded with replies.
Which was good news for START (Skin Treatment and Research Trust) as we also asked you for a donation to help START in their research into replacement skin for series skin problems.
Our five chosen readers share their tips from the top.
PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS
Susan Hughes, 29, Cambridgeshire
‘My main problem was overriding a blemished skin.
Ever since the age of 13 I've been hoping my spots would go away — but constant picking at them has left some scars.’
Barbara's advice: ‘Susan's skin needs foundation with concealer on top.
And make-up won't stay on without powder.
Powders are not what they used to be and today's formulations won't clog, streak or look heavy, provided you apply them properly.
In fact, proper application of make-up with the correct tools of the trade is often the key.
Always use a clean powder puff.
Tip a little loose powder into the palm of your hand and pat the powder puff into it.
Press and pat onto the face but never rub it.’
Rosy Silver, 40, Leicester
‘Everything I try seems to come out far too think and mask-like.
And I always seem to poke myself in the eye with mascara.’
Barbara's advice: ‘Use a hand mirror when applying mascara.
Make sure there is no grease around the eye — use powder if necessary.
When doing top lashes look down into your mirror so it's just under your nose.
Reverse it for the bottom lashes — look up in to the mirror about your forehead.
Remove any blobs with a damp cotton bud.
Use an eyelash comb to separate the lashes.’
Christine Hardy, 44, Surrey
‘I want to know how to make up without looking much too heavily made-up.’
Barbara's advice: ‘Contrast eye-shadow to your eyes.
As you will probably find gingers, greys, coppers, yellows and browns as well as the main colour in your irises — pick one of those.
Warm subtle browns and taupes are good for day.
Cover the lid with one colour.
Make a wedge shape in the outer corner with a darker colour.
With a wide but slim blender brush, blend the darker shadow across the socket line and under the eye.’
Ellen Davies, 30, Cheshire
‘I can never choose lipstick.’
Barbara's advice: ‘Colour always depends on the clothes and the occasion.
As you grow older the shape of the lipline becomes less defined; using a lip pencil can make you look younger.
Browns go with virtually any lipstick.
Keep lips together while drawing the lipline and don't make it too heavy.
Lipstick lasts longer if you apply it with a lipbrush.’
Marilyn Cousins, 41, Herts
‘How do you suggest I cover up my psoriasis?’
Barbara's advice: ‘Use a thin film of foundation.
(Match it on your face , not the back of your hand.)
Then use concealer over the foundation and set with powder.
This is better than using thick foundation to cover scars.’
Know the tricks of the trade and go from a bare-face start to a beautiful finish.
Barbara Daly (centre) surrounded by (clockwise from top right): Christine Hardy, Ellen Davies, Marilyn Cousins, Rosy Silver and Susan Hughes
SHE BEAUTY
LUSTRE for LIFE
Hair care technology has gone beyond conditioner: today's products are a prescription for total hair health.
By Jo Glanville-Blackburn
Hair is always on show and it's one of the first things to suffer from the effects of poor diet, pregnancy, the menopause and stress.
And that's before the problems we inflict ourselves: frazzling our hair with heated appliances, harsh chemical processes and using the wrong products for our hair type.
But modern products go beyond shampoos and conditioners — new hair problems can be tackled like skin care.
Hair loss
Glen Lyons, consultant trichologist at the Philip Kingsley Clinic, says: ‘In the last five years I've noticed a dramatic increase in the number of women suffering from hair and scalp conditions, particularly the speeding up of genetic hair loss.
The number one cause is stress, which particularly affects the professional woman — often in her mid 20s to late 30s.
This is because here energy levels are often depleted — either she doesn't eat properly or she diets in order to keep slim.’
Ninety per cent of women who visit the clinic with hair loss problems are deficient in iron through dieting or simply because they are run down or have been ill.
‘I often advise women that an extra half a stone will benefit their hair,’ says Glenn.
Going overboard on nutritional supplements wouldn't necessarily help.
An overdose of zinc, for example, could impair the absorption of iron into the system.
A balanced diet will give nutritional requirements in all the right proportions.
Technology has improved our hairstyles, but our hair has suffered in the process.
Constant use of hairdryers and heated rollers takes its toll.
Try using a diffuser hairdryer like Babyliss Diffuser Dryer (from £19.95) which disperses heat rather than concentrating it on one area, or buy an attachment such as Braun's DIF2 Diffuser (£4.95).
And the best way to dry long hair is with a hooded hairdryer.
If you want an alternative to heated styling brushes, try Clairol's Wavelengths (£27.95 for 14 heated flexible stylers.)
Then there are the effects of the chemicals caused in colouring, perming or bleaching.
And exposure to the drying effects of sunlight from more frequent beach holidays, central heating, air conditioning and pollution only exacerbates dry hair problems.
Hair loss as a result of antibiotics, pregnancy, dieting etc takes place three to four months later.
This is because your hair goes through a growing phase which lasts from three to five years, then a resting phase which lasts for three to four month before it falls out.
When hair has been subjected to elements which will cause the hair to fall out it will still have that three month resting period before you'll see any noticeable loss of hair.
Fifty per cent of women suffer temporary hair loss after having a baby.
Fortunately, it is a temporary condition and eventually your hair will return to normal.
The reason for the hair loss is that during pregnancy hormone levels are higher and keep the hair in its growing phase for much longer.
After you've given birth, levels decrease, returning to pre-natal levels.
This is when the hair loss results.
If you're breast feeding, your hormone levels remain high until you stop.
Following the menopause, hair texture becomes very coarse and if a woman has a predisposition to genetic hair loss, or her hair has been thinning, this can be a crucial time.
Dr Hugh Rushton, Research Director for the Philip Kingsley Trichology Clinic, believes that hormone replacement therapy (HRT) is very effective in restoring condition to hair because it maintains a better balance of hormones, particularly oestrogen.
Scalp conditions
Scalp conditions can range from itchiness and inflammation to dandruff and psoriasis.
And you are 80% more likely to suffer from scalp inflammation if you have eczema or psoriasis anywhere on your body.
But the number one cause is stress.
Stress is always responsible for neuro eczema, which shows up as a patch of inflammation in the nape of the neck at the top of the spine.
It's the most irritable type of scalp condition and it's on the increase.
Dairy products, most notably cheese, have been shown to have an inflammatory effect on scalp conditions.
Also to be avoided are white wine an champagne (the better the quality the worse the case) because of their sugar content.
You should eat every four hours to maintain energy availability for non-essential tissue and during the working day avoid foods which take longer than four to five hours to digest such as cheese, eggs, nuts, bananas and fatty foods.
Perms
The chemicals in perms are in themselves very safe and effective, but damage can easily result from poor technique on the part of the hairdresser.
This can be failure to recognise the hair's unsuitability to withstand the process, incorrect winding and tightness of the curlers or the hairdresser's insufficient attention at any part of the process.
Perming long hair can cause special problems.
Ian Whelpton technical manager to Clynol, who manufacture perms, believes it should only be permed when twisted and wound around a rod.
If hair is simply rolled on conventional rollers, the hairdresser can only check the hair visible on the roller and not the ends which were would around first.
As the ends of the hair absorb perming solution more rapidly, there's greater scope for damage there.
Almost every haircare range now contains an intensive conditioner for hair that's become dry through heated styling products, colouring and perming.
But some leading shampoos and conditioners contain small amounts of bleaching agents to promote blonde colouring.
If you regularly perm your hair and find its condition is getting worse, it could be your hair is suffering the effect of those bleaching agents.
Change to a specialised range for permed hair, such as Lamaur, or L'Oréal's Energance.
Conditioners
All types of hair, even oily, can benefit from conditioner, but requirements differ depending on the extent of the damage.
Most conditioners are made up or waxes, oils and polymers and help to protect from pollution and control hair in excessive humidity and prevent moisture loss from the hair shaft.
Moisture is essential to the hair.
It's what makes your hair bouncy and pliable.
Dry hair is hair which lacks moisture rather than hair which lacks oil.
It has no elasticity, is brittle and breaks easily when brushed or combed.
Never brush your hair when wet; instead use a wide-tooth comb.
Hair is in a stretched state when wet, a wide-tooth comb reduces breakage by gently passing through hair.
Buy a comb with no ridge along the teeth.
The join catches hairs and breaks them.
As most shampoos are detergent-based and alkaline, conditioner helps to restore the hair's natural acidity and smooths down the cuticles, making them lie flat to reflect more light and add shine.
It also lubricates hair, making it easier to comb, thus reducing damage due to friction.
Conditioners also reduce static.
A good conditioner should promote the natural strength and shine of your hair.
Neutrogena offer a simple test: after rinsing off conditioner, squeeze out excess moisture and run your fingers through your hair, shaking out and separating strands.
Its natural shape and movement should become apparent even though wet.
If your hair looks much straighter and flatter than usual the conditioner is either too heavy for your particular type of hair type or it is not washed out properly.
The five most popular brands of conditioner nationwide are Timotei, Flex by Revlon, Cream Silk, Alberto Balsam and Alberto VO5.
What problems can't be cured?
Split ends.
Cut them off.
Dandruff.
It is controllable but not curable.
Dandruff is a common problem and depends largely on two factors: susceptibility and stress, but many modern products can help.
Latest trends
Silicone has revolutionised conditioning products.
Hair is basically a fibre, negatively charged, which attracts itself thus causing friction and frizz.
Silicone cancels out the problem as it is positively charged and leaves hair in a neutral state, adding smoothness and promoting shine.
Conventional conditioners tend to add to hair causing build-up.
Silicone particles have no affinity with themselves so when they form the ingredients of a conditioner, any particles not attracted to the hair are washed away and create no build-up.
Vidal Sassoon's Wash and Go (£1.59, 200ml) is a new concept in conditioning shampoos, containing silicone to condition.
Because silicone is positively charged it is attracted to hair, while the shampoo is negative and so is washed away.
Protein: The only way protein can nourish hair is from within.
Applied in haircare products it coats the hair, making it feel softer, but it cannot alter the hair's structure.
Glenn says that you don't necessarily need a frequent wash shampoo.
As a great believer in the frequent washing of hair, he believes that today's shampoos are of such high standard that you can wash your hair daily with any of them if you want.
Glen Lyons has a variety of mail order products and fact sheets available.
Contact him at Philip Kingsley Trichological Clinic, 54 Green St, London W1Y 3RH (tel: 01–629 4004).
FREE OFFER
Permanence and Iridiance shampoo and conditioner by L'Oréal provide special aftercare for permed and coloured hair.
Exclusively available from L'Oréal salons, we've 1000 sets of shampoo and conditioner to give away to the first 1000 names drawn from the postbag on October 31 (100 for subscribers only).
Send you name and address on a postcard stating whether your hair is permed or coloured to: SHE/Iridiance and Permanence Offer, L'Oréal, 30 Kensington Church Street, London W8 4HA.
FREE OFFER
A stressful lifestyle can lead to irritated scalp conditions such as dandruff.
Dandruff can't be cured but it can be controlled if you use specialised products such as those made to counteract the problem.
Selsun, long renowned for their effective anti-dandruff shampoo, have now created Soft Conditioner to complete the range.
We have 1000 bottles of Selsun Soft Conditioner to give away free to the first 1000 readers whose names and addresses are drawn from the postbag after October 31 1989.
Send your name and address on a postcard to: SHE/Selsun Soft Conditioner Offer, Abbott Laboratories Ltd, Abbott House, Moorbridge Road, Maidenhead, Berkshire, SL6 8LG. 200 bottles have been put aside especially for SHE subscribers, so if this applies to you please mark your postcard clearly.
Beautiful hair in the peak of condition doesn't just come out of a bottle.
You have to take care of the rest of your body, too.
‘90% of women who visit the clinic with hair problems are iron deficient because they're underweight.
I often ask women to put on half a stone for the sake of their hair’
Dairy foods and champagne are known to have an inflammatory effect on scalp conditions
SHE QUICK CUISINE
What's in store?
The most memorable occasions are often the ones you didn't plan.
But if friends descended, would you be ready to rustle up an impromptu supper?
Here's how to create delicious last-minute meals entirely from standbys in the store cupboard.
The hour is growing late and the conversation between old friends shows no signs of flagging.
‘You must all stay for supper,’ you gaily cry (not wishing to break up the unexpected party), and fling open the store cupboard.
And what sight greets you?
Gleaming rows of useful tins and bottles, interesting pasta and pulses, an array of herbs and spices?
No.
You are faced with half a packet of dusty dried peas, the unopened naan bread mix that seemed such a good idea at the time and the smoked oysters left over from last year's Christmas hamper.
Before this happens to you again, resolve to spring clean your storecupboard and stock up with non-perishable, versatile ingredients which will enable you to create impromptu meals without having to drive miles to the late-night grocers.
No store cupboard worth its salt is ever without Italian tomatoes — top of the list for canned standbys.
These are also available in a sieved variety, to save you laboriously removing bitter seeds.
Heat up a tin or two with sautéed onions and garlic, a splash of red or white wine, a pinch of dried oregano and a bay leaf, and you've got an instant pasta sauce ready to hand.
Add richness with a few dried wild mushrooms, soaked for 20 minutes and added with their liquor.
(This also makes a wonderful risotto base.)
Or turn the basic into a marinara sauce with a tin of clams, mussels or tuna.
For more interesting instant salad bases, keep cans of sweet red peppers and artichoke hearts (see recipe for Mediterranean Salad), broad, flageolet or canellini beans.
Ad a little finely chopped onion, a few black olives, fruity olive oil and a squeeze of lemon.
Don't forget the classic Italian combination of tuna fish and white beans.
Or go Greek — use a food processor to purée chick peas with garlic, lemon, olive oil and tahini (sesame paste) for fluffy humous.
Keep a packet of pitta bread in the freezer, heat up under the grill from frozen and cut into fingers.
Serve warm.
No need to dash out to the Chinese takeaway — if you keep an Oriental corner of the cupboard you can create your own instant stir-  fries .
Oyster and blackbean bottled sauces (look for those without monosodium glutamate) are classic standbys — add either to stir-fried, shredded ginger root, garlic, canned water chestnut, baby sweetcorn, bamboo shoots and a few soaked Chinese dried mushrooms.
Serve on a bed of noodles or rice, and dress with a little sesame oil.
Grains, pasta and pulses offer unlimited scope.
Couscous is an excellent base for hot and cold salads and it doesn't need cooking — simply soak it.
Mix with red peppers, broad beans, onion, lemon and garlic.
It's well worth investing in a packet of wild rice; it's expensive but you can add it to brown rice for a more exotic effect.
Mix one part wild rice with two parts brown or white, add chopped toasted hazelnuts or pine nuts, dried apricots and sultanas.
Cinnamon sticks and cardamom seeds complete the Middle Eastern flavour.
Unlike most pulses, lentils need no presoaking — simmer gently for 20 minutes until tender, add salt about five minutes before the end of cooking.
Stir into sautéed onion and garlic and toss with a lemon and mint dressing.
Garnish with strips of red pepper and feta cheese.
Good pasta needs minimal embellishment — garlic, Parmesan and nutty butter or olive oil; chopped olives and lightly fried anchovies; strips of prosciutto; bacon and egg for carbonara; caramelised onions and fried toasted wholemeal breadcrumbs.
Remember to keep the fridge stocked with useful stores.
Pesto (Italian basil and pine nut sauce) is delicious tossed over hot pasta, and it makes a useful substitute for fresh basil in a vinaigrette dressing.
Once opened, a jar will keep for up to two weeks in the fridge (seal surface with a little olive oil).
Feta cheese has a storage life of two months; crumble over salads for an instant Mediterranean flavour.
Always have a head of garlic and a piece of fresh ginger root to impart a Far-Eastern flavour to simple ingredients.
Keep small whole salami and a vacuum-packed bresaola (an Italian cured beef) or prosciutto.
Drizzle with olive oil and top with flakes of fresh Parmesan for an elegant starter.
My latest favourites are sun-dried tomatoes in olive oil, pungent and sweet.
Admittedly, they are expensive, but you only need one or two to transform a salad or perform magic when mixed with lemon, garlic and salami and stirred into pasta (see recipe for Fettucine with sun-dried tomatoes).
And when it comes to quick and delicious desserts, a range of tinned fruits in their own natural juices is essential.
Apricots are especially good, as are cherries and exotics like lychees, mango and guava, served in a complementary liquor.
Try black cherries warmed with a little kirsch and topped with ice cream (from your well-stocked freeze, naturally!) and a few crumbled Amaretti biscuits.
Or use fruit to make instant purées for fools and snows and to flavour your own yogurt.
If you add frozen pastry to your stock you have pâtisserie.
Layer nuts and/or fruit, glaze with apricot and redcurrant jam and bake until golden.
(See recipe below.)
THE ESSENTIALS
Onions, garlic, lemons, ½ dozen eggs, butter, olive oil, wine vinegar, mustard, a limited range of herbs and spices, eg bay leaves, oregano, thyme or mixed herbs, paprika, cinnamon, coriander, sea salt and black peppercorns.
In tins: tomatoes, tuna, apricots, mixed beans, plus sultanas, and a selection of rice and pasta.
FETTUCINE WITH SUN-DRIED TOMATOES
Preparation time: 8 minutes.
Cooking time: 10 minutes.
Serves 4.
4oz (100g) fettucine, or other pasta.
2 tbsps virgin olive oil.
2 garlic cloves, peeled and thinly sliced.
3 tbsps dry white wine.
1 lemon.
2 sun-dried tomatoes, roughly chopped.
1 oz. (25g) thinly-sliced Italian salami.
1 small dried red chilli, seeds removed, finely chopped.
Fresh Parmesan to serve.
Bring a large pan of salted water to the boil, add the fettucine or whatever pasta you choose, separate strands with a fork.
Cook for 7–10 minutes until al dente .
Sauté garlic in olive oil until just golden.
Do not allow to brown, otherwise it will become bitter.
Remove from the pan with a slotted spoon.
Pare 4 strips of zest from the lemon using a vegetable peeler.
Add the wine and lemon peel to the olive oil and simmer for 2 minutes.
Add the sun-dried tomatoes, red chilli and thinly-sliced salami.
Drain the pasta and toss well in the sauce.
Season with plenty of freshly ground black pepper and serve immediately with generous amounts of fresh Parmesan, either grated or flaked with a knife.
MEDITERRANEAN SALAD
Preparation time: 10 minutes.
Cooking time: 5 minutes.
Serves: 6 as a starter, 4 as a light lunch.
1 × 14oz (397g) can artichoke hearts, drained.
3 tbsps fruity olive oil.
1 x 6 ½ (185g) can sweet red peppers (pimientos), drained.
1 small onion, peeled and sliced.
2oz (50g) black olives, pitted. 4oz (100g) feta cheese.
1 tsp red wine vinegar.
Salt and freshly ground black pepper.
1/4 lemon, very finely chopped.
Halve artichokes lengthways and place cut side down on absorbent paper.
Sauté in 1 tbsp of the oil until golden.
Halve peppers, remove seeds and slice in 1/4’(5mm) strips.
Place in a salad bowl with the artichokes, onion and olives.
Crumble over the feta cheese.
Blend vinegar and seasoning, stir in the finely chopped lemon and whisk in the well flavoured oil (Waitrose own label extra virgin olive oil is very good).
Pour over the salad, toss well.
Serve with crusty bread.
PINE NUT TART
Preparation time: 15 minutes.
Cooking time: 30 minutes.
Serves 6–8.
7oz (200g) frozen pastry.
4oz (100g) ground almonds.
1oz (25g) castor sugar.
2 tbsps self-raising flour.
2 eggs.
1 tsp vanilla extract.
Scant ½ tsp vanilla essence.
3oz (75g) unsalted butter, softened.
2 tbsps low-sugar apricot jam.
3oz (75g) pine nuts.
Icing sugar to decorate.
Roll out the pastry to line an 8’(20cm) fluted flan tin.
Chill.
Blend the almonds, sugar and flour.
Stir in the eggs, vanilla extract, almond essence and butter until they are evenly combined.
Spread the pastry base with the jam and top with almond mixture.
Sprinkle over the pine nuts and bake at 375°F (200°C Gas Mark 5) for about 30 minutes until golden brown.
Allow to cool.
Dust with a little icing sugar and serve warm or cold with crème fraîche or fromage frais.
Food writer Joy Davies spent 1987 travelling in search of exotic new recipes.
When she has the time she loves to spend hours in her kitchen, although quick cooking is the norm.
SHE AFTERWORK COOK
Top of the pots
Off stage, singer Sheila Ferguson cooks up a soul food storm
Soul fool is all that's best about eating.
It's big healthy hunks of wholesome home cooking served to a joyous family gathering.
It's juice running down chins, fingers instead of forks, plates licked squeaky clean and belts loosened around waists.
Those of us who've had a bellyful of over-processed, bland, convenience foods, cardboard crispbreads and diet spreads have much cause to thank Ms Sheila Ferguson, ex-Three Degrees singer and author of a new book,Soul Food .
She has spent the last 18 months researching and writing the kind of cookbook which brings all the old fun and the sheer sensual pleasure back into cooking — and eating.
For Sheila, passionately fond of all cooking, the book goes beyond being a delicious collection of American family recipes.
It represents a concerted effort to preserve her black heritage.
‘I really wanted to create a reference book for my twin daughters, Alicia and Alexandra, of all the recipes I loved as a child, and still like cooking,’ explains Sheila.
‘They are growing up missing half their heritage, and I really began to be concerned when they said fish and chips were their favourite food.
‘But what really fixed it was visiting my family in the States.
I discovered they're all switching to health foods, cutting out fat, salt and pork.
I knew I had to act fast!’
Fortunately the old recipes are very much alive — much of the food photographed in the book was made by Sheila's relatives in their own homes especially for a photo-session last August in Philadelphia.
The origins of the soul style of cooking began in the American Deep South, among black plantation slaves.
Given cheaper, tougher cuts of meat and staple rations of corn, molasses, buttermilk and a few seasonal vegetables, they showed great inventiveness and creativity with these limited ingredients.
The sophistication and range of this style of cooking grew, as Sheila describes in the first chapter of her book.
‘Before your get to the delicious recipes, you must pay attention to the important history lesson!
‘I did most of my research in the British Museum,’ says Sheila.
‘I've tried to cross-reference food historians with cookery writers, who tend to brush aside the contribution of black slave cooks.
And I've tried to stay true to the original recipes given to me by members of my family, even though some of them won't be very popular — I think the brains and chitterlings [pigs' intestines]recipes are of historical interest only!’
Cooking soul food is very much a ‘handful of this, a good dollop of that’ sort of affair.
It is a form of cooking which uses all the senses — listening to the sizzling fat to tell when chicken is fried just right, smelling to detect the moment a cake is baked to perfection.
‘I'm usually too fully to eat after cooking a dinner party,’ confesses Sheila.
‘I've been tasting bits all day, so when it comes to serving dinner I can only sit and chat.’
Sing for your supper
Sheila is very fond of entertaining — many famous friends live near her lovely riverside home in Berkshire.
The likes of Terry Wogan, Michael Parkinson and Ernie Wise all have been known to clamour for a soul food supper in preference to other exotic foreign fare.
Sheila's Smothered Fried Chicken (juicy inside, crisp outside, smothered in delicious gravy) is a firm favourite.
When she left the Three Degrees in 1987, Sheila decided to combine singing and showbiz with spending more time at home, cooking, and being with her twin daughters.
‘To me, if the kitchen's not smelling of delicious food then there's something wrong at home,’ says Sheila, who does all her cooking herself.
‘The kids love having me here, they wish I could be here all the time.
They run in an out of the kitchen, and at seven, they've already developed sensitive taste buds.
I got them to try all the recipes in the book — even a mouthful of chitterlings.
They never knew what to expect when they came home from school!’
Neither Sheila nor her husband Chris Robinson, a property developer, have any family in this country.
‘My relatives all live in the States — his are in Jersey.
So we try and compensate by doing lots of family things at the weekends, when we are all together.
In the week, if I'm busy, Chris can fix supper (I always leave meals in the freezer) and he does the ironing.
It's good for the girls to see some role reversal.’
One family tradition which is rigorously upheld is the big soul-food blow out which they all enjoy whenever Sheila returns from a tour, or when a TV project is over.
‘The moment I get back I'm in the kitchen.
Soon there are delicious smells wafting through the house.
I can feel them getting hungrier and hungrier, then we all sit down to eat, or ‘greeze’ as they say down South.
It's so lovely to see them all sitting there, juice running down their chins.’
Every Sunday the family get up early for an enormous American breakfast — pancakes, ham, waffles with maple syrup, and then later on in the afternoon they all sit down to an English roast.
‘I like being in the kitchen — it's my domain,’ says Sheila, who, it must be said, does look more at home behind a microphone than a mixing bowl.
‘When I've laid a table and put a really good meal in front of my family I feel fulfilled as a woman.
I get a sexy kind of pleasure from it, to see them satisfied, licking their lips, really enjoying the food I've prepared.’
With so much emphasis on cooking and eating, it's amazing that both Sheila and Chris manage to say so slim.
‘We both have to watch our weight — we weight ourselves each morning.
Of course we don't eat soul food all the time — nobody could!
We eat sensibly: lots of salads.
I never eat diet food, I hate all those fake tastes.
I prefer to go hungry all day, saving calories for one big, delicious meal.’
Now that her children are old enough to do without a nanny, Sheila refuses all help in the house, preferring to do all her shopping herself.
But finding American seasoning is a real problem locally.
I know Harrods have a good selection and now McCormicks are bringing out many of the American seasonings in their range of spices.
But I rely on stocking up whenever I visit the States — I take an empty suitcase and bring it back full’
Sheila admits that food additives are a great worry — so much so that she is investigating the possibility of growing her own exotic vegetables in a hothouse.
These will be for family use only, but she's branching out in the commercial food market soon with a line of American foods, with the help of husband Chris.
‘If he's a good boy I might make him Chairman of the board of Ferguson Foods!
‘Meanwhile I've just signed with Stock Aitken and Waterman to produce my next records, and there are plenty of things happening on the television score — it's all rather secret but there is talk of a sit-com this autumn.’
Soul Food was published on September 14 by Weidenfeld & Nicholson (£12.95).
SWEET POTATO PIE
1½lbs. (750g) sweet potatoes.
3 large eggs.
8–12oz (250–375g) sugar (depending on sweetness of potatoes).
3–4 tsps ground cinnamon.
½ tsp. ground allspice. 8fl oz (250m) double cream.
1 unbaked 10 inch pie shell (made from 7½oz plain flour, 5oz lard or vegetable shortening, and about 3½ tbsps iced water)
Boil your sweets, still in their jackets, until almost tender (about 20 minutes).
Peel them while they're still hot, then mash ‘em up.
Preheat your oven 350°F (180°C, Gas Mark 4).
Beat the eggs, sugar, salt and spices into the potatoes.
Now pour in the cream and stir well.
Give one last beating for good measure.
Turn your mixture into the pie shell.
Bake in the oven for one hour until the pie is nice and firm.
Try inserting a knife into the centre.
If it comes out clean, your pie is done.
Let it cool down a bit.
Then serve on its own, or with a nice dollop of cream, or ice cream.
PHILADELPHIA ICE CREAM
Now this is not strictly a soul food recipe, but since Philadelphia is my home town and my family has eaten its way through tons of this, I always think of it as northern soul food.
Serves 6 
1¼ pints (1l) single cream, or equal parts double and single cream.
8oz (250g) sugar.
1½ tbsps pure vanilla extract, or 1 tbsp vanilla extract and 1 tsp crushed vanilla beans.
⅛ tsp salt.
In a medium saucepan over a low heat, heat cream to just lukewarm.
Do not let it boil!
Stir in the sugar, salt and vanilla until the sugar dissolves completely.
Cook slightly, then freeze in your ice-cream maker according to the manufacturer's instructions.
If you don't have one, turn down your freezer as low as it will go and freeze the mixture in a shallow metal pie pan.
After 45 minutes to an hour, the mixture will have frozen to the consistency of thick slush.
Tip it into a food processor or mash it with a fork in a bowl, then return to the freezer.
Repeat every 45 minutes for up to four hours until the ice cream has a good texture.
Soften for about an hour in the fridge before serving.
CARROT CAKE
This cake is so moist that you don't really need a frosting, but it can only enhanced with cream cheese frosting (see below).
Makes a 10in/25cm cake 
3 large eggs, separated.
8fl oz (250ml) vegetable oil.
12oz (375g sugar).
1 tsp pure vanilla extract.
2 tbsps boiling water.
6oz (175g) sifted plain flour.
¼ tsp salt.
2 tsps ground cinnamon.
½ tsp ground nutmegs. 1¼ tsps baking soda.
4oz (120g) chopped pecans or walnuts.
8oz (250g) finely grated raw carrots.
Preheat your oven to 375°F (190°C, Gas 5).
Combine egg yolks, oil, sugar, vanilla and boiling water in a large bowl and beat together until well blended.
Sift together the flour, salt, cinnamon, nutmeg and baking soda, then blend it into the eggs.
Thrown in nuts and carrots and blend.
Pour batter into a generously greased and floured 10in/25cm ring cake tine.
Bake in the oven for 50 minutes to an hour, or until the cake springs back when you press your fingers into it.
Loosen the cake from the edges, but don't remove it for 15 minutes.
Then turn it out onto a wire cake rack to cool thoroughly.
CREAM CHEESE FROSTING
This is one of those creamy frostings that seems to disappear on its way to the cake, simply because it's so darn hard to keep from tasting it to death.
7oz (22g) icing sugar.
½ tsp pure vanilla extract.
1/8 tsp salt.
4 tbsps cream cheese, softened.
1½ tbsps butter, softened.
Blend all the ingredients together and beat until smooth.
You can either frost the cooled cake as usual or you can warm up the frosting and pour it over the cake like a glaze.
BARBECUED SPARE RIBS
Now what could be more mouthwatering than a big plate of juicy, tender ribs drippin' with barbecue sauce?
Oooo…makes me feel downright sanctified, just thinking about it!
Serves 6, and keeps well in the fridge 
6lbs (3kg) meaty pork spare ribs.
1 large onion, finely chopped.
2 tbsps cider vinegar.
1½oz (45g) light brown sugar.
2 tsps dry mustard.
1 tbsp celery salt or 1 tsp celery seed.
¼ tsp cayenne pepper.
8fl oz (250ml) tomato ketchup.
2 tbsps melted pork fat, bacon grease or melted butter.
3 tbsps Worcester sauce.
4 tbsps fresh lemon juice.
1 cup water or meat stock.
1 tsps paprika. 1½tsp black pepper.
4fl oz (120ml) beer.
4fl oz (120ml) dry white wine (optional).
Heat the fat in a large heavy saucepan over medium heat.
Brown the onion, stirring frequently for five minutes.
Add all the remaining ingredients, bring to the boil and then simmer, uncovered, for 20 minutes.
The ribs should be barbecued well away from direct heat for a good two hours — begin basting with sauce only during the last 15–20 minutes of cooking, otherwise the sauce will taste bitter.
Be sure to baste on both sides.
Alternatively, make the sauce in advance and marinate the ribs for a couple of hours, turning often.
Wipe off excess sauce before throwing on the barbecue, and baste during last 20 minutes as above.
MACARONI SALAD
Served in most soul food restaurants to accompany barbecued ribs or chicken.
Serves 6 
1lb (500g) cooked macaroni.
5oz (150g) finely chopped celery.
1 medium onion, finely minced.
1oz (30g) finely chopped fresh parsley.
½ green pepper, seeded and chopped.
½ red pepper, seeded and finely chopped.
1 tsp salt, or to taste.
½tsp celery salt, or to taste.
½ tsp ground black pepper.
8fl oz (250ml) mayonnaise. 2fl oz (60ml) vinegar.
Make sure the macaroni is well drained and place it in a bowl along with the celery, onion, parsley, green and red peppers, salts and pepper.
Mix the mayonnaise and vinegar and blend until smooth.
Pour on the dressing and mix well.
Cover and refrigerate overnight.
The longer this salad chills the better the flavour.
Then, and only then, taste it and adjust your seasoning.
SHE FOOD NEWS
Natural selection
Advertisements and packages which claim that a product is full of ‘natural goodness’, ‘naturally better’ or ‘nature's way’are largely meaningless and should not be used.
That's official, part of long-urged Government restrictions on the mis-use of the word ‘natural’ in food labelling and advertising.
The word ‘natural’ will still be allowed, says the Ministry of Agriculture's Food Advisory Committee, for ‘single foods of a traditional nature to which nothing has been added and which have been subjected only to such processing as to render them suitable for human consumption.
We consider freezing, concentration, fermentation, pasteurisation, sterilisation, smoking (without chemicals) and traditional cooking processes to be examples of processes which would be acceptable.’
Ah, how difficult it is.
Will sterilisation include food sterilised by irradiation, when it is legalised?
Which kinds of flour will be allowed to carry the word ‘natural’?
White flour may have half a dozen substances, including improvers and nutrients, added to it.
But some restriction is better than none.
It will strengthen your case should you be so infuriated by a label that you decided to take it to your local trading standards officer.
The new Agricultural Minister, John Gummer, has decided that voluntary restraint is not enough and is planning legislation now.
Some people will see these moves as a way of ‘doing down’ wholefood products, but I believe that those who are using natural ingredients, even if they can't claim the whole product is natural, will benefit by the restriction on misleading claims.
MEASURE FOR MEASURE
Do you measure food in ounces or grams?
Most cookery columns have settled into providing metric measurements first, followed by ounces.
SHE does it the other way round, because we're convinced that not only our readers, but most UK cooks, don't cook metric.
Even most school-leavers.
Are we right or wrong?
How would you like us to do it?
Please tell us on a postcard.
Vote either for ‘Metric first’, or ‘Imperial first’, and give your age too — you needn't put your name if you're shy.
Send your card to: SHE (pounds or kilos), National Magazine House, 72 Broadwick Street, London W1V 2BP.
DEAR MARGE
When you wheel your trolley around the supermarket, you could be forgiven for thinking that our basic foods haven't changed for years.
But they do, drastically, all the time.
Take margarine, which celebrates its 120th birthday this year.
It was the result of a competition set by Napoleon III to invent a butter substitute to help Europe's food problems.
Until well after World War II, margarine ran a poor second to butter in both sales and esteem.
But in the last ten years, Britain's butter consumption has suddenly fallen by about half, and margarine has reached a pinnacle of acceptance.
Now, though, it looks as though its triumph may be short lived.
Low-fat spreads — only 15 short years after their appearance — are now striding away with the sales.
It's significant that Flora, top seller of any butter, margarine or spread, have put the Flora name on their new Extra Light low-fat version.
That will make it complete with ordinary Flora — which suggests that makes Van den Berghs recognise that even Flora is going to lose sales to low-fat spreads.
But what about baking?
Until now, you couldn't bake with reduced fat spreads.
But Stork's Light Blend (also made by Van Den Berghs), 25% lower in fat than margarine or butter, can be used in ordinary baking and other recipes.
It's also much lower in saturated fats than their own, or other brands, of block margarine.
So goodbye margarine?
OLD FLAME
Gas cookers are celebrating the centenary of their arrival in private houses.
The odd thing is that the earliest models — unstreamlined and primitive (thermostats weren't available until the 20s)— seem just the thing you'd see in today's trendy kitchen.
This superb ‘Parkinson’ gas cooker, made by Parkinson Cowan around 1900, cost £15.
I think I'd like one — with a thermostat, please…
BREAD LINE
Organic food must be making headway: Hovis, those self-styled traditionalists, have launched an organic loaf.
Good news, except that it costs at least 10p more than other stoneground wholemeal loaves.
This price gulf mirrors the problem with organic food: most shoppers are put off buying it because it's too expensive.
Sainsbury, for example, defend the sky-high price of their organic vegetables by saying that they take less percentage profit on them, and that the wholesalers seem to be the ones jacking up the price.
But how can courgettes, which are sold by the grower at, say, 25–30p a lb at the most, end up on the shelves at Safeway for £1.16 per lb?
Two recent surveys clearly show that many shoppers are willing to pay more for organic food.
But how much more?
If we're not careful, shoppers will lose interest and the chance to ‘green’ our farms may be lost.
(Macdonald, £10.95).
Her philosophy on food: you don't need to sacrifice your tastebuds to eat healthily.
SHE's food expert Miriam Polunin is a well-respected writer on cookery, diet and nutrition.
Her books include The Right Way to Eat (J M Dent, £2.50),The Wholemeal Kitchen (Thorsons, £4.95) and The New Cookbook 
SHE TRAVEL
QUICK QUICK SNOW
Ski fever?
Our comprehensive, at-a-glance resort guide is the last word.
By Minty Clinch.
AUSTRIA
Every year nearly half of Britain's 600,000 skiers choose Austria for its onion-domed prettiness, its full-blooded nightlife and its earthy peasant merriment.
With a few very distinguished exceptions, the skiing is on the easy side, well suited to beginners who can enjoy the scenic and economic advantages of a single two bar hamlet for the first and only time.
Check for English speaking instructors: Austrian yokel speak is beyond interpretation by any but the most fluent German linguists.
Hotels are functional rather than luxurious, with tepid water and — crime of crimes for bruised and weary limbs — a preference for showers over baths.
The food is dumpling-based, substantial, and it would be kinder to draw a veil over the indigenous wine lake.
Great beer and great bars, often alive to the sound of lederhosen-slapping music.
In a nation of committed male chauvinists, all this excitement may stimulate a desire to pinch a schoolgirl's bottom.
As many of the British visitors are in school parties, they can be sure of a warm and rousing welcome.
Resorts: St Anton stands alone for experts: Kitzbuhel relies on traditional grandeur; Obertauern is purpose-built with excellent snow records: Ischgl and Badgastein offer stern challenges to advanced intermediates; family/beginner choices include Alpbach, Lech, Mayerhofen, Seefeld, Niederau and Westendorf.
SWITZERLAND
Only the rich can ski in Switzerland which makes for a degree of civilisation neighbours can't match.
Ironically, this proudly bourgeois country has the grandest resorts, notably St Moritz and Gstaad.
The hotels are rarely less than impeccable, be they five star or one, and the service, though short on warmth, overdoses on diligence.
Switzerland also has the safest though by no means the most integrated lift systems, the most beautiful mountains (the Eiger, the Matterhorn) the best lunch stops and very palatable, albeit expensive wine (Dloe, Fendent).
Except in the most fashionable watering holes, the nightlife is underwhelming.
Resorts: French speaking Verbier can lay a justifiable claim to be the best skiing in Europe — and to attract the most gung-ho British visitors; all addicts must visit Zermatt, Grindelwald /Wengen/Murren and Davos/Klosters at one time or another; Andermatt is an off-piste paradise; Engelberg is recommended for intermediates, as is Champery, a pretty village with good access to the huge Portes du Soleil circuit: beginners do not need to go to Switzerland, but Saas Fee is a good place to learn if you must.
FRANCE
The French invented factory skiing, along with all the checks and balances that implies.
Alpine France is dominated by new brutalist architecture: stacked rabbit hutches reaching into the sky; chains of pizzerias and hamburger restaurants; cramped supermarkets.
But oh, the glory and the convenience of skiing in resorts where you step into your bindings and ski down to the lift without setting foot to snow, where you cruise all day on networks so meticulously designed that you have but to descend to find another fan of lifts at your disposal.
The food in some areas has more regional character than others but there are fine meals to be had if you ask around.
Resorts: L'Espace Killy (Val D'Isere/Tignes) and Les Trois Vallées (Courcheval/Meribel/Val Thorens) are all things to all intermediate and expert skiers; Chamonix and neighbouring Argentiere are more traditional Meccas; families and beginners should head for Anglophile Flaine, the brute among brutals it may be, but wonderfully equipped with baby lifts and baby care available at all hours of the day or night: Valmorel is also recommended in this category, as is futuristic Avoriaz, a major crossroads on the Portes du Soleil.
NORTH AMERICA
From a European perspective, ski North America means the Rockies: it's not worth fighting the New Yorkers for turning space in the icy East Coast resorts.
A tree line at 11,5000 feet (compared with 5,500 in Europe) gives the American Rocky Mountain resorts an unfamiliar uniformity: the runs are carved out of the forest, making for excellent visibility in bad weather (in itself commendably rare), but you can get the feeling that one glade is very much like another.
Piste care is relentlessly industrious, part moguled and part groomed so that all tastes are catered for.
Most hotels are medium plastic so self-catering condos, often beautifully appointed, can be a better bet, the more so because restaurant food veers from absurdly chi chi — as in elk Wellington — to savagely basic.
As for lunch up the mountain, forget it — if you can.
Ditto night life in most resorts.
Resorts: star spotters head for Aspen, Colorado, which has all grades of skiing — at a price; Vail is smart too; neighbouring Copper Mountain and Breckenridge are less awesomely large and more youth oriented; experts on and off the piste love Jackson Hole, Wyoming; Utah's powder paradises are Park City, Snowbird and Alta, with Robert Redford's Sundance as a family alternative; mogul maniacs bash the hell out of their knees in Taos, New Mexico and the old silver mining town of Telluride.
ANDORRA
Andorra has the same share of the market — six per cent— as Switzerland, for diametrically opposite reasons.
In this tiny principality high in the Eastern Pyrenees between France and Spain, the key words are duty free and the overall prices are the lowest in Europe.
The skiing doesn't stretch even as far as advanced intermediate, but reports of dedicated tuition in perfect English and high sunshine levels in a place on the same latitude as Rome make this an excellent first-timer's choice.
Though they have cornered the lion's share of the Brits in this part of the world, Andorra's six resorts are but the tip of the Pyrenean iceberg.
France has 40 resorts and Spain 31, most of them little known over here but none the worse for that, provided you can speak the appropriate language.
Resorts: Soldeu, Arsinal, Arcalis and Pal represent the cream of Andorra; in France, the old spa town of Bareges is delightfully unspoiled in a region famed for its Gascon cuisine; alternatives include St Lary, modern La Mongie and Carterets; Spain's finest include Formigal, La Molina, Panticosa and Marsella.
EASTERN EUROPE
Eastern Europe is another area that relies on rock bottom prices to attract the younger element among British skiers.
Yugoslavia, geographically and spiritually the closest to the Alps, is by far the most popular destination.
The alternatives include Romania, described unequivocally by a friend as ‘pretty dreadful’, and Bulgaria which has well organised skiing for the beginner and early intermediate, plus night life fuelled by plum brandy, very acceptable wine and elaborate gymnastic displays.
New on the menu is Czechoslovakia: the South Tatras claim to cater for advanced and intermediate skiers and the North Tatras for beginners.
Resorts: Kranjska Gora, just over Yugoslavia's border with Austria, stages regular World Cup races and has limited advanced as well as intermediate and beginners' slopes; Bled is an historic town with pistes 20 minutes drive away; Bohinj is a pretty village; in the Balkans, Kopaonik's purpose-built apartments are the cheapest of the cheap; in Bulgaria: take your pick between neo-Alpine Borovets and purpose-built Pamporovo; in Romania, Poiana Brasov.
You have been warned.
ITALY
Italy offers style and sex, frequently accompanied by a shortage of snow.
Italians only find skiing interesting when they're shouting epithets or carving each other up, which makes for severe anxiety neurosis among less passionate mortals.
The natives roam their rather less than spectacular slopes in huge gangs, effectively blocking off one tract of mountain from the next so that foreigners spend much of their time waiting for detached companions.
Most positively, the accommodation is of higher quality than its star rating would suggest in rival countries.
Resorts: Cortina is international jet set, glamour and glitz; Cervinia, Courmayeur and neighbouring La Thuile have a wide range of intermediate pistes, Gresonnay and Champoluc, also in the Aosta Valley, make tranquil alternatives for adventurous Italian speaking beginners; and where is the noisiest of them all?
Sauze D'Oulx, the spiritual home of the Romford yuppie.
SCANDINAVIA
Scandinavia is so expensive that it makes Switzerland feel like Andorra, and so dark in mid winter that many of the slopes are floodlit to avoid disappointment.
Sweden is currently off the Richter price scale for British clients but Norway, euphoric at winning the 1994 Olympics for Lillehammer, is determined to regain the reputation it had for alpine skiing thirty years ago, when the annual quota of British skiers was 15,000; today it is 1,500, but that will change when the tour operators can be induced to include Norwegian destinations in their programmes.
Resorts: Voss and Geilo are well-established international resorts; modern alternatives include Trysil, Oppdal and Hemsedal.
SKI TRIPS
On an intermediate platform?
Ali Ross, a small feisty Scotsman, promises to get you off it and onto the steeper slopes beyond.
His courses in Wengen and Tignes can be booked up through Supertravel: 01–584 5060.
Ski Scott Dunn brought informal luxury to Champery three years ago: now the demand is so great that they are expanding into Zermatt: 01–602 8029.
Ski better: each winter Judith and Colin McCubbin, BASI instructors based near Bath, head for Davos where they run clinics for people who soon become their friends.
Intermediate or advanced on piste, £99; first timers, inexperienced off piste £129.
Book through Tailor Made Ski Tours: 0225 859598.
Derring do: Patrick and Jean Zimmer, gorgeous English speaking ex racing brothers from Alsace, will revolutionise your powder burn and your confidence on steep and deep in Val D'Isere, Top Ski: 79.06.11.80.
Many believe Jackson Hole, Wyoming, to be the best ski resort in the world.
First in there from Britain is Sean O'Beirne's company Collineige with a luxury five double bedroom apartment to be run as an ‘English chalet’ which sounds in intriguing combination.
Collineige also offer Euroradical in Chamonix and Argentiere: 0276 691996.
Ski free in France: eat and sleep rurally and ski touristically by driving to the resort each day.
Air France fly drive programmes through Lyons 01–568 6981.
Too small to ski: Thomson's Family Special in St Wolfgang and St Johann in Tyrol in Austria and Risoul in France offers a guardian angel to play with your pre-ski children while you hit the slopes: 01–435 8431.
Ski test: if you book a Ski Enterprise holiday in Tignes on March 17 or 24, you can try out the 1990–91 range of skis from leading sports manufacturers.
Ski start: the major tour operators run learn to ski weeks which are especially useful for lone learners.
Consult and compare at your local travel agent.
Hire boots in the resort, not in your local sports shop, then you can change them in the evening.
Ditto skis.
At altitude, sunburn can seriously damage your skin — children in particular should go with factor 15 or more.
Snow blindness is dangerous: goggles are the best, or good quality sunglasses.
Insurance is a must.
If you're heading west, remember the cost of medicine in America.
Pre-ski exercises are vital, especially among the desk bound.
Or practise on a dry slope.
If you can be flexible, book late: scan the ads in the papers.
At least you'll know where it's snowing.
Non-skiers should not be bored in St Moritz, Arosa, Kitzbuhel, Zermatt, Chamonix or Cortina.
Still undecided?
Go to the Daily Mail Ski shows at the National Exhibition Centre in Birmingham (September 28-October 1), the Central Hall at G-Mex in Manchester (October 5–8) and Earls Court in London (November 11–19).
Out in the crisp, clear air, with a backdrop of mountains and a clear run ahead: wherever you choose in the world to ski — fashionable Switzerland, sexy, stylish Italy, star-struck Colorado — our run-down of high life destinations will make sure you end up in the right place.
The traditional grandeur of Kitzbuhel, Austria — the skiing is less demanding than the scenery suggests
Forest exclusive Zermatt, Switzerland — the most gung-ho of the Swiss resorts and a must for all British skiing addicts
Picture book Aspen (or perhaps that should be autograph book?).
Serious celebrity spotters head for Colorado, where they can enjoy all grades of skiing too, for a price
the SHE ELANCYL CELLULITE project
Whether you're slim or fat, there's one figure problem that can seem impossible to beat.
It's cellulite — those unsightly pockets of dimpled ‘orange-peel’ skin.
Slim women — or those who have successfully been on a diet — often feel deeply disheartened by the fact that diet and exercise alone do not seem to improve these problem areas.
Yet there is something you can do, and the earlier you start the more chance you have of being successful.
French cosmetic scientists believe that water retention and toxic wastes build up in pockets of fat on the hips and bottom.
This causes the skin tissues to harden and age prematurely, so that the fat looks lumpy, and circulation grows sluggish.
Consequently more water and toxins become trapped, and more cellulite builds up.
So what can you do?
You can help your body detoxify by cutting down on coffee, tea, alcohol and refined foods.
Give up smoking and increase your intake of fresh fruit and vegetables and clear water.
A sedentary lifestyle also spells bad news for hips and thighs: increase your circulation by taking more exercise.
However, you also need to give yourself a flying start by stimulating the circulation through massage and natural herbal extracts.
That's where Elancyl comes in.
The traditional Elancyl treatment involves the green massage glove containing Elancyl soap with ivy, which you can really enjoy using briskly in the bath or shower.
Then follow with either the active toning gel or cream to leave your skin feeling smoother, soft and fresh.
It contains ivy extract to tone, butcher's broom which helps to stimulate circulation and mateine, believed by Frenchwomen to help fat dissolve.
With today's hectic lifestyle many women want an even quicker and easier treatment.
That's where Elancyl MP24 comes in.
In addition to the ivy, butcher's broom and mateine, it has Vitamin E, a key ingredient for improving skin tone.
It is formulated as an attractive gel with green microparticles suspended inside.
These prolong the effect of the active ingredients for up to 24 hours, so all you need to do is to hand-massage MP24 lightly over your hips and thighs.
While the French have long been convinced of the value of massage with natural ingredients in the treatment of cellulite, the British are sometimes sceptical.
That's why we're going to ask you to be our testers.
So do you pay as much attention to your body as you do to your face?
We'd like to know what you think about cellulite.
Fill in the survey and send it back to us.
Then we'll pick 500 forms out of the bag and send you a month's supply of Elancyl MP24 or an Active Toning Kit and a second survey which we will need you to fill in and return to us.
Of these 500, we'll pick out six readers to act as the stars of the project.
If you're one of these we'll bring you to London to talk to the scientists and have your cellulite scientifically measured.
Then we'll give all six a special programme to follow, involving the use of Elancyl.
One month later we'll ask you back to London to report on your progress and have your cellulite analysed.
Then you'll have the attentions of a top hairdresser and make-up artist, and we'll ask you how the programme made a difference to your life.
Then a leading photographer will capture your new look for our April issue, in which we will also publish the results of the two surveys showing how everyone found the experience of using Elancyl.
It's an exciting project, and a chance to prove to yourself whether cellulite needs special treatment as part of your body care routine.
So don't hesitate — fill in the form and send it, with a full-length recent photo of yourself, to: Elancyl/SHE Cellulite Project, 72 Broadwick Street, London W1V 2BP.
SHE LOOKS AT BOOKS
All cisterns go
Inventing the WC was a big job for Thomas Crapper
‘Never has the saying ‘a prophet is without honour in his own land’ been more true than in the case of Thomas Crapper,’asserts Wallace Reyburn in his lively, informative eulogy to the unsung hero who invented the modern WC cistern.
A big hand for Crapper!
Three cheers for the man who did more to improve ‘la condition humaine’ than Freud, Mrs Beaton and Madame Curie rolled into one.
Yet were we taught about Crapper at school?
No we were not.
Few people know that this great pioneer was born in 1837 and at the age of 11 walked the 165 miles from Yorkshire to London in search of work.
As an apprentice plumber he endured years of chilblains and chapped hands due to constant submersion in cold water until he set himself up in business in London.
Incidentally readers of a more literary bent will be interested to know that the poet W B Yeats lived next door to Crapper for a spell but fails to record the fact in his memoirs.
Crapper's triumph was to invent the pull-chain foolproof flush.
He then turned his attention to the problem of the noisy cistern.
As Reyburn observes: ‘Sensitive females know it is no good announcing ‘Excuse me a minute, I'll see if the scones are done’ merely to have the sound of the flushing toilet proclaim to everybody in the house, ‘I have been to the loo’.’
While solving this drawback, Crapper noted that the noise divided into four categories: the rush, the gurgle, the hiss and the gush.
His experimentation resulted in a Crapper special with in-built silencers.
You may well smirk, but I think we should all be taking our hats off to the man.
Why aren't streets named after him?
Council blocks?
Why didn't W B Yeats immortalise him in a poem?
Diabolical flush
Interestingly the noisy flush is still with us.
Reyburn tells about the panic before the coronation of the present Queen when the special needs of the assembled elderly peers had to be anticipated.
Suppose their frail bladders couldn't take the strain?
Additional WCs were installed, then someone had the alarming thought that at the ceremony's climax when the entire Abbey would be hushed as the crown was placed on her Majesty's head, there might occur one of those terrible historical coincidences whereby all the WCs were occupied and all the occupants pulled the chain simultaneously.
Would the sound of that diabolical symphonic flush carry that diabolical symphonic flush carry into the Abbey and create a major embarrassment for the British Monarchy?
A test was arranged involving a detachment of Guards who lined up along the WCs and flushed in unison.
Happily the sound didn't carry.
Reyburn's book is packed with information.
Did you know, for example, that Sir Winston Churchill had no seat on his WC?
Or that Belgium is the only country apart from Britain that uses Bronco (medicated) hard toilet tissue?
Furthermore, in the world of the lavatory pan things don't stand still.
Think of the low level suite, the siphonic flush, the plastic seat.
How Crapper's eyes would have gleamed at the sight of a pampas plug-flush, low-level siphonic.
Reyburn describes watching a siphonic being tested by a Mr Barclay in Stoke-on-Trent who produced three ping-pong balls.
‘Most difficult thing in the world to flush,’ he said.
Down they disappeared with a whoosh.
As Reyburn observes: ‘Of course the necessity to flush ping-pong balls down the toilet rarely crops up in everyday life but the owner of a double-trap ‘siphonic’ can take comfort from the fact that she has the toilet for the job when it arises.’
Some changes are for the worst, however.
Think of the dreaded slipping seat.
Reyburn even suggests a link between the insecure plastic WC seats and the bolshiness of today's youth.
Doubtless, the psychiatrists should be giving the matter their attention.
Flushed with Pride by Wallace Reyburn, Pavilion £5.99.
SHELF LIFE
How's this for class?
Yvonne Paul whose The Glamour Game (W H Allen, £2.95) tells all about the Glamour Biz sent me in the blouse off her back, drenched in exotic perfume, as a ‘thank-you’ after I'd interviewed her for the Daily Mail and mentioned how much I liked her get-up.
Her book will make feminists scream ‘tacky’ and explode but even Yvonne, who supplies Page 3 models, draws the line occasionally: ‘I never let my girls serve drinks topless at stag parties, jump out of pies nude, participate in lesbian orgy film sequences or model fur — animals skins for fur coats — now that really is obscene.’
One hundred and fifty years ago Daguerre in Paris and Talbot in London announced the invention of photographs.
The Art of the Daguerrotype (Viking, £20) contains 65 of these exquisite old photographs.
They put the Instamatic to shame.
Had dinner with Eric McCormach (‘an enticingly diabolical imagination’) whose Inspecting the Vaults (Bloomsbury, £4.99) is a book to give you sleepless nights.
His macabre The Paradise Motel (Bloomsbury, £12.95) is even worse, or better depending how much you enjoy nightmares.
Shocking, ghastly (a man with a scrotum down to his knees, a baby that looks like an egg…),
I couldn't put it down.
Above: Thomas Crapper's triumphant invention — the foolproof flush.
Below: the Daguerrotype photograph is 150 years old
Apart from her monthly column for SHE, Val Hennessy is chief book reviewer for the Daily Mail , and writes features for YOU magazine.
She has two grown-up children and thinks reading is as important as eating.
SHE GOOD READ GUIDE
TENSE PAST
Gillian Freeman's Termination Rock (Pandora, £12.95) is a novel that inserts itself under your skin leaving you wanting more.
Joanna, trying to cope with the painful fact that she cannot ever have a baby, begins to remember the life of 19th-century Anna and her son, Merlin.
The edges are blurred — is she in fact, Ann's reincarnation?
Or is this just an elaborate distraction created by her mind to avoid facing her infertility?
Enigmatic, delicate and beautifully understated, this is a book that will draw you into its very heart.
HORROR STORY
Paddy Doyle follows the magnificent tradition of immensely gifted disabled Irish writers like Christy Brown and Christy Nolan in The God Squad (Corgi, £3.99).
As a four-year-old orphan, Paddy was institutionalised in a religious industrial school, and the events which followed corrupt the name of religion.
Viciously beaten and sexually abused, he sustained series injury leading to a long round of hospitals, major brain surgery and permanent disability.
This is a horrifying story, but it is also a moving testament to the courage of the child who grew up to become a man surprisingly free from bitterness or hatred.
If you only buy one book, let it be this one; you will be lastingly enriched.
THE CHILD WITHIN
There is no pain, too, in The Fog Line by Carol Birch (Bloomsbury, £12.95).
When Gloria's childhood is brought to a violent end by savage rape, the fog descends in her mind and the voices begin.
As she grows up she is able to bring up her child and form other relationships, but the split has occurred and the damaged child within her mind waits for the chance of retribution.
The language is ugly and violent, yet it is fitting; she handles her characters with sympathy and a rare insight.
LEND ME YOUR ERAS
On a gentler note, two richly evocative novels which look back to different eras.
June Barraclough's A Time to Love (Methuen, £12.95) spans both World Wars and paints a vivid picture of the loves and sorrows of the characters in the lives of two women friends.
Jean Stubbs does the same for the 60s in Like We Used To Be (Macmillan, £11.95) bringing to life the world of Flower Power and pot, contraception and the Beatles.
KIDS' STUFF
Children's books today are of such a high standard, they are too luscious to ignore.
In future I will be looking at a selection regularly.
From Doubleday comes a new series of first-rate hardbacks for small children.
An enchanting picture book by Ian Beck, The Teddy Robber, £6.95 is a wonderfully funny story of a giant who's lost his teddy bear so he goes around stealing other teddies from wherever he can.
And The Truckers by Terry Pratchett, £7.95, is about a race of four-inch-high people who live beneath a department store.
A fantasy that will appeal to a wide range of ages.
Tom's Rainbow Walk by Catherine Anholt (Heinemann, £6.95) is a delightful and colourful story for tines about how Tom chooses the colours for his new jumper.
Left: in Carol Birch's The Fog Line , a damaged child lurks within an unsure adult.
Below:The Teddy Robber has a soft spot for cuddly toys.
SHE SHORT STORY
Another form of LOVE
She'd promised the girl a lift as far as Malaga.
He was fuming.
But she always won, and between the two of them he was quite helpless.
By David Marshall.
‘We don't want the girl with us,’ he said.
‘You don't but I do,’ the woman said.
‘I've told her we'll give her a lift as far as Malaga and that's what we'll do.’
She waited for a moment and then walked off to stand in a different part of the ship.
He stayed where he was, leaning over the rail and looking out across the straits towards Spain.
It was a warm cloudy October afternoon.
After a few minutes, he went into the saloon and ordered a coffee which he drank standing at the bar.
Someone pulled at his sleeve.
It was the girl.
‘Can you buy me a Coke?
I've run out of money.’
They sat down at one of the tables.
The girl sucked up her Coke through a straw, watching him while she did so.
She said: ‘Where's your wife?’
‘Out on deck — and she's not my wife?’
‘Oh, right.’
She didn't take her eyes off him for a moment.
‘She's quite a bit older than you, isn't she?
Not that it matters.
I mean, you're quite a bit older than me and that doesn't matter, either.’
‘I wish to God you'd stop staring at me,’ he said.
‘Sorry.
Just interested, that's all.’
‘Interested?
Why ‘interested’?’
‘You've got an interesting face.’
Then she said: ‘No, you haven't.
It's a perfectly ordinary face.’
He stood up.
‘I'm going out on deck.’
‘To find your friend?’
‘Not necessarily.’
She finished her Coke.
‘Hang on.
I'll come with you.’
The two of them went to stand in the bow.
There was a great black scribble of cloud hanging over Algeciras.
The girl got her camera out and started taking pictures.
‘Stand by the rail,’ she said.
The man sheepishly obeyed, automatically pulling his stomach in and gazing ironically into the lens.
‘Try to look interesting ,’ she called, moving in for a close-up.
‘No, you just look disgruntled.
Just relax.
That's better.’
Finally, she held the camera right up to his face.
‘Now don't move.
I want to get you in three-quarter profile.’
The man snorted and turned irritably away.
‘This has gone far enough,’ he snapped.
‘It hasn't gone anywhere yet.’
She laughed.
‘There's no film in the camera.
Hey, come back.’
When they disembarked at Algeciras, the Spanish customs officers searched the car and made them open their luggage.
It began to rain.
As soon as they got in the car and were clear of the port, the girl said: ‘Can we stop for a moment?
I want to pee.’
They drove slowly through the town, looking for somewhere to park.
The road ended in an area of derelict warehouses.
It was raining heavily by now.
The man lost his temper.
‘You'll just have to wait.’
He drove quickly and dangerously back the way they'd come.
It was almost dark by the time they got on the motorway.
‘I dread this part of it,’ the woman said.
‘Going through Marbella in the rush hour.’
The girl was sitting hunched-up in the back seat.
‘I'm going to burst if you don't stop soon.’
After a while they pulled up outside a large concrete hotel, not quite finished, incorporating a long cruelly-lit restaurant, almost empty, which faced the road.
The girl dived out and ran towards the hotel.
‘Let's drive off and leave her,’ he suggested to her.
‘Don't be absurd,’ the woman said.
‘I'm going in.
It doesn't look too bad.’
He waited for five minutes then went in after them.
The place smelled of fresh paint and new carpets.
The woman walked across the foyer towards him.
‘I think we'll stay here tonight,’ she said.
‘I just want to check the restaurant first.
Would you like to wait here for me?’
He said down in an armchair and picked up a magazine.
He started reading an article about the lifestyle of the rich and famous.
There were pictures on every page: an heiress danced at a charity ball with a matador half her age —’ Enrico makes me feel like a child again’, an ageing pop star posed with his new wife —’Now I really do have everything.’
Out of the corner of his eye, he saw the girl coming towards him.
‘Ready when you are,’ she said.
The man slowly turned over the page of his magazine.
‘We're spending the night here.’
‘Brilliant.’
She grinned at him.
‘In that case, shouldn't you be getting our bags out of the car?’
They sat at a table in the corner of the restaurant.
Half-way through dinner, the woman laid her knife and fork together and said: ‘I'm wrecked after that drive.
I think I'll go up now.’
‘It's only quarter to nine,’ the man said.
‘You don't have to come.
You stay and finish your meal.’
When she'd gone, the girl said: ‘Are you going to marry her?’
‘Hurry up and finish your meal.’
He poured himself some wine and then, as if it were an afterthought, some for her.
‘Perhaps you're married already?’
‘What's that got to do with you?’
Pressing her foot against his, she leaned forward across the table.
‘Don't you know?’ she murmured.
When they finished the wine, he stood up.
‘I'm going up now.
Goodnight.’
Their room was in darkness and he had to fumble about for the switch to the bedside lamps.
The woman groaned and half sat up.
‘God, I was just dropping off.
Can't you give me any time to myself?’
He leaned over the bed and kissed her forehead.
‘Sorry, darling, I was —’
‘Look, why don't you go down to the bar and have a couple of drinks?’
‘But she'll be in there.’
‘Then you'll have someone to talk to.’
She lay down again and turned away from him, yawning.
‘Don't be too late, will you?
I've booked our early morning calls.’
She yawned again.
‘You'll find some money in my purse.
It's on the dressing table.’
Instead of going to the bar, he went out for a walk down the road.
Although it had almost stopped raining, there was heavy traffic on the road and he soon turned back.
The hotel bar was a shadowy place with pink lights on the tables and above the bar.
He hesitated for a moment when he saw the girl sitting on one of the large black leather sofas that were ranged along one wall.
Then he went over to her.
‘I thought you hadn't got any money?’
The girl shrugged.
‘And I thought you were going to bed.’
‘I suppose you expect me to pay for that drink, do you?’
‘It's going on the bill.
Your friend will pay.
After all, she's got money and we haven't, have we?’
She added: ‘I got you one as well.
The most expensive brandy they've got.’
‘You are the absolute limit,’ he said.
But after a moment, he sat down next to her.
‘Are you ashamed to be seen with me?’ she asked.
‘Yes.
You look like a scarecrow.’
The girl laughed.
‘Is that all?’
‘No.’
He tasted his brandy.
‘You smell.’
‘What do I smell off?’
‘The usual things.’
‘Well, I've been on the road for three days.’
‘Why didn't you have a shower before dinner?
You had time.’
‘I did have a shower — but what's the use of putting dirty clothes on a clean body?’
She added: ‘Thank God you two came along when you did.
If you hadn't stopped to give me a lift this morning, I'd still be shuffling along the road to Tangiers.’
‘I was against the idea.’
‘Why do you dislike me?
Correction.
Why do you make such a show of disliking me?’
‘You could at least offer to pay.’
‘Could it be you recognise in me things you despise in yourself?’
‘You could write her a cheque.’
The girl finished her drink and slid along the sofa until her arm touched his.
‘OK.
Come on.’
‘Where to?’
‘My room.
That's where my chequebook is.’
As soon as they got into her room, the girl started to undress, leaving her clothes where they fell.
‘There's a doo-dah under the pillow,’ she said and got into bed.
‘I don't know what this is all about,’ he said when he climbed in beside her.
‘I don't even like you.’
‘Oh, God, not that again surely?’
She put her arm round him and pressed against him.
‘I suppose I'd better kiss you — just for the look of the thing.’
Afterwards, when he was getting dressed, she said: ‘It hurts, doesn't it?’
‘What?’
‘Charity.’
He stood near the end of the bed, pulling his shoes on.
She sat up and stretched out her hand to him.
‘Why does it hurt?
It's only another form of love.’
When he was ready to go, she lay back and turned on to her side.
‘Well, we've made our point, haven't we?’
The man leaned over the bed as if he was going to kiss her.
‘What point?’
He straightened up.
‘What the hell are you talking about?’
She smiled at him and slowly shook her head.
‘Was I a pressie?’ she asked.
‘From her to you, with love.
With contemptuous affection, I should say.
She must be very sure of herself — and of you too, of course.’
‘Id better be going,’ he said.
‘To her?’
She sat up.
‘Straight from my bed to hers — without any pause for reflection or refreshment?
I don't believe it.’
He started to say something but she cut in.
‘Look, I'll be in the bar in fifteen minutes.
You be there.’
In the morning, the woman had almost finished her breakfast when he entered the dining room.
‘Late night?’ she asked as he sat down.
‘Not particularly.’
He poured himself some coffee.
‘I didn't wake you, did I?’
‘Half-woke me, that's all.’
She pushed the plate of rolls towards him.
‘What did you find to do?’
‘Oh, just sat in the bar, drinking and talking?’
‘With the girl?’
‘Some of the time, yes.’
The woman looked at her watch.
‘I'm beginning to think you were right about her.
Where the hell is she?’
‘In her room I imagine.’
‘She had her call at five past six.
I checked with reception.’
‘Maybe she's gone back to sleep.
Do you want me to go and see?’
‘No, I'll go.
You hurry up and finish your breakfast.’
She stood up.
‘Well, whatever happens, we're leaving here at seven thirty on the dot.
If she's not ready, we'll go without her.’
She added: ‘I might do that anyway.
What do you think?’
‘I don't know,’ he said.
He looked out of the window at the trucks lumbering through the mist, down the road towards Algeciras or heading east towards Malaga.
‘We've come so far, we might as well go all the way.’
He added: ‘What I mean is, we can't just dump her, not now.’
After breakfast, the man collected their bags and went outside.
The air smelled of wet earth and diesel fumes and in the east the mist was shot through with orange spokes of light.
As he was putting their luggage into the book, the girl came out of the hotel carrying her backpack.
‘Where's your friend?’ she asked.
‘Settling the bill.
It was more than she expected.
She doesn't like to be taken advantage of.’
‘The rich think they can buy anything, don't they?’
‘They're right,’ he said.
‘They can.’
‘That's not what you said last night — when we were in the bar.
The second time, I mean, when you told me all about everything.’
He dragged a bag out, turned it round and pushed it back in exactly the same position.
‘They can buy anything,’ she said, ‘but they can't keep it.
Isn't that what we said?’
They got away on time.
The mist soon dissolved and they reached Malaga in patchy sunshine.
The had to park illegally some distance from the railway station.
‘I may not be allowed to stay here,’ the woman said.
‘Why don't you give our young friend a hand with her backpack?— After all, she's going to be lugging it all round Madrid this afternoon.’
‘All right.’
He got out of the car and stood back while they said their goodbyes.
When the girl and he reached the platform, the train was in.
‘Are you going to kiss me?’ she said.
‘Just for the look of the thing.’
After they'd kissed, she said: ‘Why don't you come with me.
It's not too late, you know.’
‘I'd like to.
I find you extremely addictive.’
‘I wouldn't know about addiction,’ she said.
‘That's more your department than mine.
But come with me anyway.
I can't make any promises of course.
I might manage a short-term prediction, though.’
‘I can't just walk out on her.’
‘I'd walk now if I were you.
I wouldn't wait to be told.’
‘She doesn't know about us.
I haven't said a thing.’
‘God, men are so thick.
She knows .
Don't you see that?’
‘But my bag's in the car.’
‘Never mind your bag.
All you need is your passport and your money.’
She stared at him.
‘No money?
Then your credit card.’
‘She's the one with credit cards.
She said I didn't need one.’
The girl laid her had briefly against her cheek.
‘You've lost the lot, haven't you?
All you've got left are your chains, your pretty golden chains.’
She turned his wrist over to look at his watch.
‘The train doesn't leave till quarter past.
You've got eleven minutes.’
‘I'll have to tell her,’ he said.
Sighing, the girl hoisted her backpack on to her shoulder.
‘OK — but be quick.’
He hurried back along the platform, bumping into people, side-stepping, apologising, then across the concourse to where he thought the car was, only it wasn't there.
‘Oh,no ,’ he said aloud and started running down the street, looking for the car.
When he saw her coming towards him, he stopped.
The woman said: ‘A policeman made me move the car.
It's just round the corner in the next street.’
‘I've been looking for you everywhere,’ he said breathlessly.
‘I thought you'd…’
‘Thought I'd what?
Deserted you?
She smiled at him and took his arm.
‘Did the girl get off all right?’
The traffic in the town was heavy but once they were clear of Malaga it started to thin out.
The woman, who had decided that she should drive during the morning and he in the afternoon, hummed softly to herself as she drove east along the coast.
The man, who had winched his seat back as far as it would go, lay beside her, staring up through the sunroof at the sky which was now a pure and empty blue.
David Marshall lives in central London, where he devotes his time to writing short stories for magazines and drama for radio.
In addition to the many successful plays he has written, David also contributes to the acclaimed radio serials The Archers and Citizens 
CALL THE SHE HOROSCOPE HOTLINE
Libra
star sign of the month
(Sept 24-Oct 23)
Astrology books have an awful lot to say about the Libran character and words like wishy-washy, lazy, indecisive and unambitious leap right out of the pages.
And maybe that's how it used to be — but the person you are today is far removed and different from the individual you were a year or so ago.
Now you are stronger, wiser and finer in every way — more concerned with doing than dreaming and no longer a people-pleaser.
You please yourself, and quite rightly, too!
Unfortunately, at the moment those delicate Libran scales may not be perfectly balanced.
The Sun in your own birth sign is challenged by Neptune on October 2 and by Jupiter on the 3rd.
Consequently, this appears to be a testing point as well as a turning point both at home and in your career.
What to do?
Simply back down, back away and let the world and its problems come to you — and they surely will!
In particular, the Full Moon in your opposite sign of Aries on the 14th may prove to be tense, and even a little tearful, but partners, employers and family members alike must be told in no uncertain terms that you intend to do things your way or not at all .
Indeed a major move of some kind seems to be unavoidable if not inevitable now, but once you decide where you ought to be — and more importantly, with whom you want to be — then the world will be your oyster.
Career-wise, especially, it seems you are destined to scale new heights and what takes place sometime around October 29 and again on November 3 will put you firmly in the big league and back in the money again.
Emotionally, you still appear to be feeling somewhat torn and indecisive and the trouble is you have an enormous yearning to give while asking for very little or even nothing in return.
Either way, expect to be fêted, fussed and fawned over this month — and for goodness' sake allow yourself to enjoy it!
SCORPIO
(Oct 24-Nov 22) With the Sun and Mars blocked away in the most sensitive and private area of your solar chart, you, in turn, are bound to be feeling restricted and rather frustrated at the moment.
In fact, the next two or three days may well be a time of harsh words and even harsher realities, particularly on the work front.
And it's obvious, isn't it, that certain people simply haven't a clue as to where you are at or what makes you tick.
The truth of this statement will become even more apparent to you around the 14th — and really the best thing to do over the next couple of weeks is to keep your plans flexible and your options open and let others live with their consciences — if they can, that is!
Now for some good news to dispel the gloom; once the Sun enters Scorpio on October 23, you can relax and safely say that the remainder of this year will be plain sailing and relatively carefree.
In particular, the New Moon present in your own birth sign on the 29th will trigger off a new period of some really quite remarkable and reassuring developments in your very personal life.
Lucky old you!
SAGITTARIUS
(Nov 23-Dec 21) Because your ruler Jupiter is under pressure and under siege.
You are probably experiencing a few second thoughts, not to mention sleepless nights, over a business arrangement or joint undertaking.
The real bone of contention — as if you didn't know — is money.
But what really seems to hurt and rankle you most at the moment is the behaviour and attitude of a friend or close companion — and no doubt the Full Moon in Aries on the 14th will prove challenging and even emotionally upsetting.
Still, learn from experience: and the moral of this story is: don't mix business with pleasure.
Although all of this must sound rather grim and depressing, in actual fact almost everything that happens now is fated — even written in the stars, as they say.
Therefore, take what occurs around the 29th or thereabouts as a definite sign or signal from the heavens that not only must life go on, but that it also has to get better and better.
CAPRICORN
(Dec 22-Jan 20) The planetary heavyweights — Saturn, Neptune and Uranus — are still passing through your own birth sign and when all things are said and done, life — as any self-respecting Capricorn will readily admit — is not exactly a barrel of laughs at the moment.
In fact, it is extremely hard to determine just exactly where you are experiencing the most hostility and hassle — at home or at work?
Either way, these next two or three days are bound to be both difficult and rather demanding for you.
But it will probably be around the time of the Full Moon on the 14th that you decide enough is enough and when you realise that success, solace or excitement can only be found in a different setting.
Finally, an emotional attachment or special friendship — call it what you will — can only go from strength to strength now, and in this respect, October should have a fairytale ending.
AQUARIUS
(Jan 21-Feb 19) Jupiter and Neptune are challenged by the Sun in Libra and everything must seem to be out of focus at the moment, if not a bit unreal.
The accent is on travel and all forms of communication — however, as a word of warning, don't be too surprised if certain plans have to be shelved or if an offer is suddenly withdrawn.
In fact, if you are a sane and sensible Aquarian, you will leave matters well alone, both personally and at work, until after the Full Moon on the 14th.
Then no-one and nothing will be able to defeat, deflate or depress you.
And there's more, as what transpires between October 29 and November 3 should be the making of you, and should make your year complete.
PISCES
(Feb 20-Mar 20) You should read the forecast for Sagittarius, so much of it applies to you at the moment.
Partners, lovers and business associates alike are behaving like things possesses, and harping endlessly on about who earns what or owns what.
In fact, as early as October 1, when your ruler Neptune is challenged by Jupiter in Cancer, you will realise that money is really only half the battle or problem you're facing this month — because someone appears to be breaking all the rules, if not breaking your heart.
Things will really hot up around the 12th or 14th — just remember your worth; your time and talents must be bough and paid for in full.
In other words, you don't have to go on working for peanuts!
And yet, you will prevail.
You will eventually look back on this seemingly grim period in your life with affection and gratitude.
Right now, the New Moon in Scorpio means it's time to pack your bags and see what life has to offer elsewhere.
ARIES
(Mar 21-Apr 20) The situation in the heavens is rather complex, if not explosive, at the moment and you really cannot expect any favours to come your way either at home or on the work front.
What can you expect is a certain amount of resentment or sour grapes between October 1–4 and, frustrating as it may be, all you can really do about the situation is put up and shut up in the certain knowledge that you will gain your freedom, however long it takes.
The Full Moon in your own birth sign on the 14th should certainly be an eye-opener for what can only be described as a partnership or marital affairs — and yet out of all this turmoil will come a new kind of happiness, serenity and security.
In fact, anything of a business, property or joint financial nature is so well starred at the end of this month — only the most disillusioned Aries individual could fail to see that what lies ahead is the stuff that dreams are made of.
TAURUS
(Apr 21-May 21) In astrology, work and health are curiously linked are curiously linked — and for one reason or another, you are likely to feel under par, under pressure and totally misunderstood at the moment.
In fact, you can argue and remonstrate until you are blue in the face but certain plans or arrangements cannot be progressed just yet and you must simply sit tight and wait for the Full Moon in Aries on the 14th before making any drastic changes or decisions.
Not a cheery little forecast you'll agree — but remember you don't have to stay in the jungle to be fair game.
And another thing, you really ought to be venturing further afield; travelling or doing something more challenging now and therefore perhaps you need a gentle prod to remind you that life is only, after all, what you make it.
So what are you making of your life?
The New Moon in your opposite sign of Scorpio on the 29th should prove exciting and rather eventful as far as one involvement or partnership is concerned — and obviously 1989 is by no means over yet, not by a long chalk.
GEMINI
(May 22-June 21) The Sun now passing through the sign of Libra is supposed to bring romance and good fortune — and yet all you seem to have experienced lately is hassle and aggravation, especially over a business or financial matter.
Just how petty, greedy and self-interested others really are will be made perfectly clear to you during the next few days and your reaction to them may well be to decide to turn off the charm and the money supply forthwith.
However, once you have safely navigated the Full Moon on the 14th — and managed to reassure someone that you'd love them even if they didn't have a bean — then the remainder of this month should be magic time.
In fact, a new career opening or a new way of life altogether is on offer around the 29th which can't be refused.
In fact, for personal or even health reasons rather than financial ones — you must take it.
CANCER
(June 22-July 23) Although Jupiter is now sparkling away in your own birth sign and you in turn should feel decidedly more buoyant or optimistic, unfortunately, the atmosphere at home is likely to remain strained during the first few days of the month.
Just why a partner or a member of the family is so opposed to certain changes is hard to fathom but since the Full Moon on the 14th cuts right across the home and career angles of your horoscope, you may have to turn your full attention to work matters for a while and leave property or domestic issues waiting on hold until towards end the of the month.
But joy of joys, the New Moon in Scorpio on the 29th and some stunning planetary aspects in early November should spark off some kind of personal revival and no matter how many times you have been let down or left in the lurch in the past, emotionally this can and ought to be one of the happiest times you have ever known.
LEO
(July 24-Aug 23) Your ruler the Sun takes a swipe at Neptune on October 2 and then Jupiter on the 3rd.
Therefore, you are bound to feel thwarted, frustrated as well as exhausted at the moment — quite unable to get your point or message across and still in two minds regarding certain plans and moves.
Hopefully, however, the Full Moon in Aries on the 14th will bring this dreary little phase or cycle to an end and many a Leo will be moving in, moving out and putting down new roots elsewhere.
In fact, ever since the beginning of the year you seem to have been toying with the idea of making a major career move or change of residence and what transpires sometimes between October 29 and November 3 should enable you to rebuild and reshape your life — and the past with all its traumas and dramas will be placed in their true perspective, if not forgotten altogether.
VIRGO
(Aug 24-Sep 23) This really is a peculiar time for finances.
Yet it's the principle, not the money, that seems to be upsetting you — and the fact that others demand or expect so much and appreciate so little.
But if you continue to dig in your heels over this then one friendship or involvement may become a casualty now.
This would be a shame because a great deal has been achieved and accomplished recently and let's hope that by the 14th — Full Moon and all — an amicable settlement can be reached.
One the Sun enters the sensitive and secretive sign of Scorpio on the 24rd, new sights, scenes and associations beckon and if not this month then certainly next, you should be on the threshold of some quite remarkable and far-reaching changes on all fronts.
SHE's forecaster Justin Toper is a Libran.
After he graduated from London's Faculty of Astrological Studies, his star talents were spotted by veteran astrologer Patrick Walker and he has now been casting daily horoscopes for The Sun for over ten years.
He won't cast his own horoscope, because he doesn't want to know too much about the future.
But he says Shakespeare certainly put his finger on the truth when he wrote: ‘There are more things in heaven and earth…than are dreamt in (your) philosophy.’
Call Justin Toper on your SHE horoscope hotline (38p per minute, 25p off-peak).
SHE SEX & HEALTH
Doctor David Delvin
At last— the book we've all been waiting for:The A-Z of Good Sex by SHE's Dr Delvin.
Sample this crucial guide to everything you want to know about sex with these questions from SHE readers who weren't afraid to ask.
SEE NEXT PAGE FOR DOC D'S HELPLINE
Q
What do you think I should do?
I am married, but I have somehow slipped into an affair with a man at our local squash club.
It all happened when the two of us played a practice game together at the club one afternoon.
We seemed to get on awfully well on the court, and we laughed together a lot during the game.
There was no-one else in the building at the time.
As the men's and the women's changing rooms are next to each other, we continued chatting to one another through the communicating door.
Just after I'd stepped under the shower, I heard him come up behind me.
He took me in his arms, and that was that.
Since then, we have gone on making love at the club during the day when it is quiet.
Am I made to go on with this relationship.
A
Squash has always had a bit of a reputation as a sexy sort of game.
Maybe that's because of the very close physical contact of fairly scantily-dressed men and women in an enclosed space.
Also, there's a theory that when males and females perspire, they give off ‘pheromones’— scents which are strong sexual attractants with a powerful effect on the unconscious mind.
Add to all this the heady brew of an ‘unchaperoned’ building plus adjacent changing rooms and a warm, soapy shower — and you've a recipe for disaster.
If you go on meeting this man in this fashion, it's a hundred to one that somebody is going to find out.
The news will get to your husband — and to this bloke's wife (if he has one).
Furthermore, if anybody catches you in the club showers, your lover is very likely to end up being blackballed (if you'll forgive the phrase).
Q
My husband wants me to have anal sex, but I find it revolting and painful.
Should I submit to keep him happy?
A
Certainly not.
Ask him how he'd like it if you poked something up his rear end.
Q
I'm pregnant and find my sexual feelings much stronger than before — I have to rub my clitoris at night.
Will this harm the baby?
A
Not at all, particularly as your clitoris is away from the area where the baby is.
If this innocent practice helps you relax and to cope better with your pregnancy, I reckon you should just lie back and enjoy it.
Q
I'm due to be married next Easter, and my fiancé has just told me he likes dressing up in women's clothes.
What do I do?
A
I'm sure this has come as a big shock to you.
But there are many ‘cross-dressers’ around.
Rather surprisingly, quite a lot of them do make happy and successful marriages — though their wives have to be pretty understanding.
One possible factor in the success of some of these marriages is that quite a few women do seem to get a kick out of seeing men dressed up in women's clothing, though I don't know why.
But I think you must talk this over very thoroughly with your fiancé before you agree to go ahead with the wedding.
You must ask him whether he has any homosexual leanings — though many transvestites are basically heterosexual.
I think you might do better to live with him for a while, before you actually tie the nuptial knot with someone who may be borrowing your knickers for the next 60 years.
Q
I thought I was abnormal when I first ejaculated at a climax, and felt terribly ashamed.
But my boyfriend says it is normal.
It this true?
And if so, what is the fluid which I produce at the moment of orgasm?
A
Your boyfriend is quite right.
Surprisingly, it's normal for some women to squirt out a fluid at the moment of orgasm.
Along with most other docs, I used to believe that this fluid was always urine — and that the ladies were being slightly incontinent under the wholly understandable stress of ‘coming’.
But research in America has suggested very strongly that it's actually a special sex fluid, similar to a secretion which is ejaculated from a man's prostate gland, but produced by a sensitive structure near the famous G-spot.
I'm not yet totally convinced by the US research on the chemical nature of this liquid but (as far as I know) no-one on this side of the Atlantic has tried to analyse it.
A SHE reader did once attempt to send me a sample of her fluid, but most unfortunately the bottle broke in the post with disastrous results!
Q
For how long are men supposed to provide women with foreplay?
I ask this because I really am getting rather tired of providing this service for my wife.
Sometimes she wants as much as 15 minutes before I'm allowed to have intercourse.
A
Well sir, I've recently come across an American sex survey in which a large number of US ladies were asked the question: ‘How long do you usually like love play to last?’
The answers were as follows:
Less than five minutes:
two per cent 
Five to 15 minutes:
36%
Up to half an hour:
48%
Up to an hour:
14%
Your poor old missus is being relatively undemanding in only asking for up to 15 minutes.
Frankly, the general tone of your question is so selfish that it makes me a bit dubious about the prospects of your marriage.
I suggest that you rapidly review your attitude to your wife's sexual and emotional needs — before she starts looking for love play elsewhere.
Q
Recently, I was very surprised to find that I was willing to go to bed with a guy and have intercourse, but then discovered that I was really a bit repelled by the idea of having him kiss me.
Am I abnormal?
A
Nope.
For a lot of women, a kiss seems to be more intimate than sexual intercourse.
I'd guess you weren't very interested in this bloke.
This is probably a good indication that you shouldn't waste your time going to bed with him again.
Q
My boyfriend is a great guy and a wonderful lover.
But he seems to have one problem that I'm too embarrassed to ask him about.
Every time he stays, he misses the toilet and there is usually a slight puddle for me to clear up.
Is there anything wrong with him?
A
Nope — except he should be clearing up his own puddles.
There's a chance that he might have a moderately common anatomical abnormality of the penis (present in about one man in 200) which makes it difficult to avoid peeing on the floor.
But another explanation is more likely.
When a bloke has been sexually excited, his ‘love juices’ tend to create a slight blockage in the urinary pipe for a little while.
This makes it very difficult for the gent to aim straight when he next visits the loo.
If you ask your boyfriend, I think he'll confirm that this is the cause of the damp patch.
Q
I was engaging in some very enthusiastic love play with my husband last week when he suddenly said to me, ‘Ouch!
Don't twist so hard, or you'll break it.’
This quite alarmed me.
Is it really possible for a woman to break a man's penis in the same way that one can break a wrist or an arm?
A
Yes — this is the risk that all energetic ladies should know about.
Although your husband's penis doesn't have a bone in it (at least not unless he's a badger or something), it does become almost as stiff as a bone when he's excited.
This is because it's packed to bursting point with blood.
The blood is contained in three cylinders (each about the size of a panatella cigar) which run the length of it.
If you grasp his erect organ and twist it violently to one side, you can cause an extremely painful fracture of one or more of these cylinders.
This is a genuine surgical emergency if it occurs and the unfortunate victim has to be whisked off to hospital.
Usually, his penis is then packed in ice — and he may well have to be taken to the operating theatre to have the blood clot removed from inside it.
This is not a lot of fun.
So whatever you do to your gents in bed, please eschew all forms of violent twisting manipulation.
However, bear in mind that the secret information which I have imparted to you can be a defence against rapists.
If you are ever attacked by a man with an erect penis, simply grasp it as firmly as you can, and forcibly rearrange it from 12 o'clock to six o'clock — and then run like hell.
Q
Since so many men have slightly dirty or scruffy fingernails, couldn't vaginal loveplay lead to infection?
A
Yes — you're right.
Digital stimulation of the inside of the vagina is the second commonest form of male-female loveplay.
It is most frequently done with the middle finger.
Now inspection of a series of men's hands will quickly demonstrate that not all of their fingernails are 100% clean.
Indeed at the end of a day, this would be bacteriologically impossible.)
So transfer of germs to the vagina does happen — and it's possible those germs might lead to vaginal discharge.
However, the types of germs found on the fingers aren't usually the same one s which cause a discharge.
On the other hand (so to speak) there could be an association between dirty fingernails and cancer of the cervix.
So gentlemen readers: do make sure that anything you put inside a woman is clean.
(And I do mean anything…)
Q
I am usually on the very brink of having a climax when my husband ‘comes’.
He then falls asleep immediately, leaving me feeling terribly frustrated.
Do all men make a habit of dong this?
A
Many do.
It's thought that immediately after orgasm, a sedative chemical floods through a man's brain — making him very sleepy, unless he fights against it.
And that's why it may be a good ten minutes or so before a man can lift a finger (if you'll forgive the phrase).
However, if you stress to your husband that you really want him to stay awake and ‘finish you off’, I'm sure he'll try.
The alternative is to buy a vibrator — you never know, the buzzing might wake him up.
Q
My man has this persistent kinky idea that he wants to urinate inside me.
A
Well, don't let him.
Some urinary games are fairly harmless, but I reckon this one could damage your delicate vaginal tissue.
Next time he asks, tell him to p…off.
For your copy of The A-Z of Good Sex signed by Doc D send a cheque for £3.95 payable to Ebury Press, PO Box 50, Harlow, Essex CM17 ODZ.
For Access/Visa users call 0279 27203.
Doc D's Diary
POSITION OF THE MONTH
STADE FRANCAIS
If you have been making love horizontally in bed for years and need something new to make sex more varied, Stade Français could be the answer.
Standing sex has had a bit of a bad press — mainly because it tends to be used for illicit love-making by young couples who have no bedroom to go to.
But it can be very pleasant.
Since men are usually a bit taller than their female partners, it's easier if the man can stand so that he's a little lower than his partner.
If you're both on the same level, it can be a strain on the legs — and you may well find out when this position is often referred to as the ‘dreaded knee trembler’!
Racing Club is another version of face-to-face love-making while standing up.
The man lifts up the woman so that she can wrap her legs round him.
This is a most entertaining position, which tends to appeal to couples with a sense of humour — but don't fall backwards — this could fracture his organ (see overleaf).
Please address your questions to Dr David Delvin, SHE, National Magazine House, 72 Broadwick Street, London W1V 2BP.
Dr Delvin regrets he cannot enter into private correspondence or consultation with readers.
SHE KNITTING
Three of a kind
Like mother, like father, daughter (or son).
Wherever you are, town or country, you won't lose each other wearing this toning set of snowflake pattern jumpers.
Knitted in Patons Pure New Wool Sport, the man's jumper costs approximately £28 to knit, the woman's about £24 and the child's £15.
SHE COMPETITION DETAILS
CROWNING GLORY
Her long slender fingers paused over the keyboard.
She knew exactly what she wanted to say but the words wouldn't come.
Was this the dreaded writer's block, or was it merely her desperation to win the SHE/Timotei writing competition that had rendered her completely lost for words?
Rita Williamson from Arlesey in Bedfordshire, the winner of our SHE/Timotei Fiction competition, could have started her story like this, but she didn't, and she wasn't lost for words.
The competition called for a first chapter of 2000 words to include a couple of phrases along the lines of ‘the scent of freshly washed hair++’
Rita's winning story,Streets Ahead , features Carol Graham as the central character.
‘Her life is measured out in easy units; the number of stairs she sweeps; the number of shirts she irons; the number of hours she works to add to the family income.
She lives in Archer Road, an average sort of street.
It comprises two parallel rows of council houses tacked on the end of a neat little avenue of ‘Nash’ houses build just after the war.
In 1962 it was still new enough to be modern but poor enough to be half worn out.
Archer Road or ‘The Street’ as it was known by all who lived in it, was a bit like the curate's egg: bits of it were good and bits of it were bad, very bad.
It had its posh end and it had its rough end and it had that strange indeterminate bit in the middle that was neither, but had the pretensions and failings of both.
But behind some of the peeling doors painted in council colours, there burned ambition that would have surprised the rest of the street had it recognised it for what it was.’
Rita, a prevention for blindness co-ordinator at the London RNIB, received here cheque for £1000 at a reception in her honour.
Winner Rita Williamson's story was Streets Ahead in the SHE/Timotei writing competition.
Below: to take off in a camper van (see page 70), find the words in this grid — and don't forget the competition entry token
SHE'S THE ULTIMATE JUGGLER
Maureen Lipman has the last word!
It seems to me that I wore glasses before I wore zinc and castor oil cream.
Let's be honest, I was conceived in glasses.
It was spectacular!
This may well be a little rose-tinted, but that weighty, bulldog clip-around-the-nose sensation appears to have been with me and indeed to have shaped me — not only me, but my nose; not only my nose, but my personality — for as far back as I can see.
Neither of my parents wore them.
My mother didn't need them and was far too pretty to wear them if she had needed them.
My father preferred and still prefers to screw up his eyes and lean forward should he need to see whether the pink or blue is about to be potted.
His glasses are always ‘in my other jacket pocket’ or ‘behind the clock on the mantelpiece’.
(There isn't a clock on the mantelpiece.
Come to that, there isn't a bloody mantelpiece.)
Elder brother Geoffrey (the Paragon), blond, brainy, sporting, the white sheep of the family had, of course, the full 20/20 vision.
And no buck teeth.
How he managed to live with all I had going against him was an East Yorkshire miracle.
The glasses menagerie
I suppose I was ten when the school said I couldn't see.
I invariably sat at the back of the class for reasons not unconnected with gang warfare, and if I needed to glance at the blackboard there was always someone to show me roughly where it was.
But, no.
A second opinion was sought and, short-sightedly, my parents agreed to put me in those gorgeous National Health jobs which are now sported by your average Yuppie but which made you look second only in berkishness to the kid in the owl specs with Elastoplast all over one lens.
This was to correct a lazy eye.
I certainly had one of those.
It went with the rest of me.
In fact, if the treatment really worked I should have been Elastoplasted all over.
At first I only wore the bins for homework and blackboard but, as the years rolled myopically by, I came to rely on them more and became too lazy to take them off.
Ultimately I took to wearing them all the time — only whipping them off when approached by a boy I vaguely fancied or at the doorway of the house of a friend of my mother's, with a boy my mother fancied for me inside.
My first boyfriend seemed to like me, specs and all.
I couldn't believe it and, at the pictures, persisted in dragging them surreptitiously on and off whenever he took his eyes off the screen and looked at me.
For your eyes only
Mind you, he'd come home from university one time to see me in bed with flu, glasses and no front teeth, so I guess he was pretty immune to my charmlessness — or was too shortsighted himself to notice.
Or maybe love really is blind.
During the 70s, in my Loving Spoonful London Hippie period, I favoured tiny, blue-tinted, gold-rimmed Lennon specs like everyone else — and, for the first time, felt utterly at peace (man) with my bespectacled self.
Meeting Jack in his butch horn-rims gave me a feeling of intense familiarity and the first time we banged glasses together in mid-kiss I just knew it was sight at first love.
Sine then, whatever the frame, I've rarely had them off my nose, to the extent that I began to hide defiantly behind them, never fighting being four-eyed except in specs and a ball gown, when I always feel decidedly Everage.
My first venture into contact lenses was a classic.
I accustomed my pupils to the tiny hard lenses — building up their resistance fastidiously for an extra hour per day — then lost one down the sink and the other down the Holborn Public Baths.
Back came the ‘face furniture’ which required no solutions except that of remembering to wear them.
But the problem remained of seeing and being seen.
Vision on…and off
On stage, short sight is a positive advantage and many is the flowery eulogy some of our more sensitive critics have launched into, in praise of some actress's misty gaze into the middle distance which could be more truthfully ascribed to her horn-rims being confined to the dressing-room table, having failed to match her farthingale.
Many are the TV panel games and Awards Ceremonies where actors are required to open envelopes and read the contents.
At such occasions, actors' glasses are on and off more times than their love affairs…and millions thrill to the sound of ‘…
And the winner is Dustman Hoffbin’.
During a run in a Neil Simon play, I struggled with soft lenses which made my cry continuously.
This was unfortunate as Neil tends to expect laughs as the more usual response to his lines.
Pink-eyed and lachrymose, I returned to the lens boutique in the Earls Court Road (on the cornea actually) and complained bitterly that the lenses were a pair of over-priced disasters through which I could neither see nor play Neil Simon.
Up a blind alley
Patiently, the practitioner examined them, me and us, and proclaimed that I would probably be able to see jolly well if I didn't have them inside out and in the wrong eyes.
‘You must think I'm a very stupid person!’
I said rhetorically.
‘We're used to it, madam,’ he sighed.
‘The gentleman before you complained that his lenses gave him double vision and headaches.
Which they do if you wear your flatmate's instead of your own.’
Even as we speak, I'm wearing soft lenses.
These are specially constructed to cope with astigmatic actresses such as myself and have two tiny lines on their edges which mean ‘This way up’.
These lines are only visible if you're already wearing contact lenses!
So you have to get a man in to line them up for you before you put them in.
Once in, the pain subsiding, they very deliberately move around so that the two lines are elsewhere — and what you are reading now looks like basic Sanskrit.
Another innovation of lenses is seeing yourself without the cover of glasses from a three foot distance for your first time since puberty.
You simply freeze with the shock of the new.
Or, in my case, the old.
Mirrored lifts are the worse.
No, I lie.
Marks & Spencer food halls.
Overhead fluorescent lights and mirrored columns prove beyond doubt that M&S have a deal with top Harley Street plastic surgeons — and ‘Shall I take your bags, madam?’ takes on an entirely different meaning.
See you vaguely next month…