

WIN PRO DECKS! quite easily
AUSTRALIA not upside down STREET WIZARD hellicar interview
RAMP REMEMBERED farnborough thru' the years
GOODBYE MINI RAMP dannz's romp jam
PHOTO SECTION
CONTENTS
COVER: Just look at how harsh and tight that bank is.
Rudy Johnson here doesn't just roll up them, he pops a frontside ollie, one footed, off the bank.
Too hot.
Photo by Brad McDonald.
CONTENTS: Difficulty and technique are two attributes you could attribute Bryon Convey with.
Fakie Ollie Stale Grab, Woden wooden ramp, ACT, in Australia.
Photo by David Pang.
Staff/Edit
NEWS and TERRAIN.
It's new, and it's here, and it's all news.
PRODUCT LUST.
Yep, new product, right out of the box.
STREET WIZARD.
Just who the heck is Pete Hellicar anyways?
He's from Nottingham and he's good.
RAMP REMEMBERED.
Farnborough is one of Britain's most famous ramps.
It's gone through many changes and evolutions.
Ian Cocking writes a retrospective.
DANNZ'S JAM.
A mini ramp jam with fancy dress and the odd one foot tail grab ollie.
POSTER.
Check the moodiness of the photo.
AUSTRALIA.
A pictorial of somewhat, by David Pang.
PHOTO SECTION.
A thousand words.
BLOODY KIDS.
MOUTH ON A STICK.
LETTERS PAGE.
New to this magazine.
Write and get printed.
Practically guaranteed.
Edit
Well, here's the new issue, the March 1991 Skateboard!
Magazine.
There was a gap between the Jan/Feb issue and the one before that [November '90]whilst publishing was sorted out, but so what?
It was still the best skateboarding magazine to date.
Killer cover, killer photos inside and totally good articles.
That's the way we run things here at Skateboard!
Magazine.
If it's not the best skate mag on the shelf then we had better give up and take up flower pressing.
So, onto this issue — check the cover.
Rad one foot ollie on the tightest of banks.
Then there's a retrospective on Farnborough, possibly Britain's most famous ramp, an interview with a street wizard from Nottingham, Dannz's Mini Ramp jam, Australian Pictorial, and another blinding collection of photos for your visual pleasure.
Enjoy.
MN — SB!
NEXT MONTH
In the April 1991 issue we'll have the story on Kevin Harris' skatepark — a virtual ply heaven by all accounts.
Aside from that, Meany's been street skating in the Greater Manchester area, Duffy's been on the lookout for new terrain and unknown people  existent in the South West, and also discovers a totally hot indoor bowl with a secret location and impeccable construction.
SB!, next month.
the NeWS
You know how it is…or maybe you don't.
Gathering News for the Skateboard!
News page is a job that Meany has endeavoured to thrust upon himself with the kind of enthusiasm reserved for African Pygmies on an Easter rhino hunt.
Here's what he discovered this month.
90% OF ALL SKATERS ARE STREET SKATERS
It's true.
Rocco apparently performed a survey and determined that 9 out of 10 skaters are street skaters, and hence he has dropped every vert skater from his team.
Todd Swank, of Foundation, then decided to do the same and only retain his street skaters together to make a really small team.
As a result, Dave Phillips, Stan Stanners and Cheese are off Foundation, and Todd Swank himself is the only vert skater left: ultimately nine or so people [who rode vert]got chucked off.
Also on the subject of Foundation, expect a new video from them, imported over here by Faze 7.
Natas Kaupas has a brand new company — called 101.
He has new boards, new wheels, t shirts, and get this about the graphics for his own deck: they depict Challenger's final flight, the space shuttle explosion and a huge cloud of smoke.
Nice taste, Natas.
Also, his wheels are released soon, called Fuzzy Little Snow Frogs, they're 57mm.
Since Davie Phillips is now off Foundation, Real have snapped him up.
Davie's also been working hard on a new Poizone range.
Watch for new trousers made by a new manufacturer, and also new shirt designs printed onto in-house created sweatshirts [rather then just whacking the design onto a Hanes job].
New logos soon too.
Another thing, if you have a facility for a portable mini-ramp, for instance if you have a hall to put it in, then contact Davie or Jamie on 041 339 6523 because they have one placed in storage just doing nothing.
It's begging to be skated.
Other items from oop north, there's still a ramp in the Church, Chris Lonergan aka Noodles is now sponsored by Nidecker for snowboards, and Jamie Blair now rides for Cockroach.
VDO
Let's talk Video for a while: Real are doing a promo video, similar to the New Deal promo video that went to the shops.
I'll be about 20 minutes long.
Death Box's Spirit of the Blitz is finally out after months of filming all over Europe.
Blind are also bringing out a video.
Expect Mark and Jason Lee to adorn your screens right about now.
New Life skates — VCR cassette soon, should be in the stores right about now.
Reviews, next month.
SMALLS, SPONSORS and SUCHLIKE
Let's treat this section in departments:
NEW DEAL UK
Look out for a new Douglas deck, and look out for their UK team riders Jason Lunn, Pete McNeil and Simon Evans.
Maybe a Team File soon, maybe.
As we've mentioned before, Davie Phillips is now on Real [a company with connections to New Deal UK], they're now producing a no-pro deck called a Blank Stare.
The guys at New Deal filled us in with the latest on Harrow skatepark.
They still want to take the park over and run it on a similar operation to Southsea/Rom.
A meeting with the council is about to take place, and if all goes well the pool and performance bowl will be dug out and made skateable again.
More on that soon.
H STREET
Hokus Pokus fried brains when it came out — the level of skating was incredible for the time.
H Street are now about to release a new video, cunningly titled Not the New H Street Video .
It'll be around 30 minutes long and is intended to be a trailer for their new full length video which will be released later this year [Summer time?].
WORLD INDUSTRIES
There are a few decks coming from the house of Rocco.
Rudy Johnson, the guy on this month's cover, is coming out with a deck, and there's also a new Dune Pastras model.
Vallely is releasing his new plank, which will replace his double kick deck.
Blind, connected with Rocco, have new wheels out called White Walls.
Whether or not they are black with white sides remains to be seen…
DEATH BOX
Spirit of the Blitz is out now.
Finally!
Has Jeremy Fox gone quite mad?
Has he signed up one of the most formidable Arabs to ride for his expanding pro team?
Naaah, but watch out for a Saddam Hussein model, which Jeremy is rushing out to cash in before conscription sets in.
He's hoping to make enough money from the deck that the authorities won't send him out to the front.
Another Foxy scheming method to miss conscription is to join the Quakers, avoiding being drafted because of religious immunity [not because of bloating on porridge].
He passes blame onto Mon Barbour for that idea.
Alex Moule has his new pro model out now, featuring DB's new concave called Concurve.
Three more Death Box ams are turning pro, so you can expect models with these names on them coming out in May: Jocke Olsen, Nordien Quatbi, and Bruno Rouland.
Check out the DB Team File [Nov ish]for awareness of these blokes.
Big comp news comes from the Death Box camp.
Look forward to a mega-massive contest taking place at the big Point Depo Stadium, in Dublin, over the May 17–19th weekend.
Batchelors, the soup people, are sponsoring the whole deal.
Freestyle Ramps will provide the ramp, in the form of a brand new big vert job, which will then be shipped back to England and used at the Town and Country show this year as well.
This contest will also be a round of the AES European series.
It'll be big .
Wee Blair McAfferty now rides for the DB am team.
MORE EVENTS
Dave North is running a comp taking place over 13/14th April.
It will be at the Antrim ramps in Northern Ireland, and will officially open the new bowled out steel mini, and will also raise funds for a big vert ramp.
The vertical ramp will be made to the same dimensions as Southsea's, as long as they can come up with the money to make it.
Back to the comp: this will be sponsored by Zorlac, Death Box, and at least three pros will skate there, according to Dave.
For more info on this event ring Dave on 0232 812271, or Steve Barrow on 084 9468944.
OTHER BITS THAT WEREN'T BIG ENOUGH TO HAVE THEIR OWN HEADINGS
Gator has quit Vision to ride for G and S.
Christian Hosoi, who was meant to be getting some sort of subsidiary company through Vision, is now working to get a sub-company set up through H Street: this will eventually be similar to Chris Miller's Planet Earth.
Black Label — Rodga Harvey is first on the team.
and is Omar Hassan now riding for them too in the US?
Bash — team now consists of Neil Frey, Pike, Gregg Nowich, Chris Lonergan and Luke McKirdy.
Team File soon…
TERRAIN
INDOOR MINIS IN LONDON
There's the possibility of an indoor mini ramp complex in London, at last!
Two old Rolling Thunderites are getting it together to house mini ramps of varying sizes inside a place off Old Street.
Dave Crabb is coming over to help  with the design and building chores.
Hopefully it should be completed right now — go along and find out.
We'll have more details soon.
Harlow, in Esse, will also be getting their own indoor mini ramp.
It'll be at Braysgrove school.
RARE UNIT
Robin from Rare Unit called us up with news of ramp happenings.
They are planning a huge weekend skating festival, to take place early on during the school Summer hols, in the West Country possibly near Bath.
Camping facilities will be available on site, and charges for skating for the whole weekend will be kept to a minimum to make everyone stoked.
And just check out what they're making for the weekend bash: a 20ft wide 6ft tall spine ramp, a 16ft wide mini ramp [4ft tall], tons of street stuff with fun boxes, handrails and suchlike, and also a massive vert ramp which will be 32ft wide, 10ft transitions and 1 ½ foot of vert, and what's more this will be bowled out at one end like Vision's indoor ramp.
Robin is talking to Mon, Meany and Sean Goff for help with design for the equipment.
Following this event the ramps will be available for hire, for either events or youth clubs or whatever.
The final date and venues have yet to be set.
Write to Rare Unit for info [ad in the mag].
Morton youth club in Wirral have quarterpipes set up indoors.
Christchurch Borough Council near  Bournemouth have a similar set-up, with indoor quarters to skate on.
Stamford are improving their already rad facilities — more street stuff, a fun box with a handrail.
The park is pretty dialled in with a food shop, skate shop, and the midi ramp.
Wendover Parish Council have a new u-bend ramp: it's at Ashbrooke Recreation ground, Aylesbury Road, Wendover in  Buckinghamshire .
Radnorshire District Council have lived up to their name and have provided three ramps in their locality.
Presteigne [ramp off the main road through the village], Knighton and  Llandrindod Wells all have 12ft wide 4ft high mini ramps.
Also in Wales, Cardiff's troubled vert ramp now has a definite venue.
It's now built next door to the athletic ground in Leckwirth Road, Cardiff.
What's more they've built it on ground with the intention of adding another 8ft wide section to pump the width up.
Rad.
Fife: Cupar, in N.E. Fife, now has a 12ft mini.
Things are definitely happening over in Jersey: they've converted a fort in St. Helier into a leisure centre, with squash courts etc.
Bill Biddlecomb is the man who deserves a name check for organising the skating side of things there.
He got together a serious amount of cash and called a meeting with the skaters to ask them what they wanted; 3 skaters turned up.
Normally following that kind of response the ramp idea would go down like a lead balloon.
But no, Bill then gave them another chance and another meeting, this time 120 skaters went along, and they came up with the following ramps: 20ft wide 6ft tall spine ramp, with the spine itself being 12 ft wide [the other 8ft bit being platform], and another 12 ft wide mini ramp, plus street stuff like fun boxes etc.
It's complete now, so why not plan a trip to the Fort Region Leisure Centre in Jersey this year?
Bath seems to be over-run with ramps: there's now a 16ft wide 4ft high spine ramp in Whiteway, off Rosewarn Close, Bath.
Basildon have got it together too: they're the proud owners of a 16ft wide 6ft tall job at the Terry Marsh centre, Crest Avenue, Pilsea, Basildon.
Le Bugue is a place you've probably never heard of before now: it's in France, and they're having a 16ft wide 6ft tall ramp along with a 12ft wide 4ft tall mini being constructed at a Summer Camp, along with some street ramps and handrails.
WIN A PRO DECK!!!
Here's your chance to win this month's Product Lust deck splurge!
Win either a Vision Gator deck, or maybe an SMA Alan Peterson, or maybe the brand new Powell Cab deck!
All you have to do is to mail us a postcard with your name and address written on it together with your answer to the following simple question:
There was a big typo in the last issue — where was it and what was it?[a clue: Siamese Twin]
Send it here to: Skateboard!
Magazine, ‘What A Stupid Wazok The Art Director Is’ Deck Comp, PO BOX 1300, Dorchester, Dorset, DT1 1FN.
Closing date for contest is April 18th 1991.
Thanks to Shiners for the decks.
AND FINALLY
That about wraps it up this month.
Meany is in charge of the News now, and he's just ready to hear from you about newsworthy things happening in your area.
Are you building a new skate facility?
Running a comp?
Sponsoring someone new?
Skating for someone new?
Then call Meany on 051 7092714 and let him know all about it.
Product LUST
VISION GATOR
Gator's been riding for Vision practically since the birth of the wheel, and thus his models have always been a Vision favourite.
He enjoyed popularity during the eighties with his Gator deck, then faded away, and is now threatening to re-emerge stronger then ever.
Just check the latest Vision deck, the last one made before his recent departure to G and S. 32 ¼ inches long, 10 inches wide, with a 6 ½ inch tail.
The nose is double drilled and gives either 5 ½ or 6 ¼ inch up front, and it's quite steep too.
The 'cave is very comfortable indeed and extends the length of the deck.
Overall it's a very clean smooth shape.
Graphs?
Red cartoon depicting monkeys skating about a typical street with masses of detail.
A must-try in my book.
SMA PETERSON
Alan Peterson's new model on SMA is quite a corker.
Length is 31 ½ inches, so it's not one of the biggest decks on the market today.
Width is at 9 ¾ inch.
with the tail being 6 ¼.
Like most modern decks the nose is double drilled: either 5 ¼ or 5 ¾ inch.
The concave is from SMA [Santa Cruz]so it's fully dialled.
The Cruz Twinkick concave [as it's known]is a complex concave, and it's not just ‘concave’ in profile, a very slight rise running through the length of the deck is invisible to the eye but you can feel a more comfortable footlock when you stand on it.
The tail is quite mellow, and concave too.
Good nose.
Also, this deck comes with rocker.
Overall you can tell that SMA worked hard on the 'cave for this deck.
The graphics?
OK, they show Alan playing with a model plane [SMA link here].
POWELL CAB RAMP
Here's another new model from guy who has been riding for the same big-time company for literally eons.
The brand new ramp deck for Steve Caballero, once again made by Powell Peralta. and it's about time Cab had a new model: this one is 31 ½ inches long, with a 6 inch tail, 9 ¾ inch wide.
Again, more double drilling, giving a choice of either 5 ½ inches or 6 inches of nasal plywood.
The shape is a no gimmick smooth contour, with quite narrow hips compared to the nose section — typical fare for vert decks.
The concave feels good, similar to the Gator but deeper if anything, simple but functional.
Graphics depict usual Cab/Powell imagery, with skulls/bones/Japanese dragons, with high qual screening.
Finish, like the other decks this month is of very high quality, there is no junk here, but what do you expect from the biggest deck manufactures in the business?
A1 HAT
Yah, like wow, like A One man.
Here's a good cap, with material all the way round [ie no mesh]with embroidered A1 Meats logo [crossed choppers].
Wear it either way round.
POWELL B 80's
Running along with the current function street wheel, with smaller size being the key, here are Powell's new B 80 tyres.
They're basically 55mm diameter Street Bones.
Minimalistic graphics.
Slightly grooved running surface, should last ages.
55mm — small street wheels.
Rad stuff.
TRACKER
Tracker's Aggro trucks are considered by many to be the ‘right on’ truck at the moment.
and they're still improving them: More colours, and more strength thanks to a fully supported axle with a new strengthening strip on the hanger.
Aggros are fully rad — dead quick and stable, good grind, long lasting.
Rubbers are high qual too, if you need to replace your truck rubbers try a set of Trackers.
Or perhaps try a set of…
CELLBLOCK CUSHIONS
Skate giants Santa Cruz also chuck out Cellblock stuff too — these are the replacement truck rubbers they make.
In three hardnesses, 92a=blue, 95a=red, 98a=white.
Long lasting.
and in different shapes too, check your truck for the correct shape you need, either top or bottom.
CELLBLOCK RISERS
These are the new risers from Cellblock — they spread out making a wider area against the deck, which means more shock absorption and also reduces pressure on the deck making it less likely to snap your plank near the trucks.
The holes drilled are for light weight — and they are just that.
Lightweight.
VISION SHOES
‘Hot Diggety!’ exclaimed our resident tester when these came in.
These are the new 14050 style shoes, also known as ‘Shockwave’.
According to Vision, they are the ‘newest most versatile shoe’, and I'd tend to agree.
They are lower cut, not exactly ‘high’ tops, but offer thick padding at the ankle and support at the same time.
Combine this with a padded tongue and further support around the lower foot area and you end up with a darn comfy shoe.
Also features speedlace [for faster lacing], ‘action’ leather [tougher leather then normal for durability]upper, and long lasting sole with grip and feel.
Good amount of leather at the toe and lower foot area.
Shown is the grey version, but they're also available in black too.
Go to your local shop and try a pair.
VICTIM SHIRT
‘It's time for the Stussy backlash’ claims Richard Garland from Method Airskate shop.
They make these anti-Stussy ‘Victim’ shirts which come in three versions: t-shirt [£14], long sleeve t [£17.50], and sweatshirt [£21.95], p&p is £1.50 [cheques to ‘Method Air Ltd’, check their advert for address].
Hot stuff, good qual cotton shirt with good print.
Street Pete
O.K. Nottingham interview — take 3.
Number one was a load of rubbish.
Number two was unsuitable due to lack of photographic accompaniment.
Now we're doing this one: Pete Hellicar — Nottingham local and just starting to get known a bit more then through travelling and National magazine coverage — with the backing of a new sponsor — Lifes a Beach Board Division and a seemingly endless pool from which to draw variety, ability, and originality — as well as wide grins and industrial hair clippers he seems a fairly interesting candidate for an interview.
Right, a nice simple one to start with.
N. What's the best place you've skated?
P. Probably Eastwood Banks — tight brick transitions with grindable lip.
They are a challenge.
South bank as well 'cause that's where I started, where I got my first board ever.
I got it from a guy called Reuben, he was living in Wales and my sister Louise bought me a Joe Johnson with Rip trucks from him for £60.
She was working on TV and had wads of money.
I started skating with a couple of guys called Sam and Luke who had skated for a while in London.
They taught me to ollie and stuff and I really liked it and kept going and never stopped.
N. You learnt wall rides there?
P. At South Bank I learnt wall rides, yeah.
During a mad session I finally made one after two weeks of trying and came down and a guy called Matt said ‘Yeah you did it at last’.
I was really stoked.
Then I came back to Nottingham and just did one — that was with John — Method John.
N. So what does it feel like when you make something new like that?
P. It's a rush — you want to apply tricks and do variations, change it into something else.
N. So you learnt ollie stalefish tonight after getting ollies at last.
P. Yeah.
N. So what now?
P. On vert, sleep banks, maybe to tail on mini ramps.
Whatever comes along.
Spur of the moment stuff.
N. Who do you knock tricks around with?
P. Dino, you, it depends who is around at the time.
I'm not really secretive about new stuff.
Dino is cool to skate with because he is better then me and he really pushes everything to the maximum.
He pushes me to make stuff whilst you just cruise around and do nose feebles all the time.
N. So why do you think Dino is better then you?
P. He is so much more powerful, and goes for stuff fully.
Sometimes your will to learn a trick will take you through.
N. Where do you skate a lot?
P. Notts.
Chilwell Ramp mainly, and streets all over.
N. Who do you skate with there?
P. All the cool locals; Aidy, Dee, Mad Danny.
It's a place where people meet up — Dino, Chris Clipstore (before he went to be a surf bum in France) and all the out of towners — it's a good scene.
Alan, Wiz, the young guns, they're all into skating fully, it's not all tricky.
They don't mind having a layback grind session or eight people carving around Jacksdale as well.
The old Nuda ramp from Swanick is now in a pub car park.
Geoff has done a good job on it.
I skate with ‘my mate’ Bradley with his Matt Hensley Skinhead.
N. Has he got a skinhead now?
P. Yeah copying me (laughs)
N and P. Not really Brad, we love you and your attitude.
N. What about further afield?
P. Further afield it has to be Bury.
It's one of the best mini ramps ever and the vert ramp is a killer.
London as well, Stockwell, all over.
Anyway, Newtown in Wales when I go to see Joe and to Sheffield to see Dino.
N. Do you skate to the shops?
P. Sometimes, maybe I'll go to the video shop.
N. What to get?
P. Oh, King Solomon's Mines, no not really.
blood and guts, adventure that kind of thing.
I like Arnie.
N. Who are your friends?
P. Mainly skaters, some college people out of skating but I like to make new friends all the time.
N. Why do you skate?
P. To start with it was the ‘glamorous lifestyle’, cruising around in T-shirt and shorts, like everyone does at first.
Then it was the stage of having all the gear and having the latest Tony Hawk with 18 million inch nose and Tony comes to town so everyone (except Brad) wants to look like him.
After a while skateboarding changed from being something you do to being everything.
Then other things become extra to skateboarding, rather then the other way around.
I don't have to think about skating or being a skater, it's just there.
It is, I am.
That kind of thing.
N. Street?
P. That's where I started.
It's where my roots are you might say.
N. That's usually an excuse for being crap on ramps.
P. Yeah, I learnt the basics, ollies, carving, just rolling.
N. What is Nottingham like for streets?
P. It's good.
There are lots of spots close together around the city centre, then many more close by in a car.
N. I think Nottingham was designed on Circles.
All the good spots are close to the ring road.
The centre has a ring of spots.
P. Yeah, it's cool.
Everyone starts and finishes at Broadmarsh banks.
There's new stuff going up all the time in Nottingham.
They've just finished a new office block with the lowest handrails.
I also like to session really stupid things.
Like boardslides on bananas or slalom through forests.
Anything goes.
Full on city life man.
McTwists off dustmen (laughs).
The market square as well.
Live an American city park.
The only thing it hasn't got is a decent skate shop.
N. Oh, oh a bit political…
P. I suppose Non Stop are quite good.
N. What's the story on the Lifes A Beach gear at Rollersnakes?
P. Yeah man that was so lame of snakes.
Duncan at L.A.B. dropped off my gear at the shops as he didn't have my address, when I went to get it only half was handed over.
I had to check with John what had been sent and it turned out Rollersnakes — or one particular roller skating employee of said carpet shop/skateboard emporium — had kept most of my stuff for themselves and given me their old stock off the shelf.
N. That is so lame, that is not just done is it?
P. No it's sorted out now.
Duncan is really col down at L.A.B. My actual sponsor is Bad Boy Club board division.
I'm on a deck and clothing deal at the moment — I'm really stoked.
It's pushed me.
N. Skating with the team at Bury was a good time?
P. Yeah Reese (Simpson), Monty Nolder, Mouse, Bryan Pennington, Jeff Phillips and Jason Parks were over here a short while back and we went up to meet them and skate at Bury.
Thanks a lot Lifes A Beach for giving me a chance.
N. What sort of style do you consider yourself as having?
P. Errrr…
N. Are you sketchy?
P. Yes definitely, I like it, it makes a trick look harder.
I think your style develops more as you become more confident with trick.
As you go on they become natural and you don't have to think about them.
N. So what is your level of a basic trick?
Errr, rock and rolls, ollie fakies, Smith grinds, nose pivots, things like that.
I don't put my style on, but I am influenced by how people skate.
Matt Hensley stays crouched low, so I figure it must be a good way to skate streets.
It must be, going on his results!
N. So you like Matt Hensley's style on streets.
What about vertical?
P. Reese Simpson rips it up on vert, he's better in real life then on videos, even with a cast on one arm.
Jeff Phillips also, Mike Manzouri skates rad, Davie Phillips rips, I like his style it's so rad.
N. You had a rough school background.
Did that push you towards an 'alternative’ kind of sport like skating, rather then the more common football or darts or snooker?
P. I wanted to get into something where there was no-one telling me what to do all the time.
With skating there's no-one saying do this, do that all over the shop.
N. No team captain to call the shots?
P. Yeah, no-one says ‘c'mon do this’ no more shitty teachers or shitty teachers.
N. Do you think it makes a difference if a skater is out of school or not, not in their skating but in view of it?
P. Yeah, people who have left school are free, toodling about doing their own thing.
I was only fully into skating after I left school and went into college.
I was happy and it showed in my skating.
N. Have you broken the law ever?
P. Yes.
N. Have you ever had a gnarly car incident?
P. You know damn well about that small misjudgment made at traffic lights with a P100 and several other cars.
N. What will you be doing in five years?
P. Five years time I will be skating about still.
Probably in a suit.
Designing graphics — in a suit.
Unless I get a job for Zorlac, then I can wear my hooded sweat all the time: and never have to wash!(laughs)
N. What do you think about competitions?
P,.
They are good to meet people and I do actually like to enter.
I like to win — or try.
N. Mmm, not strictly true!
P. but don't you like to win?
N. No, the way I see it is that if you enter a competition you get at least two clear runs with no-one snaking you.
P. What's nice is when you do a trick, you know you've got it when you do it in front of all those people.
N. Are you a snake?
P. Yeah, fully.
I don't do it when I first go to a place.
Once I get into it though I snake on before anyone else gets on.
N. Who do you look up to?
P. People with stilts, tall people.
People in second story flats!!
N. What about the police?
P. They do their job.
I guess if they are reasonable there is no reason to give them any shit.
Renta cops are different though.
I don't think anyone should take any notice of them.
I skate down the road a bit before I shout at cops — or anyone that was giving me some shit.
N. What is a typical Monday?
P. Oh, my worst day — get up, eat food, watch TV, sit in 'cause I've got no money because I spent it all on Sunday, then off to work till 2am to earn more skating money.
N. OK, the big cruncher…have you got anything to contribute to skating?
P. (Pauses) Yes.
N. Well are you going to say?
P. Yes.
N. Well what is it?
P. I don't want to sound arrogant by saying it.
N. We excuse you, go for it.
P. A friendly person, someone who is good to session with, someone who can appreciate someone else's skating and not to judge them as to what they can do but also who they are and how they are.
Sorry if it sounds dumb.
N. Thank you very much Peter Hellicar.
P.Thank you very much Andrew McDermott and Louise Hellicar.
N. Goodbye.
PS.
Thanks to Edina, Donovan and Lifes a Beach.
Interview by Andrew McDermott All photos by Donovan Pennant
Doing a wheelie on one's nose sounds painful — but not when it's done like this.
Pete, nose-wheelie, urban lifestyle.
SEQUENCE: Gap, no, make that a chasm ollie.
Town centre
BELOW: Bench work, old man.
OPPOSITE PAGE: Slide on down.
Do you really need a caption for these two photos?
Do you really want to know what is going on, and where they took place?
For instance, is it really important to realise that the ollie to nosepick above is on an exceptionally harsh bank in Nottingham?
Or how about the lion sculpture on the left with Pete nosepicking the top of that?
Here's a blatant lie coming up: he ollied on to the lion's head.
FARNBOROUGH RETROSPECTIVE
Farnborough Ramp
Text by Ian Cocking
Born in November 1979 from the ashes of Wokingham skatepark, deceased October 1990.
The Farnborough half pipe was the oldest free standing skateboard ramp in the UK until last Autumn.
For many of the big names in British skating Farnborough holds an element of nostalgia and sentimental value that will never be forgotten.
The high point in the ramp's history has to be the period from 1984 until just before the recent skateboard boom that started around 1986/7.
This was the time that Farnborough was the place to be for many reasons.
It was the widest ramp, it had various height sections, many of the better skaters, the convenience of the nearby shopping precinct, and just the funniest and best skate sessions.
Many of the local and regular skaters from this era went on to become house-hold names in the UK and International skate scene; people such as Steve Douglas, Bod Boyle, Danny Webster, Sean Goff, Mark Abrook, Barry Abrook, Shane Rouse, Phil Burgoyne, Davross, Gary Lee, Don Brider, Rodga Harvey and many many others.
Even from the more recent past a younger Pete Dossett or Jason Lunn would have been seen working out on the Farnborough ramp.
As I said earlier in  its heyday Farnborough was the place to be.
Despite  its strong local following even the boys were often outnumbered by the H-BOYS, Pig City, Crystal Palace and many other skate scenes.
One Summer in particular visiting European skaters mainly from France and Germany outnumbered the English, with the German contingent actually living on or in the ramp.
Of course during the ramp's 11 year history as well as making professional skaters it has attracted a fair few.
Here's a list of pros that have dropped in on at least one Farnborough session: Neil Blender, Billy Ruff, Claus Grabke, Jeff Hedges, Rodney Mullen, Brad Bowman, Mike McGill, John Lucero, Lance Mountain, Rick Demontrond (Spidey), Todd Swank, Kevin Stabb, Adrian Demain, Puttis, and, most recently, Gary Valentine.
History
Here is a brief history of the ramp and some background to those behind the scenes.
1979–1980
The Farnborough ramp was actually two halfpipes joined together.
The first 16 feet of ramp arrived from the then defunct skatepark in Wokingham in November 1979.
Derek Seaton (a father of a skater) made the arrangements and one Sunday the ramp arrived.
At first the ramp was set up without any flat bottom or platforms and three feet of vert, the ramp remained like this for about half a year.
This made for some tight weightless riding.
1980
The local skateboard club voted to take down the three foot of vert and use the vert sections to make up a flat bottom.
Guildford skatepark was demolished and as a result Farnborough was noticed for the first time outside the immediate area.
1981
Andover pool was now the centre of southern skating, after a coup at Andover a few decided to stop off at Farnborough and were very surprised by the level skating by the locals.
Farnborough subsequently had its first piece of national coverage by the way of Alpine sports newsletter.
The ESA also made the decision to include Farnborough into that year's competition series (which was organised solely by Shane Rouse, who did this up until 1986).
Danny Webster came out of retirement to join the Farnborough locals in the first comp there.
Other notables this year were the backflipping roller skaters Richard Mason and Mick Beausang who even threw in a half twist until he broke his wrist.
Mr Sean Goff from Oxford now skated at Farnborough too.
1982
This year the flat bottom was extended to 12 ft and the ramp completely resurfaced.
As a result Farnborough took over from Andover as the place to skate so Andover closed down in late 1982/early 1983.
The old Andover locals such as the Abrooks became Farnborough locals.
Once again Farnborough hosted another comp.
This was to become an annual event if not the annual event in the British Skater's diary.
The local skaters took over the running of the skate club.
The committee became Ian Cocking, Shane Rouse, Mark Evans and Joe Evans.
Membership of the club was enforced to provide funds to improve the ramp.
If you don't pay you don't skate.
1983
More of the same but more visitors from London and Brighton etc.
Music became an important part of any skate session, notably sounds this year were the Higsons, B52's and New Order.
Neil Blender and Billy Ruff were the first pros from the States to skate the ramp.
Then local Danny Webster skated well 'ard and picked up G&S sponsorship from the US pros.
Steve Douglas's Fanzine ‘Go for It’ started this year, and from a piece of folded photocopied paper, it eventually went on to become a printed glossy skate mag covering much of the skate scene at the time and the next few years for which the Farnborough scene played a major part if not the main part.
The original Farnborough ramp was one of two 16 foot wide half pipes from the skatepark at Billy Smart's circus permanently based in Winkfield, Berkshire.
When this skatepark closed down one ramp went to Wokingham.
This then later went on to become the Farnborough ramp.
The other ramp went to Andover so the two identical ramps remained some 50 miles apart for about 6 years.
Al; though the two ramps were identical no one had previously considered joining them together until now.
Andover had closed down and the ramp was just waiting for fate.
As it happened the new ramp section was only just rescued from a bulldozer in the nick of time as the skate scene said a final goodbye to Andover skatepark.
1984
The dream to join the two ramps together to make a 32ft wide superramp was finally realised this year and the work was completed in March.
This improvement made Farnborough so much wider then any other UK ramp.
Despite the ramp's size only 16ft of 64ft of lip was platformed course the dosh had run out.
Even on the ramp's first weekend it had a visitor from the States, a Mr Keith Stevenson who is probably better known as Bill Runaway from Thrasher magazine.
Sessions just got better and better.
Farnborough was being swamped by skaters from all over Europe.
Bod was beginning to show the making of a future pro.
Sean Goff makes anything.
Old time pro Brad Bowman drops in on this year's comp and shows good stylish skating, unlike Davross who amazed visiting US skaters Lance Mountain, John Lucero, Steve Keenan and Spidey with his unstylish but entertaining hang-ups (yeah Jase).
Mike McGill dropped in one evening but really didn't enjoy the 8ft transitions unlike Roddy Mullen who just shredded the flat concrete area surrounding the ramp.
The skating of this period didn't rely too heavily on lip tricks.
Lip tricks were less intricate then of late and were really only in order to achieve the main goals of big airs and hands plants.
When Danny returned from the States Sean was well into ultra stalled hand plants assisted by 2 or 3 platform spectators so in a doubles act with Mark Abrook, Danny had to go one better by actually making a hand plant on Mark's back whilst Mark was doing a backside grind.
John Lucero stayed around so long everyone thought he was a local until he went back to the States.
Gary Lee was perfecting his limpy limpy along with Mark Abrook going after anything female and poor Mark Potter was sexually assaulted by something canine.
1985
The platform is extended across the low section and a 2ft tombstone added.
A photographers platform on the platform-less side became a permanent fixture allowing photographers to get next to the lip to capture the action.
Farnborough and Crystal Palace, the two skate centres of southern skating, hold friendly comps on each others ramps for the ‘Whip Lash’ trophy, Danny Wins.
Barry Abrook became the first UK skater to spin a 540 and make it.
Billy Ruff and Todd Swank join in the fun at this years Farnborough.
Even the local TV came down to check it out and actually make use of some good footage.
The ramp is moved around the corner of the sports centre into perpetual shade.
This summer's skate sessions were amongst the best but the endless rain was a drag.
1986
Because of the condition of the ramp, action this year got off to a slow start with the ramp's resurfacing being the prime objective.
This year Farnborough skateboard club is reformed again with Doug Cameron as the main man co-ordinating the years comp.
Kevin Stabb from the USA was over in the jam, or was it an illusion?
More new blood was emerging.
This was the time when a younger Jason Lunn and Pete Dossett would have been seen skating at Farnborough.
1986 was also the year of more TV coverage.
SPLASH came down to view Europe's best after the European Championships at Warrington.
Puttis was the only non-Brit to turn up.
Most of the locals made an appearance ramp skating on the telly which looked quite good but the street skating bit was quite lame.
1987
Farnborough decides to get a metal surface.
Many people's good intentions go to pot as Ian Cocking does the work virtually single handed.
This was also the year when the exodus away from Farnborough began.
Southsea was the main attraction but Latimer Road contributed to drawing away the London skaters.
This is probably the last of what can be described as a traditional Farnborough year, although many of the old faces were disappearing, many new faces were emerging too.
Many of the now Bracknell scene were starting to skate Farnborough this year as were West Byfleet and Fleet skate scenes.
1988
The final improvement is made to the ramp by platforming all of the remaining unplatformed lip and adding a small tombstone.
A comp is held by popular demand, but although there was a good turnout by competitors and supporters, it seemed as if the old Farnborough magic had gone forever despite some damn radical action from Jeff Hedges.
1989
The new ramp at Bracknell draws away any half-way decent vert skaters that were still skating Farnborough except the Fleet skaters, in particular Mike Bews who was keeping some old Farnborough traditions going with some hard core skating.
The only person from the old skateboard club still around on the Farnborough scene (Ian Cocking) transfers control of the ramp to the council who decided to close the ramp immediately by placing skips on the ramp.
Ian Cocking just about manages to persuade the council that the ramp is worth keeping so the ramp is fixed up but a botch job on one piece of coping makes any trick other then just plain rock 'n' rolls virtually impossible.
This year Farnborough also has a skate scene emerging from Farnborough itself for the first time since about 1981.
1990
The surface of the ramp especially around the low section starts peeling up.
The ramp begins to be known as the cheese grater.
The ramp is still heavily used despite it's small transitions and general condition.
Endless letters to the council about the state of the ramp and the botch job on the coping are ignored but the council decided to install some close circuit TV for a good proportion of what repairs to the ramp would have cost.
Mini ramps and midi ramps in the nearby area in conjunction with the Farnborough pipe accelerate the development of the new locals particularly Mark Potter and Brian Saunders.
Mike Bews was just getting better and better and is beginning to look like the making of yet another pro reared in Farnborough.
The local skaters take it upon themselves to remove some dangerous panelling designed to withstand loose board, however the local council see this as an act of vandalism and feeling are strong amongst some councillors to get rid of the ramp.
The incorrectly fitted coping is sorted out by the skaters allowing full skate action to commence but not for long.
Eventually an accident happens on the dangerous peeling metal surface, the council inspect the ramp and decide to close it.
The skips go on and they don't come off, and in early October the ramp is gone.
Rumours are that it may reappear somewhere else, perhaps Basingstoke, but who knows?
1991
Last word from the local council was that they were in favour of providing some form of skateboard facility.
It also seems as if they are at last more prepared to listen to the needs of the local skaters and on top of this a local developer has pledged ten thousand pounds towards the new facility so the future don't look so gloomy after all.
Memories…
‘Farnborough was one of the major ramps in English skate history.
It was always there and a good time.’
…Sean Goff.
‘I have many good memories of fun ramp sessions, especially on Friday evenings and the weekends.
A sad loss to English skating history.’
…Shane Rouse.
‘Farnborough is where it all began for a lot of people.
It was visited by numerous American Pros and hosted various competitions which will always be remembered by a lot of skaters and spectators, you know who you are.
May it never be forgotten.’
…Mark Abrook.
‘A place where all the skaters were long standing friends, a personal learning ground, where recognised skaters of today blossomed and a whole lot of fun.’
…Barry Abrook.
‘It was the biggest small ramp of its time and there was always a good long hard grinding session happening with all my bros from near and far.’
…Gary Lee.
Shane Rouse, floating frontside during the Summer of 1982.
Ian Cocking, frontside ollie, 1981.
Neil Blender, one of the first US pros to visit Farnborough.
Handplant, 1983
1983
Danny Webster, early Caballerial, 1983
Joe Evans, one of the regular locals, till he moved to Texas.
Sweeper, 1983.
Check the coping.
Real pool stuff.
The then youthful Gary Lee, backside.
1983
1984
Claus Grabke, on a visit during 1984
A young Barry Abrook and frontside rock in 1985.
No bum fluff yet!
Sean Goff goofing around in his pyjamas at the Whiplash 2 comp around 1985.
Vintage Steve Douglas pushing the limits of the fake ollie at the Whiplash comp. 1985.
Danny blasting a frigid air on the now 32 ft wide ramp.
ABOVE: The ramp in 1985.
BELOW: Lance Mountain popped over in 1984.
Lucien Hendrickse sadding a plant during the comp in 1986.
Bod, method air, 1986.
A real local, Ian Cocking, layback air during 1988.
The metal surface being put on in 1987.
Note mainly rollerskaters helping.
Neil Danns, 1988
Davie Phillips, mid full tilt backside boneless. 1988.
1990
FAREWELL TO DISCO DAN-Z'S
Story and Photos by Meany.
Threatened with imminent closure — his prime Liverpool city centre ramp was needed for something far less interestin' — Neil Danns threw a skate jam/party to leave a few good memories of what, despite the ramp's inadequacies was the focus of the local skate scene.
Patched together from the remnants of the Docklands ramp which some yonks back had been acquired by Neil, Liverpool's mini was a pretty unconventional affair — big transistors tweaked with smaller ones, no more then a few feet of flat bottom — and it rode like a ditch.
It's weird dimensions were merely the result of maximum usage of the available space and materials…it was punk and we loved it.
Unfortunately, all good things come to an end and, as expected sooner or later, our ramp would be sucked off to the great skatepark graveyard in the sky to join Chester, Warrington, Preston, Rhyl , etc.…everything this part of the country ever gets.
Being as Liverpool had never seen a skate comp before, the atmosphere at Dan-Z's was riotous — even though it was only a mini ramp.
To add a bit of spice to the proceedings a sketchy transition had been tacked on one end of the ramp and that was the main focus of attention, especially in the grown-ups group.
The under 16's, or whatever the category was, were mostly content with rock fakie, tail tap, rock fakie, tail tap, melan type runs.
Young H from Wallasey was a pretty major exception to this rule — he did the drop in of doom off the extension to flat bottom hipper, slashed about did mass ollies onto the extension, laybacks, wore an agnostic Front tee, and generally skated like he'd been around since the sevs and was a dwarf just pretending to be under 16.
Most of the time he was on the ramp the crowd was screamin'!
The other noticeable youngster was Tez.
He was a different type of skater but he did plenty of modern lip stuff including backside smith stop to fakie, and much other to-fakie weirdness.
No-one was quite sure whether they were meant to be in fancy dress but anyhow there were a couple decent Santa's, a smith grinding policeman, and a ridiculous looking Dave ‘Kowabunga-Mutant-Ninja-Turtle-Most-Unfortunately-named-clothing-company-of-the-century’ Davis, dressed in poncho and sombrero.
Taking the biscuit though was Mr Andy Preston who donned a ridiculously extravagant full length [right down over his board]Easter Island statue disguise and dropped in.
After making it across the ramp once, unable to see where the hell he was going, he slammed like a sack of spuds.
Wotta hero!
Midway through the afternoon there was the longest grind comp, in which dreadlocked local favourite Colin was beaten surprisingly by Richie, the Pete Rodgers for the nineties, whose reliably long stand-ups proved too much for everyone else.
Then, with the coffee and barmcakes running low it was onto the finals.
Neil and D. Davis didn't bother entering the comp so as to give everyone else a chance…and I can't really think of anyone who particularly merits a mention…oh, apart from Z-boy Fez who wore stripy skin tight trousers and looked ridiculous…don't know the results — and hey!
Where were the betties?
Page from Jargon of Delinquents 'zine.
Jeff, one foot ollie tailgrab.
Just how many people have gotten their mug into a skate mag doing this anyhow?
Dave Davies wearing what might be considered to be his next Kowabunga range.
On the other hand, it's not.
Yippy skippy yip.
As the captions become crazier and the photos become larger, the  skaters' names become smaller.
This guy is simply known as H.
There must be a song about a guy named Colin somewhere in the great existence of music.
But then again, there aren't that many words rhyming with ‘Colin’ are there?
Unlike Brian, of course.
This guy — Colin — rocking all over the extension.
Andy Preston came dressed as an Eater Island Statue — and slammed as hard as one too.
You'd be forgiven for thinking that Meany's camera equipment probably went ‘crunch’ on this one.
But with lightning reflexes Meany pulled the gear well clear of Robbie Recipe's sweeper, yet still took this shot.
Professional.
Pure pro.
Er…forgot who this is…so let's just give him the popular name ‘Local’, when in fact he probably isn't.
But however, he is doing a wheeler typo thing, almost a grind, atop the extension.
He's a Z-Boy.
Australia
A pictorial of some sorts, down under.
All Photos by David Pang.
Byron Convey, stalefish, Fairfield Ramp.
I think I met his persian cat once, during a persian cat fair in Paris.
The end of a long day…
Micheal Mullhil, Mute air, Woden ACT Ramp.
Trevor King, backside carve, Woden ACT bowl.
Blake Convey, ollie grab, mini ramp, ACT.
Micheal Donovan, handrail, Fyshwick ACT.
Patch Nugent, air to fakie, mini ramp, tucked somewhere in someone's backyard in some town, some state.
TOP: Oh lordy, what a fine pool, let's take a dive and swim.
Not quite — the Bowl in Woden, ACT is a super example of post modern day victorian architecture.
Lovely.
ABOVE LEFT: Jamie Vanberr, ollie with his front side up, to tail, in Erindale.
ABOVE CENTRE: John Finlay, with a slashbackgnarler, frontside, Curb N' Coping, his shop in Sydney.
ABOVE RIGHT: That man Lee Ralph, Smith wearing-down-his trucks stunt, Riot contest/ramp.
Jamie Vanberr (again?) performing his wonder magician-like trickery.
Cut the crap — he's doing a handrail down a flight of steps, that's all.
Woden, ACT.
Corey O'Brien, smithy smith smith smith.
So nur.
What?
You want to know where?
All right then, St Mary's ramp, NSW.
RIGHT: Micheal Luzar, a stoinking good freestyle move.
Ollieing, grabbing, twisting, landing.
Hot.
He's cool.
St Mary's, NSW.
BOTTOM: Fnnnar, beside that, Cameron Black tweaks with the power of a rhino on heat off this fly-off.
Some street comp somewhere.
BELOW: Rob Whallan — this Tailside won the vote of the judges, enabling him to win victory during the World Baseball Invitational.
What a man.
Woden ramp, ACT.
1000 WORDS
A picture is worth…
Ed Templeton.
Bin Ollie from pool.
Ca, USA. •Kline.
Florian Bohm.
Germany.
•Thomas Kalak.
Mike Crumb.
Phillips' Park, Dallas.
•Paul Duffy.
Local, Peanut Bowl, Texas.
•Paul Duffy.
Mark Heintzman.
Melanchollie, curb.
•Florian Bohm.
Omar Hassan, mini ramp, CA, USA. •Brad McDonald.
Dave Davies, smithy in Texas.
•Paul Duffy.
Alan Bird, front truck grind, Chico, Ca, USA. •Brad McDonald.
Gator, mini ramp, Ca, USA. •Brad McDonald.
Mail
A while ago, Skateboard! used to run a letters page — well, it's back.
Witness the re-birth of the SB!
Mail Page.
Read typical and not so typical letter fare from people just like you — readers.
and if these people, who are just like you, write in and have their letters printed here, why can't you write in and receive the same treatment?
Published satisfaction.
Of course, not just any old fart can write in with ‘please sir, some stickers please’ and hope to get anything printed — we need good solid letter writing about anything you feel like in the skateboard world.
For instance, tell us about your scene, ask why things happen or don't, send us a few photos, whatever.
Up to you.
S E N D:
Skateboard!
Mail, PO BOX 1300, DORCHESTER, DORSET, DT1 11FN.
Sponsorship
Dear SB!
Myself and a mate are making a video in the hope of sponsorship, even if it is just some wheels or something.
So we were wondering if you would send us some addresses of skateboard companies that might sponsor us, eg Powell, Santa Cruz or someone.
We are doing this because some kids always tell us ‘oh, we can do that but with my legs tied behind my back’ which can be very annoying.
We would be very grateful if you could send us addresses, unless you would be interested in sponsoring two young, budding 16 year old skaters.
Yours thrashingly Darran Miles.
Bournemouth Dorset
For one, we don't sponsor skaters, so you can count us out there.
Next, if you want to try to get sponsorship then write to the importers or dealers in this country — their addresses are in the ads of this magazine — don't try writing direct to the USA, they won't want to know.
Videos are an idea, but make sure they are good.
Anyway, I'm sure that those people you know who can skate with their legs tied behind their backs are definitely worthy of flowage.
SB!
PRINCE'S TRUSS
Dear sir,
I am writing on behalf of the Princes Trust Community Venture in Cornwall.
For part of our course we have to organise a community project, which entails fundraising and planning.
We considered several ideas but the one we felt to be most beneficial to the local community was a skateboard ramp/halfpipe.
We are therefore looking for sponsors to help the project.
Hopefully this may lead to publicity for these benefactors.
Yours sincerely Vikki Anderson 3–5 Commercial Square, Camborne Cornwall, TR14 8DY
You could try writing to a ramp builder, like Rare Unit or Freestyle Ramps for example.
They might oblige.
Generally, sponsors for local ramps are a very rare creature indeed — local fund raising is definitely the best way to pay for a ramp.
Or, you could privatise it and charge for skate sessions, but making it successful this way is a hard slog, what with the initial funding for equipment, paying to keep the ramps skateable, and improving the park, all out of skate session fees.
Ask Scoff.
So, go for fund raising.
and good luck!
SB!
RACISM
Dear Steve Kane,
I have just read your piece about this year's Munster competition.
As the English might say: what a load of bollocks!
It's a shame that someone as obviously capable of expressing himself as you is given to such bursts of undisguised racism and ignorance.
I mean, when was the last time ANYBODY bothered mentioning the War in any public forum, let alone in a skateboard magazine?
Mind you, it's not such a surprise coming from one who is self-confessedly arrogant and opinionated and whose only accolade is that he edits a magazine.
It seems (from the recent development of your  journalistic style) that ‘editorship’ has inflated your ego to the point of eradicating your sense of judgement.
Still, the magazine looks better and better and Paul Duffy and Marco Contati take great photographs.
Hope to meet you next year,
Jonny Weber Munchen Deutschland
Thanks for the heartfelt letter Jonny.
However, Steve Kane is no longer on Skateboard! 's staff.
SB!
A bit more retrospective — Ian Cocking, f/s ollie, Farnborough, 1983.