

Memes: the new replicators
So far, I have not talked much about man in particular, though I have not deliberately excluded him either.
Part of the reason I have used the term ‘survival machine’ is that ‘animal’would have left out plants and, in some people's minds, humans.
The arguments I have put forward should, prima facie, apply to any evolved being.
If a species is to be excepted, it must be for good particular reasons.
Are there any good reasons for supposing our own species to be unique?
I believe the answer is yes.
Most of what is unusual about man can be summed up in one word: ‘culture’.
I use the word not in its snobbish sense, but as a scientist uses it.
Cultural transmission is analogous to genetic transmission in that, although basically conservative, it can give rise to a form of evolution.
Geoffrey Chaucer could not hold a conversation with a modern Englishman, even though they are linked to each other by an unbroken chain of some twenty generations of Englishmen, each of whom could speak to his immediate neighbours in the chain as a son speaks to his father.
Language seems to ‘evolve’ by non-genetic means, and at a rate which is orders of magnitude faster than genetic evolution.
Cultural transmission is not unique to man.
The best non-human example that I know has recently been described by P. F. Jenkins in the song of a bird called the saddleback which lives on islands off New Zealand.
On the island where he worked there was a total repertoire of about nine distinct songs.
Any given male sang only one or a few of these songs.
The males could be classified into dialect groups.
For example, one group of eight males with neighbouring territories sang a particular song called the CC song.
Other dialect groups sang different songs.
Sometimes the members of a dialect group shared more than one distinct song.
By comparing the songs of fathers and sons, Jenkins showed that song patterns were not inherited genetically.
Each young male was likely to adopt songs from his territorial neighbours by imitation, in an analogous way to human language.
During most of the time Jenkins was there, there was a fixed number of songs on the island, a kind of ‘song pool’ from which each young male drew his own small repertoire.
But occasionally Jenkins was privileged to witness the ‘invention’ of a new song, which occurred by a mistake in the imitation of an old one.
He writes: ‘New song forms have been shown to arise variously by change of pitch of a note, repetition of a note, the elision of notes and the combination of parts of other existing songs…
The appearance of the new form was an abrupt event and the product was quite stable over a period of years.
Further, in a number of cases the variant was transmitted accurately in its new form to younger recruits so that a recognizably coherent group of like singers developed.’
Jenkins refers to the origins of new songs as ‘cultural mutations’.
Song in the saddleback truly evolves by non-genetic means.
There are other examples of cultural evolution in birds and monkeys, but these are just interesting oddities.
It is our own species that really shows what cultural evolution can do.
Language is only one example out of many.
Fashions in dress and diet, ceremonies and customs, art and architecture, engineering and technology, all evolve in historical time in a way that looks like highly speeded up genetic evolution, but has really nothing to do with genetic evolution.
As in genetic evolution though, the change may be progressive.
There is a sense in which modern science is actually better than ancient science.
Not only does our understanding of the universe change as the centuries go by: it improves.
Admittedly the current burst of improvement dates back only to the Renaissance, which was preceded by a dismal period of stagnation, in which European scientific culture was frozen at the level achieved by the Greeks.
But, as we saw in Chapter 5, genetic evolution too may proceed as a series of brief spurts between stable plateaux.
The analogy between cultural and genetic evolution has frequently been pointed out, sometimes in the context of quite unnecessary mystical overtones.
The analogy between scientific progress and genetic evolution by natural selection has been illuminated especially by Sir Karl Popper.
I want to go even further into directions which are also being explored by, for example, the geneticist L. L. Cavalli-Sforza, the anthropologist F. T. Cloak, and the ethologist J. M. Cullen.
As an enthusiastic Darwinian, I have been dissatisfied with explanations that my fellow-enthusiasts have offered for human behaviour.
They have tried to look for ‘biological advantages’ in various attributes of human civilization.
For instance, tribal religion has been seen as a mechanism for solidifying group identity, valuable for a pack-hunting species whose individuals rely on cooperation to catch large and fast prey.
Frequently the evolutionary preconception in terms of which such theories are framed is implicitly group-selectionist, but it is possible to rephrase the theories in terms of orthodox gene selection.
Man may well have spent large portions of the last several million years living in small kin groups.
Kin selection and selection in favour of reciprocal altruism may have acted on human genes to produce many of our basic psychological attributes and tendencies.
These ideas are plausible as far as they go, but I find that they do not begin to square up to the formidable challenge of explaining culture, cultural evolution, and the immense differences between human cultures around the world, from the utter selfishness of the Ik of Uganda, as described by Colin Turnbull, to the gentle altruism of Margaret Mead's Arapesh.
I think we have got to start again and go right back to first principles.
The argument I shall advance, surprising as it may seem coming from the author of the earlier chapters, is that, for an understanding of the evolution of modern man, we must begin by throwing out the gene as the sole basis of our ideas on evolution.
I am an enthusiastic Darwinian, but I think Darwinism is too big a theory to be confined to the narrow context of the gene.
The gene will enter my thesis as an analogy, nothing more.
What, after all, is so special about genes?
The answer is that they are replicators.
The laws of physics are supposed to be true all over the accessible universe.
Are there any principles of biology that are likely to have similar universal validity?
When astronauts voyage to distant planets and look for life, they can expect to find creatures too strange and unearthly for us to imagine.
But is there anything that must be true of all life, wherever it is found, and whatever the basis of its chemistry?
If forms of life exist whose chemistry is based on silicon rather than carbon, or ammonia rather than water, if creatures are discovered that boil to death at — 100 degrees centigrade, if a form of life is found that is not based on chemistry at all but on electronic reverberating circuits, will there still be any general principle that is true of all life?
Obviously I do not know but, if I had to bet, I would put my money on one fundamental principle.
This is the law that all life evolves by the differential survival of replicating entities.
The gene, the DNA molecule, happens to be the replicating entity that prevails on our own planet.
There may be others.
If there are, provided certain other conditions are met, they will almost inevitably tend to become the basis for an evolutionary process.
But do we have to go to distant worlds to find other kinds of replicator and other, consequent, kinds of evolution?
I think that a new kind of replicator has recently emerged on this very planet.
It is staring us in the face.
It is still in its infancy, still drifting clumsily about in its primeval soup, but already it is achieving evolutionary change at a rate that leaves the old gene panting far behind.
The new soup is the soup of human culture.
We need a name for the new replicator, a noun that conveys the idea of a unit of cultural transmission, or a unit of imitation .
‘Mimeme’ comes from a suitable Greek root, but I want a monosyllable that sounds a bit like ‘gene’.
I hope my classicist friends will forgive me if I abbreviate mimeme to meme .
If it is any consolation, it could alternatively be thought of as being related to ‘memory’, or to the French word ‘même’.
It should be pronounced to rhyme with ‘cream’.
Examples of memes are tunes, ideas, catch-phrases, clothes fashions, ways of making pots or of building arches.
Just as genes propagate themselves in the gene pool by leaping from body to body via sperms or eggs, so memes propagate themselves in the meme pool by leaping from brain to brain via a process which, in the broad sense, can be called imitation.
If a scientist hears, or reads about, a good idea, he passes it on to his colleagues and students.
He mentions it in his articles and his lectures.
If the idea  catches on, it can be said to propagate itself, spreading from brain to brain.
As my colleague N.K. Humphrey neatly summed up an earlier draft of this chapter; ‘…memes should be regarded as living structures, not just metaphorically but technically.
When you plant a fertile meme in my mind you literally parasitize my brain, turning it into a vehicle for the meme's propagation in just the way that a virus may parasitize the genetic mechanism of a host cell.
And this isn't just a way of talking — the meme for, say, ‘belief in life after death’ is actually realized physically, millions of times over, as a structure in the nervous systems of individual men the world over.’
Consider the idea of God.
We do not know how it arose in the meme pool.
Probably it originated many times by independent ‘mutation’.
In any case, it is very old indeed.
How does it replicate itself?
By the spoken and written word, aided by great music and great art.
Why does it have such high survival value?
Remember that ‘survival value’ here does not mean value for a gene in a gene pool, but value for a meme in a meme pool.
The question really means: What is it about the idea of a god that gives it its stability and penetrance in the cultural environment?
The survival value of the god meme in the meme pool results from its great psychological appeal.
It provides a superficially plausible answer to deep and troubling questions about existence.
It suggests that injustices in this world may be rectified in the next.
The ‘everlasting arms’ hold out a cushion against our own inadequacies which, like a doctor's placebo, is none the less effective for being imaginary.
These are some of the reasons why the idea of God is copied so readily by successive generations of individual brains.
God exists, if only in the form of a meme with high survival value, or infective power, in the environment provided by human culture.
Some of my colleagues have suggested to me that this account of the survival value of the god meme begs the question.
In the last analysis they wish always to go back to ‘biological advantage’.
To them it is not good enough to say that the idea of a god has ‘great psychological appeal’.
They want to know why it has great psychological appeal.
Psychological appeal means appeal to brains, and brains are shaped by natural selection of genes in gene-pools.
They want to find some way in which having a brain like that improves gene survival.
I have a lot of sympathy with this attitude, and I do not doubt that there are genetic advantages in our having brains of the kind that we have.
But nevertheless I think that these colleagues, if they look carefully at the fundamentals of their own assumptions, will find that they are begging just as many questions as I am.
Fundamentally, the reason why it is good policy for us to try to explain biological phenomena in terms of gene advantage is that genes are replicators.
As soon as the primeval soup provided conditions in which molecules could make copies of themselves, the replicators themselves took over.
For more than three thousand million years, DNA has been the only replicator worth talking about in the world.
But it does not necessarily hold these monopoly rights for all time.
Whenever conditions arise in which a new kind of replicator can make copies of itself, the new replicators will tend to take over, and start a new kind of evolution of their own.
Once this new evolution begins, it will in no necessary sense be subservient to the old.
The old gene-selected evolution, by making brains, provided the ‘soup’ in which the first memes arose.
Once self-copying memes had arisen, their own, much faster, kind of evolution took off.
We biologists have assimilated the idea of genetic evolution so deeply that we tend to forget that it is only one of many possible kinds of evolution.
Imitation, in the broad sense, is how memes can replicate.
But just as not all genes that can replicate do so successfully, so some memes are more successful in the meme-pool than others.
This is the analogue of natural selection.
I have mentioned particular examples of qualities that make for high survival value among memes.
But in general they must be the same as those discussed for the replicators of Chapter 2: longevity, fecundity, and copying-fidelity.
The longevity of any one copy of a meme is probably relatively unimportant, as it is for any one copy of a gene.
The copy of the tune ‘Auld Lang Syne’ that exists in my brain will last only for the rest of my life.
The copy of the same tune that is printed in my volume of The Scottish Student's Song Book is unlikely to last much longer.
But I expect there will be copies of the same tune on paper and in peoples' brains for centuries to come.
As in the case of genes, fecundity is much more important than longevity of particular copies.
If the meme is a scientific idea, its spread will depend on how acceptable it is to the population of individual scientists; a rough measure of its survival value could be obtained by counting the number of times it is referred to in successive years in scientific journals.
If it is a popular tune, its spread through the meme pool may be gauged by the number of people heard whistling it in the streets.
If it is a style of women's shoe, the population memeticist may use sales statistics from shoe shops.
Some memes, like some genes, achieve brilliant short-term success in spreading rapidly, but do not last long in the meme pool.
Popular songs and stiletto heels are examples.
Others, such as the Jewish religious laws, may continue to propagate themselves for thousands of years, usually because of the great potential permanence of written records.
This brings me to the third general quality of successful replicators: copying-fidelity.
Here I must admit that I am on shaky ground.
At first sight it looks as if memes are not high-fidelity replicators at all.
Every time a scientist hears an idea and passes it on to somebody else, he is likely to change it somewhat.
I have made no secret of my debt in this book to the ideas of R. L. Trivers.
Yet I have not repeated them in his own words.
I have twisted them round for my own purposes, changing the emphasis, blending them with ideas of my own and of other people.
The memes are being passed on to you in altered form.
This looks quite unlike the particulate, all-or-none quality of gene transmission.
It looks as though meme transmission is subject to continuous mutation, and also to blending.
It is possible that this appearance of non-particulateness is illusory, and that the analogy with genes does not break down.
After all, if we look at the inheritance of many genetic characters such as human height or skin-colouring, it does not look like the work of indivisible and unblendable genes.
If a black and a white person mate, their children do not come out either black or white: they are intermediate.
This does not mean the genes concerned are not particulate.
It is just that there are so many of them concerned with skin colour, each one having such a small effect, that they seem to blend.
So far I have talked of memes as though it was obvious what a single unit-meme consisted of.
But of course it is far from obvious.
I have said a tune is one meme, but what about a symphony: how many memes is that?
Is each movement one meme, each recognizable phrase of melody, each bar, each chord, or what?
I appeal to the same verbal trick as I used in Chapter 3.
There I divided the ‘gene complex’ into large and small genetic units, and units within units.
The ‘gene’ was defined, not in a rigid all-or-none way, but as a unit of convenience, a length of chromosome with just sufficient copying-fidelity to serve as a viable unit of natural selection.
If a single phrase of Beethoven's ninth symphony is sufficiently distinctive and memorable to be abstracted from the context of the whole symphony, and used as the call-sign of a maddeningly intrusive European broadcasting station, then to that extent it deserves to be called one meme.
It has, incidentally, materially diminished my capacity to enjoy the original symphony.
Similarly, when we say that all biologists nowadays believe in Darwin's theory, we do not mean that every biologist has, graven in his brain, an identical copy of the exact words of Charles Darwin himself.
Each individual has his own way of interpreting Darwin's ideas.
He probably learned them not from Darwin's own writings, but from more recent authors.
Much of what Darwin said is, in detail, wrong.
Darwin if he read this book would scarcely recognize his own original theory in it, though I hope he would like the way I put it.
Yet, in spite of all this, there is something, some essence of Darwinism, which is present in the head of every individual who understands the theory.
If this were not so, then almost any statement about two people agreeing with each other would be meaningless.
An ‘idea-meme’ might be defined as an entity that is capable of being transmitted from one brain to another.
The meme of Darwin's theory is therefore that essential basis of the idea which is held in common by all brains that understand the theory.
The differences in the ways that people represent the theory are then, by definition, not part of the meme.
If Darwin's theory can be sub-divided into components, such that some people believe component A but not component B , while others believe B but not A , then A and B should be regarded as separate memes.
If almost everybody who believes in A also believes in B — if the memes are closely ‘linked’ to use the genetic term — then it is convenient to lump them together as one meme.
Let us pursue the analogy between memes and genes further.
Throughout this book, I have emphasized that we must not think of genes as conscious, purposeful agents.
Blind natural selection, however, makes them behave rather as if they were purposeful, and it has been convenient, as a shorthand, to refer to genes in the language of purpose.
For example, when we say ‘genes are trying to increase their numbers in future gene pools’, what we really mean is ‘those genes that behave in such a way as to increase their numbers in future gene pools tend to be the genes whose effects we see in the world’.
Just as we have found it convenient to think of genes as active agents, working purposefully for their own survival, perhaps it might be convenient to think of memes in the same way.
In neither case must we get mystical about it.
In both cases the idea of purpose is only a metaphor, but we have already seen what a fruitful metaphor it is in the case of genes.
We have even used words like ‘selfish’ and ‘ruthless’of genes, knowing full well it is only a figure of speech.
Can we, in exactly the same spirit, look for selfish or ruthless memes?
There is a problem here concerning the nature of competition.
Where there is sexual reproduction, each gene is competing particularly with its own alleles — rivals for the same chromosomal slot.
Memes seem to have nothing equivalent to chromosomes, and nothing equivalent to alleles.
I suppose there is a trivial sense in which many ideas can be said to have ‘opposites’.
But in general memes resemble the early replicating molecules, floating chaotically free in the primeval soup, rather than modern genes in their neatly paired, chromosomal regiments.
In what sense then are memes competing with each other?
Should we expect them to be ‘selfish’ or ‘ruthless’, if they have no alleles?
The answer is that we might, because there is a sense in which they must indulge in a kind of competition with each other.
Any user of a digital computer knows how precious computer time and memory storage space are.
At many large computer centres they are literally costed in money; or each user may be allotted a ration of time, measured in seconds, and a ration of space, measured in ‘words’.
The computers in which memes live are human brains.
Time is possibly a more important limiting factor than storage space, and it is the subject of heavy competition.
The human brain, and the body that it controls, cannot do more than one or a few things at once.
If a meme is to dominate the attention of a human brain, it must do so at the expense of ‘rival’ memes.
Other commodities for which memes compete are radio and television time, billboard space, newspaper column-inches, and library shelf-space.
In the case of genes, we saw in Chapter 3 that co-adapted gene complexes may arise in the gene pool.
A large set of genes concerned with mimicry in butterflies became tightly linked together on the same chromosome, so tightly that they can be treated as one gene.
In Chapter 5 we met the more sophisticated idea of the evolutionarily stable set of genes.
Mutually suitable teeth, claws, guts, and sense organs evolved in carnivore gene pools, while a different stable set of characteristics emerged from herbivore gene pools.
Does anything analogous occur in meme pools?
Has the god meme, say, become associated with any other particular memes, and does this association assist the survival of each of the participating memes?
Perhaps we could regard an organized church, with its architecture, rituals, laws, music, art, and written tradition, as a co-adapted stable set of mutually-assisting memes.
To take a particular example, an aspect of doctrine that has been very effective in enforcing religious observance is the threat of hell fire.
Many children and even some adults believe that they will suffer ghastly torments after death if they do not obey the priestly rules.
This is a peculiarly nasty technique of persuasion, causing great psychological anguish throughout the middle ages and even today.
But it is highly effective.
It might almost have been planned deliberately by a machiavellian priesthood trained in deep psychological indoctrination techniques.
However, I doubt if the priests were that clever.
Much more probably, unconscious memes have ensured their own survival by virtue of those same qualities of pseudo-ruthlessness that successful genes display.
The idea of hell fire is, quite simply,self perpetuating , because of its own deep psychological impact.
It has become linked with the god meme because the two reinforce each other, and assist each other 's survival in the meme pool.
Another member of the religious meme complex is called faith.
It means blind trust, in the absence of evidence, even in the teeth of evidence.
The story of Doubting Thomas is told, not so that we shall admire Thomas, but so that we can admire the other apostles in comparison.
Thomas demanded evidence.
Nothing is more lethal for certain kinds of meme than a tendency to look for evidence.
The other apostles, whose faith was so strong that they did not need evidence, are held up to us as worthy of imitation.
The meme for blind faith secures its own perpetuation by the simple unconscious expedient of discouraging rational inquiry.
Blind faith can justify anything.
If a man believes in a different god, or even if he uses a different ritual for worshipping the same god, blind faith can decree that he should die — on the cross, at the stake, skewered on a Crusader's sword, shot in a Beirut street, or blown up in a bar in Belfast.
Memes for blind faith have their own ruthless ways of propagating themselves.
This is true of patriotic and political as well as religious blind faith.
Memes and genes may often reinforce each other, but they sometimes come into opposition.
For example, the habit of celibacy is presumably not inherited genetically.
A gene for celibacy is doomed to failure in the gene pool, except under very special circumstances such as we find in the social insects.
But still, a meme for celibacy can be successful in the meme pool.
For example, suppose the success of a meme depends critically on how much time people spend in actively transmitting it to other people.
Any time spent in doing other things than attempting to transmit the meme may be regarded as time wasted from the meme's point of view.
The meme for celibacy is transmitted by priests to young boys who have not yet decided what they want to do with their lives.
The medium of transmission is human influence of various kinds, the spoken and written word, personal example and so on.
Suppose, for the sake of argument, it happened to be the case that marriage weakened the power of a priest to influence his flock, say because it occupied a large proportion of his time and attention.
This has, indeed, been advanced as an official reason for the enforcement of celibacy among priests.
If this were the case, it would follow that the meme for celibacy could have greater survival value than the meme for marriage.
Of course, exactly the opposite would be true for a gene for celibacy.
If a priest is a survival machine for memes, celibacy is a useful attribute to build into him.
Celibacy is just a minor partner in a large complex of mutually-assisting religious memes.
I conjecture that co-adapted meme-complexes evolve in the same kind of way as co-adapted gene-complexes.
Selection favours memes that exploit their cultural environment to their own advantage.
This cultural environment consists of other memes which are also being selected.
The meme pool therefore comes to have the attributes of an evolutionarily stable set, which new memes find it hard to invade.
I have been a bit negative about memes, but they have their cheerful side as well.
When we die there are two things we can leave behind us: genes and memes.
We were built as gene machines, created to pass on our genes.
But that aspect of us will be forgotten in three generations.
Your child, even your grandchild, may bear a resemblance to you, perhaps in facial features, in a talent for music, in the colour of her hair.
But as each generation passes, the contribution of your genes is halved.
It does not take long to reach negligible proportions.
Our genes may be immortal but the collection of genes that is any one of us is bound to crumble away.
Elizabeth II is a direct descendant of William the Conqueror.
Yet it is quite probable that she bears not a single one of the old king's genes.
We should not seek immortality in reproduction.
But if you contribute to the world's culture, if you have a good idea, compose a tune, invent a sparking plug, write a poem, it may live on, intact, long after your genes have dissolved in the common pool.
Socrates may or may not have a gene or two alive in the world today, as G. C. Williams has remarked, but who cares?
The meme-complexes of Socrates, Leonardo, Copernicus and Marconi are still going strong.
However speculative my development of the theory of memes may be, there is one serious point which I would like to emphasize once again.
This is that when we look at the evolution of cultural traits and at their survival value, we must be clear whose survival we are talking about.
Biologists, as we have seen, are accustomed to looking for advantages at the gene level (or the individual, the group, or the species level according to taste).
What we have not previously considered is that a cultural trait may have evolved in the way that it has, simply because it is advantageous to itself .
We do not have to look for conventional biological survival values of traits like religion, music, and ritual dancing, though these may also be present.
Once the genes have provided their survival machines with brains that are capable of rapid imitation, the memes will automatically take over.
We do not even have to posit a genetic advantage in imitation, though that would certainly help.
All that is necessary is that the brain should be capable of imitation: memes will then evolve that exploit the capability to the full.
I now close the topic of the new replicators, and end the chapter on a note of qualified hope.
One unique feature of man, which may or may not have evolved memically; is his capacity for conscious foresight.
Selfish genes (and, if you allow the speculation of this chapter, memes too) have no foresight.
They are unconscious, blind, replicators.
The fact that they replicate, together with certain further conditions means, willy nilly, that they will tend towards the evolution of qualities which, in the special sense of this book, can be called selfish.
A simple replicator, whether gene or meme, cannot be expected to forgo short-term selfish advantage even if it would really pay it, in the long term, to do so.
We saw this in the chapter on aggression.
Even though a ‘conspiracy of doves’ would be better for every single individual than the evolutionarily stable strategy, natural selection is bound to favour the ESS.
It is possible that yet another unique quality of man is a capacity for genuine, disinterested, true altruism.
I hope so, but I am not going to argue the case one way or the other, nor to speculate over its possible memic evolution.
The point I am making now is that, even if we look on the dark side and assume that individual man is fundamentally selfish, our conscious foresight — our capacity to simulate the future in imagination — could save us from the worst selfish excesses of the blind replicators.
We have at least the mental equipment to foster our long-term selfish interests rather than merely our short-term selfish interests.
We can see the long-term benefits of participating in a ‘conspiracy of doves’, and we can sit down together to discuss ways of making the conspiracy work.
We have the power to defy the selfish genes of our birth and, if necessary, the selfish memes of our indoctrination.
We can even discuss ways of deliberately cultivating and nurturing pure, disinterested altruism — something that has no place in nature, something that has never existed before in the whole history of the world.
We are built as gene machines and cultured as meme machines, but we have the power to turn against our creators.
We, alone on earth, can rebel against the tyranny of the selfish replicators.
Nice guys finish first
Nice guys finish last.
The phrase seems to have originated in the world of baseball, although some authorities claim priority for an alternative connotation.
The American biologist Garrett Hardin used it to summarize the message of what may be called ‘sociobiology’ or ‘selfish genery’.
It is easy to see its aptness.
If we translate the colloquial meaning of ‘nice guy’ into its Darwinian equivalent, a nice guy is an individual that assists other members of its species, at its own expense, to pass their genes on to the next generation.
Nice guys, then, seem bound to decrease in numbers: niceness dies a Darwinian death.
But there is another, technical, interpretation of the colloquial word ‘nice’.
If we adopt this definition, which is not too far from the colloquial meaning, nice guys can finish first .
This more optimistic conclusion is what this chapter is about.
Remember the Grudgers of Chapter 10.
These were birds that helped each other in an apparently altruistic way, but refused to help — bore a grudge against — individuals that had previously refused to help them.
Grudgers came to dominate the population because they passed on more genes to future generations than either Suckers (who helped others indiscriminately, and were exploited) or Cheats (who tried ruthlessly to exploit everybody and ended up doing each other down).
The story of the Grudgers illustrated an important general principle, which Robert Trivers called ‘reciprocal altruism’.
As we saw in the example of the cleaner fish (pages 186–7), reciprocal altruism is not confined to members of a single species.
It is at work in all relationships that are called symbiotic — for instance the ants milking their aphid ‘cattle’(page 181).
Since Chapter 10 was written, the American political scientist Robert Axelrod (working partly in collaboration with W. D. Hamilton, whose name has cropped up on so many pages of this book), has taken the idea of reciprocal altruism on in exciting new directions.
It was Axelrod who coined the technical meaning of the word ‘nice’ to which I alluded in my opening paragraph.
Axelrod, like many political scientists, economists, mathematicians and psychologists, was fascinated by a simple gambling game called Prisoner's Dilemma.
It is so simple that I have known clever men misunderstand it completely, thinking that there must be more to it!
But its simplicity is deceptive.
Whole shelves in libraries are devoted to the ramifications of this beguiling game.
Many influential people think it holds the key to strategic defence planning, and that we should study it to prevent a third world war.
As a biologist, I agree with Axelrod and Hamilton that many wild animals and plants are engaged in ceaseless games of Prisoner's Dilemma, played out in evolutionary time.
In its original, human, version, here is how the game is played.
There is a ‘banker’, who adjudicates and pays out winnings to the two players.
Suppose that I am playing against you (though, as we shall see, ‘against’ is precisely what we don't have to be).
There are only two cards in each of our hands, labelled COOPERATE and DEFECT.
To play, we each choose one of our cards and lay it face down on the table.
Face down so that neither of us can be influenced by the other's move: in effect, we move simultaneously.
We now wait in suspense for the banker to turn the cards over.
The suspense is because our winnings depend not just on which card we have played (which we each know), but on the other player's card too (which we don't know until the banker reveals it).
Since there are 2 x 2 cards, there are four possible outcomes.
For each outcome, our winnings are as follows (quoted in dollars in deference to the North American origins of the game):
Outcome I: We have both played COOPERATE.
The banker pays each of us $300.
This respectable sum is called the Reward for mutual cooperation.
Outcome II: We have both played DEFECT.
The banker fines each of us $10.
This is called the Punishment for mutual defection.
Outcome III: You have played COOPERATE; I have played DEFECT.
The banker pays me $500 (the Temptation to defect) and fines you (the Sucker) $100.
Outcome IV: You have played DEFECT; I have played COOPERATE.
The banker pays you the Temptation payoff of $500 and fines me, the Sucker, $100.
Outcomes III and IV are obviously mirror images: one player does very well and the other does very badly.
In outcomes I and II we do as well as one another, but I is better for both of us than II.
The exact quantities of money don't matter.
It doesn't even matter how many of them are positive (payments) and how many of them, if any, are negative (fines).
What matters, for the game to qualify as a true Prisoner's Dilemma, is their rank order.
The Temptation to defect must be better than the Reward for mutual cooperation, which must be better than the Punishment for mutual defection, which must be better than the Sucker's payoff.
(Strictly speaking, there is one further condition for the game to qualify as a true Prisoner's Dilemma: the average of the Temptation and the Sucker payoffs must not exceed the Reward.
The reason for this additional condition will emerge later.)
The four outcomes are summarized in the Payoff matrix in Figure A.
Now, why the ‘dilemma'?
To see this, look at the payoff matrix and imagine the thoughts that might go through my head as I play against you.
I know that there are only two cards you can play, COOPERATE and DEFECT.
Let's consider them in order.
If you have played DEFECT (this means we have to look at the right hand column), the best card I could have played would have been DEFECT too.
Admittedly I'd have suffered the penalty for mutual defection, but if I'd cooperated I'd have got the Sucker's payoff which is even worse.
Now let's turn to the other thing you could have done (look at the left hand column), play the COOPERATE card.
Once again DEFECT is the best thing I could have done.
If I had cooperated we'd both have got the rather high score of $300.
But if I'd defected I'd have got even more — $500.
The conclusion is that, regardless of which card you play, my best move is Always Defect .
So I have worked out by impeccable logic that, regardless of what you do, I must defect.
And you, with no less impeccable logic, will work out just the same thing.
So when two rational players meet, they will both defect, and both will end up with a fine or a low payoff.
Yet each knows perfectly well that, if only they had both played COOPERATE, both would have obtained the relatively high reward for mutual cooperation ($300 in our example).
That is why the game is called a dilemma, why it seems so maddeningly paradoxical, and why it has even been proposed that there ought to be a law against it.
‘Prisoner’ comes from one particular imaginary example.
The currency in this case is not money but prison sentences.
Two men — call them Peterson and Moriarty — are in jail, suspected of collaborating in a crime.
Each prisoner, in his separate cell, is invited to betray his colleague (DEFECT) by turning King's Evidence against him.
What happens depends upon what both prisoners do, and neither knows what the other has done.
If Peterson throws the blame entirely on Moriarty, and Moriarty renders the story plausible by remaining silent (cooperating with his erstwhile and, as it turns out, treacherous friend), Moriarty gets a heavy jail sentence while Peterson gets off scot-free, having yielded to the Temptation to defect.
If each betrays the other, both are convicted of the crime, but receive some credit for giving evidence and get a somewhat reduced, though still stiff, sentence, the Punishment for mutual defection.
If both cooperate (with each other, not with the authorities) by refusing to speak, there is not enough evidence to convict either of them of the main crime, and they receive a small sentence for a lesser offence, the Reward for mutual cooperation.
Although it may seem odd to call a jail sentence a ‘reward’, that is how the men would see it if the alternative was a longer spell behind bars.
You will notice that, although the ‘payoffs’ are not in dollars but in jail sentences, the essential features of the game are preserved (look at the rank order of desirability of the four outcomes).
If you put yourself in each prisoner's place, assuming both to be motivated by rational self-interest and remembering that they cannot talk to one another to make a pact, you will see that neither has any choice but to betray the other, thereby condemning both to heavy sentences.
Is there any way out of the dilemma?
Both players know that, whatever their opponent does, they themselves cannot do better than DEFECT; yet both also know that, if only both had cooperated,each one would have done better.
If only…if only…if only there could be some way of reaching agreement, some way of reassuring each player that the other can be trusted not to go for the selfish jackpot, some way of policing the agreement.
In the simple game of Prisoner's Dilemma, there is no way of ensuring trust.
Unless at least one of the players is a really saintly sucker, too good for this world, the game is doomed to end in mutual defection with its paradoxically poor result for both players.
But there is another version of the game.
It is called the ‘Iterated’ or ‘Repeated’Prisoner's Dilemma.
The iterated game is more complicated, and in its complication lies hope.
The iterated game is simply the ordinary game repeated an indefinite number of times with the same players.
Once again you and I face each other, with a banker sitting between.
Once again we each have a hand of just two cards, labelled COOPERATE and DEFECT.
Once again we move by each playing one or other of these cards and the banker shells out, or levies fines, according to the rules given above.
But now, instead of that being the end of the game, we pick up our cards and prepare for another round.
The successive rounds of the game give us the opportunity to build up trust or mistrust, to reciprocate or placate, forgive or avenge.
In an indefinitely long game, the important point is that we can both win at the expense of the banker, rather than at the expense of one another.
After ten rounds of the game, I could theoretically have won as much as $5,000, but only if you have been extraordinarily silly (or saintly) and played COOPERATE every time, in spite of the fact that I was consistently defecting.
More realistically, it is easy for each of us to pick up $3,000 of the banker's money by both playing COOPERATE on all ten rounds of the game.
For this we don't have to be particularly saintly, because we can both see, from the other's past moves, that the other is to be trusted.
We can, in effect, police each other 's behaviour.
Another thing that is quite likely to happen is that neither of us trusts the other: we both play DEFECT for all ten rounds of the game, and the banker gains $100 in fines from each of us.
Most likely of all is that we partially trust one another, and each play some mixed sequence of COOPERATE and DEFECT, ending up with some intermediate sum of money.
The birds in Chapter 10 who removed ticks from each other 's feathers were playing an iterated Prisoner's Dilemma game.
How is this so?
It is important, you remember, for a bird to pull off his own ticks, but he cannot reach the top of his own head and needs a companion to do that for him.
It would seem only fair that he should return the favour later.
But this service costs a bird time and energy, albeit not much.
If a bird can get away with cheating — with having his own ticks removed but then refusing to reciprocate — he gains all the benefits without paying the costs.
Rank the outcomes, and you'll find that indeed we have a true game of Prisoner's Dilemma.
Both cooperating (pulling each other 's ticks off) is pretty good, but there is still a temptation to do even better by refusing to pay the costs of reciprocating.
Both defecting (refusing to pull ticks off) is pretty bad, but not so bad as putting effort into pulling another's ticks off and still ending up infested with ticks oneself.
The payoff matrix is Figure B.
But this is only one example.
The more you think about it, the more you realize that life is riddled with Iterated Prisoner's Dilemma games, not just human life but animal and plant life too.
Plant life?
Yes, why not?
Remember that we are not talking about conscious strategies (though at times we might be), but about strategies in the ‘Maynard Smithian’ sense, strategies of the kind that genes might preprogram.
Later we shall meet plants, various animals and even bacteria, all playing the game of Iterated Prisoner's Dilemma.
Meanwhile, let's explore more fully what is so important about iteration.
Unlike the simple game, which is rather predictable in that DEFECT is the only rational strategy, the iterated version offers plenty of strategic scope.
In the simple game there are only two possible strategies, COOPERATE and DEFECT.
Iteration, however, allows lots of conceivable strategies, and it is by no means obvious which one is best.
The following, for instance, is just one among thousands: ‘cooperate most of the time, but on a random 10 per cent of rounds throw in a defect’.
Or strategies might be conditional upon the past history of the game.
My ‘Grudger’ is an example of this; it has a good memory for faces, and although fundamentally cooperative it defects if the other player has ever defected before.
Other strategies might be more forgiving and have shorter memories.
Clearly the strategies available in the iterated game are limited only by our ingenuity.
Can we work out which is best?
This was the task that Axelrod set himself.
He had the entertaining idea of running a competition, and he advertised for experts in games theory to submit strategies.
Strategies, in this sense, are preprogrammed rules for action, so it was appropriate for contestants to send in their entries in computer language.
Fourteen strategies were submitted For good measure Axelrod added a fifteenth, called Random, which simply played COOPERATE and DEFECT randomly, and served as a kind of baseline ‘non-strategy’: if a strategy can't do better than Random, it must be pretty bad.
Axelrod translated all 15 strategies into one common programming language, and set them against one another in one big computer.
Each strategy was paired off in turn with every other one (including a copy of itself) to play Iterated Prisoner's Dilemma.
Since there were 15 strategies, there were 15 x 15, or 225 separate games going on in the computer.
When each pairing had gone through 200 moves of the game, the winnings were totalled up and the winner declared.
We are not concerned with which strategy won against any particular opponent.
What matters is which strategy accumulated the most ‘money’, summed over all its 15 pairings.
‘Money’ means simply ‘points’, awarded according to the following scheme: mutual Cooperation, 3 points; Temptation to defect, 5 points; Punishment for mutual defection, 1 point (equivalent to a light fine in our earlier game); Sucker's payoff, 0 points (equivalent to a heavy fine in our earlier game).
The maximum possible score that any strategy could achieve was 15,000 (200 rounds at 5 points per round, for each of 15 opponents).
The minimum possible score was o.
Needless to say, neither of these two extremes was realized.
The most that a strategy can realistically hope to win in an average one of its 1 5 pairings cannot be much more than 600 points.
This is what two players would each receive if they both consistently cooperated, scoring 3 points for each of the 200 rounds of the game.
If one of them succumbed to the temptation to defect, it would very probably end up with fewer points than 600 because of retaliation by the other player (most of the submitted strategies had some kind of retaliatory behaviour built into them).
We can use 600 as a kind of benchmark for a game, and express all
The maximum possible score that any strategy could achieve was 15,000 (200 rounds at 5 points per round, for each of 15 opponents).
The minimum possible score was 0.
Needless to say, neither of these two extremes was realized.
The most that a strategy can realistically hope to win in an average one of its 15 pairings cannot be much more than 600 points.
This is what two players would each receive if they both consistently cooperated, scoring 3 points for each of the 200 rounds of the game.
If one of them succumbed to the temptation to defect, it would very probably end up with fewer points than 600 because of retaliation by the other player (most of the submitted strategies had some kind of retaliatory behaviour built into them).
We can use 600 as a kind of benchmark for a game, and express all scores as a percentage of this benchmark.
On this scale it is theoretically possible to score up to 166 per cent(1,000 points), but in practice no strategy's average score exceeded 600.
Remember that the ‘players’ in the tournament were not humans but computer programs, preprogrammed strategies.
Their human authors played the same role as genes programming bodies (think of Chapter 4's computer chess and the Andromeda computer).
You can think of the strategies as miniature ‘proxies’ for their authors.
Indeed, one author could have submitted more than one strategy (although it would have been cheating — and Axelrod would presumably not have allowed it — for an author to ‘pack’ the competition with strategies, one of which received the benefits of sacrificial cooperation from the others).
Some ingenious strategies were submitted, though they were, of course, far less ingenious than their authors.
The winning strategy, remarkably, was the simplest and superficially least ingenious of all.
It was called Tit for Tat, and was submitted by Professor Anatol Rapoport, a well-known psychologist and games theorist from Toronto.
Tit for Tat begins by cooperating on the first move and thereafter simply copies the previous move of the other player.
How might a game involving Tit for Tat proceed?
As ever, what happens depends upon the other player.
Suppose, first, that the other player is also Tit for Tat (remember that each strategy played against copies of itself as well as against the other 14).
Both Tit for Tats begin by cooperating.
In the next move, each player copies the other's previous move, which was COOPERATE.
Both continue to COOPERATE until the end of the game, and both end up with the full 100 per cent‘benchmark’ score of 600 points.
Now suppose Tit for Tat plays against a strategy called Naive Prober.
Naive Prober wasn't actually entered in Axelrod's competition, but it is instructive nevertheless.
It is basically identical to Tit for Tat except that, once in a while, say on a random one in ten moves, it throws in a gratuitous defection and claims the high Temptation score.
Until Naive Prober tries one of its probing defections the players might as well be two Tit for Tats.
A long and mutually profitable sequence of cooperation seems set to run its course, with a comfortable 100 per cent benchmark score for both players.
But suddenly, without warning, say on the eighth move, Naive Prober defects.
Tit for Tat, of course, has played COOPERATE on this move, and so is landed with the Sucker's payoff of 0 points.
Naive Prober appears to have done well, since it has obtained 5 points from that move.
But in the next move Tit for Tat ‘retaliates’.
It plays DEFECT, simply following its rule of imitating the opponent's previous move.
Naive Prober meanwhile, blindly following its own built-in copying rule, has copied its opponent's COOPERATE move.
So it now collects the Sucker's payoff of o points, while Tit for Tat gets the high score of 5.
In the next move, Naive Prober — rather unjustly one might think —‘retaliates’ against Tit for Tat's defection.
And so the alternation continues.
During these alternating runs both players receive on average 2.5 points per move (the average of 5 and o).
This is lower than the steady 3 points per move that both players can amass in a run of mutual cooperation (and, by the way, this is the reason for the ‘additional condition’ left unexplained on page 204).
So, when Naive Prober plays against Tit for Tat, both do worse than when Tit for Tat plays against another Tit for Tat.
And when Naive Prober plays against another Naive Prober, both tend to do, if anything, even worse still, since runs of reverberating defection tend to get started earlier.
Now consider another strategy, called Remorseful Prober.
Remorseful Prober is like Naive Prober, except that it takes active steps to break out of runs of alternating recrimination.
To do this it needs a slightly longer ‘memory’ than either Tit for Tat or Naive Prober.
Remorseful Prober remembers whether it has just spontaneously defected, and whether the result was prompt retaliation.
If so, it ‘remorsefully’ allows its opponent ‘one free hit’without retaliating.
This means that runs of mutual recrimination are nipped in the bud.
If you now work through an imaginary game between Remorseful Prober and Tit for Tat, you'll find that runs of would-be mutual retaliation are promptly scotched.
Most of the game is spent in mutual cooperation, with both players enjoying the consequent generous score.
Remorseful Prober does better against Tit for Tat than Naive Prober does, though not as well as Tit for Tat does against itself.
Some of the strategies entered in Axelrod's tournament were much more sophisticated than either Remorseful Prober or Naive Prober, but they too ended up with fewer points, on average, than simple Tit for Tat.
Indeed the least successful of all the strategies (except Random) was the most elaborate.
It was submitted by ‘Name withheld’— a spur to pleasing speculation: Some eminence grise in the Pentagon?
The head of the CIA?
Henry Kissinger?
Axelrod himself?
I suppose we shall never know.
It isn't all that interesting to examine the details of the particular strategies that were submitted.
This isn't a book about the ingenuity of computer programmers.
It is more interesting to classify strategies according to certain categories, and examine the success of these broader divisions.
The most important category that Axelrod recognizes is ‘nice’.
A nice strategy is defined as one that is never the first to defect.
Tit for Tat is an example.
It is capable of defecting, but it does so only in retaliation.
Both Naive Prober and Remorseful Prober are nasty strategies because they sometimes defect, however rarely, when not provoked.
Of the 15 strategies entered in the tournament, 8 were nice.
Significantly, the 8 top-scoring strategies were the very same 8 nice strategies, the 7 nasties trailing well behind.
Tit for Tat obtained an average of 504–5 points: 84 per cent of our benchmark of 600, and a good score.
The other nice strategies scored only slightly less, with scores ranging from 83.4 per cent down to 75.6 per cent.
There is a big gap between this score and the 66.8 per cent obtained by Graaskamp, the most successful of all the nasty strategies.
It seems pretty convincing that nice guys do well in this game.
Another of Axelrod's technical terms is ‘forgiving’.
A forgiving strategy is one that, although it may retaliate, has a short memory.
It is swift to overlook old misdeeds.
Tit for Tat is a forgiving strategy.
It raps a defector over the knuckles instantly but, after that, lets bygones be bygones.
Chapter 10's Grudger is totally unforgiving.
Its memory lasts the entire game.
It never forgets a grudge against a player who has ever defected against it, even once.
A strategy formally identical to Grudger was entered in Axelrod's tournament under the name of Friedman, and it didn't do particularly well.
Of all the nice strategies (note that it is technically nice, although it is totally unforgiving), Grudger/Friedman did next to worst.
The reason unforgiving strategies don't do very well is that they can't break out of runs of mutual recrimination, even when their opponent is ‘remorseful’.
It is possible to be even more forgiving than Tit for Tat.
Tit for Two Tats allows its opponents two defections in a row before it eventually retaliates.
This might seem excessively saintly and magnanimous.
Nevertheless Axelrod worked out that, if only somebody had submitted Tit for Two Tats, it would have won the tournament.
This is because it is so good at avoiding runs of mutual recrimination.
So, we have identified two characteristics of winning strategies: niceness and forgivingness.
This almost utopian-sounding conclusion — that niceness and forgivingness pay — came as a surprise to many of the experts, who had tried to be too cunning by submitting subtly nasty strategies; while even those who had submitted nice strategies had not dared anything so forgiving as Tit for Two Tats.
Axelrod announced a second tournament.
He received 62 entries and again added Random, making 63 in all.
This time, the exact number of moves per game was not fixed at 200 but was left open, for a good reason that I shall come to later.
We can still express scores as a percentage of the ‘benchmark’, or ‘always cooperate’ score, even though that benchmark needs more complicated calculation and is no longer a fixed 600 points.
Programmers in the second tournament had all been provided with the results of the first, including Axelrod's analysis of why Tit for Tat and other nice and forgiving strategies had done so well.
It was only to be expected that the contestants would take note of this background information, in one way or another.
In fact, they split into two schools of thought.
Some reasoned that niceness and forgivingness were evidently winning qualities, and they accordingly submitted nice, forgiving strategies.
John Maynard Smith went so far as to submit the super-forgiving Tit for Two Tats.
The other school of thought reasoned that lots of their colleagues, having read Axelrod's analysis, would now submit nice, forgiving strategies.
They therefore submitted nasty strategies, trying to exploit these anticipated softies!
But once again nastiness didn't pay.
Once again, Tit for Tat, submitted by Anatol Rapoport, was the winner, and it scored a massive 96 per cent of the benchmark score.
And again nice strategies, in general, did better than nasty ones.
All but one of the top 15 strategies were nice, and all but one of the bottom 15 were nasty.
But although the saintly Tit for Two Tats would have won the first tournament if it had been submitted, it did not win the second.
This was because the field now included more subtle nasty strategies capable of preying ruthlessly upon such an out-and-out softy.
This underlines an important point about these tournaments.
Success for a strategy depends upon which other strategies happen to be submitted.
This is the only way to account for the difference between the second tournament, in which Tit for Two Tats was ranked well down the list, and the first tournament, which Tit for Two Tats would have won.
But, as I said before, this is not a book about the ingenuity of computer programmers.
Is there an objective way in which we can judge which is the truly best strategy, in a more general and less arbitrary sense?
Readers of earlier chapters will already be prepared to find the answer in the theory of evolutionarily stable strategies.
I was one of those to whom Axelrod circulated his early results, with an invitation to submit a strategy for the second tournament.
I didn't do so, but I did make another suggestion.
Axelrod had already begun to think in ESS terms, but I felt that this tendency was so important that I wrote to him suggesting that he should get in touch with W. D. Hamilton, who was then, though Axelrod didn't know it, in a different department of the same university, the University of Michigan.
He did indeed immediately contact Hamilton, and the result of their subsequent collaboration was a brilliant joint paper published in the journal Science in 1981, a paper that won the Newcomb Cleveland Prize of the American Association for the Advancement of Science.
In addition to discussing some delightfully way-out biological examples of iterated prisoner's dilemmas, Axelrod and Hamilton gave what I regard as due recognition to the ESS approach.
Contrast the ESS approach with the ‘round-robin’ system that Axelrod's two tournaments followed.
A round-robin is like a football league.
Each strategy was matched against each other strategy an equal number of times.
The final score of a strategy was the sum of the points it gained against all the other strategies.
To be successful in a round-robin tournament, therefore, a strategy has to be a good competitor against all the other strategies that people happen to have submitted.
Axelrod's name for a strategy that is good against a wide variety of other strategies is ‘robust’.
Tit for Tat turned out to be a robust strategy.
But the set of strategies that people happen to have submitted is an arbitrary set.
This was the point that worried us above.
It just so happened that in Axelrod's original tournament about half the entries were nice.
Tit for Tat won in this climate, and Tit for Two Tats would have won in this climate if it had been submitted.
But suppose that nearly all the entries had just happened to be nasty.
This could very easily have occurred.
After all, 6 out of the 14 strategies submitted were nasty.
If 13 of them had been nasty, Tit for Tat wouldn't have won.
The ‘climate’ would have been wrong for it.
Not only the money won, but the rank order of success among strategies, depends upon which strategies happen to have been submitted; depends, in other words, upon something as arbitrary as human whim.
How can we reduce this arbitrariness?
By ‘thinking ESS’.
The important characteristic of an evolutionarily stable strategy, you will remember from earlier chapters, is that it carries on doing well when it is already numerous in the population of strategies.
To say that Tit for Tat, say, is an ESS, would be to say that Tit for Tat does well in a climate dominated by Tit for Tat.
This could be seen as a special kind of ‘robustness’.
As evolutionists we are tempted to see it as the only kind of robustness that matters.
Why does it matter so much?
Because, in the world of Darwinism, winnings are not paid out as money; they are paid out as offspring.
To a Darwinian, a successful strategy is one that has become numerous in the population of strategies.
For a strategy to remain successful, it must do well specifically when it is numerous, that is in a climate dominated by copies of itself.
Axelrod did, as a matter of fact, run a third round of his tournament as natural selection might have run it, looking for an ESS.
Actually he didn't call it a third round, since he didn't solicit new entries but used the same 63 as for Round 2.
I find it convenient to treat it as Round 3, because I think it differs from the two ‘round-robin’ tournaments more fundamentally than the two round-robin tournaments differ from each other.
Axelrod took the 63 strategies and threw them again into the computer to make ‘generation 1’ of an evolutionary succession.
In ‘generation 1’, therefore, the ‘climate’ consisted of an equal representation of all 63 strategies.
At the end of generation 1, winnings to each strategy were paid out, not as ‘money’ or ‘points’, but as offspring , identical to their (asexual) parents.
As generations went by, some strategies became scarcer and eventually went extinct.
Other strategies became more numerous.
As the proportions changed, so, consequently, did the ‘climate’ in which future moves of the game took place.
Eventually, after about 1,000 generations, there were no further changes in proportions, no further changes in climate.
Stability was reached.
Before this, the fortunes of the various strategies rose and fell, just as in my computer simulation of the Cheats, Suckers, and Grudgers.
Some of the strategies started going extinct from the start, and most were extinct by generation 200.
Of the nasty strategies, one or two of them began by increasing in frequency, but their prosperity, like that of Cheat in my simulation, was short-lived.
The only nasty strategy to survive beyond generation 200 was one called Harrington.
Harrington's fortunes rose steeply for about the first 150 generations.
Thereafter it declined rather gradually, approaching extinction around generation 1,000.
Harrington did well temporarily for the same reason as my original Cheat did.
It exploited softies like Tit for Two Tats (too forgiving) while these were still around.
Then, as the softies were driven extinct, Harrington followed them, having no easy prey left.
The field was free for ‘nice’ but ‘provocable’strategies like Tit for Tat.
Tit for Tat itself, indeed, came out top in five out of six runs of Round 3, just as it had in Rounds 1 and 2.
Five other nice but provocable strategies ended up nearly as successful (frequent in the population) as Tit for Tat; indeed, one of them won the sixth run.
When all the nasties had been driven extinct, there was no way in which any of the nice strategies could be distinguished from Tit for Tat or from each other, because they all, being nice, simply played COOPERATE against each other .
A consequence of this indistinguishability is that, although Tit for Tat seems like an ESS, it is strictly not a true ESS.
To be an ESS, remember, a strategy must not be invadable, when it is common, by a rare, mutant strategy.
Now it is true that Tit for Tat cannot be invaded by any nasty strategy, but another nice strategy is a different matter.
As we have just seen, in a population of nice strategies they will all look and behave I exactly like one another: they will all COOPERATE all the time.
So any other nice strategy, like the totally saintly Always Cooperate, although admittedly it will not enjoy a positive selective advantage over Tit for Tat, can nevertheless drift into the population without being noticed.
So technically Tit for Tat is not an ESS.
You might think that since the world stays just as nice, we could as well regard Tit for Tat as an ESS.
But alas, look what happens next.
Unlike Tit for Tat, Always Cooperate is not stable against invasion by nasty strategies such as Always Defect.
Always Defect does well against Always Cooperate, since it gets the high ‘Temptation’ score every time.
Nasty strategies like Always Defect will come in to keep down the numbers of too nice strategies like Always Cooperate.
But although Tit for Tat is strictly speaking not a true ESS, it is probably fair to treat some sort of mixture of basically nice but retaliatory ‘Tit for Tat-like’ strategies as roughly equivalent to an ESS in practice.
Such a mixture might include a small admixture of nastiness.
Robert Boyd and Jeffrey Lorberbaum, in one of the more interesting follow-ups to Axelrod's work, looked at a mixture of Tit for Two Tats and a strategy called Suspicious Tit for Tat.
Suspicious Tit for Tat is technically nasty, but it is not very nasty.
It behaves just like Tit for Tat itself after the first move, but — this is what makes it technically nasty — it does defect on the very first move of the game.
In a climate entirely dominated by Tit for Tat, Suspicious Tit for Tat does not prosper, because its initial defection triggers an unbroken run of mutual recrimination.
When it meets a Tit for Two Tats player, on the other hand, Tit for Two Tats's greater forgivingness nips this recrimination in the bud.
Both players end the game with at least the ‘benchmark’, all C, score and with Suspicious Tit for Tat scoring a bonus for its initial defection.
Boyd and Lorberbaum showed that a population of Tit for Tat could be invaded, evolutionarily speaking, by a mixture of Tit for Two Tats and Suspicious Tit for Tat, the two prospering in each other 's company.
This combination is almost certainly not the only combination that could invade in this kind of way.
There are probably lots of mixtures of slightly nasty strategies with nice and very forgiving strategies that are together capable of invading.
Some might see this as a mirror for familiar aspects of human life.
Axelrod recognized that Tit for Tat is not strictly an ESS, and he therefore coined the phrase ‘collectively stable strategy’ to describe it.
As in the case of true ESSs, it is possible for more than one strategy to be collectively stable at the same time.
And again, it is a matter of luck which one comes to dominate a population.
Always Defect is also stable, as well as Tit for Tat.
In a population that has already come to be dominated by Always Defect, no other strategy does better.
We can treat the system s bistable, with Always Defect being one of the stable points, Tit for Tat (or some mixture of mostly nice, retaliatory strategies) the other stable point.
Whichever stable point comes to dominate the population first will tend to stay dominant.
But what does ‘dominate’ mean, in quantitative terms?
How many Tit for Tats must there be in order for Tit for Tat to do better than Always Defect?
That depends upon the detailed payoffs that the banker has agreed to shell out in this particular game.
All we can say in general is that there is a critical frequency, a knife-edge.
On one side of the knife-edge the critical frequency of Tit for Tat is exceeded, and selection will favour more and more Tit for Tats.
On the other side of the knife-edge the critical frequency of Always Defect is exceeded, and selection will favour more and more Always Defects.
We met the equivalent of this knife-edge, you will remember, in the story of the Grudgers and Cheats in Chapter 10.
It obviously matters, therefore, on which side of the knife-edge a population happens to start .
And we need to know how it might happen that a population could occasionally cross from one side of the knife-edge to the other.
Suppose we start with a population already sitting on the Always Defect side.
The few Tit for Tat individuals don't meet each other often enough to be of mutual benefit.
So natural selection pushes the population even further towards the Always Defect extreme.
If only the population could just manage, by random drift, to get itself over the knife-edge, it could coast down the slope to the Tit for Tat side, and everyone would do much better at the banker's (or ‘nature's’) expense.
But of course populations have no group will, no group intention or purpose.
They cannot strive to leap the knife-edge.
They will cross it only if the undirected forces of nature happen to lead them across.
How could this happen?
One way to express the answer is that it might happen by ‘chance’.
But ‘chance’ is just a word expressing ignorance.
It means ‘determined by some as yet unknown, or unspecified, means’.
We can do a little better than ‘chance’.
We can try to think of practical ways in which a minority of Tit for Tat individuals might happen to increase to the critical mass.
This amounts to a quest for possible ways in which Tit for Tat individuals might happen to cluster together in sufficient numbers that they can all benefit at the banker's expense.
This line of thought seems to be promising, but it is rather vague.
How exactly might mutually resembling individuals find themselves clustered together, in local aggregations?
In nature, the obvious way is through genetic relatedness — kinship.
Animals of most species are likely to find themselves living close to their sisters, brothers and cousins, rather than to random members of the population.
This is not necessarily through choice.
It follows automatically from ‘viscosity’ in the population.
Viscosity means any tendency for individuals to continue living close to the place where they were born.
For instance, through most of history, and in most parts of the world (though not, as it happens, in our modern world), individual humans have seldom strayed more than a few miles from their birthplace.
As a result, local clusters of genetic relatives tend to build up.
I remember visiting a remote island off the west coast of Ireland, and being struck by the fact that almost everyone on the island had the most enormous jug-handle ears.
This could hardly have been because large ears suited the climate (there are strong offshore winds).
It was because most of the inhabitants of the island were close kin of one another.
Genetic relatives will tend to be alike not just in facial features but in all sorts of other respects as well.
For instance, they will tend to resemble each other with respect to genetic tendencies to play — or not to play — Tit for Tat.
So even if Tit for Tat is rare in the population as a whole, it may still be locally common.
In a local area, Tit for Tat individuals may meet each other often enough to prosper from mutual cooperation, even though calculations that take into account only the global frequency in the total population might suggest that they are below the ‘knife-edge’ critical frequency.
If this happens, Tit for Tat individuals, cooperating with one another in cosy little local enclaves, may prosper so well that they grow from small local clusters into larger local clusters.
These local clusters may grow so large that they spread out into other areas, areas that had hitherto been dominated, numerically, by individuals playing Always Defect.
In thinking of these local enclaves, my Irish island is a misleading parallel because it is physically cut off.
Think, instead, of a large population in which there is not much movement, so that individuals tend to resemble their immediate neighbours more than their more distant neighbours, even though there is continuous interbreeding all over the whole area.
Coming back to our knife-edge, then, Tit for Tat could surmount it.
All that is required is a little local clustering, of a sort that will naturally tend to arise in natural populations.
Tit for Tat has a built-in gift, even when rare, for crossing the knife-edge over to its own side.
It is as though there were a secret passage underneath the knife-edge.
But that secret passage contains a one-way valve: there is an asymmetry.
Unlike Tit for Tat, Always Defect, though a true ESS, cannot use local clustering to cross the knife-edge.
On the contrary.
Local clusters of Always Defect individuals, far from prospering by each other 's presence, do especially badly in each other 's presence.
Far from quietly helping one another at the expense of the banker, they do one another down.
Always Defect, then, unlike Tit for Tat, gets no help from kinship or viscosity in the population.
So, although Tit for Tat may be only dubiously an ESS, it has a sort of higher-order stability.
What can this mean?
Surely, stable is stable.
Well, here we are taking a longer view.
Always Defect resists invasion for a long time.
But if we wait long enough, perhaps thousands of years, Tit for Tat will eventually muster the numbers required to tip it over the knife-edge, and the population will flip.
But the reverse will not happen.
Always Defect, as we have seen, cannot benefit from clustering, and so does not enjoy this higher-order stability.
Tit for Tat, as we have seen, is ‘nice’, meaning never the first to defect, and ‘forgiving’, meaning that it has a short memory for past misdeeds.
I now introduce another of Axelrod's evocative technical terms.
Tit for Tat is also ‘not envious’.
To be envious , in Axelrod's terminology, means to strive for more money than the other player, rather than for an absolutely large quantity of the banker's money.
To be non-envious means to be quite happy if the other player wins just as much money as you do, so long as you both thereby win more from the banker.
Tit for Tat never actually ‘wins’ a game.
Think about it and you'll see that it cannot score more than its ‘opponent’ in any particular game because it never defects except in retaliation.
The most it can do is draw with its opponent.
But it tends to achieve each draw with a high, shared score.
Where Tit for Tat and other nice strategies are concerned, the very word ‘opponent’ is inappropriate.
Sadly, however, when psychologists set up games of Iterated Prisoner's Dilemma between real humans, nearly all players succumb to envy and therefore do relatively poorly in terms of money.
It seems that many people, perhaps without even thinking about it, would rather do down the other player than cooperate with the other player to do down the banker.
Axelrod's work has shown what a mistake this is.
It is only a mistake in certain kinds of game.
Games theorists divide games into ‘zero sum’ and ‘nonzero sum’.
A zero sum game is one in which a win for one player is a loss for the other.
Chess is zero sum, because the aim of each player is to win, and this means to make the other player lose.
Prisoner's Dilemma, however, is a nonzero sum game.
There is a banker paying out money, and it is possible for the two players to link arms and laugh all the way to the bank.
This talk of laughing all the way to the bank reminds me of a delightful line from Shakespeare:
The first thing we do, let's kill all the lawyers.
2 Henry VI 
In what are called civil ‘disputes’ there is often in fact great scope for cooperation.
What looks like a zero sum confrontation can, with a little goodwill, be transformed into a mutually beneficial nonzero sum game.
Consider divorce.
A good marriage is obviously a nonzero sum game, brimming with mutual cooperation.
But even when it breaks down there are all sorts of reasons why a couple could benefit by continuing to cooperate, and treating their divorce, too, as nonzero sum.
as if child welfare were not a sufficient reason, the fees of two lawyers will make a nasty dent in the family finances.
So obviously a sensible and civilized couple begin by going together to see one lawyer, don't they?
Well, actually no.
At least in England and, until recently, in all fifty states of the USA, the law, or more strictly — and significantly — the lawyers' own professional code, doesn't allow them to.
Lawyers must accept only one member of a couple as a client.
The other person is turned from the door, and either has no legal advice at all or is forced to go to another lawyer.
And that is when the fun begins.
In separate chambers but with one voice, the two lawyers immediately start referring to ‘us’ and ‘them’.
‘Us’, you understand, doesn't mean me and my wife; it means me and my lawyer against her and her lawyer.
When the case comes to court, it is actually listed as ‘Smith versus Smith'!
It is assumed to be adversarial, whether the couple feel adversarial or not, whether or not they have specifically agreed that they want to be sensibly amicable.
And who benefits from treating it as an ‘I win, you lose’ tussle?
The chances are, only the lawyers.
The hapless couple have been dragged into a zero sum game.
For the lawyers, however, the case of Smith v.
Smith is a nice fat nonzero sum game, with the Smiths providing the payoffs and the two professionals milking their clients' joint account in elaborately coded cooperation.
One way in which they cooperate is to make proposals that they both know the other side will not accept.
This prompts a counter proposal that, again, both know is unacceptable.
And so it goes on.
Every letter, every telephone call exchanged between the cooperating ‘adversaries’ adds another wad to the bill.
With luck, this procedure can be dragged out for months or even years, with costs mounting in parallel.
The lawyers don't get together to work all this out.
On the contrary, it is ironically their scrupulous separateness that is the chief instrument of their cooperation at the expense of the clients.
The lawyers may not even be aware of what they are doing.
Like the vampire bats that we shall meet in a moment, they are playing to well-ritualized rules.
The system works without any conscious overseeing or organizing.
It is all geared to forcing us into zero sum games.
Zero sum for the clients, but very much nonzero sum for the lawyers.
What is to be done?
The Shakespeare option is messy.
It would be cleaner to get the law changed.
But most parliamentarians are drawn from the legal profession, and have a zero sum mentality.
It is hard to imagine a more adversarial atmosphere than the British House of Commons.
(The law courts at least preserve the decencies of debate.
As well they might, since ‘my learned friend and I’ are cooperating very nicely all the way to the bank.)
Perhaps well-meaning legislators and, indeed, contrite lawyers should be taught a little game theory.
It is only fair to add that some lawyers play exactly the opposite role, persuading clients who are itching for a zero sum fight that they would do better to reach a nonzero sum settlement out of court.
What about other games in human life?
Which are zero sum and which nonzero sum?
And — because this is not the same thing — which aspects of life do we perceive as zero or nonzero sum?
Which aspects of human life foster ‘envy’, and which foster cooperation against a ‘banker'?
Think, for instance, about wage-bargaining and ‘differentials’.
When we negotiate our pay-rises, are we motivated by ‘envy’, or do we cooperate to maximize our real income?
Do we assume, in real life as Well as in psychological experiments, that we are playing a zero sum game when we are not?
I simply pose these difficult questions.
To answer them would go beyond the scope of this book.
Football is a zero sum game.
At least, it usually is.
Occasionally it can become a nonzero sum game.
This happened in 1977 in the English Football League (Association Football or ‘Soccer’; the other games called football — Rugby Football, Australian Football, American Football, Irish Football, etc., are also normally zero sum games).
Teams in the Football League are split into four divisions.
Clubs play against other clubs within their own division, accumulating points for each win or draw throughout the season.
To be in the First Division is prestigious, and also lucrative for a club since it ensures large crowds.
At the end of each season, the bottom three clubs in the First Division are relegated to the Second Division for the next season.
Relegation seems to be regarded as a terrible fate, worth going to great efforts to avoid.
May 18th 1977 was the last day of that year's football season.
Two of the three relegations from the First Division had already been determined, but the third relegation was still in contention.
It would definitely be one of three teams, Sunderland, Bristol, or Coventry.
These three teams, then, had everything to play for on that Saturday.
Sunderland were playing against a fourth team (whose tenure in the First Division was not in doubt).
Bristol and Coventry happened to be playing against each other.
It was known that, if Sunderland lost their game, then Bristol and Coventry needed only to draw against each other in order to stay in the First Division.
But if Sunderland won, then the team relegated would be either Bristol or Coventry, depending on the outcome of their game against each other.
The two crucial games were theoretically simultaneous.
As a matter of fact, however, the Bristol-Coventry game happened to be running five minutes late.
Because of this, the result of the Sunderland game became known before the end of the Bristol-Coventry game.
Thereby hangs this whole complicated tale.
For most of the game between Bristol and Coventry the play was, to quote one contemporary news report, ‘fast and often furious’, an exciting (if you like that sort of thing) ding-dong battle.
Some brilliant goals from both sides had seen to it that the score was 2-all by the eightieth minute of the match.
Then, two minutes before the end of the game, the news came through from the other ground that Sunderland had lost.
Immediately, the Coventry team manager had the news flashed up on the giant electronic message board at the end of the ground.
Apparently all 22 players could read, and they all realized that they needn't bother to play hard any more.
A draw was all that either team needed in order to avoid relegation.
Indeed, to put effort into scoring goals was now positively bad policy since, by taking players away from defence, it carried the risk of actually losing — and being relegated after all.
Both sides became intent on securing a draw.
To quote the same news report: ‘Supporters who had been fierce rivals seconds before when Don Gillies fired in an 80th minute equaliser for Bristol, suddenly joined in a combined celebration.
Referee Ron Challis watched helpless as the players pushed the ball around with little or no challenge to the man in possession.’
What had previously been a zero sum game had suddenly, because of a piece of news from the outside world, become a nonzero sum game.
In the terms of our earlier discussion, it is as if an external ‘banker’ had magically appeared, making it possible for both Bristol and Coventry to benefit from the same outcome, a draw.
Spectator sports like football are normally zero sum games for a good reason.
It is more exciting for crowds to watch players striving mightily against one another than to watch them conniving amicably.
But real life, both human life and plant and animal life, is not set up for the benefit of spectators.
Many situations in real life are, as a matter of fact, equivalent to nonzero sum games.
Nature often plays the role of ‘banker’, and individuals can therefore benefit from one another 's success.
They do not have to do down rivals in order to benefit themselves.
Without departing from the fundamental laws of the selfish gene, we can see how cooperation and mutual assistance can flourish even in a basically selfish world.
We can see how, in Axelrod's meaning of the term, nice guys may finish first.
But none of this works unless the game is iterated .
The players must know (or ‘know’) that the present game is not the last one between them.
In Axelrod's haunting phrase, the ‘shadow of the future’ must be long.
But how long must it be?
It can't be infinitely long.
From a theoretical point of view it doesn't matter how long the game is; the important thing is that neither player should know when the game is going to end.
Suppose you and I were playing against each other, and suppose we both knew that the number of rounds in the game was to be exactly 100.
Now we both understand that the 100th round, being the last, will be equivalent to a simple one-off game of Prisoner's Dilemma.
Therefore the only rational strategy for either of us to play on the 100th round will be DEFECT, and we can each assume that the other player will work that out and be fully resolved to defect on the last round.
The last round can therefore be written off as predictable.
But now the 99th round will be the equivalent of a one-off game, and the only rational choice for each player on this last but one game is also DEFECT.
The 98th round succumbs to the same reasoning, and so on back.
Two strictly rational players, each of whom assumes that the other is strictly rational, can do nothing but defect if they both know how many rounds the game is destined to run.
For this reason, when games theorists talk about the Iterated or Repeated Prisoner's Dilemma game, they always assume that the end of the game is unpredictable, or known only to the banker.
Even if the exact number of rounds in the game is not known for certain, in real life it is often possible to make a statistical guess as to how much longer the game is likely to last.
This assessment may become an important part of strategy.
If I notice the banker fidget and look at his watch, I may well conjecture that the game is about to be brought to an end, and I may therefore feel tempted to defect.
If I suspect that you too have noticed the banker fidgeting, I may fear that you too may be contemplating defection.
I will probably be anxious to get my defection in first.
Especially since I may fear that you are fearing that I…
The mathematician's simple distinction between the one-off Prisoner's Dilemma game and the Iterated Prisoner's Dilemma game is too simple.
Each player can be expected to behave as if he possessed a continuously updated estimate of how long the game is likely to go on.
The longer his estimate, the more he will play according to the mathematician's expectations for the true iterated game: in other words, the nicer, more forgiving, less envious he will be.
The shorter his estimate of the future of the game, the more he will be inclined to play according to the mathematician's expectations for the one-off game: the nastier, and less forgiving will he be.
Axelrod draws a moving illustration of the importance of the shadow of the future from a remarkable phenomenon that grew up during the First World War, the so-called live-and-let-live system.
His source is the research of the historian and sociologist Tony Ashworth.
It is quite well known that at Christmas British and German troops briefly fraternized and drank together in no-man's-land.
Less well known, but in my opinion more interesting, is the fact that unofficial and unspoken nonaggression pacts, a ‘live-and-let-live’ system, flourished all up and down the front lines for at least two years starting in 1914.
A senior British officer, on a visit to the trenches, is quoted as being astonished to observe German soldiers walking about within rifle range behind their own line.
‘Our men appeared to take no notice.
I privately made up my mind to do away with that sort of thing when we took over; such things should not be allowed.
These people evidently did not know there was a war on.
Both sides apparently believed in the policy of ‘live-and-let-live’.’
The theory of games and the Prisoner's Dilemma had not been invented in those days but, with hindsight, we can see pretty clearly what was going on, and Axelrod provides a fascinating analysis.
In the entrenched warfare of those times, the shadow of the future for each platoon was long.
That is to say, each dug-in group of British soldiers could expect to be facing the same dug-in group of Germans for many months.
Moreover, the ordinary soldiers never knew when, if ever, they were going to be moved; army orders are notoriously arbitrary, capricious and incomprehensible to those receiving them.
The shadow of the future was quite long enough, and indeterminate enough, to foster the development of a Tit for Tat type of cooperation.
Provided, that is, that the situation was equivalent to a game of Prisoner's Dilemma.
To qualify as a true Prisoner's Dilemma, remember, the payoffs have to follow a particular rank order.
Both sides must see mutual cooperation (CC) as preferable to mutual defection.
Defection while the other side cooperates (DC) is even better if you can get away with it.
Cooperation while the other side defects (CD) is worst of all.
Mutual defection (DD) is what the general staff would like to see.
They want to see their own chaps, keen as mustard, potting Jerries (or Tommies) whenever the opportunity arises.
Mutual cooperation was undesirable from the generals' point of view, because it wasn't helping them to win the war.
But it was highly desirable from the point of view of the individual soldiers on both sides.
They didn't want to be shot.
Admittedly — and this takes care of the other payoff conditions needed to make the situation a true Prisoner's Dilemma — they probably agreed with the generals in preferring to win the war rather than lose it.
But that is not the choice that faces an individual soldier.
The outcome of the entire war is unlikely to be materially affected by what he, as an individual, does.
Mutual cooperation with the particular enemy soldiers facing you across no-man's-land most definitely does affect your own fate, and is greatly preferable to mutual defection, even though you might, for patriotic or disciplinary reasons, marginally prefer to defect (DC) if you could get away with it.
It seems that the situation was a true prisoner's dilemma.
Something like Tit for Tat could be expected to grow up, and it did.
The locally stable strategy in any particular part of the trench lines was not necessarily Tit for Tat itself.
Tit for Tat is one of a family of nice, retaliatory but forgiving strategies, all of which are, if not technically stable, at least difficult to invade once they arise.
Three Tits for a Tat, for instance, grew up in one local area according to a contemporary account.
We go out at night in front of the trenches…
The German working parties are also out, so it is not considered etiquette to fire.
The really nasty things are rifle grenades…
They can kill as many as eight or nine men if they do fall into a trench…
But we never use ours unless the Germans get particularly noisy, as on their system of retaliation three for every one of ours come back.
It is important, for any member of the Tit for Tat family of strategies, that the players are punished for defection.
The threat of retaliation must always be there.
Displays of retaliatory capability were a notable feature of the live-and-let-live system.
Crack shots on both sides would display their deadly virtuosity by firing, not at enemy soldiers, but at inanimate targets close to the enemy soldiers, a technique also used in Western films (like shooting out candle flames).
It does not seem ever to have been satisfactorily answered why the two first operational atomic bombs were used — against the strongly voiced wishes of the leading physicists responsible for developing them — to destroy two cities instead of being deployed in the equivalent of spectacularly shooting out candles.
An important feature of Tit for Tat-like strategies is that they are forgiving.
This, as we have seen, helps to damp down what might otherwise become long and damaging runs of mutual recrimination.
The importance of damping down retaliation is dramatized by the following memoir by a British (as if the first sentence left us in any doubt) officer:
I was having tea with A company when we heard a lot of shouting and went to investigate.
We found our men and the Germans standing on their respective parapets.
Suddenly a salvo arrived but did no damage.
Naturally both sides got down and our men started swearing at the Germans, when all at once a brave German got on to his parapet and shouted ‘We are very sorry about that; we hope no one was hurt.
It was not our fault, it is that damned Prussian artillery.’
Axelrod comments that this apology ‘goes well beyond a merely instrumental effort to prevent retaliation.
It reflects moral regret for having violated a situation of trust, and it shows concern that someone might have been hurt.’
Certainly an admirable and very brave German.
Axelrod also emphasizes the importance of predictability and ritual in maintaining a stable pattern of mutual trust.
A pleasing example of this was the ‘evening gun’ fired by British artillery with clockwork regularity at a certain part of the line.
In the words of a German soldier:
At seven it came — so regularly that you could set your watch by it…
It always had the same objective, its range was accurate, it never varied laterally or went beyond or fell short of the mark…
There were even some inquisitive fellows who crawled out…a little before seven, in order to see it burst.
The German artillery did just the same thing, as the following account from the British side shows:
So regular were they [the Germans]in their choice of targets, times of shooting, and number of rounds fired, that…
Colonel Jones…knew to a minute where the next shell would fall.
His calculations were very accurate, and he was able to take what seemed to uninitiated Staff Officers big risks, knowing that the shelling would stop before he reached the place being shelled.
Axelrod remarks that such ‘rituals of perfunctory and routine firing sent a double message.
To the high command they conveyed aggression, but to the enemy they conveyed peace.’
The live-and-let-live system could have been worked out by verbal negotiation, by conscious strategists bargaining round a table.
In fact it was not.
It grew up as a series of local conventions, through people responding to one another 's behaviour;the individual soldiers were probably hardly aware that the growing up was going on.
This need not surprise us.
The strategies in Axelrod's computer were definitely unconscious.
It was their behaviour that defined them as nice or nasty, as forgiving or unforgiving, envious or the reverse.
The programmers who designed them may have been any of these things, but that is irrelevant.
A nice, forgiving, non-envious strategy could easily be programmed into a computer by a very nasty man.
And vice versa.
A strategy's niceness is recognized by its behaviour, not by its motives (for it has none) nor by the personality of its author (who has faded into the background by the time the program is running in the computer).
A computer program can behave in a strategic manner, without being aware of its strategy or, indeed, of anything at all.
We are, of course, entirely familiar with the idea of unconscious strategists, or at least of strategists whose consciousness, if any, is irrelevant.
Unconscious strategists abound in the pages of this book.
Axelrod's programs are an excellent model for the way we, throughout the book, have been thinking of animals and plants, and indeed of genes.
So it is natural to ask whether his optimistic conclusions — about the success of non-envious, forgiving niceness — also apply in the world of nature.
The answer is yes, of course they do.
The only conditions are that nature should sometimes set up games of Prisoner's Dilemma, that the shadow of the future should be long, and that the games should be nonzero sum games.
These conditions are certainly met, all round the living kingdoms.
Nobody would ever claim that a bacterium was a conscious strategist, yet bacterial parasites are probably engaged in ceaseless games of Prisoner's Dilemma with their hosts and there is no reason why we should not attribute Axelrodian adjectives — forgiving, non-envious, and so on— to their strategies.
Axelrod and Hamilton point out that normally harmless or beneficial bacteria can turn nasty, even causing lethal sepsis, in a person who is injured.
A doctor might say that the person's ‘natural resistance’ is lowered by the injury.
But perhaps the real reason is to do with games of Prisoner's Dilemma.
Do the bacteria, perhaps, have something to gain, but usually keep themselves in check?
In the game between human and bacteria, the ‘shadow of the future’ is normally long since a typical human can be expected to live for years from any given starting-point.
A seriously wounded human, on the other hand, may present a potentially much shorter shadow of the future to his bacterial guests.
The ‘Temptation to defect’ correspondingly starts to look like a more attractive option than the ‘Reward for mutual cooperation’.
Needless to say, there is no suggestion that the bacteria work all this out in their nasty little heads!
Selection on generations of bacteria has presumably built into them an unconscious rule of thumb which works by purely biochemical means.
Plants, according to Axelrod and Hamilton, may even take revenge, again obviously unconsciously.
Fig trees and fig wasps share an intimate cooperative relationship.
The fig that you eat is not really a fruit.
There is a tiny hole at the end, and if you go into this hole (you'd have to be as small as a fig wasp to do so, and they are minute: thankfully too small to notice when you eat a fig), you find hundreds of tiny flowers lining the walls.
The fig is a dark indoor hothouse for flowers, an indoor pollination chamber.
And the only agents that can do the pollinating are fig wasps.
The tree, then, benefits from harbouring the wasps.
But what is in it for the wasps?
They lay their eggs in some of the tiny flowers, which the larvae then eat.
They pollinate other flowers within the same fig.
‘Defecting’, for a wasp, would mean laying eggs in too many of the flowers in a fig and pollinating too few of them.
But how could a fig tree ‘retaliate'?
According to Axelrod and Hamilton, ‘It turns out in many cases that if a fig wasp entering a young fig does not pollinate enough flowers for seeds and instead lays eggs in almost all, the tree cuts off the developing fig at an early stage.
All progeny of the wasp then perish.’
A bizarre example of what appears to be a Tit for Tat arrangement in nature was discovered by Eric Fischer in a hermaphrodite fish, the sea bass.
Unlike us, these fish don't have their sex determined at conception by their chromosomes.
Instead, every individual is capable of performing both female and male functions.
In any one spawning episode they shed either eggs or sperm.
They form monogamous pairs and, within the pair, take turns to play the male and female roles.
Now, we may surmise that any individual fish, if it could get away with it, would ‘prefer’ to play the male role all the time, because the male role is cheaper.
Putting it another way, an individual that succeeded in persuading its partner to play the female most of the time would gain all the benefits of ‘her’ economic investment in eggs, while ‘he’has resources left over to spend on other things, for instance on mating with other fish.
In fact, what Fischer observed was that the fishes operate a system of pretty strict alternation.
This is just what we should expect if they are playing Tit for Tat.
And it is plausible that they should, because it does appear that the game is a true Prisoner's Dilemma, albeit a somewhat complicated one.
To play the COOPERATE card means to play the female role when it is your turn to do so.
Attempting to play the male role when it is y r turn to play the female is equivalent to playing the DEFECT card.
Defection is vulnerable to retaliation: the partner can refuse to play the female role next time it is ‘her’(his?) turn to do so, or ‘she’ can simply terminate the whole relationship.
Fischer did indeed observe that pairs with an uneven sharing of sex roles tended to break up.
A question that sociologists and psychologists sometimes ask is why blood donors (in countries, such as Britain, where they are not paid) give blood.
I find it hard to believe that the answer lies in reciprocity or disguised selfishness in any simple sense.
It is not as though regular blood donors receive preferential treatment when they come to need a transfusion.
They are not even issued with little gold stars to wear.
Maybe I am naïve, but I find myself tempted to see it as a genuine case of pure, disinterested altruism.
Be that as it may, blood-sharing in vampire bats seems to fit the Axelrod model well.
We learn this from the work of G. S. Wilkinson.
Vampires, as is well known, feed on blood at night.
It is not easy for them to get a meal, but if they do it is likely to be a big one.
When dawn comes, some individuals will have been unlucky and return completely empty, while those individuals that have managed to find a victim are likely to have sucked a surplus of blood.
On a subsequent night the luck may run the other way.
So, it looks like a promising case for a bit of reciprocal altruism.
Wilkinson found that those individuals who struck lucky on any one night did indeed sometimes donate blood, by regurgitation, to their less fortunate comrades.
Out of 110 regurgitations that Wilkinson witnessed, 77 could easily be understood as cases of mothers feeding their children, and many other instances of blood-sharing involved other kinds of genetic relatives.
There still remained, however, some examples of blood-sharing among unrelated bats, cases where the ‘blood is thicker than water’ explanation would not fit the facts.
Significantly the individuals involved here tended to be frequent roostmates — they had every opportunity to interact with one another repeatedly, as is required for an Iterated Prisoner's Dilemma.
But were the other requirements for a Prisoner's Dilemma met?
The payoff matrix in Figure D is what we should expect if they were.
Do vampire economics really conform to this table?
Wilkinson looked at the rate at which starved vampires lose weight.
From this he calculated the time it would take a sated bat to starve to death, the time it would take an empty bat to starve to death, and all intermediates.
This enabled him to cash out blood in the currency of hours of prolonged life.
He found, not really surprisingly, that the exchange rate is different, depending upon how starved a bat is.
A given amount of blood adds more hours to the life of a highly starved bat than to a less starved one.
In other words, although the act of donating blood would increase the chances of the donor dying, this increase was small compared with the increase in the recipient's chances of surviving.
Economically speaking, then, it seems plausible that vampire economics conform to the rules of a Prisoner's Dilemma.
The blood that the donor gives up is less precious to her (social groups in vampires are female groups) than the same quantity of blood is to the recipient.
On her unlucky nights she really would benefit enormously from a gift of blood.
But on her lucky nights she would benefit slightly, if she could get away with it, from defecting — refusing to donate blood.
‘Getting away with it’, of course, means something only if the bats are adopting some kind of Tit for Tat strategy.
So, are the other conditions for the evolution of Tit for Tat reciprocation met?
In particular, can these bats recognize one another as individuals?
Wilkinson did an experiment with captive bats, proving that they can.
The basic idea was to take one bat away for a night and starve it while the others were all fed.
The unfortunate starved bat was then returned to the roost, and Wilkinson watched to see who, if anyone, gave it food.
The experiment was repeated many times, with the bats taking turns to be the starved victim.
The key point was that this population of captive bats was a mixture of two separate groups, taken from caves many miles apart.
If vampires are capable of recognizing their friends, the experimentally starved bat should turn out to be fed only by those from its own original cave.
That is pretty much what happened.
Thirteen cases of donation were observed.
In twelve out of these thirteen, the donor bat was an ‘old friend’ of the starved victim, taken from the same cave; in only one out of the thirteen cases was the starved victim fed by a ‘new friend’, not taken from the same cave.
Of course this could be a coincidence but we can calculate the odds against this.
They come to less than one in 500.
It is pretty safe to conclude that the bats really were biased in favour of feeding old friends rather than strangers from a different cave.
Vampires are great mythmakers.
To devotees of Victorian Gothic they are dark forces that terrorize by night, sapping vital fluids, sacrificing an innocent life merely to gratify a thirst.
Combine this with that other Victorian myth, nature red in tooth and claw, and aren't vampires the very incarnation of deepest fears about the world of the selfish gene?
As for me, I am sceptical of all myths.
If we want to know where the truth lies in particular cases, we have to look.
What the Darwinian corpus gives us is not detailed expectations about particular organisms.
It gives us something subtler and more valuable: understanding of principle.
But if we must have myths, the real facts about vampires could tell a different moral tale.
To the bats themselves, not only is blood thicker than water.
They rise above the bonds of kinship, forming their own lasting ties of loyal blood-brotherhood.
Vampires could form the vanguard of a comfortable new myth, a myth of sharing, mutualistic cooperation.
They could herald the benignant idea that, even with selfish genes at the helm, nice guys can finish first.
The long reach of the gene
An uneasy tension disturbs the heart of the selfish gene theory.
It is the tension between gene and individual body as fundamental agent of life.
On the one hand we have the beguiling image of independent DNA replicators, skipping like chamois, free and untrammelled down the generations, temporarily brought together in throwaway survival machines, immortal coils shuffling off an endless succession of mortal ones as they forge towards their separate eternities.
On the other hand we look at the individual bodies themselves and each one is obviously a coherent, integrated, immensely complicated machine, with a conspicuous unity of purpose.
A body doesn't look like the product of a loose and temporary federation of warring genetic agents who hardly have time to get acquainted before embarking in sperm or egg for the next leg of the great genetic diaspora.
It has one single-minded brain which coordinates a cooperative of limbs and sense organs to achieve one end.
The body looks and behaves like a pretty impressive agent in its own right.
In some chapters of this book we have indeed thought of the individual organism as an agent, striving to maximize its success in passing on all its genes.
We imagined individual animals making complicated economic ‘as if ’ calculations about the genetic benefits of various courses of action.
Yet in other chapters the fundamental rationale was presented from the point of view of genes.
Without the gene's-eye view of life there is no particular reason why an organism should ‘care’ about its reproductive success and that of its relatives, rather than, for instance , its own longevity.
How shall we resolve this paradox of the two ways of looking at life?
My own attempt to do so is spelled out in The Extended Phenotype , the book that, more than anything else I have achieved in my professional life, is my pride and joy.
This chapter is a brief distillation of a few of the themes in that book, but really I'd almost rather you stopped reading now and switched to The Extended Phenotype !
On any sensible view of the matter Darwinian selection does not work on genes directly.
DNA is cocooned in protein, swaddled in membranes, shielded from the world and invisible to natural selection.
If selection tried to choose DNA molecules directly it would hardly find any criterion by which to do so.
All genes look alike, just as all recording tapes look alike.
The important differences between genes emerge only in their effects .
This usually means effects on the processes of embryonic development and hence on bodily form and behaviour.
Successful genes are genes that, in the environment influenced by all the other genes in a shared embryo, have beneficial effects on that embryo.
Beneficial means that they make the embryo likely to develop into a successful adult, an adult likely to reproduce and pass those very same genes on to future generations.
The technical word phenotype is used for the bodily manifestation of a gene, the effect that a gene, in comparison with its alleles, has on the body, via development.
The phenotypic effect of some particular gene might be, say, green eye colour.
In practice most genes have more than one phenotypic effect, say green eye colour and curly hair.
Natural selection favours some genes rather than others not because of the nature of the genes themselves, but because of their consequences — their phenotypic effects.
Darwinians have usually chosen to discuss genes whose phenotypic effects benefit, or penalize, the survival and reproduction of whole bodies.
They have tended not to consider benefits to the gene itself.
This is partly why the paradox at the heart of the theory doesn't normally make itself felt.
For instance a gene may be successful through improving the running speed of a predator.
The whole predator's body, including all its genes, is more successful because it runs faster.
Its speed helps it survive to have children; and therefore more copies of all its genes, including the gene for fast running, are passed on.
Here the paradox conveniently disappears because what is good for one gene is good for all.
But what if a gene exerted a phenotypic effect that was good for itself but bad for the rest of the genes in the body?
This is not a flight of fancy.
Cases of it are known, for instance the intriguing phenomenon called meiotic drive.
Meiosis, you will remember, is the special kind of cell division that halves the number of chromosomes and gives rise to sperm cells or egg cells.
Normal meiosis is a completely fair lottery.
Of each pair of alleles, only one can be the lucky one that enters any given sperm or egg.
But it is equally likely to be either one of the pair, and if you average over lots of sperms (or eggs) it turns out that half of them contain one allele, half the other.
Meiosis is fair, like tossing a penny.
But, though we proverbially think of tossing a penny as random, even that is a physical process influenced by a multitude of circumstances — the wind, precisely how hard the penny is flicked, and so on.
Meiosis, too, is a physical process, and it can be influenced by genes.
What if a mutant gene arose that just happened to have an effect, not upon something obvious like eye colour or curliness of hair, but upon meiosis itself?
Suppose it happened to bias meiosis in such a way that it, the mutant gene itself, was more likely than its allelic partner to end up in the egg.
There are such genes and they are called segregation distorters.
They have a diabolical simplicity.
When a segregation distorter arises by mutation, it will spread inexorably through the population at the expense of its allele.
It is this that is known as meiotic drive.
It will happen even if the effects on bodily welfare, and on the welfare of all the other genes in the body, are disastrous.
Throughout this book we have been alert to the possibility of individual organisms ‘cheating’ in subtle ways against their social companions.
Here we are talking about single genes cheating against the other genes with which they share a body.
The geneticist James Crow has called them ‘genes that beat the system’.
One of the best-known segregation distorters is the so-called t gene in mice.
When a mouse has two t genes it either dies young or is sterile.
t is therefore said to be ‘lethal’ in the homozygous state.
If a male mouse has only one t gene it will be a normal, healthy mouse except in one remarkable respect.
If you examine such a male's sperms you will find that up to 95 per cent of them contain the t gene, only 5 per cent the normal allele.
This is obviously a gross distortion of the 50 per cent ratio that we expect.
Whenever, in a wild population, a t allele happens to arise by mutation, it immediately spreads like a brushfire.
How could it not, when it has such a huge unfair advantage in the meiotic lottery?
It spreads so fast that, pretty soon, large numbers of individuals in the population inherit the t gene in double dose (that is, from both their parents).
These individuals die or are sterile, and before long the whole local population is likely to be driven extinct.
There is some evidence that wild populations of mice have, in the past, gone extinct through epidemics of t genes.
Not all segregation distorters have such destructive side-effects as t .
Nevertheless, most of them have at least some adverse consequences.
(Almost all genetic side-effects are bad, and a new mutation will normally spread only if its bad effects are outweighed by its good effect.
If both good and bad effects apply to the whole body, the net effect can still be good for the body.
But if the bad effects are on the body, and the good effects are on the gene alone, from the body's point of view the net effect is all bad.)
In spite of its deleterious side-effects, if a segregation distorter arises by mutation it will surely tend to spread through the population.
Natural selection (which, after all, works at the genic level) favours the segregation distorter, even though its effects at the level of the individual organism are likely to be bad.
Although segregation distorters exist they aren't very common.
We could go on to ask why they aren't common, which is another way of asking why the process of meiosis is normally fair, as scrupulously impartial as tossing a good penny.
We'll find that the answer drops out once we have understood why organisms exist anyway.
The individual organism is something whose existence most biologists take for granted, probably because its parts do pull together in such a united and integrated way.
Questions about life are conventionally questions about organisms.
Biologists ask why organisms do this, why organisms do that.
They frequently ask why organisms group themselves into societies.
They don't ask — though they should — why living matter groups itself into organisms in the first place.
Why isn't the sea still a primordial battleground of free and independent replicators?
Why did the ancient replicators club together to make, and reside in, lumbering robots, and why are those robots — individual bodies, you and me — so large and so complicated?
It is hard for many biologists e en to see that there is a question here at all.
This is because it is second nature for them to pose their questions at the level of the individual organism.
Some biologists go so far as to see DNA as a device used by organisms to reproduce themselves, just as an eye is a device used by organisms to see!
Readers of this book will recognize that this attitude is an error of great profundity.
It is the truth turned crashingly on its head.
They will also recognize that the alternative attitude, the selfish gene view of life, has a deep problem of its own.
That problem — almost the reverse one — is why individual organisms exist at all, especially in a form so large and coherently purposeful as to mislead biologists into turning the truth upside down .
To solve our problem, we have to begin by purging our minds of old attitudes that covertly take the individual organism for granted; otherwise we shall be begging the question.
The instrument with which we shall purge our minds is the idea that I call the extended phenotype.
It is to this, and what it means, that I now turn.
The phenotypic effects of a gene are normally seen as all the effects that it has on the body in which it sits.
This is the conventional definition.
But we shall now see that the phenotypic effects of a gene need to be thought of as all the effects that it has on the world .
It may be that a gene's effects, as a matter of fact, turn out to be confined to the succession of bodies in which the gene sits.
But, if so, it will be just as a matter of fact.
It will not be something that ought to be part of our very definition.
In all this, remember that the phenotypic effects of a gene are the tools by which it levers itself into the next generation.
All that I am going to add is that the tools may reach outside the individual body wall.
What might it mean in practice to speak of a gene as having an extended phenotypic effect on the world outside the body in which it sits?
Examples that spring to mind are artefacts like beaver dams, bird nests and caddis houses.
Caddis flies are rather nondescript, drab brown insects, which most of us fail to notice as they fly rather clumsily over rivers.
That is when they are adults.
But before they emerge as adults they have a rather longer incarnation as larvae walking about the river bottom.
And caddis larvae are anything but nondescript.
They are among the most remarkable creatures on earth.
Using cement of their own manufacture, they skilfully build tubular houses for themselves out of materials that they pick up from the bed of the stream.
The house is a mobile home, carried about as the caddis walks, like the shell of a snail or hermit crab except that the animals builds it instead of growing it or finding it.
Some species of caddis use sticks as building materials, others fragments of dead leaves, other small snail shells.
But perhaps the most impressive caddis houses are the ones built in local stone.
The caddis chooses its stones carefully, rejecting those that are too large or too small for the current gap in the wall, even rotating each stone until it achieves the snuggest fit.
Incidentally, why does this impress us so?
If we forced ourselves to think in a detached way we surely ought to be more impressed by the architecture of the caddis's eye, or of its elbow joint, than by the comparatively modest architecture of its stone house.
After all, the eye and the elbow joint are far more complicated and ‘designed’ than the house.
Yet, perhaps because the eye and elbow joint develop in the same kind of way as our own eyes and elbows develop, a building process for which we, inside our mothers, claim no credit, we are illogically more impressed by the house.
Having digressed so far, I cannot resist going a little further.
Impressed as we may be by the caddis house, we are nevertheless, paradoxically, less impressed than we would be by equivalent achievements in animals closer to ourselves.
Just imagine the banner headlines if a marine biologist were to discover a species of dolphin that wove large, intricately meshed fishing nets, twenty dolphin-lengths in diameter!
Yet we take a spider web for granted, as a nuisance in the house rather than as one of the wonders of the world.
And think of the furore if Jane Goodall returned from Gombe stream with photographs of wild chimpanzees building their own houses, well roofed and insulated, of painstakingly selected stones neatly bonded and mortared!
Yet caddis larvae, who do precisely that, command only passing interest.
It is sometimes said, as though in defence of this double standard, that spiders and caddises achieve their feats of architecture by ‘instinct’.
But so what?
In a way this makes them all the more impressive.
Let us get back to the main argument.
The caddis house, nobody could doubt, is an adaptation, evolved by Darwinian selection.
It must have been favoured by selection, in very much the same way as, say, the hard shell of lobsters was favoured.
It is a protective covering for the body.
As such it is of benefit to the whole organism and all its genes.
But we have now taught ourselves to see benefits to the organism as incidental, as far as natural selection is concerned.
The benefits that actually count are the benefits to those genes that give the shell its protective properties.
In the case of the lobster this is the usual story.
The lobster's shell is obviously a part of its body.
But what about the caddis house?
Natural selection favoured those ancestral caddis genes that caused their possessors to build effective houses.
The genes worked on behaviour, presumably by influencing the embryonic development of the nervous system.
But what a geneticist would actually see is the effect of genes on the shape and other properties of houses.
The geneticist should recognize genes ‘for’ house shape in precisely the same sense as there are genes for, say, leg shape.
Admittedly, nobody has actually studied the genetics of caddis houses.
To do so you would have to keep careful pedigree records of caddises bred in captivity, and breeding them is difficult.
But you don't have to study genetics to be sure that there are, or at least once were, genes influencing differences between caddis houses.
All you need is good reason to believe that the caddis house is a Darwinian adaptation.
In that case there must have been genes controlling variation in caddis houses, for selection cannot produce adaptations unless there are hereditary differences among which to select.
Although geneticists may think it an odd idea, it is therefore sensible for us to speak of genes ‘for’ stone shape, stone size, stone hardness and so on.
Any geneticist who objects to this language must, to be consistent, object to speaking of genes for eye colour, genes for wrinkling in peas and so on.
One reason the idea might seem odd in the case of stones is that stones are not living material.
Moreover, the influence of genes upon stone properties seems especially indirect.
A geneticist might wish to claim that the direct influence of the genes is upon the nervous system that mediates the stone-choosing behaviour, not upon the stones themselves.
But I invite such a geneticist to look carefully at what it can ever mean to speak of genes exerting an influence on a nervous system.
All that genes can really influence directly is protein synthesis.
A gene's influence upon a nervous system, or, for that matter, upon the colour of an eye or the wrinkliness of a pea, is always indirect.
The gene determines a protein sequence that influences X that influences Y that influences Z that eventually influences the wrinkliness of the seed or the cellular wiring up of the nervous system.
The caddis house is only a further extension of this kind of sequence.
Stone hardness is an extended phenotypic effect of the caddis's genes.
If it is legitimate to speak of a gene as affecting the wrinkliness of a pea or the nervous system of an animal (all geneticists think it is) then it must also be legitimate to speak of a gene as affecting the hardness of the stones in a caddis house.
Startling thought, isn't it?
Yet the reasoning is inescapable.
We are ready for the next step in the argument: genes in one organism can have extended phenotypic effects on the body of another organism.
Caddis houses helped us take the previous step; snail shells will help us take this one.
The shell plays the same role for a snail as the stone house does for a caddis larva.
It is secreted by the snail's own cells, so a conventional geneticist would be happy to speak of genes ‘for’ shell qualities such as shell thickness.
But it turns out that snails parasitized by certain kinds of fluke (flatworm) have extra-thick shells.
What can this thickening mean?
If the parasitized snails had had extra-thin shells, we'd happily explain this as an obvious debilitating effect on the snail's constitution.
But a thicker shell?
A thicker shell presumably protects the snail better.
It looks as though the parasites are actually helping their host by improving its shell.
But are they?
We have to think more carefully.
If thicker shells are really better for the snail, why don't they have them anyway?
The answer probably lies in economics.
Making a shell is costly for a snail.
It requires energy.
It requires calcium and other chemicals that have to be extracted from hard-won food.
All these resources, if they were not spent on making shell substance, could be spent on something else such as making more offspring.
A snail that spends lots of resources on making an extra-thick shell has bought safety for its own body.
But at what cost?
It may live longer, but it will be less successful at reproducing and may fail to pass on its genes.
Among the genes that fail to be passed on will be the genes for making extra-thick shells.
In other words, it is possible for a shell to be too thick as well as(more obviously) too thin.
So, when a fluke makes a snail secrete an extra-thick shell, the fluke is not doing the snail a good turn unless the fluke is bearing the economic cost of thickening the shell.
And we can safely bet that it isn't being so generous.
The fluke is exerting some hidden chemical influence on the snail that forces the snail to shift away from its own ‘preferred’ thickness of shell.
It may be prolonging the snail's life.
But it is not helping the snail's genes.
What is in it for the fluke?
Why does it do it?
My conjecture is the following.
Both snail genes and fluke genes stand to gain from the snail's bodily survival, all other things being equal.
But survival is not the same thing as reproduction a d there is likely to be a trade-off.
Whereas snail genes stand to gain from the snail's reproduction, fluke genes don't.
This is because any given fluke has no particular expectation that its genes will be housed in its present host's offspring.
They might be, but so might those of any of its fluke rivals.
Given that snail longevity has to be bought at the cost of some loss in the snail's reproductive success, the fluke genes are ‘happy’ to make the snail pay that cost, since they have no interest in the snail's reproducing itself.
The snail genes are not happy to pay that cost, since their long-term future depends upon the snail reproducing.
So, I suggest that fluke genes exert an influence on the shell-secreting cells of the snail, an influence that benefits themselves but is costly to the snail's genes.
This theory is testable, though it hasn't been tested yet.
We are now in a position to generalize the lesson of the caddises.
If I am right about what the fluke genes are doing, it follows that we can legitimately speak of fluke genes as influencing snail bodies, in just the same sense as snail genes influence snail bodies.
It is as if the genes reached outside their ‘own’ body and manipulated the world outside.
As in the case of the caddises, this language might make geneticists uneasy.
They are accustomed to the effects of a gene being limited to the body in which it sits.
But, again as in the case of the caddises, a close look at what geneticists ever mean by a gene having ‘effects’ shows that such uneasiness is misplaced.
We need to accept only that the change in snail shell is a fluke adaptation.
If it is, it has to have come about by Darwinian selection of fluke genes.
We have demonstrated that the phenotypic effects of a gene can extend, not only to inanimate objects like stones, but to ‘other’ living bodies too.
The story of the snails and flukes is only the beginning.
Parasites of all types have long been known to exert fascinatingly insidious influences on their hosts.
A species of microscopic protozoan parasite called Nosema , which infests the larvae of flour beetles, has ‘discovered’ how to manufacture a chemical that is very special for the beetles.
Like other insects, these beetles have a hormone called the juvenile hormone which keeps larvae as larvae.
The normal change from larva to adult is triggered by the larva ceasing production of juvenile hormone.
The parasite Nosema has succeeded in synthesizing (a close chemical analogue of) this hormone.
Millions of Nosema club together to mass-produce juvenile hormone in the beetle larva's body, thereby preventing it from turning into an adult.
Instead it goes on growing, ending up as a giant larva more than twice the weight of a normal adult.
No good for propagating beetle genes, but a cornucopia for Nosema parasites.
Giantism in beetle larvae is an extended phenotypic effect of protozoan genes.
And here is a case history to provoke even more Freudian anxiety than the Peter Pan beetles — parasitic castration!
Crabs are parasitized by a creature called Sacculina .
Sacculina is related to barnacles, though you would think, to look at it, that it was a parasitic plant.
It drives an elaborate root system deep into the tissues of the unfortunate crab, and sucks nourishment from its body.
It is probably no accident that among the first organs that it attacks are the crab's testicles or ovaries; it spares the organs that the crab needs to survive — as opposed to reproduce — till later.
The crab is effectively castrated by the parasite.
Like a fattened bullock, the castrated crab diverts energy and resources away from reproduction and into its own body — rich pickings for the parasite at the expense of the crab's reproduction.
Very much the same story as I conjectured for Nosema in the flour beetle and for the fluke in the snail.
In all three cases the changes in the host, if we accept that they are Darwinian adaptations for the benefit of the parasite, must be seen as extended phenotypic effects of parasite genes.
Genes, then, reach outside their ‘own’ body to influence phenotypes in other bodies.
To quite a large extent the interests of parasite genes and host genes may coincide.
From the selfish gene point of view we can think of both fluke genes and snail genes as ‘parasites’ in the snail body.
Both gain from being surrounded by the same protective shell, though they diverge from one another in the precise thickness of shell that they ‘prefer’.
This divergence arises, fundamentally, from the fact that their method of leaving this snail's body and entering another one is different.
For the snail genes the method of leaving is via snail sperms or eggs.
For the fluke's genes it is very different.
Without going into the details (they are distractingly complicated) what matters is that their genes do not leave the snail's body in the snail's sperms or eggs.
I suggest that the most important question to ask about any parasite is this.
Are its genes transmitted to future generations via the same vehicles as the host's genes?
If they are not, I would expect it to damage the host, in one way or another.
But if they are, the parasite will do all that it can to help the host, not only to survive but to reproduce.
Over evolutionary time it will cease to be a parasite, will cooperate with the host, and may eventually merge into the host's tissues and become unrecognizable as a parasite at all.
Maybe, as I suggested on page 182, our cells have come far across this evolutionary spectrum: we are all relics of ancient parasitic mergers.
Look at what can happen when parasite genes and host genes do share a common exit.
Wood-boring ambrosia beetles (of the species Xyleborus ferrugineus)are parasitized by bacteria that not only live in their host's body but also use the host's eggs as their transport into a new host.
The genes of such parasites therefore stand to gain from almost exactly the same future circumstances as the genes of their host.
The two sets of genes can be expected to ‘pull together’ for just the same reasons as all the genes of one individual organism normally pull together.
It is irrelevant that some of them happen to be ‘beetle genes’, while others happen to be ‘bacterial genes’.
Both sets of genes are ‘interested’ in beetle survival and the propagation of beetle eggs, because both ‘see’beetle eggs as their passport to the future.
So the bacterial genes share a common destiny with their host's genes, and in my interpretation we should expect the bacteria to cooperate with their beetles in all aspects of life.
It turns out that ‘cooperate’ is putting it mildly.
The service they perform for the beetles could hardly be more intimate.
These beetles happen to be haplodiploid, like bees and ants (see Chapter 10).
If an egg is fertilized by a male, it always develops into a female.
An unfertilized egg develops into a male.
Males, in other words, have no father.
The eggs that give rise to them develop spontaneously, without being penetrated by a sperm.
But, unlike the eggs of bees and ants, ambrosia beetle eggs do need to be penetrated by something .
This is where the bacteria come in.
They prick the unfertilized eggs into action, provoking them to develop into male beetles.
These bacteria are, of course, just the kind of parasites that, I argued, should cease to be parasitic and become mutualistic, precisely because they are transmitted in the eggs of the host, together with the host's ‘own’ genes.
Ultimately, their ‘own’ bodies are likely to disappear, merging into the ‘host’body completely.
A revealing spectrum can still be found today among species of hydra — small, sedentary, tentacled animals, like freshwater sea anemones.
Their tissues tend to be parasitized by algae.
(The ‘g’ should be pronounced hard.
For unknown reasons some biologists, not least in America, have recently taken to saying Algy as in Algernon, not only for the plural ‘algae’, which is — just — forgivable, but also for the singular ‘alga’, which is not.)
In the species Hydra vulgaris and Hydra attenuata , the algae are real parasites of the hydras, making them ill.
In Chlorohydra viridissima , on the other hand, the algae are never absent from the tissues of the hydras, and make a useful contribution to their well-being, providing them with oxygen.
Now here is the interesting point.
Just as we should expect, in Chlorohydra the algae transmit themselves to the next generation by means of the hydra's egg.
In the other two species they do not.
The interests of alga genes and Chlorohydra genes coincide.
Both are interested in doing everything in their power to increase production of Chlorohydra eggs.
But the genes of the other two species of hydra do not ‘agree’ with the genes of their algae.
Not to the same extent, anyway.
Both sets of genes may have an interest in the survival of hydra bodies.
But only hydra genes care about hydra reproduction.
So the algae hang on as debilitating parasites rather than evolving towards benign cooperation.
The key point, to repeat it, is that a parasite whose genes aspire to the same destiny as the genes of its host shares all the interests of its host and will eventually cease to act parasitically.
Destiny, in this case, means future generations.
Chlorohydra genes and alga genes, beetle genes and bacteria genes, can get into the future only via the host's eggs.
Therefore, whatever ‘calculations’ the parasite genes make about optimal policy, in any department of life, will converge on exactly, or nearly exactly, the same optimal policy as similar ‘calculations’made by host genes.
In the case of the snail and its fluke parasites, we decided that their preferred shell thicknesses were divergent.
In the case of the ambrosia beetle and its bacteria, host and parasite will agree in preferring the same wing length, and every other feature of the beetle's body.
We can predict this without knowing any details of exactly what the beetles might use their wings, or anything else, for.
We can predict it simply from our reasoning that both the beetle genes and the bacterial genes will take whatever steps lie in their power to engineer the same future events — events favourable to the propagation of beetle eggs.
We can take this argument to its logical conclusion and apply it to normal, ‘own’ genes.
Our own genes cooperate with one another, not because they are our own but because they share the same outlet — sperm or egg — into the future.
If any genes of an organism, such as a human, could discover a way of spreading themselves that did not depend on the conventional sperm of egg route, they would take it and be less cooperative.
This is because they would stand to gain by a different set of future outcomes from the other genes in the body.
We've already seen examples of genes that bias meiosis in their own favour.
Perhaps there are also genes that have broken out of the sperm/egg ‘proper channels’ altogether and pioneered a sideways route.
There are fragments of DNA that are not incorporated in chromosomes but float freely and multiply in the fluid contents of cells, especially bacterial cells.
They go under various names such as viroids or plasmids.
A plasmid is even smaller than a virus, and it normally consists of only a few genes.
Some plasmids are capable of splicing themselves seamlessly into a chromosome.
So smooth is the splice that you can't see the join: the plasmid is indistinguishable from any other part of the chromosome.
The same plasmids can also cut themselves out again.
This ability of DNA to cut and splice, to jump in and out of chromosomes at the drop of a hat, is one of the more exciting facts that have come to light since the first edition of this book was published.
Indeed the recent evidence on plasmids can be seen as beautiful supporting evidence for the conjectures near bottom of page 182 (which seemed a bit wild at the time).
From some points of view it does not really matter whether these fragments originated as invading parasites or breakaway rebels.
Their likely behaviour will be the same.
I shall talk about a breakaway fragment in order to emphasize my point.
Consider a rebel stretch of human DNA that is capable of snipping itself out of its chromosome, floating freely in the cell, perhaps multiplying itself up into many copies, and then splicing itself into another chromosome.
What unorthodox alternative routes into the future could such a rebel replicator exploit?
We are losing cells continually from our skin; much of the dust in our houses consists of our sloughed-off cells.
We must be breathing in one another 's cells all the time.
If you draw your fingernail across the inside of your mouth it will come away with hundreds of living cells.
The kisses and caresses of lovers must transfer multitudes of cells both ways.
A stretch of rebel DNA could hitch a ride in any of these cells.
If genes could discover a chink of an unorthodox route through to another body (alongside, or instead of, the orthodox sperm or egg route), we must expect natural selection to favour their opportunism and improve it.
As for the precise methods that they use, there is no reason why these should be any different from the machinations — all too predictable to a selfish gene/extended phenotype theorist — of viruses.
When we have a cold or a cough, we normally think of the symptoms as annoying byproducts of the virus's activities.
But in some cases it seems more probable that they are deliberately engineered by the virus to help it to travel from one host to another.
Not content with simply being breathed into the atmosphere, the virus makes us sneeze or cough explosively.
The rabies virus is transmitted in saliva when one animal bites another.
In dogs, one of the symptoms of the disease is that normally peaceful and friendly animals become ferocious biters, foaming at the mouth.
Ominously too, instead of staying within a mile or so of home like normal dogs, they turn into restless wanderers, propagating the virus far afield.
It has even been suggested that the well-known hydrophobic symptom encourages the dog to shake the wet foam from its mouth — and with it the virus.
I do not know of any direct evidence that sexually transmitted diseases increase the libido of sufferers, but I conjecture that it would be worth looking into.
Certainly at least one alleged aphrodisiac, Spanish Fly, is said to work by inducing an itch…and making people itch is just the kind of thing viruses are good at.
The point of comparing rebel human DNA with invading parasitic viruses is that there really isn't any important difference between them.
Viruses may well, indeed, have originated as collections of breakaway genes.
If we want to erect any distinction, it should be between genes that pass from body to body via the orthodox route of sperms or eggs, and genes that pass from body to body via unorthodox, ‘sideways’ routes.
Both classes may include genes that originated as ‘own’ chromosomal genes.
And both classes may include genes that originated as external, invading parasites.
Or perhaps, as I speculated on page 182, all ‘own’ chromosomal genes should be regarded as mutually parasitic on one another.
The important difference between my two classes of genes lies in the divergent circumstances from which they stand to benefit in the future.
A cold virus gene and a breakaway human chromosomal gene agree with one another in ‘wanting’ their host to sneeze.
An orthodox chromosomal gene and a venereally transmitted virus agree with one another in wanting their host to copulate.
It is an intriguing thought that both would want the host to be sexually attractive.
More, an orthodox chromosomal gene and a virus that is transmitted inside the host's egg would agree in wanting the host to succeed not just in its courtship but in every detailed aspect of its life, down to being a loyal, doting parent and even grandparent.
The caddis lives inside its house, and the parasites that I have so far discussed have lived inside their hosts.
The genes, then, are physically close to their extended phenotypic effects, as close as genes ordinarily are to their conventional phenotypes.
But genes can act at a distance; extended phenotypes can extend a long way.
One of the longest that I can think of spans a lake.
Like a spider web or a caddis house, a beaver dam is among the true wonders of the world.
It is not entirely clear what its Darwinian purpose is, but it certainly must have one, for the beavers expend so much time and energy to build it.
The lake that it creates probably serves to protect the beaver's lodge from predators.
It also provides a convenient waterway for travelling and for transporting logs.
Beavers use flotation for the same reason as Canadian lumber companies use rivers and eighteenth-century coal merchants used canals.
Whatever its benefits, a beaver lake is a conspicuous and characteristic feature of the landscape.
It is a phenotype, no less than the beaver's teeth and tail, and it has evolved under the influence of Darwinian selection.
Darwinian selection has to have genetic variation to work on.
Here the choice must have been between good lakes and less good lakes.
Selection favoured beaver genes that made good lakes for transporting trees, just as it favoured genes that made good teeth for felling them.
Beaver lakes are extended phenotypic effects of beaver genes, and they can extend over several hundreds of yards.
A long reach indeed!
Parasites, too, don't have to live inside their hosts; their genes can express themselves in hosts at a distance.
Cuckoo nestlings don't live inside robins or reed-warblers; they don't suck their blood or devour their tissues, yet we have no hesitation in labelling them as parasites.
Cuckoo adaptations to manipulate the behaviour of foster-parents can be looked upon as extended phenotypic action at a distance by cuckoo genes.
It is easy to empathize with foster parents duped into incubating the cuckoo's eggs.
Human egg collectors, too, have been fooled by the uncanny resemblance of cuckoo eggs to, say, meadow-pipit eggs or reed-warbler eggs (different races of female cuckoos specialize in different host species).
What is harder to understand is the behaviour of foster-parents later in the season, towards young cuckoos that are almost fledged.
The cuckoo is usually much larger, in some cases grotesquely larger, than its ‘parent’.
I am looking at a photograph of an adult dunnock, so small in comparison to its monstrous foster-child that it has to perch on its back in order to feed it.
Here we feel less sympathy for the host.
We marvel at its stupidity, its gullibility.
Surely any fool should be able to see that there is something wrong with a child like that.
I think that cuckoo nestlings must be doing rather more than just ‘fooling’ their hosts, more than just pretending to be something they aren't.
They seem to act on the host's nervous system in rather the same way as an addictive drug.
This is not so hard to sympathize with, even for those with no experience of addictive drugs.
A man can be aroused, even to erection, by a printed photograph of a woman's body.
He is not ‘fooled’ into thinking that the pattern of printing ink really is a woman.
He knows that he is only looking at ink on paper, yet his nervous system responds to it in the same kind of way as it might respond to a real woman.
We may find the attractions of a particular member of the opposite sex irresistible, even though the better judgment of our better self tells us that a liaison with that person is not in anyone's long-term interests.
The same can be true of the irresistible attractions of unhealthy food.
The dunnock probably has no conscious awareness of its long-term best interests, so it is even easier to understand that its nervous system might find certain kinds of stimulation irresistible.
So enticing is the red gape of a cuckoo nestling that it is not uncommon for ornithologists to see a bird dropping food into the mouth of a baby cuckoo sitting in some other bird's nest!
A bird may be flying home, carrying food for its own young.
Suddenly, out of the corner of its eye, it sees the red super-gape of a young cuckoo, in the nest of a bird of some quite different species.
It is diverted to the alien nest where it drops into the cuckoo's mouth the food that had been destined for its own young.
The ‘irresistibility theory’ fits with the views of early German ornithologists who referred to foster-parents as behaving like ‘addicts’and to the cuckoo nestling as their ‘vice,.
It is only fair to add that this kind of language finds less favour with some modern experimenters.
But there's no doubt that if we do assume that the cuckoo's gape is a powerful drug-like superstimulus, it becomes very much easier to explain what is going on.
It becomes easier to sympathize with the behaviour of the diminutive parent standing on the back of its monstrous child.
It is not being stupid.
‘Fooled’ is the wrong word to use.
Its nervous system is being controlled, as irresistibly as if it were a helpless drug addict, or as if the cuckoo were a scientist plugging electrodes into its brain.
But even if we now feel more personal sympathy for the manipulated foster-parent, we can still ask why natural selection has allowed the cuckoos to get away with it.
Why haven't host nervous systems evolved resistance to the red gape drug?
Maybe selection hasn't yet had time to do its work.
Perhaps cuckoos have only in recent centuries started parasitizing their present hosts, and will in a few centuries be forced to give them up and victimize other species.
There is some evidence to support this theory.
But I can't help feeling that there must be more to it than that.
In the evolutionary ‘arms race’ between cuckoos and any host species, there is a sort of built-in unfairness, resulting from unequal costs of failure.
Each individual cuckoo nestling is descended from a long line of ancestral cuckoo nestlings, every single one of whom must have succeeded in manipulating its foster-parent.
Any cuckoo nestling that lost its hold, even momentarily, over its host would have died as a result.
But each individual foster-parent is descended from a long line of ancestors many of whom never encountered a cuckoo in their lives.
And those that did have a cuckoo in their nest could have succumbed to it and still lived to rear another brood next season.
The point is that there is an asymmetry in the cost of failure.
Genes for failure to resist enslavement by cuckoos can easily be passed down the generations of robins or dunnocks.
Genes for failure to enslave foster-parents cannot be passed down the generations of cuckoos.
This is what I meant by ‘built-in unfairness’, and by ‘asymmetry in the cost of failure’.
The point is summed up in one of Aesop's fables: ‘The rabbit runs faster than the fox, because the rabbit is running for his life while the fox is only running for his dinner.’
My colleague John Krebs and I have dubbed this the ‘life/ dinner principle’.
Because of the life/dinner principle, animals might at times behave in ways that are not in their own best interests, manipulated by some other animal.
Actually, in a sense they are acting in their own best interests: the whole point of the life/dinner principle is that they theoretically could resist manipulation but it would be too costly to do so.
Perhaps to resist manipulation by a cuckoo you need bigger eyes or a bigger brain, which would have overhead costs.
Rivals with a genetic tendency to resist manipulation would actually be less successful in passing on genes, because of the economic costs of resisting.
But we have once again slipped back into looking at life from the point of view of the individual organism rather than its genes.
When we talked about flukes and snails we accustomed ourselves to the idea that a parasite's genes could have phenotypic effects on the host's body, in exactly the same way as any animal's genes have phenotypic effects on its ‘own’ body.
We showed that the very idea of an ‘own’ body was a loaded assumption.
In one sense, all the genes in a body are ‘parasitic’ genes, whether we like to call them the body's ‘own, genes or not.
Cuckoos came into the discussion as an example of parasites not living inside the bodies of their hosts.
They manipulate their hosts in much the same way as internal parasites do, and the manipulation, as we have now seen, can be as powerful and irresistible as any internal drug or hormone.
As in the case of internal parasites, we should now rephrase the whole matter in terms of genes and extended phenotypes.
In the evolutionary arms race between cuckoos and hosts, advances on each side took the form of genetic mutations arising and being favoured by natural selection.
Whatever it is about the cuckoo's gape that acts like a drug on the host's nervous system, it must have originated as a genetic mutation.
This mutation worked via its effect on, say, the colour and shape of the young cuckoo's gape.
But even this was not its most immediate effect.
Its most immediate effect was upon unseen chemical happenings inside cells.
The effect of genes on colour and shape of gape is itself indirect.
And now here is the point.
Only a little more indirect is the effect of the same cuckoo genes on the behaviour of the besotted host.
In exactly the same sense as we may speak of cuckoo genes having (phenotypic) effects on the colour and shape of cuckoo gapes, so we may speak of cuckoo genes having (extended phenotypic) effects on host behaviour.
Parasite genes can have effects on host bodies, not just when the parasite lives inside the host where it can manipulate by direct chemical means, but when the parasite is quite separate from the host and manipulates it from a distance.
Indeed, as we are about to see, even chemical influences can act outside the body.
Cuckoos are remarkable and instructive creatures.
But almost any wonder among the vertebrates can be surpassed by the insects.
They have the advantage that there are just so many of them; my colleague Robert May has aptly observed that ‘to a good approximation, all species are insects.’
Insect ‘cuckoos’ defy listing; they are so numerous and their habit has been reinvented so often.
Some examples that we'll look at have gone beyond familiar cuckooism to fulfil the wildest fantasies that The Extended Phenotype might have inspired.
A bird cuckoo deposits her egg and disappears.
Some ant cuckoo females make their presence felt in more dramatic fashion.
I don't often give Latin names, but Bothriomyrmex regicidus and B. decapitans tell a story.
These two species are both parasites on other species of ants.
Among all ants, of course, the young are normally fed not by parents but by workers, so it is workers that any would-be cuckoo must fool or manipulate.
A useful first step is to dispose of the workers' own mother with her propensity to produce competing brood.
In these two species the parasite queen, all alone, steals into the nest of another ant species.
She seeks out the host queen, and rides about on her back while she quietly performs, to quote Edward Wilson's artfully macabre understatement, ‘the one act for which she is uniquely specialized: slowly cutting off the head of her victim’.
The murderess is then adopted by the orphaned workers, who unsuspectingly tend her eggs and larvae.
Some are nurtured into workers themselves, who gradually replace the original species in the nest.
Others become queens who fly out to seek pastures new and rival heads yet unsevered.
But sawing off heads is a bit of a chore.
Parasites are not accustomed to exerting themselves if they can coerce a stand-in.
My favourite character in Wilson's The Insect Societies is Monomorium santschii .
This species, over evolutionary time, has lost its worker caste altogether.
The host workers do everything for their parasites, even the most terrible task of all.
At the behest of the invading parasite queen, they actually perform the deed of murdering their own mother.
The usurper doesn't need to use her jaws.
She uses mind-control.
How she does it is a mystery; she probably employs a chemical, for ant nervous systems are generally highly attuned to them.
If her weapon is indeed chemical, then it is as insidious a drug as any known to science.
For think what it accomplishes.
It floods the brain of the worker ant, grabs the reins of her muscles, woos her from deeply ingrained duties and turns her against her own mother.
For ants, matricide is an act of special genetic madness and formidable indeed must be the drug that drives them to it.
In the world of the extended phenotype, ask not how an animal's behaviour benefits its genes; ask instead whose genes it is benefiting.
It is hardly surprising that ants are exploited by parasites, not just other ants but an astonishing menagerie of specialist hangers-on.
Worker ants sweep a rich flow of food from a wide catchment area into a central hoard which is a sitting target for freeloaders.
Ants are also good agents of protection: they are well-armed and numerous.
The aphids of Chapter 10 could be seen as paying out nectar to hire professional bodyguards.
Several butterfly species live out their caterpillar stage inside an ants' nest.
Some are straightforward pillagers.
Others offer something to the ants in return for protection.
Often they bristle, literally, with equipment for manipulating their protectors.
The caterpillar of a butterfly called Thisbe irenea has a sound-producing organ in its head for summoning ants, and a pair of telescopic spouts near its rear end which exude seductive nectar.
On its shoulders stands another pair of nozzles, which cast an altogether more subtle spell.
Their secretion seems to be not food but a volatile potion that has a dramatic impact upon the ants' behaviour.
An ant coming under the influence leaps clear into the air.
Its jaws open wide and it turns aggressive, far more eager than usual to attack, bite and sting any moving object.
Except, significantly, the caterpillar responsible for drugging it.
Moreover, an ant under the sway of a dope-peddling caterpillar eventually enters a state called ‘binding’, in which it becomes inseparable from its caterpillar for a period of many days.
Like an aphid, then, the caterpillar employs ants as bodyguards, but it goes one better.
Whereas aphids rely on the ants' normal aggression against predators, the caterpillar administers an aggression-arousing drug and it seems to slip them something addictively binding as well.
I have chosen extreme examples.
But, in more modest ways, nature teems with animals and plants that manipulate others of the same or of different species.
In all cases in which natural selection has favoured genes for manipulation, it is legitimate to speak of those same genes as having (extended phenotypic) effects on the body of the manipulated organism.
It doesn't matter in which body a gene physically sits.
The target of its manipulation may be the same body or a different one.
Natural selection favours those genes that manipulate the world to ensure their own propagation.
This leads to what I have called the Central Theorem of the Extended Phenotype:An animal's behaviour tends to maximise the survival of the genes ‘for’ that behaviour, whether or not those genes happen to be in the body of the particular animal performing it .
I was writing in the context of animal behaviour, but the theorem could apply, of course, to colour, size, shape — to anything.
It is finally time to return to the problem with which we started, to the tension between individual organism and gene as rival candidates for the central role in natural selection.
In earlier chapters I made the assumption that there was no problem, because individual reproduction was equivalent to gene survival.
I assumed there that you can say either ‘The organism works to propagate all its genes’ or ‘The genes work to force a succession of organisms to propagate them.’
They seemed like two equivalent ways of saying the same thing, and which form of words you chose seemed a matter of taste.
But somehow the tension remained.
One way of sorting this whole matter out is to use the terms ‘replicator’ and ‘vehicle’.
The fundamental units of natural selection, the basic things that survive or fail to survive, that form lineages of identical copies with occasional random mutations, are called replicators.
DNA molecules are replicators.
They generally, for reasons that we shall come to, gang together into large communal survival machines or ‘vehicles’.
The vehicles that we know best are individual bodies like our own.
A body, then, is not a replicator; it is a vehicle.
I must emphasize this, since the point has been misunderstood.
Vehicles don't replicate themselves; they work to propagate their replicators.
Replicators don't behave, don't perceive the world, don't catch prey or run away from predators; they make vehicles that do all those things.
For many purposes it is convenient for biologists to focus their attention at the level of the vehicle.
For other purposes it is convenient for them to focus their attention at the level of the replicator.
Gene and individual organism are not rivals for the same starring role in the Darwinian drama.
They are cast in different, complementary and in many respects equally important roles, the role of replicator and the role of vehicle.
The replicator/vehicle terminology is helpful in various ways.
For instance it clears up a tiresome controversy over the level at which natural selection acts.
Superficially it might seem logical to place ‘individual selection’ on a sort of ladder of levels of selection, half-way between the ‘gene selection’advocated in Chapter 3 and the ‘group selection’criticized in Chapter 7.
‘Individual selection’ seems vaguely to be a middle way between two extremes, and many biologists and philosophers have been seduced into this facile path and treated it as such.
But we can now see that it isn't like that at all.
We can now see that the organism and the group of organisms are true rivals for the vehicle role in the story, but neither of them is even a candidate for the replicator role.
The controversy between ‘individual selection’ and ‘group selection’is a real controversy between alternative vehicles.
The controversy between individual selection and gene selection isn't a controversy at all, for gene and organism are candidates for different, and complementary, roles in the story, the replicator and the vehicle.
The rivalry between individual organism and group of organisms for the vehicle role, being a real rivalry, can be settled.
As it happens the outcome, in my view, is a decisive victory for the individual organism.
The group is too wishy-washy an entity.
A herd of deer, a pride of lions or a pack of wolves has a certain rudimentary coherence and unity of purpose.
But this is paltry in comparison to the coherence and unity of purpose of the body of an individual lion, wolf, or deer.
That this is true is now widely accepted, but why is it true?
Extended phenotypes and parasites can again help us.
We saw that when the genes of a parasite work together with each other, but in opposition to the genes of the host (which all work together with each other ), it is because the two sets of genes have different methods of leaving the shared vehicle, the host's body.
Snail genes leave the shared vehicle via snail sperm and eggs.
Because all snail genes have an equal stake in every sperm and every egg, because they all participate in the same unpartisan meiosis, they work together for the common good, and therefore tend to make the snail body a coherent, purposeful vehicle.
The real reason why a fluke is recognizably separate from its host, the reason why it doesn't merge its purposes and its identity with the purposes and identity of the host, is that the fluke genes don't share the snail genes' method of leaving the shared vehicle, and don't share in the snail's meiotic lottery — they have a lottery of their own.
Therefore, to that extent and that extent only, the two vehicles remain separated as a snail and a recognizably distinct fluke inside it.
If fluke genes were passed on in snail eggs and sperms, the two bodies would evolve to become as one flesh.
We mightn't even be able to tell that there ever had been two vehicles.
‘Single’ individual organisms such as ourselves are the ultimate embodiment of many such mergers.
The group of organisms — the flock of birds, the pack of wolves — does not merge into a single vehicle, precisely because the genes in the flock or the pack do not share a common method of leaving the present vehicle.
To be sure, packs may bud off daughter packs.
But the genes in the parent pack don't pass to the daughter pack in a single vessel in which all have an equal share.
The genes in a pack of wolves don't all stand to gain from the same set of events in the future.
A gene can foster its own future welfare by favouring its own individual wolf, at the expense of other individual wolves.
An individual wolf, therefore, is a vehicle worthy of the name.
A pack of wolves is not.
Genetically speaking, the reason for this is that all the cells except the sex cells in a wolf's body have the same genes, while, as for the sex cells, all the genes have an equal chance of being in each one of them.
But the cells in a pack of wolves do not have the same genes, nor do they have the same chance of being in the cells of sub-packs that are budded off.
They have everything to gain by struggling against rivals in other wolf bodies (although the fact that a wolf-pack is likely to be a kin group will mitigate the struggle).
The essential quality that an entity needs, if it is to become an effective gene vehicle, is this.
It must have an impartial exit channel into the future, for all the genes inside it.
This is true of an individual wolf.
The channel is the thin stream of sperms, or eggs, which it manufactures by meiosis.
It is not true of the pack of wolves.
Genes have something to gain from selfishly promoting the welfare of their own individual bodies, at the expense of other genes in the wolf pack.
A bee-hive, when it swarms, appears to reproduce by broad-fronted budding, like a wolf pack.
But if we look more carefully we find that, as far as the genes are concerned, their destiny is largely shared.
The future of the genes in the swarm is, at least to a large extent, lodged in the ovaries of one queen.
This is why — it is just another way of expressing the message of earlier chapters — the bee colony looks and behaves like a truly integrated single vehicle.
Everywhere we find that life, as a matter of fact, is bundled into discrete, individually purposeful vehicles like wolves and bee-hives.
But the doctrine of the extended phenotype has taught us that it needn't have been so.
Fundamentally, all that we have a right to expect from our theory is a battleground of replicators, jostling, jockeying, fighting for a future in the genetic hereafter.
The weapons in the fight are phenotypic effects, initially direct chemical effects in cells but eventually feathers and fangs and even more remote effects.
It undeniably happens to be the case that these phenotypic effects have largely become bundled up into discrete vehicles, each with its genes disciplined and ordered by the prospect of a shared bottleneck of sperms or eggs funnelling them into the future.
But this is not a fact to be taken for granted.
It is a fact to be questioned and wondered at in its own right.
Why did genes come together into large vehicles, each with a single genetic exit route?
Why did genes choose to gang up and make large bodies for themselves to live in?
In The Extended Phenotype I attempt to work out an answer to this difficult problem.
Here I can sketch only a part of that answer — although, as might be expected after seven years, I can also now take it a little further.
I shall divide the question up into three.
Why did genes gang up in cells?
Why did cells gang up in many-celled bodies?
And why did bodies adopt what I shall call a ‘bottlenecked’ life cycle?
First then, why did genes gang up in cells?
Why did those ancient replicators give up the cavalier freedom of the primeval soup and take to swarming in huge colonies?
Why do they cooperate?
We can see part of the answer by looking at how modern DNA molecules cooperate in the chemical factories that are living cells.
DNA molecules make proteins.
Proteins work as enzymes, catalysing particular chemical reactions.
Often a single chemical reaction is not sufficient to synthesize a useful end-product.
In a human pharmaceutical factory the synthesis of a useful chemical needs a production line.
The starting chemical cannot be transformed directly into the desired end-product.
A series of intermediates must be synthesized in strict sequence.
Much of a research chemist's ingenuity goes into devising pathways of feasible intermediates between starting chemicals and desired end-products.
In the same way single enzymes in a living cell usually cannot, on their own, achieve the synthesis of a useful end-product from a given starting chemical.
A whole set of enzymes is necessary, one to catalyse the transformation of the raw material into the first intermediate, another to catalyse the transformation of the first intermediate into the second, and so on.
Each of these enzymes is made by one gene.
If a sequence of six enzymes is needed for a particular synthetic pathway, all six genes for making them must be present.
Now it is quite likely that there are two alternative pathways for arriving at that same end-product, each needing six different enzymes, and with nothing to choose between the two of them.
This kind of thing happens in chemical factories.
Which pathway is chosen may be historical accident, or it may be a matter of more deliberate planning by chemists.
In nature's chemistry the choice will never, of course, be a deliberate one.
Instead it will come about through natural selection.
But how can natural selection see to it that the two pathways are not mixed, and that cooperating groups of compatible genes emerge?
In very much the same way as I suggested with my analogy of the German and English rowers (Chapter 5).
The important thing is that a gene for a stage in pathway 1 will flourish in the presence of genes for other stages in pathway 1, but not in the presence of pathway 2 genes.
If the population already happens to be dominated by genes for pathway 1, selection will favour other genes for pathway 1, and penalize genes for pathway 2.
And vice versa.
Tempting as it is, it is positively wrong to speak of the genes for the six enzymes of pathway 2 being selected ‘as a group’.
Each one is selected as a separate selfish gene, but it flourishes only in the presence of the right set of other genes.
Nowadays this cooperation between genes goes on within cells.
It must have started as rudimentary cooperation between self-replicating molecules in the primeval soup (or whatever primeval medium there was).
Cell walls perhaps arose as a device to keep useful chemicals together and stop them leaking away.
Many of the chemical reactions in the cell actually go on in the fabric of membranes; a membrane acts as a combined conveyor-belt and test-tube rack.
But cooperation between genes did not stay limited to cellular biochemistry.
Cells came together (or failed to separate after cell division) to form many-celled bodies.
This brings us to the second of my three questions.
Why did cells gang together; why the lumbering robots?
This is another question about cooperation.
But the domain has shifted from the world of molecules to a larger scale.
Many-celled bodies outgrow the microscope.
They can even become elephants or whales.
Being big is not necessarily a good thing: most organisms are bacteria and very few are elephants.
But when the ways of making a living that are open to small organisms have all been filled, there are still prosperous livings to be made by larger organisms.
Large organisms can eat smaller ones, for instance, and can avoid being eaten by them.
The advantages of being in a club of cells don't stop with size.
The cells in the club can specialize, each thereby becoming more efficient at performing its particular task.
Specialist cells serve other cells in the club and they also benefit from the efficiency of other specialists.
If there are many cells some can specialize as sensors to detect prey, others as nerves to pass on the message, others as stinging cells to paralyse the prey, muscle cells to move tentacles and catch the prey, secretory cells to dissolve it and yet others to absorb the juices.
We must not forget that, at least in modern bodies like our own, the cells are a clone.
All contain the same genes, although different genes will be turned on in the different specialist cells.
Genes in each cell type are directly benefiting their own copies in the minority of cells specialized for reproduction, the cells of the immortal germ line.
So, to the third question.
Why do bodies participate in a ‘bottlenecked’ life cycle?
To begin with, what do I mean by bottlenecked?
No matter how many cells there may be in the body of an elephant, the elephant began life as a single cell, a fertilized egg.
The fertilized egg is a narrow bottleneck which, during embryonic development, widens out into the trillions of cells of an adult elephant.
And no matter how many cells, of no matter how many specialized types, cooperate to perform the unimaginably complicated task of running an adult elephant, the efforts of all those cells converge on the final goal of producing single cells again — sperms or eggs.
The elephant not only has its beginning in a single cell, a fertilized egg.
Its end, meaning its goal or end-product, is the production of single cells, fertilized eggs of the next generation.
The life cycle of the broad and bulky elephant both begins and ends with a narrow bottleneck.
This bottlenecking is characteristic of the life cycles of all many-celled animals and most plants.
Why?
What is its significance?
We cannot answer this without considering what life might look like without it.
It will be helpful to imagine two hypothetical species of seaweed called bottle-wrack and splurge-weed.
Splurge-weed grows as a set of straggling, amorphous branches in the sea.
Every now and then branches break off and drift away.
These breakages can occur anywhere in the plants, and the fragments can be large or small.
As with cuttings in a garden, they are capable of growing just like the original plant.
This shedding of parts is the species's method of reproducing.
As you will notice, it isn't really different from its method of growing, except that the growing parts become physically detached from one another.
Bottle-wrack looks the same and grows in the same straggly way.
There is one crucial difference, however.
It reproduces by releasing single-celled spores which drift off in the sea and grow into new plants.
These spores are just cells of the plant like any others.
As in the case of splurge-weed, no sex is involved.
The daughters of a plant consist of cells that are clone-mates of the cells of the parent plant.
The only difference between the two species is that splurge-weed reproduces by hiving off chunks of itself consisting of indeterminate numbers of cells, while bottle-wrack reproduces by hiving off chunks of itself always consisting of single cells.
By imagining these two kinds of plant, we have zeroed in on the crucial difference between a bottlenecked and an unbottlenecked life cycle.
Bottle-wrack reproduces by squeezing itself, every generation, through a single-celled bottleneck.
Splurge-weed just grows and breaks in two.
It hardly can be said to possess discrete ‘generations’, or to consist of discrete ‘organisms’, at all.
What about bottle-wrack?
I'll spell it out soon, but we can already see an inkling of the answer.
Doesn't bottle-wrack already seem to have a more discrete, ‘organismy’ feel to it?
Splurge-weed, as we have seen, reproduces by the same process as it grows.
Indeed it scarcely reproduces at all.
Bottle-wrack, on the other hand, makes a clear separation between growth and reproduction.
We may have zeroed in on the difference, but so what?
What is the significance of it?
Why does it matter?
I have thought a long time about this and I think I know the answer.
(Incidentally, it was harder to work out that there was a question than to think of the answer!)
The answer can be divided into three parts, the first two of which have to do with the relationship between evolution and embryonic development.
First, think about the problem of evolving a complex organ from a simpler one.
We don't have to stay with plants, and for this stage of the argument it might be better to switch to animals because they have more obviously complicated organs.
Again there is no need to think in terms of sex; sexual versus asexual reproduction is a red herring here.
We can imagine our animals reproducing by sending off nonsexual spores, single cells that, mutations aside, are genetically identical to one another and to all the other cells in the body.
The complicated organs of an advanced animal like a human or a woodlouse have evolved by gradual degrees from the simpler organs of ancestors.
But the ancestral organs did not literally change themselves into the descendant organs, like swords being beaten into ploughshares.
Not only did they not.
The point I want to make is that in most cases they could not.
There is only a limited amount of change that can be achieved by direct transformation in the ‘swords to ploughshares’ manner.
Really radical change can be achieved only by going ‘back to the drawing board’, throwing away the previous design and starting afresh.
When engineers go back to the drawing board and create a new design, they do not necessarily throw away the ideas from the old design.
But they don't literally try to deform the old physical object into the new one.
The old object is too weighed down with the clutter of history.
Maybe you can beat a sword into a ploughshare, but try ‘beating’ a propeller engine into a jet engine!
You can't do it.
You have to discard the propeller engine and go back to the drawing board.
Living things, of course, were never designed on drawing boards.
But they do go back to fresh beginnings.
They make a clean start in every generation.
Every new organism begins as a single cell and grows anew.
It inherits the ideas of ancestral design, in the form of the DNA program, but it does not inherit the physical organs of its ancestors.
It does not inherit its parent's heart and remould it into a new (and possibly improved) heart.
It starts from scratch, as a single cell, and grows a new heart, using the same design program as its parent's heart, to which improvements may be added.
You see the conclusion I am leading up to.
One important thing about a ‘bottlenecked’ life cycle is that it makes possible the equivalent of going back to the drawing board.
Bottlenecking of the life cycle has a second, related consequence.
It provides a ‘calendar’ that can be used to regulate the processes of embryology.
In a bottlenecked life cycle, every fresh generation marches through approximately the same parade of events.
The organism begins as a single cell.
It grows by cell division.
And it reproduces by sending out daughter cells.
Presumably it eventually dies, but that is less important than it seems to us mortals; as far as this discussion is concerned the end of the cycle is reached when the present organism reproduces and a new generation's cycle begins.
Although in theory the organism could reproduce at any time during its growth phase, we can expect that eventually an optimum time for reproduction would emerge.
Organisms that released spores when they were too young or too old would end up with fewer descendants than rivals that built up their strength and then released a massive number of spores when in the prime of life.
The argument is moving towards the idea of a stereotyped, regularly repeating life cycle.
Not only does each generation begin with a single-celled bottleneck.
It also has a growth phase —‘childhood’— of rather fixed duration.
The fixed duration, the stereotypy, of the growth phase, makes it possible for particular things to happen at particular times during embryonic development, as if governed by a strictly observed calendar.
To varying extents in different kinds of creature, cell divisions during development occur in rigid sequence, a sequence that recurs in each repetition of the life cycle.
Each cell has its own location and time of appearance in the roster of cell divisions.
In some cases, incidentally, this is so precise that embryologists can give a name to each cell, and a given cell in one individual organism can be said to have an exact counterpart in another organism.
So, the stereotyped growth cycle provides a clock, or calendar, by means of which embryological events may be triggered.
Think of how readily we ourselves use the cycles of the earth's daily rotation, and its yearly circumnavigation of the sun, to structure and order our lives.
In the same way, the endlessly repeated growth rhythms imposed by a bottlenecked life cycle will — it seems almost inevitable — be used to order and structure embryology.
Particular genes can be switched on and off at particular times because the bottleneck/growth-cycle calendar ensures that there is such a thing as a particular time.
Such well-tempered regulations of gene activity are a prerequisite for the evolution of embryologies capable of crafting complex tissues and organs.
The precision and complexity of an eagle's eye or a swallow's wing couldn't emerge without clockwork rules for what is laid down when.
The third consequence of a bottlenecked life history is a genetic one.
Here, the example of bottle-wrack and splurge-weed serves us again.
Assuming, again for simplicity, that both species reproduce asexually, think about how they might evolve.
Evolution requires genetic change, mutation.
Mutation can happen during any cell division.
In splurge-weed, cell lineages are broad-fronted, the opposite of bottlenecked.
Each branch that breaks apart and drifts away is many-celled.
It is therefore quite possible that two cells in a daughter will be more distant relatives of one another than either is to cells in the parent plant.
(By ‘relatives’, I literally mean cousins, grandchildren and so on.
Cells have definite lines of descent and these lines are branching, so words like second cousin can be used of cells in a body without apology.)
Bottle-wrack differs sharply from splurge-weed here.
All cells in a daughter plant are descended from a single spore cell, so all cells in a given plant are closer cousins (or whatever) of one another than of any cell in another plant.
This difference between the two species has important genetic consequences.
Think of the fate of a newly mutated gene, first in splurge-weed, then in bottle-wrack.
In splurge-weed, the new mutation can arise in any cell, in any branch of the plant.
Since daughter plants are produced by broad-fronted budding, lineal descendants of the mutant cell can find themselves sharing daughter plants and grand-daughter plants with unmutated cells which are relatively distant cousins of themselves.
In bottle-wrack, on the other hand, the most recent common ancestor of all the cells in a plant is no older than the spore that provided the plant's bottlenecked beginning.
If that spore contained the mutant gene, all the cells of the new plant will contain the mutant gene.
If the spore did not, they will not.
Cells in bottle-wrack will be more genetically uniform within plants t–an cells in splurge-weed (give or take an occasional reverse-mutation).
In bottle-wrack, the individual plant will be a unit with a genetic identity, will deserve the name individual.
Plants of splurge — weed will have less genetic identity, will be less entitled to the name ‘individual’ than their opposite numbers in bottle-wrack.
This is not just a matter of terminology.
With mutations around, the cells within a plant of splurge-weed will not have all the same genetic interests at heart.
A gene in a splurge-weed cell stands to gain by promoting the reproduction of its cell.
It does not necessarily stand to gain by promoting the reproduction of its ‘individual’ plant.
Mutation will make it unlikely that the cells within a plant are genetically identical, so they won't collaborate wholeheartedly with one another in the manufacture of organs and new plants.
Natural selection will choose among cells rather than‘plants’.
In bottle-wrack, on the other hand, all the cells within a plant are likely to have the same genes, because only very recent mutations could divide them.
Therefore they will happily collaborate in manufacturing efficient survival machines.
Cells in different plants are more likely to have different genes.
After all, cells that have passed through different bottlenecks may be distinguished by all but the most recent mutations — and this means the majority.
Selection will therefore judge rival plants, not rival cells as in splurge-weed.
So we can expect to see the evolution of organs and contrivances that serve the whole plant.
By the way, strictly for those with a professional interest, there is an analogy here with the argument over group selection.
We can think of an individual organism as a ‘group’ of cells.
A form of group selection can be made to work, provided some means can be found for increasing the ratio of between group variation to within-group variation.
Bottle-wrack's reproductive habit has exactly the effect of increasing this ratio; splurge-weed's habit has just the opposite effect.
There are also similarities, which may be revealing but which I shall not explore, between ‘bottlenecking’ and two other ideas that have dominated this chapter.
Firstly the idea that parasites will cooperate with hosts to the extent that their genes pass to the next generation in the same reproductive cells as the genes of the hosts — squeezing through the same bottleneck.
And secondly the idea that the cells of a sexually reproducing body cooperate with each other only because meiosis is scrupulously fair.
To sum up, we have seen three reasons why a bottlenecked life history tends to foster the evolution of the organism as a discrete and unitary vehicle.
The three may be labelled, respectively, ‘back to the drawing board’, ‘orderly timing-cycle’, and ‘cellular uniformity’.
Which came first, the bottlenecking of the life cycle, or the discrete organism?
I should like to think that they evolved together.
Indeed I suspect that the essential, defining feature of an individual organism is that it is a unit that begins and ends with a single-celled bottleneck.
If life cycles become bottlenecked, living material seems bound to become boxed into discrete, unitary organisms.
And the more that living material is boxed into discrete survival machines, the more will the cells of those survival machines concentrate their efforts on that special class of cells that are destined to ferry their shared genes through the bottleneck into the next generation.
The two phenomena, bottlenecked life cycles and discrete organisms, go hand in hand.
As each evolves, it reinforces the other.
The two are mutually enhancing, like the spiralling feelings of a woman and a man during the progress of a love affair.
The Extended Phenotype is a long book and its argument cannot easily be crammed into one chapter.
I have been obliged to adopt here a condensed, rather intuitive, even impressionistic style.
I hope, nevertheless, that I have succeeded in conveying the flavour of the argument.
Let me end with a brief manifesto, a summary of the entire selfish gene/extended phenotype view of life.
It is a view, I maintain, that applies to living things everywhere in the universe.
The fundamental unit, the prime mover of all life, is the replicator.
A replicator is anything in the universe of which copies are made.
Replicators come into existence, in the first place, by chance, by the random jostling of smaller particles.
Once a replicator has come into existence it is capable of generating an indefinitely large set of copies of itself.
No copying process is perfect, however, and the population of replicators comes to include varieties that differ from one another.
Some of these varieties turn out to have lost the power of self-replication, and their kind ceases to exist when they themselves cease to exist.
Others can still replicate, but less effectively.
Yet other varieties happen to find themselves in possession of new tricks: they turn out to be even better self-replicators than their predecessors and contemporaries.
It is their descendants that come to dominate the population.
As time goes by, the world becomes filled with the most powerful and ingenious replicators.
Gradually, more and more elaborate ways of being a good replicator are discovered.
Replicators survive, not only by virtue of their own intrinsic properties, but by virtue of their consequences on the world.
These consequences can be quite indirect.
All that is necessary is that eventually the consequences, however tortuous and indirect, feed back and affect the success of the replicator at getting itself copied.
The success that a replicator has in the world will depend on what kind of a world it is — the pre-existing conditions.
Among the most important of these conditions will be other replicators and their consequences.
Like the English and German rowers, replicators that are mutually beneficial will come to predominate in each other 's presence.
At some point in the evolution of life on our earth, this ganging up of mutually compatible replicators began to be formalized in the creation of discrete vehicles — cells and, later, many-celled bodies.
Vehicles that evolved a bottlenecked life cycle prospered, and became more discrete and vehicle-like.
This packaging of living material into discrete vehicles became such a salient and dominant feature that, when biologists arrived on the scene and started asking questions about life, their questions were mostly about vehicles — individual organisms.
The individual organism came first in the biologist's consciousness, while the replicators — now known as genes — were seen as part of the machinery used by individual organisms.
It requires a deliberate mental effort to turn biology the right way up again, and remind ourselves that the replicators come first, in importance as well as in history.
One way to remind ourselves is to reflect that, even today, not all the phenotypic effects of a gene are bound up in the individual body in which it sits.
Certainly in principle, and also in fact, the gene reaches out through the individual body wall and manipulates objects in the world outside, some of them inanimate, some of them other living beings, some of them a long way away.
With only a little imagination we can see the gene as sitting at the centre of a radiating web of extended phenotypic power.
And an object in the world is the centre of a converging web of influences from many genes sitting in many organisms.
The long reach of the gene knows no obvious boundaries.
The whole world is criss-crossed with causal arrows joining genes to phenotypic effects, far and near.
It is an additional fact, too important in practice to be called incidental but not necessary enough in theory to be called inevitable, that these causal arrows have become bundled up.
Replicators are no longer peppered freely through the sea; they are packaged in huge colonies — individual bodies.
And phenotypic consequences, instead of being evenly distributed throughout the world, have in many cases congealed into those same bodies.
But the individual body, so familiar to us on our planet, did not have to exist.
The only kind of entity that has to exist in order for life to arise, anywhere in the universe, is the immortal replicator.