

PASSION BLACKWOMEN'S CREATIVITY
RU 486 A MEDICAL MIRACLE?
THE WOMEN'S TROOP: REDEFINING MIME
BIG MOMMA…
ANOTHER HAIRY TALE
PLUS: POSTCARDS FROM THE EDGE; ZOË FAIRBAIRNS' DADDY'S GIRLS; AND THE MOTHER TONGUE TOUR
WAR IN THE GULF Reports from Riyadh, Cairo, New York and London 
CONTENTS
ISSUE 220
FEATURES
Passion — Blackwomen's Creativity
War In The Gulf: Reports from Cairo, New York and London
The Women's Troop — Redefining Mime
RU 486 — A Medical Miracle?
The Bristol Cancer Help Clinic Study
NEWS
BRITISH — Abortion Information: Students Still Determined; Rochdale Report Published; Bloody Sunday March; Unfair Deportations Continue
INTERNATIONAL — Panama: One Year After Invasion; Pakistan: People Respond to Gulf War
REGULARS
Letters
Censorship, W H Smith and The Dialogue
Fiction
Big Momma — Another Hairy Tale
Music
Le Mystère des Voix Bulgares
Film
Postcards from the Edge; Hidden Agenda
Television
Men's Madness; Roseanne
Performance
13 Lucky for Some; And the Cow Jumped over the Moon
Books
Zoë Fairbairns's Daddy's Girls
Images
Nursery Rhymes by Paula Rego
Spare Time
A Guide to What's On and Where
Pulse of the Movement
Women Against War In The Gulf; Nuclear Test Update
Classifieds
Parenting
Smoking and Pregnancy
Health
The Dental Dam Fights Back
SPARE RIB IS PRODUCED COLLECTIVELY BY Esther Bailey, Marcel Farry, Elorine Grant, and Jennifer Mourin
DISTRIBUTION
Newstrade: COMAG (0895) 444 055
Bookshops: Turnaround (071) 609 7836
Subscriptions: Spare Rib (071) 253 9792
PRINTING
BPCC Business Magazines (0206) 851 665
THANKS THIS MONTH TO
Tracey, Annie Hole, Irene Shepstone, Marian Larragy and Anne
COVER PHOTOGRAPH
Maud Sulter
ADVERTISING
Spare Rib (071) 253 9958 March copy date: February 20
NEXT ISSUE OUT
4 March
ENQUIRIES
Please send a stamped addressed envelope with all enquiries.
SPARE RIB cannot be held responsible for the loss or damage of any correspondence.
SPARE RIB is available on tape for subscribers who are blind or partially sighted
LETTERS
MORE ON THE BEAUTY MYTH
DEAR SPARE RIB,
I found Naomi Wolf's article Exploding The Beauty Myth in the November 1990 issue so eye-opening, thoughtful and powerful that I felt compelled to buy her book.
The Beauty Myth casts bright light on the ugly facts about woman's current situation and social identity — facts which are blatantly obvious, but to which women seem to remain blind and submissive.
I felt this book cries for action; it has helped me understand that to give an honest testimony of my feelings, I had to impose on myself not to betray my dignity as a woman and as a member of a community.
Another powerful message that the book conveys is the need for true communication, understanding and respect between men and women, or women and men.
The need to strive for such aims can only be thought of as fundamental and humanitarian.
If an honest attempt is made in one's own little world to make this strive a living force without being crushed under foot by one's contemporaries, then one may consider oneself and the community to which one belongs lucky.
I can only praise Naomi Wolf's clean, direct, piquant exposition and visionary commonsense and hope that many, many women and men will read her book.
A CASAL
OPENING THE SISTERHOOD
DEAR SPARE RIB,
Shame on me for this is the first issue of SR I've ever read (Nov), but I hope it will not be the last, for may I say, I think I may have at last found a space where I can be heard — most women's magazines shun the type of letter I submit — not cosy enough for their letters pages, I suspect.
In fact, most of what I read in SR (I couldn't embrace everything — women can choose can't they?) made me shake with recognition of our universal plight — we are all oppressed, whether we are aware of it or not.
What took me so long to take you off the lowest shelf (were they trying to hide you?) in W H Smith, and take you home?
I can only explain my reluctance, honestly, to the fact that up to now I wasn't ready — the views expressed might be too ‘militant’, lesbian-orientated and ‘anarchist’ for the type of feminism I was espousing.
Perhaps I've ‘grown’— more likely it is the fact that I have a wealth of female experience that other women are writing about, like myself (unrecognised at present…) so I have no need to be ‘ashamed’ any longer .
You will be the friend I seek if you can address the situation of reconciling the issue of being a Jewish woman (no longer at the age of unfulfilled hope) who is married, and fights to be a feminist, and wishes to survive the crises of conscience that result.
By that I mean those of us who don't fit in to the stereotypes created by our culture, and refuse to be; for example, such like myself who aren't rapacious materialists, fashion victims, empty-headed bimbos, domineering matriarchs who perpetually have a pan of chicken soup on the hob and a home-made cake ready for everloving family to devour.
I have long ago chosen a more tortuous path — most particularly having eschewed motherhood, a state I do not regret not having.
Most of all, having chosen to live with a man, as a feminist, is the biggest challenge; but being ‘open’ and ‘communicative’I have tried to show him it is possible, though it's not a ‘doddle’as you can imagine.
Throughout my life I have been oppressed by society's expectations, so the man in my life is not to blame for my constant questioning of what life can offer me, and women like me.
The result of trying to be a valid person has made me prone to depression, agoraphobia, and reclusiveness — for I'm tired to have to constantly explain my ‘differentness’.
My main solace is being able to write down (I expect no instant adoration) my feelings, isolation, experiences, attitudes, in prose or poetry on paper — a safety valve.
I have tried therapy (male) which was unsympathetic to say the least; if I'd been a ‘good little Jewish girl’, and (later) the type of young woman that would make ‘an ideal bride’ I would have been ‘happy’.
Not a word about how people should have related to me , as a person in my own right.
My writing does not condemn me.
Neither would I infer that Spare Rib's readers would endorse that I'm straight, white, no longer middle class, anti-IRA, have mixed feelings about Israel's policies, can't knit, bake, have unbiddable hair and a 34-inch chest.
I also have never wanted to master the art of stiletto-wearing.
If Spare Rib will address (I'm sorry I've missed any previous relevant articles) these issues can I join the Sisterhood?
VERY SINCERELY, CAROLE LEVENE
W H SMITH — PUT US WITH THE WOMEN'S MAGAZINES
We recently received this letter which a reader sent to the Manager of a WH Smith on Church Street in Liverpool:
DEAR MADAM/SIR,
I enclose herewith an extract from Spare Rib Magazine, in which reference is made to an agreement between Spare Rib Magazine and W H Smith in regard to placing the magazine in the Women's Section.
Before Christmas I visited W H Smith and found that Spare Rib Magazine had been put in ‘General Interest’, which includes all the soft pornography magazines.
Potential new readers of Spare Rib would not think of looking under that section for a women's magazine, and I assumed it was a mistake on the part of overworked staff.
I decided to be helpful and, rather than bother anyone, I took it upon myself to move about 30 of the magazines to the Women's Section.
It was therefore with great irritation that I noticed a day or two later that they had all been moved back to the ‘General Interest’ section.
So, it was no mistake but a general policy decision to put Spare Rib with the soft pornography under ‘General Interest’.
I would be extremely interested to know the thinking behind this policy, and look forward to your assurance that next time I buy Spare Rib from W H Smith I will find it in the Women's Section.
YOURS SINCERELY, BARBARA A BRYAN
Pass it on!
WHO'S CENSORING WHO?
DEAR SPARE RIB,
It was good to see such an intelligent article on censorship in the Dec/Jan edition.
I realise I'm not saying anything new, but I'd like to reinforce some of the links between the topics raised in that issue.
Firstly, the appearance of Spare Rib amongst the Women's magazines in W H Smith.
Like Ruth Store, who wrote last month, I always have trouble finding SR in main line newsagents.
I had been under the impression that Smith's didn't stock SR at all, so well did they hide it.
I've been in the habit of buying from various ‘alternative’ bookshops in a desperate attempt to support all of them.
My loyalty was already tested by the thought of subscribing and giving you some guaranteed income.
My searches even led me to the absurdity of being directed to the deep freeze in one newsagent when I asked for Spare Rib.
And then came your call for us to buy from W H Smith.
As it happened, I attended a speaker meeting of Campaign Against Pornography that week at which the ‘Off the Shelf’ campaign against Smiths was discussed.
It became very clear to me that (as your article said) the issue was not censorship v. freedom but rather, who was to be censored and by what means.
Inability to compete commercially is a very effective censorship, which (as usual) those with power blame on the victims.
Minorities and oppressed groups have always been censored by this no-laws-no-redress means, and the demeaning of women and the belittling of their voice in Smiths' top shelf magazines was by no means the only way in which Smiths (and society) censored women's views.
So whilst supporting the theory that Smiths should not carry offensive ‘literature’, I felt it was very important that the women's movement should be proposing — and buying in large quantities — some (or many) alternatives to fill those top shelves.
Merely refusing to shop in Smiths, gives us even less of a voice with the stocklists than previously.
With all this in mind, I visited the High Street Smiths to buy Dec/Jan.
Although it was amongst the women's glossies as promised, it was still tucked away in a corner with only its spine showing.
Although visibility remains a problem I really do think this repositioning is an important step forward.
If SR is to remain a relevant magazine it has to continue to attract new young readers — with outlets for feminist and particularly lesbian thought being cut back on all sides SR could well be a first line in this battle for the foreseeable future.
But all this brings me to the ‘Ongoing Debate’ of the letters page and those comments of Naomi Wolf about variety and the impossibility of being all things to all women.
While ‘male’ magazines are too numerous to mention the equally diverse ‘female’population is expected to make do with just 1 or 2 magazines with their concerns at heart.
It is a sign of our growth as a movement that one magazine is no longer enough.
SR cannot be all things to all women — it must be a reflection of the concerns of its editors, like any magazine and we must remember how harmful struggling for control of our ‘tiny slice’ of power can be and put our astonishing energy and feeling into creating a world in which we can expand and fill our rightful share of Smiths with our chosen, positive images of women — the men aren't going to do it for us.
So I hope you'll understand that if I don't include my subscription with this letter it's not because I don't support you and if I shop in Smiths it's not because I want them to sell pornography.
JESS DAWE
THE DIALOGUE CONTINUES
DEAR SPARE RIB,
* To comment on the recent debate I think you do a great job and I like the new look.
It's very important that you keep your international stance — but to also keep up to date on the more traditional demands of the women's movement is important too.
Why don't you do a page a month looking at the old struggles of the 60's/70's/80's and what the situation is now.
I used to love the letters page but now it gets a bit bogged down in one debate — make it a bit longer and keep the ‘one-off’ letters/comments.
I'd like to see more stuff about lesbians internationally.
My mum'll be renewing my subscription for my Christmas present!
IN INTERNATIONAL SISTERHOOD SELINA WORSLEY
Grupo de lesbianas feministas de Barcelona
DEAR SPARE RIB,
Having enjoyed without exception your 1990 Spare Rib editions.
I have returned this year after a two and a half year break) to a 100% improvement within your magazine — correction my magazine.
It now feels like it is embracing me and other Black sisters.
Interesting dialogue on the letters page.
Good to see Black and white women coming to terms with our ‘difference’; but most importantly our one overriding similarity.
We are all women!
Thank you for your nineties coverage of women's lives in the Year of the Horse.
Keep it up.
ONE LOVE, MAXINE JANETT
DEAR SPARE RIB,
I was really disgusted with Delia Cope after reading her letter she sent in the Dec/Jan 1990/91 edition.
Obviously Delia Cope is a white middle class racist woman who really doesn't care how she oppresses us as Black women.
The issues relating to the power she has now and her ancestors have had do not bother her.
Delia Cope believes by listening to Black women's poems she is doing us a favour.
‘Ethnic minorities’ she says, most Black women take  offence when considered to be in the same category as Europeans who can be just as racist as Delia Cope.
If you look at who are meant to be ‘Ethnic’, white women should realise that they can never be oppressed in the same way as can Black women.
How insulting Delia Cope is, obviously she feels too high and mighty to read Spare Rib because it's become less entertaining, uninteresting, uninformative and boring because it covers Black women's issues.
Delia Cope believes that although we have suffered from slavery, imperialism, capitalism, and exploitation, we should dismiss our feelings, keep smiling and put up with this shit.
We have a right to be represented in a women's magazine that's fighting for equal representation.
I'm sure the Delia Copes of this world can make their own boring magazine.
Yes, middle class women have done a lot for the ‘Women's Movement’ but does she really think that us working class women have been sitting on our arses doing nothing all this time.
Anyway, I hope that Spare Rib always continues to be there for all women, and some of us do appreciate the entertaining, interesting and informative magazine Spare Rib is.
YOURS, SURINDER LANDA
* indicates that this letter has been cut
INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S DAY IS MARCH 8 — IF YOU HAVE ANY LISTINGS PLEASE SEND THEM IN!
THIS IS N.U.J REPORTING NOTHING LIVE FROM NOWHERE.
NOW BACK TO THE STUDIO!…
PASSION
BLACKWOMEN'S CREATIVITY
An Interview with Maud Sulter
In 1977 Maud Sulter stepped on a train from Glasgow to London and began her current journey into the interior of Blackwomen's Creativity.
She didn't know at the time that some day she would call herself ‘artist’ or ‘writer’— not many teenage coloured girls from the Gorbals in Glasgow had trailblazed a path in that direction, so it was a real exploration into the unknown for her when at sixteen she set out to go to college to study fashion.
Since then she has gone on to create exhibitions, including Zabat — a stunning series of Blackwomen's portraits which will be exhibited at Camerawork Gallery in London from March 15–April 19, and has now edited Passion: Discourses on Blackwomen's Creativity , recently published by Urban Fox Press.
‘Passion’ features many visual artists including Lubaina Himid, Robyn Kahukiwa, Sutapa Biswas and Janet Caron.
However Maud Sulter's vision of Blackwomen's Creativity includes activities as diverse as Hairbraiding, Poetry and Performance.
The many women included in the book were chosen because of their involvement with the Blackwomen's Creativity Project, an organisation which Maud Sulter founded in 1982.
In creating ‘Passion’, she has not only documented the activities of BWCP but also provided ‘an excellent introduction to the range and intensity of Blackwomen's Creativity in Britain’
Artists Newsletter
Why did you decide to create Passion?
In 1982 I was the first Blackwoman to join the Sheba Feminist Publisher's collective.
At that time a variety of the women's presses were mooting ideas for conventional anthologies of Black writing in the UK.
I felt that it was too easy for what were essentially white women's publishers culling some short stories and poems from Blackwomen and then hailing the fact that they had published x-dozen Blackwomen writers.
This especially at a time when they were earning significant incomes from Blackwomen writers such as Alice Walker and Maya Angelou.
As Alice Walker has pointed out, Blackwomen must read history for clues not facts, and it seemed essential to leave clues as to a more holistic range of our artistic pursuits.
Obviously no academic course in Britain is geared towards working class Blackwomen's experience across the board, but so many of us have a vast appetite for knowledge — for a herstory.
We must create our own, which is what I set out to achieve with Passion .
There comes a time in many of our lives when we say ‘Girl, get yourself a piece of paper’.
Around 1985 I was getting so many requests from students, mainly from Blackwomen, to give interviews to inform their dissertations.
Hours and hours of Blackwomen's work goes — unpaid and unacknowledged — into quite literally saving Blackwomen from failing their degrees.
So few informed Blackwomen artists are employed in institutions, that we are co-erced into helping out, at the very last minute, to save Blackwomen artists, no, let me correct that, Black students across the board, that it was obvious that the wheel could not be eternally re-invented.
Passion offers schools, colleges and community venues the opportunity to invest in a vast wealth of information about our work during the 80's and then draw from that information in a more creative and challenging way.
All of us face racism and sexism in our explorations, and the wonderful articles and portfolios in Passion signpost a continuum of experiences, our litany of survival, which has created the situation where we can, like the Blackwomen's Creativity Project , network internationally from a position of equality not imperialism.
And so to recap, my ambition was to look at Blackwomen's Creativity across a spectrum of activities including fine art, childbearing, opera, theatre etc.
It is not possible to create a hierarchy of our artistic fields as we are living as Blackwomen in the aftermath of slavery and imperialism.
Therefore we need to recognise our creative practices as survival and press for their development from that position.
It is no use to sit back on our laurels and think OK, so we were there.
We need to be here now, and we need to ensure that we continue to create in the future.
In 1982 I read a short report published in Outwrite  Women's  Newspaper by Ingrid Pollard — who is now a well known social documentary photographer.
She had written a report on a Black Art Convention in Wolverhampton.
I called Outwrite and they kindly put me in contact with Ingrid.
We began to work on two hander pieces — she took the pictures, I wrote the words.
These short features were independent of my research for the book but they provided us with an opportunity of working together and getting to know each other.
It was tremendous fun reviewing acts such as The Weather Girls and interviewing writers such as Alice Walker, Ntozake Shange, Terri Mcmillan and Maya Angelou.
These articles were mainly published in Spare Rib ,Artrage ,Outwrite and FAN .
So from the relationship that developed during that period we developed the collaboration which features in the first section of Passion .
These photographs are now available for hire as a touring exhibition.
The 24 pictures are now integrated into our Project as the Blackwomen's Creativity Project IV .
BWCP I, II and III featured Claudette Johnson, Mumtaz Karimjee and a group show of Chila Kumari Burman, Ingrid Pollard, Myself, Leslee Wills and Nina Edge.
However none of these exhibitions could have happened if it hadn't been for the groundbreaking work carried out by Lubaina Himid since the late 70s.
As she outlines in her chapter of Passion entitled Mapping: Blackwomen Artists 1980–90 , she not only created the ground plan of contemporary Black Art in Britain but also curated such essential exhibitions as 5 Black Women at the Africa Centre and Black Woman Time Now .
Looking back at the Hayward Gallery showing of Black (male) work in '89, it is obvious that it is still vital for Blackwomen Artists to organise together or we will simply be written out of history once again.
Lubaina Himid was central to the printing of the Elbow Room Section in The Other Story catalogue, and financed the republication of The Thin Black Line catalogue to keep our herstory in circulation.
These exhibitions were staged in London during the past decade and it is fascinating to read in Mapping how she perceives the achievements and losses during that period.
Given that artists such as Sonia Boyce, Brenda Agard and Jennifer Comrie were first brought to a wider public's notice in these exhibitions curated by Lubaina, it is not surprising that we owe her a debt which, given the current backlash against Blackwomen's Creativity, we fear that we may never be able to repay.
I remember going to Black Woman Time Now at Battersea Arts Centre and thinking ‘Wow’, this is terrific.
Black-women-artists.
Thirteen of them.
Zabat!’
She not only made Black Women in Britain professional artists, but also suggested, by our active support for our creativity, that any Black woman could be an artist.
As long as you were prepared to work hard.
Although you started the ‘Blackwomen's Creativity Project’ in 1982, it is obvious that your idea of there being a wide range of legitimate areas of Blackwomen's Creativity is still revolutionary.
How does it feel, 8 years later, to still be at the cutting edge of feminist art practice?
Obviously, as a young woman, with only enthusiasm and few resources, I did not know that the Blackwomen's Creativity Project would be creating history by staging exhibitions and events.
It was only towards the end of last year, when the book was going to press and space was tight, that I realised how important a contribution was made not only by my work, but also the work of all the women who had contributed to the Project both nationally and internationally.
Then I allowed myself the luxury to think ‘Hey, yeah, at 30 you're not such a failure after all.’
It didn't matter that it had taken such a long time.
Where nothing is written it takes time to create a document which is genuinely useful to many of us, both as a verification of our struggle and a signpost to future strategies for our art work.
I truly believe that each of us had held on in there not only for ourselves, but also for the women we are destined never to meet in person, but with whom we share our motivation to create a world where our creativity is valued.
Not only in a simple financial sense but also in a spiritual sense.
I believe Blackwomen's Creativity to be revolutionary in its potential.
It confronts racism, sexism, privilege, abuse, but tries soulfully not to  lose its integrity.
It holds out for beauty over mere rhetoric, active passion over passive submission.
It keeps us alive when too much around us does not value our humanity.
Just ask yourself — what value is Blackwomen's lives in a world in chaos over money, over war, over patriarchy?
Who will value our lives if not ourselves?
There is so much to be learned from what these women express in words and pictures — are we brave enough to listen?
The contributors to Passion have expressed the desire to support the Project not for financial gain or fame (although these are by-products on occasion!).
They contributed because on the one hand, they were asked and understood that what they had to say was important, and also because too many of them grew up in a world without such books.
There were few role models in the wider society which suggested that our creativity was so diverse and has such wonderful potential.
Recently, at a lively event at Centreprise, a community literature venue in Hackney, East London, I was asked to define Blackwomen's Creativity.
Without hesitation I said ‘it transcends artificial barriers of race, class, sexuality and gender.
The thing is to take these issues on board and get on with the work as a community of artists.
After all we each know who pulls their weight and who ligs it!
Now that the eight year journey to Passion is complete it is all of our responsibility to get out there and get Passion into bookshops, onto bookshelves and onto reading lists.
The world would be a better place if it was predisposed to listen to Blackwomen's voices.
Here they are.
Are we prepared to listen?
And so with ‘Passion: Discourses on Blackwomen's Creativity’ out at last, what does 1991 hold in store for you?
Well, towards the end of 1990 I was appointed artist in residence at the Tate Gallery in Liverpool.
The post is sponsored by MoMart and culminates with an exhibition of my work at the Gallery in August/September '91.
It will be called Hysteria .
In addition, the Tate is commissioning me to select an exhibition from their Collection.
I have chosen to concentrate on Women Artists 1850–1940.
So I anticipate a lively and above all, beautiful exhibition which will allow us to advance our debates around the issues of Women, Modernity and Modernism.
My first novel,Necropolis , which is set in my home town of Glasgow, will be published this May.
Having spent a fabulous time with the Easterhouse Women's Group at the Wellhouse Community Centre, I have been encouraged to continue working on the issues central to my creativity, women, race and class — a wonderfully exciting picture to paint for our futures.
Zabat has now arrived in London.
The show was commissioned by the Rochdale Art Gallery in 1987, staged there in '89 and has been on the road since then.
It is now time to move on to new pastures.
My ambition now is to move into film and music with Hysteria — which promises to be as big a success as Zabat — centred as it is on the passionate potential of Blackwomen's Creativity!’
Maud Sulter was in conversation with Ardentia Verba.
ARTS AND EXTRACTS from PASSION Discourses on Blackwomen's Creativity
SUTAPA BISWAS addresses important issues with the use of myths and ancient Hindu mythologies.
Reworking her rich and cultural history to question Western attitudes and assumptions.
INGRID POLLARD is a documentary photographer who has published her photographs in several magazines and journals such as Spare Rib, Outwrite and The Voice .
She has exhibited prints widely in exhibitions in Britain and the USA.
LUBAINA HIMID is a lecturer in Fine Art at Lancashire Polytechnic and has been the main force behind the flowering of Blackwomen's Art in Britain.
Her ground breaking shows 5 Black Women at the Africa Centre ,Black Woman Time Now and The Thin Black Line brought the work of artists such as Veronica Ryan, Sonia Boyce and Sutapa Biswas to a wider public, often taking the risk of giving women their first public exhibition.
She worked as Assistant Curator to Jill Morgan at Rochdale Art Gallery 1988–1990 and staged major shows by Donald Rodney,Critical and Claudette Johnson,Pushing Back the Boundaries .
RUBBING CULTURE'S NOSE IN THE MUD OF POLITICS
VEENA STEPHENSON
Within heritage, culture, history, etc, it seems to me that whilst women of a patriarchal society have no separate ‘grand narratives’, people of an imperialised culture often do have knowledge of an era before imperialism.
Also vestiges of that culture such as language, religion, certain social relations, which have not needed to change under domination continue to exist alongside new impositions.
Whilst at college I became intrigued by the evidence that Indian art seemed to mean ancient Indian art, referring only to that era before imperialism.
It was/is presented either sparsely, as in generic art historical texts, or as a separate, specialised area of study.
For instance, Gombrich's much-prescribed ‘The Story of Art’ contains barely two pages on the entire subject.
Even so he only mentions the art of Gandhara, and this only because of a supposed influence on it by Classical art which he says ‘helped the Indians to create an image of their saviours’.
Even in the reference section at the end of the book the most he offers is to say that by studying the Buddha image we can learn more about Eastern art ‘than if we read a good many surveys of these fields’.
So in a typically ‘orientalist’ tradition he reduces all the cultures which form the so-called East to a single stereotypical image.
VEENA STEPHENSON is one of the new wave of Black feminist theorists.
In her incisive essay she nips a few Icons of Feminist Art Theory in the ankle.
She works with the Asian Women Writers Collective.
ZENOBIA
BERNARDINE EVARISTO
The name Zenobia belonged to a legendary Black queen and warrior of the East who dies circa AD 272.
Her enormous empire, Palmyra, extended the land we now know as Iraq through to Southern Africa.
She was as famous as Cleopatra and indeed she conquered Egypt which she added to her empire.
Zenobia was also the first name of my paternal grandmother who lived and died in Nigeria and whom I never met.
I wrote the poem Zenobia while staying on the Greek island of Crete.
Like Spain, Crete is also imbued with a resonant African past.
One set of early inhabitants of Crete were the Minoans who came from, amongst other places, Africa.
(Another snippet of information usually excluded from tourist brochures).
The southern coast of Crete fringes the Libyan Sea, so this is hardly surprising.
So was it very surprising that I picked up on the African presence moving around the island?
Or did it pick me up!
Zenobia wore a crown
of thinly sliced shaped ivory leaves.
A delicate twist of each one,
forming a magical halo —
Light Of Life,
the summer that she came to us.
Our parched cracked lips
trembled in anticipation.
Young thirsty eyes devoured
the bevy of jewels cascading
along the seams and ridges
of her roundsome frame.
‘Your obedient servants’ we gasped,
‘Melon seeds, Turquoise, Rubies, Amethysts.’
Florid words fell like unwanted cherry pips,
now to lie and bleach on stone.
Our thin dry bodies knelt in homage
as Zenobia strode toward us
from the foothills.
Finely coiled hennaed hair
dancing about her thighs.
Clenched teeth of cowrie shells
draped from her noble neck.
Swan vision in ebony rising before us,
each movement a serenade.
Limbs a symphony in ancient mountain ranges.
Shells transformed to golden sun pearls.
Her laughter sweeping across savannahs,
singing from rock to water,
rebounding in caverns,
gushing into dells,
melting our hardness,
washing our tiredness away.
(She had come to us when our heads —
helmets of molten lead, throbbed in hope
for some last recognition)
Zenobia was as large as we were diminished.
As alive as we were dying.
Placed rosaries of wild hibiscus
on our fragile points.
Rubbed our souls for soothing:
tip tongued slurring for sure 
over ripe watermelons.
Each pip a seed, each seed a growth,
each growth — life.
Zenobia, as stolid
as an old and mighty warrior.
Designs of scars, battle marked patches,
as smooth as sea washed pebbles — shocking!
From high noon to sundown
we blazed and buzzed like hot island bees
on sweet cherry trees.
Swimming in the cooling of aqua sources.
Playing upon thick soft mats
of brum and floribunda.
Trying to live again
before late afternoon in the heat.
But Zenobia came and left
before the sun had set,
before our sweat had dried
to hard nodules or nothingness,
before the flowers
had withered and shrivelled,
before she would age with us,
before she would die with us.
Her regents stride back to the foothills;
a sheen of polished mahogany,
escaping between jagged and shearing rock
as quickly as she had entered.
Daylight transferred to sea to night,
and Zenobia — carefully wrapped and placed
in our storehouse of memories —
— that summer.
1987
Your Name is Mud
Nina Edge
In talking about ‘craft’ practice and black craftswomen a dance must be stepped through a sludge of definition, misinformation, appropriation and assumption.
A series of conversations with foundation arts students, arts graduates and post graduates reveals plenty of sludge amongst a privileged group who have been the recipients of a generous slice of the United Kingdom's art ‘Education’ cake.
Having gorged for some time on the sweet taste of the ‘knowledge’ available from large British institutions, those trained in the ‘Fine Arts’emit an acrid belch of superiority on the subject of their craft.
Their homes are often sumptuously hung, not with the finest of eurocentric defined Fine Art, or even the craftiest of Crafts Council defined craft, but with Javanese batik, Indian embroideries, West African Adire, and selected ex-colonial produce.
Objects of this nature in the sludge ridden book of definitions are not even craft, are less than craft, are merely ethnic .
Simple practice without analysis may be seen to be part of the craft tradition; crafts people and their wares not being subject to literary criticism in the way that arts people are and historically have been.
To engage in activities defined as ‘craft’ without thinking about it might appear to be a merry dance but the sludge is always there to be slipped up in.
In order to pass by without getting something sticky on your feet it is wise to be aware of the nature of these definitions, misinformations, appropriations and assumptions.
It is perhaps a shame to divert attention and energy away from the act of making and being, toward analysis of how your makings and be-ing (what you make and who you are) are received by those who are empowered to see them.
It takes account of what the products are called and where they rest.
If they have come to rest through the act of sale to a stranger then, what was their price?, and, in what currency were they purchased?
Who has enough food to exchange goods for a piece of baked earth or strands of the seed of cotton, and why are they inclined to buy handmade objects at all when manufactured goods look safer, may be guaranteed, and will almost always be cheaper?
Are there differences in the experience of handling and owning materials that have been processed by hand and those processed by machines, tools and computers?
It could be said that a major function of handmade ceramic ware, individually thrown mugs and bowls, is to aid the transition into the automated computer age.
A comforter in a world of numbers and bar codes.
From the time of the resurrection of handmade table ware in the United Kingdom to the present day, the booms in sales of craft ware follows closely the introductions of major technological changes and their ever increasingly felt effect on all aspects of life.
Outside of the ‘high craft’ venues: galleries and museums, the most likely locations for the purchase of handmade ware are regions where there are tourist industries.
What better way to prove that you have been somewhere in a consumer culture, than to buy something made locally whilst you are there.
The United Kingdom's tourist industry relies to an incredible extent on a nostalgia, a re-construction of the past, particularly a rural past without tears, bloodstains or nasty smells.
It is connected to a desire to paint an all white picture of Britain, a Britain before ‘immigration’, an insular idea of what Ye Olde British culture and produce was.
NINA EDGE studied in Cardiff and continues to live and work there.
Her work was included in BWCP III and she has exhibited in exhibitions such as Along The Lines of Resistance and Diverse Cultures .
WAR IN THE GULF
What happens when a so-called Third World nation or region says to the imperialist powers, NO, we will not conduct our affairs according to your orders?
We can answer this question on the basis of our past experiences.
In fact, we have witnessed this very scenario on so many occasions we could not even begin to discuss them.
We have witnessed the murder of millions of men, women and children by the US and their allies in Africa, Vietnam, Nicaragua, El Salvador, Grenada, Chile and the list goes on.
We have seen the US break the economic back of small sovereign nations, imposing an economic warfare and savage poverty, which brings with it humiliation, degradation, starvation and the loss of countless human lives.
To name but two examples, we have seen the US use chemical warfare when they dropped 17 million gallons of Agents Orange, Blue and White on Vietnam; and we have seen them feed a germ which induced a potentially fatal fever into Cuba's water supply.
And tragically, in the past few weeks we have seen the US and its Allies carry out over 44,000 sorties over a period of 20 days against the people of Iraq.
And the bombing continues as we go to press.
The uncensored unofficial number of Iraqi deaths is said to number as many as 300,000.
In Baghdad alone, over 100,000 people have been killed.
To continue in 1991 with the same blatant colonialism and imperialism that has been conducted since the days when Christopher Columbus invaded the Americas, the imperialist powers have combined their increasingly sophisticated and deadly military machinery with slick psychological warfare.
A calculated campaign of domination over the media, and other major information outlets, has ensured that the perception of the recent events documented in the following pages never reaches the majority of people on this planet.
Instead, the information disseminated is designed to make too many people comfortable with the idea that these horrifying centuries of murder and pillage have been a fight for justice and democracy.
Like the military machinery, the psychological warfare gets ever more sophisticated.
The kind of media barrage of misinformation, lies and distorted perceptions that we have seen during these past weeks, is in fact one of the most important strategies of ‘Operation Desert Storm’.
It paves the way for George Bush to speak of a ‘new world order’, while simultaneously launching the largest military operation since World War II to preserve the ‘old world order’ that has served he and his colleagues so well for so long.
Aided by the media, who have never failed to find an opportunity to slip in the idea that it is Saddam Hussein who won't negotiate, the US and its Allies have led their people into a terrifying war which will claim the lives of so many of their sons and daughters.
And they have led them under the false belief that a negotiated solution was seriously pursued.
How many times have we heard the phrase, ‘Saddam Hussein won't negotiate’?
As Nawal El Saadawi points out so clearly in her report from Cairo, it was in fact George Bush's insistence on the withdrawal of Iraqi troops from Kuwait which destroyed the very basis for negotiations.
In other words, the ‘do exactly and unconditionally as we say and then we'll talk but the talks will come to nothing as per usual’ attitude.
But with the end of the Cold War, Western imperialist intervention under the guise of ‘fighting Communism’ is beginning to be laid bare, and the Allies in the Gulf are being exposed as never before.
Despite the media army, it is becoming more and more difficult for the Allies to cover up the ancient and ruthless strategy of global domination and exploitation underlying their actions.
The battle in the Gulf is not about George Bush and Saddam Hussein and which of them is less virtuous than the other.
Both men are guilty of grave violations of human rights in their own countries and elsewhere.
And the battle is clearly not about ‘liberating’ Kuwait.
It is not even just about control of the region's oil resources, although that is a significant factor.
It is about a principle for which people have been fighting and dying for centuries — the indisputable right to self-determination.
It is a battle demanding an end to foreign domination of the Arab World and its resources, and an end to the illegitimate political and economic order in the region, imposed by outside forces.
It is the same battle, in a new form, which dates centuries back, and which finds support from peoples all over the ‘Third World’ who have been fighting and dying for too long for something which is so clearly their birthright.
For many Arab people, their ambivalence about supporting Saddam Hussein is secondary to their desperate need to rid themselves of a system imposed by outside forces; a system that enables a small ruling Arab elite to plunder the region's resources, siphoning off cheap oil to the West, while millions of Arabs live in dire poverty, struggling to survive the economic blows dealt to the Arab nation by the West.
And as the Western media talks about a 3rd World War starting in the Gulf, millions of people all over the world know that the Third World War started long before the battle in the Gulf.
We remember the pain and suffering of millions who have died throughout the ‘Third World’, fighting for the most basic of human rights, and we reflect shamefully on the fact that it is only when the US and their allies face the prospect of their own children dying that this war is truly acknowledged.
And the contradictions are more glaring than ever.
where were the US, Britain and others during the last three years of the Palestinian Intifada?
Palestinians waging an unarmed resistance to Israeli occupation of Arab lands, have suffered a brutal repression and thousands of deaths of unarmed civilians at the hands of Israeli armed forces.
Where were the Allies when Israeli forces invaded Lebanon in 1982, murdering over 20,000 Palestinians and Lebanese?
How can it possibly be construed as unreasonable that the US discuss and join in an internationally negotiated end to the occupation of Palestine and Lebanon as well as Kuwait?
And how can it be construed as reasonable that the US and their Western allies continue to control and plunder the oil resources in the Arab region via puppet regimes such as those they have directly installed in Kuwait and Saudi Arabia, while the Arab World, like the rest of the ‘Third World’, finds itself experiencing an ever increasing and intolerable poverty at the hands of Western capitalism and imperialism.
Whether Saddam Hussein had invaded or not, Kuwait's days in its present form were numbered anyway, as are the days of all puppet regimes in the Arab World.
Across the globe conditions are critical.
Lines are being drawn.
The Arab masses, like their counterparts throughout the so-called Third World, are at boiling point, sick and tired of the hypocrisy, naked aggression, and humiliation of centuries of imperialism.
A vast majority of Arab leaders and Arab people have made it clear that the invasion of Kuwait is an issue for the Arab nation to resolve, but to no avail.
The US and British refusal to respect the wishes of the Arab people, and their indisputable right to self-determination, demonstrates that sadly, despite a changing world, the West is determined to hang on to its outmoded and intolerable attitudes and practices.
They continue to refuse to come to the negotiating table.
They continue to ignore the pleas of people worldwide to stop bombing Iraq and to stop this madness.
Instead, they continue to maintain their position by holding the world to economic and military ransom.
But with all the military might they may summon, they can never break the resolve the people who have suffered for too long under their rule.
There will be no peace on this planet without justice
Nawal El Saadawi Reports from Egypt 
On the television screen in my home I watched the muscles on George Bush's face contract, and listened to his voice, dry and unfeeling, as he informed the peoples of the world that the war on Iraq had begun: to liberate Kuwaiti people, punish aggression, and ensure that a new world order, based on peace and security, would be established for all peoples no matter how small.
He condemned the ruler of Iraq, Saddam Hussein for invading Kuwait, an act which he qualified as violating the principles of international law and of the United Nations.
Yet the war on Iraq is a violation of the very principles George Bush claims to uphold.
When American troops were first sent to the Gulf Region after the Iraqi occupation of Kuwait, the reason given by the US for this deployment of troops was the protection of Saudi Arabia from an ‘eventual invasion by Iraq’.
This aim was soon replaced by the ‘liberation of Kuwait’.
Now the declared objective is to ‘free’ Kuwait and to destroy the military capacity of Iraq.
Yet how many times has America sided with Israeli aggression against the people of Palestine?
How many times has America used its veto to maintain Israel's occupation of three Arab countries and to permit the continued killing of men, women, and children in occupied Palestine?
How often has America used its position within the United Nations to prevent even an investigation into Israeli massacres in occupied Palestine?
And for how long has America exerted pressures to prevent the convening of an international conference for a peaceful solution of the Middle East Conflict?
A new international order cannot be built on double standards: one standard for rich and powerful nations and for those whom they support, and another standard for those who are poor and have limited power and resources.
George Bush calls the Iraqi missile attacks on Israel ‘outrageous’ while exalting the prowess of those who have thrown double the explosive power of the Hiroshima Bomb on Baghdad, not to liberate Kuwait, but to control the oil, and remind all Arab peoples that no one can defy the American will to become the world's policemen now that the Soviet Union is not to be counted for as an opponent.
George Bush calls Saddam Hussein a dictator.
But what about the regimes he defends in other Arab countries like Saudi Arabia where women cannot even drive a car and have no rights at all, and where all opposition is crushed without mercy by long prison sentences, condemnation to death or assassination?
George Bush, at the head of the Tomahawk missiles, has consistently pushed through a policy of war against Iraq.
He has refused all real negotiation at any stage, since negotiations necessarily mean dropping preliminary conditions like the withdrawal of Iraqi troops from Kuwait.
We do not support aggression anywhere.
We did not support the invasion of Kuwait by Iraq.
But America has unleashed the most devastating war the world has witnessed since ‘World War II’.
And all over the world, we as women will continue to raise our voices.
We will continue to struggle, using all means at our disposal, for an immediate stop to this war and for the opening of negotiations before the conflagration spreads more and more.
This is why I joined the International Women's Peace Delegation to Baghdad, a few days before the twenty eight nation attack on Iraq.
International Women's Peace Delegation to Iraq and Jordan
The Delegation was composed of seven women: Margarita Papandreou (Women for Mutual Security, and Global Co-ordinator of the Delegation); myself — Nawal El Saadawi (writer, medical doctor and President of the Arab Women's Solidarity Association); Fatheya Seoudi (Women's Centre, Jordan); Joan Drake (Institute of Policy Studies in Washington and Madrea, Latin America); Maude Barlow (Voice of Women — Canada, Women World Parliamentarians for Peace); Flora Abrachmanova (World Democratic Federation of Women) and Kay Kamp (Women's International League for Peace and Freedom).
A meeting had been arranged with Saddam Hussein on January 8, but our plane was delayed and we arrived in Baghdad too late for our appointment.
Nonetheless, we immediately started our other meetings to make up for lost time.
These included meetings with Saadi Mahdi Saleh (President of the Iraqi Parliament); Taha Yasseen Ramadan (Vice Prime Minister of Iraq); Latif Nasseef Gassem (Minister of Information); Ghanem Aziz (Vice President of the Parliament); a number of deputies in the parliament, both men and women; Nawal El Ghazaui (Vice Chairwoman of the Iraqi Women's Federation); Haifa Abdel Rahman; Ilham El Zoubedi; Azza Kobba and other women in the Federation.
We were unable to meet with the Chairwoman of the Iraqi Women's Federation, Manal Younis, as at the time she was on a ship bound for Iraq with a cargo of medicines and milk.
(Since UN sanctions against Iraq were imposed, over 4,300 people have died in Iraq from lack of medicines.)
The ship however, did not reach its destination as it was tear-gassed by American and other naval forces guarding the Red Sea.
Two women were critically injured.
When we left Baghdad, there was no further news of what had happened to those on board, except that the ship had been forced to unload its cargo in the port of Kabbous, Oman.
We sent a message of solidarity to the 250 women on board the ship, who had come from different parts of the world including the Arab Region.
Aims and Objectives
The objectives of the Peace mission were:
1) A plea for negotiations without preconditions since preconditions would only be an obstacle in the face of such negotiations.
2) To arrive at an Arab settlement of the conflict under the auspices of the United Nations.
3) Immediate simultaneous withdrawal of all troops (foreign multinational and Iraqi) and their replacement by Arab and UN troops under the supervision of the United Nations.
4) The convening of an International Conference to deal with the conflict between Iraq and Kuwait as well as other conflicts in the Middle East, in particular the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and the conflicts over oil.
All the Iraqi people with whom we met assured us that they were eager for negotiations in order to avoid war, but said that they would not take orders from George Bush, and that none of the parties should insist on any conditions to the holding of these negotiations.
They considered George Bush's insistence on the withdrawal of Iraqi troops from Kuwait as a condition which destroyed the basis for negotiations, as once withdrawal had taken place there would no longer be a conflict to negotiate.
For them, this adamant position on the part of the dominant faction in the American administration exposed the complete lack of any desire for a peaceful negotiated solution to the conflict in the Middle East.
They also insisted that Kuwaiti machinations against Iraq (started during the Iraqi-Iranian war) such as violations of quotas for oil production, reduction of oil prices and the pumping of oil from the Rumeila Oil fields (in disputed territory)— all carried out with American backing — had led to this current conflict.
On January 10, our Delegation organized a press conference and held a demonstration in front of the American Embassy in Baghdad to protest against the despatching of American military forces to the region.
We handed in a letter of protest which insisted that the principles of the United Nations, including the solving of all conflicts by negotiations and peaceful means, should be upheld everywhere and at all times.
This applied to the present conflict as well as to the Israeli conflict with the Arab peoples.
Hundreds of Palestinians and Lebanese, mainly civilians, women and children, are being killed by Israelis.
No conflict can really be resolved as long as these double standards prevail.
We made it clear that in our views, the Western capitalist countries and their allies are not so much concerned over the ‘liberation of Kuwait’ as they are over maintaining their monopoly over the oil and money of the Arab Gulf countries.
We also published a joint declaration with the Iraqi Women's Federation which upheld similar ideas.
Before leaving, we paid a visit to the Volunteers in the Peace Camp.
A large number of men and women had come to Iraq from all over the world to build a ‘human wall’ between the armies on the Iraqi-Saudi border.
Among them were women between 70 and 80 years of age, some of them using crutches.
On the way back from Baghdad we stopped briefly in Amman, Jordan.
Many people there were expecting an Israeli attack on Jordan, the aims of which would be to force the Palestinians of the Occupied lands to remain in Jordan, and, in accordance with Israel's notorious ‘transfer plan’, accommodate the expected arrival in Israel of millions of immigrants from the Soviet Union.
Many fear this attack may come later on, after the war on Iraq is over.
After our visit to Baghdad and Amman, the Women's International Peace Delegation had been planning to visit the US to meet with George Bush, but this was postponed when the attack on Iraq began on January 16.
Since then, in Amman, Turkey, the US and other countries, we have continued to organise various actions for peace and send appeals for a stop to the war.
Our efforts for peace will continue, including a possible tour of the US at the end of February.
Barbara Day reports from New York 
When New Yorkers first got word that war had started, those not glued to TV sets gravitated to Times Square, where little more than two weeks earlier a cheering crowd had watched the descent of a red, white and blue ball marking the dwindling seconds of 1990.
On January 16, 1991, however, the mood was hardly one of celebration.
Stunned groups and individuals read incessantly circling headlines announcing US bombing of Iraq.
The crowds, eventually numbering in the thousands, evolved into a spontaneous anti-war demonstration and headed across town, disrupting traffic while shouting ‘No blood for oil’ and finally rallying at the United Nations building.
Resolution 678 — Intimidation, Bribery and Extortion
In view of the UN's role in this war, the choice of destination had a chilling logic.
Immediately after Iraq's invasion of Kuwait on August 2, 1990, President George Bush took the international lead in condemning the act.
The US vetoed proposals for a substantive conference that would allow regional discussions and negotiations, linking talks of an Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait with an Israeli withdrawal from occupied Arab territory.
Instead, the US used the UN as a forum for launching a successful diplomatic attack that culminated in the UN Security Council Resolution 678 (UNSCR 678)(see SR Dec/Jan, 1990) which ordered Iraq to leave Kuwait by January 15.
Bush then used the resolution to bludgeon the US Congress into approving his war.
Moreover, many of the international deals that made US military action possible in the Gulf, were conceived of, or concluded during the UN World Summit for Children in September 1990.
While never publicly stated, it was understood that China's abstention during the vote on UNSCR 678 (Yemen and Cuba voted no) won it a reprieve from the enforcement of US sanctions linked to its slaughter of students in Tiananmen Square in 1989.
China's abstention also won it freedom from ‘US concern’ over its dismal human rights record and any criticism of its ongoing prosecution of prominent pro-democracy activists.
Meanwhile, while not officially sanctioning the use of force against Iraq, China's curry-favouring bolstered its future bid for ‘Third World’ leadership.
The Soviets, Iraq's patron in the days of superpower bi-polarity, were immediately rewarded with a $4 billion Saudi Arabian loan for their vote in favour of the Resolution; Syria got $1.5 billion from the Saudis and a free hand in Lebanon from the US; and for their acquiescence, several Non-Aligned States got promises of IMF loans or World Bank credit.
On the other hand, for its no vote Yemen has been threatened with the withdrawal of $70 million in US aid.
Iraqi Foreign Minister Tariq Aziz, in a letter to UN Secretary General Perez de Cuellar on January 24, noted that the United States had  manoeuvred passage of Resolution 678 through a combination of ‘pressure, intimidation, extortion and bribery’.
Detailing for de Cuellar the damage done to Iraq's civilian population and culture by five days of Allied bombing, Aziz declared, ‘You personally bear responsibility to history and mankind for the heinous crimes being committed against the noble people of Iraq who are fighting for their freedom.’
By the third day of the war, Pentagon officials boasted of being able to drop as much as 5,000 tons of bombs a day on Baghdad — double the amount dropped by Allies during the 1945 bombing of Dresden.
And as we go to press,the equivalent of more than three Hiroshima's have been dropped on Iraq .
Iraq is not alone in its displeasure with de Cuellar.
On January 24, Francois Guillani, de Cuellar's official spokesperson, fanned speculation within UN headquarters that de Cuellar was under intense pressure to resign, by announcing over the public address system that ‘It is untrue that the Secretary General is considering stepping down’.
Many UN members from ‘Third World’ nations, now say they saw January 15 as a diplomatic rather than military deadline.
After all, they argue, UN resolutions ordering South Africa out of Namibia took decades of diplomatic wrangling, and those regarding Israel's occupation of the West Bank have been routinely ignored by Washington.
Nearly three weeks into the war, many at the UN felt — as did French  Defense Minister Jean-Pierre Chevenement and Soviet Foreign Minister Aleksandr Bessmertnykh — that Washington, with its wanton bombing of Iraq, was exceeding the mandate of Resolution 678.
US Economy on the Verge of Depression
‘Operation Desert Shield’, said Brooklyn Congressman Major Owens, speaking at an anti-war press conference one week before the first US bombs rained on Baghdad, ‘is Bush's way of shielding public attention from the monstrous thefts in the S&Ls (Savings & Loan Assocs.); from crumbling bridges, roads and subways; from deteriorating education and healthcare systems; and from the growing number of people forced to live and beg on city streets.’
The press conference, called by families with members in the military, was aimed at slowing Bush's rush to war.
Major Owens was one of the handful of mostly Black and Latino lawmakers willing to oppose the war during two days of nationally televised Congressional debates.
They opted instead for continued UN sanctions and negotiations.
They maintained that the money spent on ‘this unnecessary war’ could best be used to improve the rapidly declining quality of life in the United States.
Their comments, however, were overwhelmed by a chorus of patriotic congress members, predicting victory in a ‘quick’ war against Iraq.
Some US analysts, however, believe that because of the dire economic situation in the US, negotiations never had a chance.
Thomas Ferguson at the Boston-based McCormack Institute of Public Policy, contends that US action in the Gulf was motivated more by a desire for economic hegemony, than anger at Iraqi aggression.
‘Precisely because the area's oil supplies are relatively more important to the allies’, wrote Ferguson in The Nation (January 28, 1991), ‘the United States' unique ability to project power within the region, confers enormous leverage in its negotiations with the allies over, for example, American Commercial access to Western Europe or Japan.’
Since the outbreak of the war, mainstream US media have been enthusiastically jingoistic and bloodthirsty.
They have not provided an analytic background for Bush's war, nor have they mentioned that the ‘technically fascinating fireworks’ over Baghdad cost the US public $2 trillion, and a decade of inner city deprivation.
Every Patriot missile fired in defence of Israel or in the Saudi Arabian sky, costs Americans $1.3 million.
Every Cruise or Tomahawk costs $1 million.
Congressional estimates currently put the war's cost at $1 billion a day.
The Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board recently warned that a three month war in the Gulf would send the US economy into depression.
Meanwhile, grassroots opposition is growing.
Much of the energy behind the organised US Peace Effort originates with Vietnam veterans and their families, and the churches.
All 37 denominations in the National Council of Churches — representing 42 million people — wrote to Bush before he went to war, futilely petitioning him to ‘give peace a chance’.
Demonstrations have been large and frequent.
January 19 and 26 saw a combined total of 300,000 anti-war activists march in Washington and an equal number take to the streets of San Francisco.
Hundreds of smaller, locally organised anti-war actions have occurred nationwide, but little attention is afforded them by a media cowering under government charges that it contributed to the US defeat in Vietnam.
And while the White House has publicly dismissed anti-war demonstrators as well-meaning but ‘misguided individuals’, off the record, some presidential advisers reportedly consider the anti-war movement a danger to be dealt with, noting that ‘its membership is mainstream and 100 times stronger now than at the beginning of Vietnam.’
Reem Abdelhadi reports from London 
During the Gulf crisis, we are seeing a comeback of the old colonial ‘values’: the West has a ‘moral duty’ to resolve other nations' problems; Western ‘civilisation’comes to the rescue of nations incapable of solving their own problems.
The West has to dictate to other nations' leadership, telling them what to do with their own wealth and natural resources.
Not that the West is indeed civilised and politically sound.
The colonial powers, and later the imperial powers, have disrupted the lives of hundreds of nations, denied or attempted to wipe out their cultures, exploited their natural resources and imposed alien rule on them.
Like other ‘Third World’ nations, the Arab people had suffered and continue to suffer as a result of colonialism and imperialism.
Once more, the Arab people are being dealt with like ‘uncontrollable children’ with a dangerous weapon; the weapon being the military machinery the West was previously happy to supply as long as Western interests were protected.
The media has played a key role in presenting the Arab people as somewhat ‘different’.
Since the war started, there has been hardly anything shown of Arab people, except, of course, massive anti-west demonstrations.
This makes the dehumanisation of the bombing plausible.
Thus it is easy to feel ‘precision bombing does not hit people, and anyway, all Arabs hate us’.
Little is shown of the background to this conflict, and even less is shown of the people who have struggled against the Saddam Hussein government whilst Western aid continued fuelling his campaigns against Iran, the Kurdish people and his own people.
If this war is about justice, then is it not time that the Iraqi opposition of democratic and progressive forces be recognised?
Should they not be THE key contributors to any solution of the conflict?
But this is not about justice, nor is it about International law.
This war is about Western domination of the Middle East.
It is about control over oil — which is Arab wealth.
It is about self appointed ‘policing’ of the world, restoring ‘stability’and ‘order’according to the standards of the US, Britain and other major political and military imperialist powers.
International law was not enforced when the US invaded Panama and Grenada.
Nor was it enforced when Israel invaded Palestine, and other Arab lands.
International law and the Geneva conventions apply only to the endless cases of aggression around the world, with the US, Britain and Israel being some of the main provocateurs in the aggressors' camp.
Iraq invaded Kuwait.
Israel invaded Palestine.
Kuwait was illegally annexed by the Iraqi regime.
The Golan Heights were illegally annexed by Israel.
Numerous UN resolutions were passed against Israel's aggression and brutality, and some were passed against Iraq's aggression.
Yet the might of the Western war machinery moves swiftly to implement some UN resolutions but not others.
They say they aim to liberate Kuwait — starting with the bombing of civilians in Baghdad and Basra, whilst, only a few hundred miles away, Palestinian people continue to suffer while Israel rejects a three-man UN observer mission!
The Arab people, especially the Iraqis, experience discrimination and racism on all levels.
Iraq was being destroyed while a CNN commentator excitedly described it as ‘fireworks on the 4th of July’.
Meanwhile in Britain, many Iraqi people — most of whom have long fought against Saddam Hussein's government — are being deported on the basis of being a ‘threat to national security’.
These Iraqi people are not safe anywhere.
First they were pursued by Iraqi government agents, then war broke out and they are carpet bombed in Iraq, and once more they are being pursued, but this time by the British government.
The Palestinians are also suffering in their country, including being deprived of the use of gas masks and adequate warning systems.
And in Britain, like the Iraqis, they are considered a ‘threat to national security’.
There has been a marked increase in Anti-Arab and Anti-Muslim racism in this country.
But the sentiments are not entirely new.
Indeed, they date way back to colonial times.
And they have been renewed on an alarming scale since the crisis started.
Once again the situation of the Black community in Britain — people who have more than contributed to the building of this country — comes into question.
The Asian, Muslim and Arab communities are now being threatened more than ever with attacks, harassment, detention and deportation.
Yet another important aspect of this war are the British troops.
For those who have relatives fighting in the Gulf we must also show support and sensitivity.
Some of these soldiers did not choose to fight this war.
The best way to support these young men and women is to bring them home alive.
Just think: the average age of the Iraqi soldier is 19, the average age of the British soldiers can't be much more than that 
January 26, Amman, Jordan: Iraqi, Palestinian and Jordanian women protesting the war demand the immediate withdrawal of all foreign troops from Arab soil and an Arab solution to the conflict.
Below right: January 11, 1991.
A young Mexican-American woman on a 100,000-strong anti-war protest in Santa Rosa, California.
Iraq, January 25: Relatives hold up an Iraqi child injured in Allied Bombing raids on Baghdad.
As we go to press, the uncensored unofficial number of Iraqi deaths is said to number as many as 300,000.
In Baghdad alone, over 100,000 people have been killed.
Bonn, January 26: Demonstrators in Germany carry PLO flags on a 150,000-strong protest against the war in the Gulf.
San Francisco, January 19: An estimated 50,000 people attend a rally calling for peace in the Gulf
‘We apologise for not being able to bring you the report from Riyadh.
Unfortunately, as we were going to press, due to the escalation of the war and increasing press restrictions, our reporter in Saudi Arabia was unable to submit her article.
January 15: Hands off the Middle East torchlit demonstration in London
BLACK MIME THEATRE Presents THE WOMEN'S TROOP in Mothers 
The birth of THE WOMEN'S TROOP has made it and its older brother company, Black Mime Theatre, the only two professional Black Mime companies in existence to date.
With the Winter premiere of their play, MOTHERS, the three women use their own unique style to redefine the concept of mime while investigating the myths of mother love and the image of the ‘perfect’ mother that is consistently upheld in society.
Claudette Williams went along to take a closer look.
MOTHERS is a moving portrayal of the relationship between West Indian mothers and their daughters by the Black Mime Theatre's sister trio, the Women's Troop.
It is honest, humorous and compulsive.
I felt totally drawn into the piece as I recognised struggled I've had with my own mother and my feelings of shame, and fear, talking about sex — the terrible silence that develops which no one attempts to break down for fear of the pain ‘that ‘conversation would bring’.
The performance begins with a mother teaching her daughter a nursery rhyme.
The simple musical patterns used are a metaphor that holds the stories together.
The piece then challenges these emotional inheritances, and show that it is possible to go beyond them.
In confronting them with courage and humanity these patterns can be redressed.
Its daring use of music, mime, dance and humour challenges the audience to look beyond the stereotypes.
The three performers, Sky Hunt, Cindy Afflick and Paulina Graham are excellent and totally committed to the piece.
Denise Wong, the artistic director of the company and director of the piece says, ‘We wanted to look at mothers, but it is such a vast topic that we decided to concentrate on the mother and daughter relationship, and the concept of unconditional love.
We built our scenario on three mothers.
The mother we all want, the idolized woman.
The mother we all had, with all her faults.
And a young mother who develops and changes.
What we are trying to say is that we don't have to look to our mothers for everything.
All our work is improvised.
We research issues and talk about our personal history, and then create from there.’
WHY MOTHERS?
Sky Hunt:
It is an issue that everyone relates to, and it has never been done.
It was a very frightening subject, personal experiences came up.
All the things that can be passed down, the inhibitions, guilt and fear.
Paulina Graham:
From our research we could do six shows.
The re-occurring themes were, unconditional love and being able to look beyond our mothers for advice.
We are conditioned to believe all the books we read about what a mother should be.
Cindy Afflick:
The tough line of the show is that mothers don't love unconditionally — their love is subject to human conditions and human emotions.
We wanted to address these issues and give mothers their names…for they are always introduced as ‘such and such's mother’.
Mothers should be able to say ‘I don't love you at this time’ instead of the belief that ‘I am your mother, therefore, I love you’which we are all programmed to believe.
WHAT IS BLACK MIME?
Denise Wong:
As a group we wanted to dismiss the whole concept of the ‘White Face Clown’ and create innovative mime that speaks to the young — a mime that is accessible and relevant to the Black Community.
Mime is part of our cultural heritage — it is based in the tradition of the African storyteller.
It's not new to us, it is a connected memory that we are trying to revive to popularise its varied usage.
We use mime as an umbrella term for all the art forms.
Our mime is not silent, we integrate movement and text.
It's exciting, challenging and totally experimental.
HOW DID THE WOMEN'S GROUP COME ABOUT?
Denise Wong:
Mime is such a male dominated art form that I decided to develop a women's group, to encourage more black women into mime.
The women train by themselves, tackle issues which are women based and are developing a voice that is her own creation.
Sky Hunt:
That voice is ever changing as we learn and develop our technique as a group.
It requires total support and trust.
There are so many styles in mime.
What we are trying to do is to excite, giving black women a voice, in mime.
Our creativity is so undervalued that going onto that empty space means that we are saying, look at me, I'm alive!
Cindy Afflick:
It's such a special feeling, from that empty space we can create anything, just by movement, voice and song.
The  boundaries are limitless…
Paulina Graham:
…but rooted in our culture.
We can paint our images from many influences but they arrive here in Britain today.
Our commitment is to remain in this art form because it is positive and real; and to demand the right to define it.
Denise Wong:
We hope to form a young troop.
To encourage work with the body, before all the inhibitions develop.
For the ability to play on stage is important in life, as it is to continue to fill that empty space with our vision.
MUSIC
LE MYSTERE DES VOIX BULGARES
In Bulgaria traditional music thrives, and unlike British fold music (collated and ruined by rich Victorians) it has for centuries remained undiluted by outside influences.
This is in part due to the geography of the country; isolated villages in mountains and plains, separate regions with different dialects, modes of dress, and styles of music.
And whatever other effects it may have had, Communist rule meant that the country was immune to the MacDonalds culture which has swept away the individuality of so many countries.
The Bulgarian State TV and Radio Choir — known as Le Mystere Des Voix Bulgares , recently visited England as part of the Voice Over Festival of international singing.
Pam Mason attended their performance at Norwich Cathedral.
Norwich Cathedral, is a building whose splendour matched the music and voices of Le Mystere Des Voix  Bulgares ; who were dressed gloriously in traditional regional costumes.
Hearing them live, you realised that their voices have immense power as well as great beauty.
The absolute control they have over their voices was stunning, their harmonising superb.
Although few in the audience could have had the slightest idea of what the songs were about, their power to move was undiminished by the language barrier; such was their skill in vocal expression that the audience could tell which of the songs were mildly comic.
The brief tour was funded by the Bulgarian State.
In Bulgaria, the State provides free classes in traditional singing, instruments and dance, which are open to all, and in most villages there is a State-funded chitalishte or community centre — a degree of public funding of the arts which performers and audiences in Western countries can only dream of.
I asked Dora Hristova, the choir's musical director and conductor, if she thought the recent revolution in Bulgaria would change all this.
‘The changes are mainly political, and economic.
Before, the government gave money and support for cultural life, for choirs, all sorts of cultural activities, and it hasn't changed.
They are keen to preserve the good achievements.
But I can't see into the future’.
The music is, she says, ‘Medieval, from ancient times.
Peasant women still sing in this way.
The songs are sung in villages, on the mountains, at weddings, different rituals, harvesting, even when they're working outside — whenever they feel like singing.
Our programme is of authentic and arranged songs, harmonized by composers.
Songs and styles of singing are handed down from mother to daughter, unchanged over centuries or even  millennia .
Dora says that it is this originality which is one of the strengths of Le Mystere; ‘Most of the women have no real training as singers.
They're selected from villages.
It's very important to preserve the original vocal style.
There are different styles of singing in different regions, and we balance the programme to include different songs from different regions.
Shop, which is a region near Sofia, is famous for its diaphonic style, two voices singing in dissonance’.
This dissonance is one of the most characteristic sounds of Bulgarian women's traditional singing; other striking features are the high-pitched yips which punctuate singing from the Shop and Pirin regions, and Pirin songs also feature strikingly beautiful na visoko (high) voices.
These skilful vocal gymnastics make the music unique and unforgettable.
The words of the songs, even given the fact that much is lost in translation, are disappointing; such is the passion and power of the voices that you feel they must be singing about life and death matters.
On the sleeve notes to a (pre-revolutionary) Radio Sofia complication of Bulgarian traditional songs, Parvoleta Prokopava writes, ‘The…songs are actually the history of our nation, its victories and downfalls, its joys and sufferings…
Our songs are the sighs of the maidens in love, the tenderness of wedlock, the dreams of our children.’
Dora Hristova is a little more succinct.
‘They're about everyday life,’ she says.
‘Love songs prevail’.
Five years ago, Le Mystere Des Voix Bulgares would have been lucky to fill a church hall in Norwich.
The music hasn't changed; it's been the same for the past few  millennia .
Perhaps the best result of the current fascination with ‘world music’ is that, after decades of using it as a fashion accessory or status symbol, people have actually begun to listen to music again.
Le Mystere Des Voix Bulgares volume 3 is available on Phonogram Records
She takes the night train/With her bible of dreams/A suitcase pretty pink/A cassette of fresh screams…
(Ophelia's Shadow), so begins the title song of Toyah  Wilcox's new album.
Having written all of these clever, fresh and almost poetic sounding lyrics; which are backed by everything from African percussions to Rock guitar, Toyah can be satisfied with having produced such an innovative album.
FILM
REVERSAL OF FORTUNE
Director: Barbet Schroeder
Sunny Von Bulow ‘was’ a spoilt, super-rich American socialite who had it all.
Sunny Von Bulow ‘is’ lying in a luxury New York hospital in a coma.
She has been there for the past 10 years.
It is from this bed (fictionally) that Reversal of Fortune is narrated.
Rather a bizarre concept, some would think, but it is handled in a sensitive way.
Surrounding this narrative is the story of Claus Von Bulow; how he was found guilty of injecting Sunny with the insulin that led to her coma, and then later acquitted.
The world of Claus and Sunny Von Bulow is icy, sterile and at times, tragically comic.
Yes, there are a few laughs.
Claus for instance, goes to bed dressed like a down-hill skier.
It is into this chilling world that Alan Dershowitz, Von Bulow's defence lawyer (upon whose book the movie is based), steps.
His warm-hearted Brooklyn sass is the exact opposite to Von Bulow's upperclass stiffness.
This only adds to the dynamism between them as he tries to prove Von Bulow's innocence.
This provides the main thrust of a very entertaining movie.
The performances are razor-sharp.
Jeremy Irons' (Claus) accent could slice ice.
And Glenn Close's stubborn and pain-ridden performance as Sunny makes you sad for her and hate her at the same time.
Sunny's two children from a previous marriage brought the case against Claus and have continued to make sure their mother's story is kept in the lime light,(they opposed this film though), while at the same time trying to hide the truth about their mother — that she was a pill-potting drunk who injected herself regularly.
Claus, cleared of all charges, now lives in London.
In the meantime, Sunny is treated to regular weekly massages, hairdos and other beautician treatments.
Did her husband try to kill her, as the film states?
Only Sunny knows.
Elorine Grant
HIDDEN AGENDA
Director: Ken Loach
An international civil rights organisation are concluding their investigation of allegations of torture carried out by the RUC (Police) and Army in Northern Ireland.
One of the team, Paul, an American lawyer, is shot dead in an RUC undercover shoot-to-kill operation.
His death provokes an outrage and a police investigation into the shooting.
What subsequently evolves is high political intrigue and pressure smoothly applied to silence even the ‘honest cop’.
The film's powerful beginning, with the civil rights team hearing testimony from detainees, was difficult enough to watch if you have understanding or experience of the repression in Ireland.
This was a fine piece of filmmaking — uncompromising and direct, with no overplay on the emotional side.
Despite this, however, I was disappointed.
Halfway through, the film loses its grip on the day-to-day reality in Northern Ireland.
The corruption of the security forces seems straight forward in the beginning, but as the plot unfolds, the facts of torture, a shoot-to-kill policy, and the silencing of information in Northern Ireland seems only to serve as a backdrop to the political intrigue.
Rather than being a credible exposé and powerful statement on the subversion of British ‘democracy’, the film takes on the flavour of international espionage and intrigue, epitomised by the killing of Paul.
And the relevance of Northern Ireland to the subversion of democracy in Britain remains mystified.
It ends up becoming an ordinary political thriller fitting the ‘TV Cop’ genre.
However, while I think it is a failed attempt, there is a lot in the film which deserves attention, particularly the initial sequences.
My guess is that it was this if anything which provoked the reaction amongst British critics at the 1990 Cannes Film Festival, and the covert but unsuccessful attempt, reportedly led by a British daily newspaper, to have the film taken out of the Festival altogether.
Go and see it by all means, but don't expect too much.
Margaret Gillan 
Meryl Streep and Shirley Maclaine all in one film — great.
Meryl and Shirley as mother and daughter — unconvincing.
But don't let that put you off.
‘Postcards From the Edge’ is a deeply moving, thought-provoking, funny film.
It is after all a film about a mother and daughter relationship.
Meryl Streep is wonderfully comic as an actress who really wants to be a singer, while Shirley Maclaine shows her versatility and talent as she defiantly crashes through ‘I'm Still Here’.
Mother and daughter spar regularly.
Drink v drugs, career v no-career; youth v age; mother v child.
Each driving the other towards the kind of frustration which you can only feel for a family member.
A film within a film, gives this movie layers that  complement rather than complicate.
This is the film to start 1991 with.
ELORINE GRANT
Postcards From The Edge is playing at various cinemas in London and opens in the Regions on Feb 15
TELEVISION
When ‘Female Circumcision’ went out in the ‘40 Minutes’series in 1983, it caused a public furore.
The film revealed not only that the  practice was widespread in Africa, but occurred in Britain.
The next day a motion was signed by members of Parliament from all parties, which led to an Act making the  practice illegal in Britain in 1985.
FEMALE CIRCUMCISION UK, again produced by Louise Panton, reveals that despite the 1985 Act, young girls born and brought up in Britain are still circumcised, and in the most radical way.
There are interviews with women who still practise female circumcision and the film-makers talk to Efna Graham, the director of FORWARD — a voluntary organisation which is trying to combat Female Circumcision.
She has criticisms against statutory agencies who do nothing about this for fear of being branded racists.
On Feb 24 on BBC2's ‘40 Minutes’.
MEN'S MADNESS
The Myth of Male Reason
Jan 21 C4
This disturbing critique of male values questioned the motives behind scientific achievements.
Hailed as a kind of dominant world religion, science is a powerful tool some men have used to elevate themselves above other men, women, children, and the plants and animals that make up the world we live in.
Chilling excerpts of lab experiments, and military and environmental exploits showed how these men probe, detect and dissect in order to ‘understand’.
‘Progress’ is seen as the ultimate goal in these men's pathological drive to rationalise, control and order the world.
It is all to do with progress for progress' sake.
Men of science want to know everything there is to know, do everything there is to do whether it's turning a cow into beef burgers in 10 minutes flat or creating the ‘ultimate’ erotic experience; men do it all in the name of progress.
What the film did not point out however was — who pays for all this, in terms of resources and human life?
A history of imperialism and Western economic dominance has enabled white men to pursue technological progress at the expense of the so called‘third world’.
Western scientists have no qualms about testing drugs on women of the so named ‘third world’ before they are deemed safe to use on their own women.
We are all being bullied because knowledge is power.
It is time to challenge standardised doctrines of patriarchy and imperialism.
Technology dehumanises everything in a constant move away from nature.
In their madness, these men are competitive, isolated, and deeply insecure.
This is the really menacing thing because in their obsession with proving themselves, they are pulling us all towards destruction.
By setting this film against a backdrop of the London Underground, Christine Halsall and Steven Sprung made us feel inextricably woven into this madness.
Whether woman, child or man we were shocked to our senses by this exceptional polemic.
Louise Kimpton-Nye 
February 18 sees the start of Channel 4's Vietnamese Cinema film season.
In contrast to the plethora of American propagandist films about the Vietnam war, these films — which are made by Vietnamese film-makers — show the post-1945 Vietnamese experience from the Vietnamese perspective.
Films include THE WILD FIELD (1975) on Feb 24,(above) FAIRY TALE FOR 17-YEAR-OLDS (1987) on March 4, THE GIRL ON THE RIVER (1987) on March 10 and LITTLE GIRL FROM HANOI (1973) on March 17.
Channel 4 sees the welcome return of comedienne Roseanne Barr as the hilarious, wise-cracking housewife and mother of three, Roseanne Corner, in the third series of America's most popular sitcom.
On Fridays from Feb 15.
Don't miss it!
PERFORMANCE
The Daughters of Oshun, formerly the Siren Theatre Company, return with their hugely successful production of Ntozake Shange's choreopoem FOR COLOURED GIRLS WHO HAVE CONSIDERED SUICIDE WHEN THE RAINBOW IS ENOUGH, first performed by the company last July to packed houses.
The Daughters of Oshun (meaning Goddess of creativity and love) was formed by Tselane Tambo and are a group of young Black women committed to producing quality theatre.
Through creative expression they aim to educate, inspire and entertain which is exactly why Daughters of Oshun chose For Coloured Girls…as it shows positively how far Black women have come.
The play is directed by Paulette Randall and presented by The Daughters of Oshun: Angela Anderson, Logan McGeary, Remi Easom, Tselane Tambo, Storme Webber and Sonee D Baker.
At the Albany Empire, Douglas Way, Deptford SE8 3YZ from Feb 12–33 (no shows on 16/17/18).
Transfer Theatre open their new devised music-theatre show THE TIME OF HER LIFE at the end of January and then go on a tour throughout the North West, Midlands and South until March.
THE TIME…is about the past, present and futures of three women: grandmother, mother — a G.P., and daughter, Alex, who is seriously ill.
Transfer's fifth show is based on first hand accounts of women working in the health services.
Spring 1991 tour  includes Somerset, Oxon, Kent, Walsall, Shrops, Wolverhampton, Staffs and Lancs.
Ring 0865 244 374 for info.
Second Wave's new musical 13 LUCKY FOR SOME by Lisselle Kayla is the story of friendship and bullying in a class of third year girls.
Led by charismatic Emma, the gang decide to victimise ‘new girl’ Melanie, played by 15 year old Sheryl Malcolm (right).
An unexpected encounter between the bully and the bullied results in friendship, and the downfall of Emma.
The play is being performed by Second Wave members with the cast of thirteen drawn from the weekly performance group (12–16 year olds).
THE TRAVERSE THEATRE will be touring in Feb and March with AND THE COW JUMPED OVER THE MOON by Donna Franceschild.
AND THE COW…is a powerful and unsentimental portrait of four women who face the uncertainty and anxiety of breast cancer with humour, dignity and resilience.
Pictured above (L to R), Nan Kerr plays Mary, Gerda Stevenson plays Andrea and Myra Mcfadyen plays Eloise.
The play will be touring extensively in Scotland.
Call 031 225 2633 for dates and venues.
BOOKS
DADDY'S GIRLS
It's been five years since Zoë Fairbairns last published a novel, during that time she has been writing a huge and compelling family saga,Daddy's Girls .
Pam Mason talked with Zoë about her novel that spans the 60s, 70s and 80s, and charts the lives and struggles of four women; three daughters and their mother, and the man who rules their lives as husband and father
Christine, Janet and Miranda Toms are three young women whose childhoods and early adult lives are marred by their father's violence and irresponsibility, and their mother's desperate dependence on him.
Their father, Sandy Toms is, surprisingly you might think, presented as a very likeable character.
Zoë Fairbairns says, ‘Every reader will respond to him in their own way.
I intended to present him as an attractive personality — the sort of man who is very charming, hospitable, physically attractive to a lot of women.
Such people do exist, and they can be very dangerous, it can be very risky to become involved with them.’
Sandy beats his daughters gleefully, and has a string of mistresses, moving from one to another as they get sick of him.
Meanwhile, his wife justifies everything he does, ignores the very obvious sufferings of her daughters, and sacrifices her last chance of a career in nursing in a vain attempt to make her husband love her.
Anyone who has read about (or lived through) the patterns of obsession with cold irresponsible men which Robin Norwood charted in her book Women Who Love Too Much will recognise this syndrome.
‘I read Women Who…halfway through writing the novel,’ Zoë says, ‘it was not a direct inspiration, but it was very validating’.
She stresses that the reader should not focus on the behaviour of the mother in the novel to the exclusion of all else; ‘It's very important not to see a novel as summing up the entire state of women — yes there are weak women but there are also very strong women.
There isn't only one type of women's experience.’
However it is extremely refreshing to read a feminist novel which in part tackles the issue of obsessive love so uncompromisingly, and refuses to confuse compulsion with romance.
Like her earlier Stand We At Last , which told the story of over a century of Western feminism,Daddy's Girls shows Zoë Fairbairns to be adept at recreating detail and charting the changes in character's lives as years pass.
Perhaps the most poignant part of her latest novel is the story of Christine, oldest of the sisters, who grows up in the 1950s, and is later described by one of her sisters as ‘a feminist before her time’— which is, as the sister observes, a highly lonely position.
Christine ‘rebels’ by joining CND and by finding herself a boyfriend.
The outcome of her rebellion leaves her parents with some incongruous political views.
The two other sisters, Miranda and Janet, go radically different ways; Janet becomes a Tory, while Miranda grows up to be a very conscious feminist.
It isn't giving away much of the story to say that Miranda at first sees her mother's behaviour — alternately doing everything she can to please her husband and then screaming rage at him for letting her down — as a clear example of women's oppression.
But later, she begins to question that view; ‘Women like her are a menace’, she says.
‘They tell lies to their daughters and they teach daughters to tell lies to themselves…
Covering up for the fathers.
Driving the daughters mad.’
Zoë Fairbairns says, ‘Miranda's mistake was that her feminism centred on one person, her mother, and when that one person lets her down, she doesn't know what she thinks.
I think it's a mistake to centre yourself on just one issue.’
However she sees a great deal of hope in Miranda's situation; ‘You can acknowledge that women do let other women down and still be a feminist.
We make bad decisions and bad choices sometimes.
Stories come out of people's failings and falsities, and how they resolve them.’
Adultery features in this novel, as it did in Stand We At Last and Here Today , another of her novels.
I asked her why this was.
‘I have never actually married’, she says, ‘I find the marriage vows preposterous, I could never imagine myself making them.
People promise permanence and fidelity, and often it doesn't work out.’
The men in the Toms family support each other a great deal; none of them show any disapproval of Sandy's lifestyle.
‘It's a very patriarchal family,’ Zoë says, ‘the family define itself as the men, with the women and children just surrounding them — so when one man gets himself another woman, it doesn't change things.’
She says she believes women can support each other equally strongly, with more positive aims in mind; ‘Women do unite together on projects and support each other— the fact that feminism survives, and the existence of projects like Spare Rib , show how well women work together.’
The ending of the book, is, she says, fairly open; it is up to the reader to visualise their own ending.
The last line of the book is the father asking Janet, ‘What do you think I am?’ and Janet's response to it is written by the reader.
I like to think that Miranda will survive her crisis and not be as depressed and defeated as she is now.
In general, I leave endings open to a number of interpretations.’
The novel is published by Methuen, a mainstream publisher, and judging by the jacket, is not being marketed as a feminist title.
What sort of market does she see herself as writing for?
‘I have always wanted to write for as many people as possible, I want my books to be on the general fiction shelves as well as the feminist shelves.’
SLEEPING WITH MONSTERS: Conversations with Scottish and Irish Women Poets
(Eds.)
Rebecca E. Wilson & Gillean Somerville-Arjat
Polygon
Reading this collection of interviews with twenty five Scottish and Irish women poets is like opening up a box of plain chocolates, only to be confronted with an array of brightly coloured and diverse tasting  liqueurs .
For the range of topics under discussion here is varied and unexpected.
Whether the poet is concerned with nappies or dragons, the interview technique used is accommodating.
Each woman is given free range over her speech and ideas, creating a relaxed format through which the personality of both poet and interviewer emerges comfortably.
Questions raised are concerned with the nature of writers' inspiration, the link between form and content, as well as personalised questions suited to the individual.
Each interview is concluded with an example of the poet's work, which together with an introductory biographical note adds a sense of homeliness to cushion the often impassioned and intellectual rhetoric that arises.
Talk varied from views on nationalism and child birth to thoughts on mysticism and linguistic oppression.
Such diversity reflects the authors' commitment to the post 70s feminist interest with the range and variegation of women's experiences.
Although most of the poets embrace feminism, the majority reflect the idea of a uniform female existence: preferring not to be categorised by a ‘feminist’ or ‘woman poet’label but letting their work speak for itself.
This is a stimulating and rewarding read, providing insight into why and how a writer operates, as well as creating interest in Scottish and Irish poetry that is so often neglected by the English establishment.
Sara Evans
STORIA 5: A WOMAN'S EYE VIEW OF BRITAIN TODAY
(Ed.)
Kate Figes
Photographs by Anita Corbin
Pandora Press
Storia 5 contains fourteen articles (fact and fiction) on the state of Britain today from a selection of contemporary female British writers, and foreign writers based in this country.
Equalling and occasionally surpassing the excellent journalism we sometimes enjoy in our quality press, this collection loses out in its lack of immediacy.
The success of any such endeavour rests in how effectively it captures the essence of the times;Storia overall has a distinct 80s feel to it.
Ruth Richardson's two historical pieces avoid the tyranny of topicality.
As she uncovers the work of a Victorian architectural editor (Orlando Curioso) she reveals London's sites afresh, beautifully and imaginatively conveying ‘the curious experience of overlapped time.’
The freedom Storia gives its contributors is its strength and its weakness.
Lucy O'Brien's Pop Pastiche and the New Generation comprehensively traces the growth of pop music in an effort to explain current trends in revivalism, and offers a welcome female voice in the otherwise male dominated arena of music journalism.
Interesting and fun, it's a bit heavy in the nostalgia stakes.
Surely the magic has been lost from pop music because she is now nearer 30 than 13.
The Bay City Rollers were better than Kylie.
Its weakness: Articles such as Melissa Benn's rambling, sentimental piece about her 10 years living in Kilburn.
Sometimes overlapping, the articles can complement each other.
Where Eva Figes' expose on homeownership during the Boom and Bust bingo economy of the 80s leaves off, Sheila McKechnie's excellent article on the housing crises picks up.
Change will come, she points out, when the economy and not morality demands it.
But with all the glasnost in the world I could not accept Natasha Vitaliev's comments (Impressions of Britain Today ): ‘Women in Britain have equal rights with men…
Women are free and equal in a sexual sense.
A woman's career depends basically on her capabilities.’
If only.
Anita Corbin's photo Fit Brew Lasses, Wigan 1983 makes Storia well worth £5.99.
Sue Murphy
THE KISS
Linda Cullen
Attic Press
Linda Cullen asserts that her first book will not be her last, good I hope the next one is on the way.
This novel is a love story.
Close friends since schooldays, Joanna and Helen are now successful career women in their twenties.
As they become more aware of their importance to each other the relationship changes — it becomes sexual.
For Joanna and Helen this is a surprisingly natural development of their friendship.
They feel comfortable in bed together — they've been sleeping together for years after all, and the new-found passion is lovely and exciting.
Issues arise, as they will.
For Joanna it is commitment to their lesbian relationship; Helen is undecided.
It is mainly Joanna's story, set in Ireland, written by an Irish woman and published by an Irish press — but it could be anywhere.
For me this is one of its limitations.
The other is that is based on middle class experience.
Economic pressures belong with Joanna's mother, whose husband left her with three school-going children; Helen's lecturing post in another country is a career move.
Despite these limitations, Linda Cullen is at ease with her characters and their tale, without avoiding the fact that there are no easy solutions to the problems both women face.
The Kiss quite simply, tells the story of this relationship in an open and sensitive way — this is its strength.
It's a boost, too, to read of support given by friends who aren't surprised and who continually to provide what friends usually do — acceptance and back-up through the difficult times.
This, I think is what makes it possible for this story to have a positive if not a ‘sunset’ ending.
This book is refreshing in its simplicity, in that it doesn't pretend to be anything more than what it is — a love story.
A book to take to bed!
Margaret Gillan
IMAGES
SURFACE TENSION
Until 24 February
Surface Tension is an artist-initiated exhibition of time-based installations by Heather Allen, Susan Brind, Evelyn Jardine, Elsie Mitchell and Aileen McLaughlin, involving the use of photography, 8 and 16 mm film, video and tape/slide projections.
The artists use personal knowledge to touch on the fragility and complexity of human experience, and to explore the forces in society that exert control over all of us.
PAPER MAKES…
An Exhibition of Paperworks by
Suzie Balazs
Coo Geller
Wendy Carlton-Dewhirst
Liz Tarr
Pippa Tuck
7 February — 2 March
A diverse exhibition from five women artists linked by their common involvement in paper.
These artists manipulate paper pulp to make sculptures, reliefs, embossed and two-dimensional work.
WARRIORS OF THE FOREST
by Sharon Lutchman
8 February — 17 March
Sharon Lutchman is of Indian descent and draws upon her diverse cultural influences to express herself.
Of her art she says, ‘It mirrors the mental and physical challenges that are to be found in the timeless Mahabharata.
Caught up in the swathes of colour and movement are the small objects we adopt and discard in our life-long struggle to define ourselves — objects and images mass produced, touched with personal desire — cherished and abandoned…’
Kathryn Ensall's recent work explores the theme of image making between the sexes.
The image of woman has been moulded and portrayed in numerous ways by men, this series of paintings and drawings explores a fantasy in which women in the home are engaged in a bizarre recreation of themselves and their men, using all of women's traditional ‘homemade’ handicraft skills.
On until 10 February at Woodlands Art Gallery, 90 Mycenae Road, Blackheath, London, SE3 7SE Tel: 081 858 4631
‘Nursery Rhymes: Etchings by Paula Rego’ is a new South Bank Centre touring exhibition, opening at the School of Art & Design in Falmouth, and continuing until 10 February.
The show consists of a complete set of 33 etchings and aquatints of traditional rhymes.
Paula Rego started illustrating rhymes for her grand-daughter, and most of the ideas came spontaneously but, aware of Freud's belief that spiders are tenacious mother figures, she drew ‘Little Miss Muffet’ with lots of grabbing arms and hairy sticky bits’.
For further tour details ring The South Bank on 071 921 0888
SPARE TIME
Film
Spinster (Jessica York, UK, 1990) women aged 26 to 86 talk about life in this enquiring documentary — part of the Norwich Women's Film Weekend, Feb 22–24 at Cinema City.
Also showing is Frances Anne Soloman's story of a young African woman transported from her home to slavery in the Caribbean,I Is a Long Memoried Woman (below) and much more!
For details phone: 0603 622 047
Dreaming Rivers (Martina Attile, UK, 1989) will be shown Mar 6 as part of Volkani's latest Black and Third World Film Exhibition, this month and next, at the Cave in Birmingham.
Other films include Black Girl (Feb 13) and Who Killed Colin Roach (Feb 27).
For details phone 021 773 4260.
Night Out
Ceili I and II : songs will be sung, people will refuse to go home!
Come join this celebration of Irish folk culture, Feb 23 at Willesden Green Ctr in North London, and again on Mar 2 for those who can't get enough!
Phone 081 451 4875 for details
Word Up Women's Cafe offers a space for new and established woman writers to come and be heard in Hackney — so come and listen, the first Fri of every month — for details phone 071 254 9632
Whaka Whaka , the 10 piece all women band, comes to the aid of Greenpeace activists who are being sued by McDonalds for producing a fact sheet on What's Wrong with McD's food .
Feb 23 at Chats in East London — for details phone 081 986 6714
Hanging's Too Good For 'Em , will be at Wesley House, 4 Wild Ct, Holborn, Feb 14 at a Irish Lesbian Network Benefit.
And they'll be back again at the White Horse on Mar 10, for a Irish Women's Abortion Support Group Benefit.
Don't miss them!
Valentine's Disco for Edinburgh Lesbian Line, Feb 16 at Madison's — for details phone 031 557 0751
Had it with House?
Tired of trash?
The Spinning Jennies have the cure: Out in the Cold, a new women only night, Fridays at Spats in London.
For details phone 071 437 7945
Black Voices — this uplifting  a capella group ranges from reggae to gospel to folk songs from the Caribbean and Africa.
Not to be missed!
Mar 7 and 10 at the Mac in Birmingham — phone 021 440 3838
Friday nights are hot at Apples and Snakes — every week they bring on a new lineup of outstanding poets and performers.
This month look out for Maggie Nichols, Patience Agbabi and Sheila Hyde — for dates and times phone 081 690 9368
Performance
Feasting on Air : a young woman is told to hold her tongue, or better still, bite it off.
Paines Plough and the Theatre Ctr join up to chart the journey from the undersea world of youth to the dry land of adulthood.
Feb 20 and 21 at the Phoenix Arts Centre in Leicester.
To book, phone 0533 554 854
Poet Storme Webber opens the festivities for International Women's Day, Mar 5 at the Sheffield Women Performers club.
Plus the Sensee Disco, all at the Leadmill — phone for details 0742 754 500
Bondage — The stories told to cab driver David Hines by the prostitutes he met while driving around Kings Cross formed the basis of this one woman monologue detailing the grim life of a London prostitute.
Feb 19–Mar 10 at the Hen & Chickens Theatre Pub in Islington — for further info phone 071 359 1030 
In celebration of International Women's Day, Apples and Snakes are bringing together many of the most popular and powerful woman poets and performers in the country, including many new performers, for a two week, nation-wide tour from the 1st to the 15th of March — THE MOTHER TONGUE TOUR.
Mark your calendar for these dates!…
These are just SOME of the tour dates, so ring 081 690 9368 for a complete list of events!
RU 486
A MEDICAL MIRACLE?
The Abortion Pill, RU 486, developed by the French based pharmaceutical company Roussel Uclaf, could be introduced onto the British market in spring of this year.
RU 486 is being ‘fast tracked’ for a licence application by the Medicines Control Agency — a procedure usually reserved for urgently needed drugs or those with a proven safety background.
Many women actively engaged in the campaign for the right of all women to safe and legal abortions have joined the pharmaceutical and medical researchers to promote RU 486 as the ‘wonder drug of the century’.
Support for the drug among women has been further heightened by the rise in anti-abortion activism in many parts of the world, which is steadily gaining ground and fighting hard to have RU 486 banned.
Janice Raymond from the Institute of Women and Technology, based in the US, urges us to take a more critical look at RU 486 in particular, and reproductive technology as a whole.
She warns against what can sometimes be a knee-jerk support of abortion technology for fear of playing into the hands of the right wing.
* This article is a part of a larger report on RU 486/PG being prepared under the auspices of the Institute on Women and Technology at MIT by Janice Raymond, Renate Klein, and Lynnette Dumble.
Entitled Broadening the RU 486 Debate: A Non-Aligned Feminist Report , it report will be available in June 1991 from the Institute on Women and Technology, Department of Urban Studies and Planning, Room 3–405, Massachusetts Institute  of Technology (MIT), Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA
FICTION
Big Momma
by Anne Goslyn
The Caribbean Sea
Juan had seen an active life.
He had been born in Tucupita and had grown up there in the region of Venezuela where the great Paraqua river met the Orinoco and flowed into the Delta of the Orinoco where the sea moved on to Trinidad.
Juan had moved as a young man to La Blanquilla, the Venezuelan island furthest from the mainland.
It lay out to sea facing the Windward Islands.
He had enjoyed a life of fishing there, until at the age of forty-five he met Lovebird Johnston.
Lovebird came from St Vincent, one of the smallest of the five large Windward Islands.
Upon marrying Lovebird Johnston, Juan moved to the outskirts of Kingstown, St Vincent and finally found work packing bananas for shipping around the world.
He did not enjoy it as he had the fishing that had been so much a part of his life on La Blanquilla.
However, he had Lovebird and she made everything worthwhile.
Their daughter, Pepita, grew up to be a healthy, happy girl in St Vincent.
She regularly went to Venezuela to stay with her aunt Alicia and her grandmother Rosa in El Tigre.
Rosa had moved from Tucupita to be with her daughter Alicia after the death of Juan's father in a riding accident.
Pepita grew into a fine, beautiful woman and went to work for the banana shippers as her father had done until he retired at sixty-two.
She loved to listen to her father's stories of fishing on La Blanquilla, but was content to check cargo and support her parents as they grew old.
Life continued to be hard but relatively content in their family.
They were poor, but Lovebird and Juan had each other and they had Pepita.
Lovebird always said that the sun shone on them as long as they were honest and hard-working, and it often made her weep to see how beautiful, respectful and hard-working her only child had grown up to be.
Birmingham, England
Big Momma settled herself down on the ceiling of the bathroom in number 31, St George's Road, Solihull, Birmingham, England.
The journey had been rough enough — she had lost the tip of one leg — but the effort it had taken to haul herself up the stairs in the cold hall to the bathroom door had left her almost dead with exhaustion.
Mrs Popple had just taken a bath.
It was 7.30 in the evening.
Albert Popple would be back soon.
He had been playing bridge and drinking a few pints of Mild at the Over 60s club.
He would be needing his tea.
When he had been in work he had eaten at 6 o'clock when he got home, but now they ate much later than they had ever done.
The works canteen had served lunch at midday, but Mrs Popple's home-cooked lunch, now that Albert was retired, was at 2 o'clock.
It only made sense to put tea back a bit.
She refused to put the lunch on any earlier in the day; it would spoil the coffee mornings she liked to go to or have at her own home from eleven to one o'clock.
Albert Popple was always out on the allotment or in the Lamb and Flag in the mornings.
It was much warmer in the bathroom after Mrs Popple's bath — much warmer at least than it was anywhere else in the suburban house.
It reminded Big Momma of home.
Pepita wiped the sweat from her forehead with the back of her right hand.
She looked up at the clear sky.
Her glance brought her eyes a little too directly in line with the sun and she pulled away quickly.
Little shooting beams of light played over the scene of the sea and the crates of bananas as her lowered eyes struggled to cope with the brightness of the sun that had entered them.
Pepita's father had died two months previously.
She was not even near to getting over the shock of the sudden loss.
The sea shimmering and heaving beneath the brisk breeze seemed ignorant of the loss in her life.
Its familiar scent and roar gave her no comfort today.
The sweet smell of the mass of bananas left her feeling hollow: it was no longer the smell of life on St Vincent.
It reminded her too much of her father's years of toil to bring up his family.
The salted scent of the sea told her of fishing far off on La Blanquilla.
Lovebird needed her more than ever now, and she needed St Vincent.
Its familiarity would be her comfort as she grew old without Juan.
Pepita saw the foreman looking across at her.
He knew that she stopped and stared at the sea or the sky far too much these days.
She would lose her job if she was not careful to keep her day-dreams to her evenings on her mother's porch.
Pepita bent back down to her work and checked off another crate of bananas that would be shipped to lands she had never seen and would never see.
She would never again hear her name called with those deep masculine Venezuelan tones — now that Juan was gone.
Big Momma explored her new surroundings in the near-darkness.
The only light came from a street-lamp.
Its beams shone through a gap in the pastel blue curtains.
They fell upon the red hour-glass painted on Big Momma's abdomen as she swung down a thread of silk and revolved slowly round on the thread until she had landed on a flat shiny surface.
She felt a little exposed and felt her way along until she discovered she was on a ledge.
Creeping underneath the ledge, she found that there was enough space for her to nestle safely while she slept off the exhaustion of the last few days.
Mr and Mrs Popple were arguing.
They had forgotten precisely what their confrontation was about.
They had descended to their usual shouting of verbal abuse.
Mr and Mrs Popple always argued at least once a week.
They had done so for the last forty-five years.
Finally, Mrs Popple decided to throw a dinner-plate — they had just finished eating — and Albert Popple stormed out of the house.
He would walk around the block for a while and give Mrs Popple a chance to calm down.
Upstairs, Big Momma began to dream of the sun and the warmth of the breezes that had played around her since she was young.
The sweet scent of her native land came back to her, but she also began to remember the terror she had felt when she was wrenched from her home and transported to a place beside the sea.
There she had been rudely thrown upon the hard ground and had been forced to defend herself.
She had finally scuttled into hiding.
Then her hiding-place had begun to move, roughly at first with many jolts, but eventually it began to rock with even undulating movements.
Many hours later — she had lost all track of time and had fallen asleep — she had again been roughly shaken as her hiding-place was opened up and its contents removed.
She had clung terrified to her hiding-place as it was carried and dropped with several others just like it.
Then it had been filled again, but this time there were no soft fruits from her native land.
Hard round metallic objects tried to crush her and a large cold tub with ice on its sides almost squashed her completely.
She has just managed to scuttle out of its way as it slammed down next to her, but the tip of one of her legs had been trapped and she had been forced to sever it and leave it behind.
By now her hiding-place had become far too dangerous for her to remain in it for much longer.
At the first opportunity, she had clambered out and dragged herself upwards to this warmer, darker, more humid place where she now slept.
Big Momma woke up having relived that terrifying journey.
She nestled tighter in the gap under the ledge and her wounded leg twitched with pain.
She was safe now, but still afraid.
It was nearly the end of her shift, Pepita looked about her.
She was tired and her back ached with each crate she bent down to check.
She stopped for a moment and took a deep breath before checking the next crate.
She bent down and took a grip of either side of a crate to steady herself.
As she straightened up she felt a sudden pain like a knife being thrust into her lower back.
She banged against the crate heavily and the one on top of it which had been badly placed fell onto the ground so that some of the bananas spilled out around her feet.
The pain in her lower back subsided leaving a dull ache.
She would have to work out the rest of her shift, but she would take the next day off and go to see the doctor.
Perhaps she had been taking too little care, or perhaps it was the strain of the bereavement coming out in physical symptoms.
Pepita began to pick up the fallen bananas and place them back in their crate.
A sudden shout made her look to one side.
It was her friend Pepe, a Mexican worker, coming over to offer her a drink of rum.
Pepita set down among the crates to wait for her friend and the rum to reach her.
Maybe she would feel better after a capful of the drink her mother disapproved of.
She put out her hands on either side, intending to lean back and stretch in the sun.
Her left hand did not come down upon the ground.
Some bananas were still lying outside their crate.
Her hand came down on top of a large bunch of them and she felt a sudden stinging pain.
She jerked her head round and saw two small puncture marks seeping blood from the fleshy part of the underside of her hand beneath the thumb.
By the time she had explained to Pepe what had happened she began to feel dizzy and steadily more nauseous.
Within minutes her eyes were watering, she was sweating profusely and she began to find it difficult to breathe and speak.
Pepe ran to get the foreman.
Mrs Popple lay on the bathroom floor, her jaw muscles having gone into spasms.
Her face was twisted into a distorted grimace and her muscles all over her body had gone rigid.
The pain was almost unbearable and she was powerless to call for help.
Thirty minutes earlier she had been going up the stairs to read the newspaper on the toilet.
She liked to read it there; it felt comforting after a row.
Now she lay on her back with her navy blue knickers still around her knees.
Albert Popple had decided to go down the Lamb and Flag after walking round the block several times.
He thought it would give Mrs Popple more time to calm down.
Anyway, having a pint was preferable to walking around the streets on a cold night such as this.
She would probably be on the loo reading the paper, he thought to himself.
She always did that after a row.
He took a mouthful of beer and swilled it round his mouth several times to rinse the remains of his meal from his teeth.
Then he swallowed it, settled down on his favourite stool at the bar and began to attempt the crossword in his daily paper.
She lay on the table in the doctor's surgery.
Pepita had been fortunate to have a job where there was a doctor or nurse on site.
So many people worked loading the ships that the owners had decided it would be a good policy.
The doctor had swiftly administered an antitoxin before the neurotoxin pumping round Pepita's body led to what he called the ‘latrodectism’— the unbearable pain and prostration of the victim that might eventually kill them.
From Pepita's symptoms he had rapidly been able to diagnose what kind of spider had bitten her and administer the antidote to its poison.
It was not the first time he had seen such symptoms.
Black widow spiders were a common nuisance when dealing with fruit such as bananas.
Mrs Popple lay on the operating table.
They opened her up, but could see no trace of the ulcer they had been expecting to find.
From the taut state of her stomach muscles and the general pain she seemed to be in, they had assumed that an ulcer had burst in her stomach.
Mr Popple had found her lying on the bathroom floor upon returning from the Lamb and Flag .
At first he had seriously thought she might be play-acting.
However, the severity of her symptoms and the embarrassing situation in which she had collapsed soon led him to take her symptoms seriously.
He had rung an ambulance.
It had arrived quite quickly, and they had said that they thought she had a burst ulcer.
Albert Popple said he was not surprised about the ulcer.
Mrs Popple had long been known to have a short temper.
Stress must have caused it.
It was with some surprise that Mr Popple, smoking a cigarette in the hospital reception, received the news that his wife did not in fact have an ulcer.
In fact, Mrs Popple had died.
The operation, and the lack of a correct diagnosis of her true illness, had killed her.
It was only when doing a post-mortem that they discovered the two small puncture marks side by side on her left buttock.
Only then did they discover what had been wrong with Edna Popple from 31 St George's Road, Solihull, Birmingham.
Pepita woke up in her bed at home.
She had been off work for several days and Lovebird had kept her in bed and fed her chicken soup from the stove.
Pepita had been trying to remember the events that led up to being bitten by the black widow spider.
But for a nagging worry she was fully recovered.
She would take another day off and then go back to work.
Now, however, she sat up in bed and wondered, as she had been wondering for the last few days, what had happened to the spider.
She had not killed it, nor had Pepe.
Her hand had come down on the spider and it had bitten her.
Turning her head round to see what the pain could be, Pepita had seen the spider scuttle back into the crate from which she had been thrown with the bananas.
She took another spoonful of her mother's chicken soup and smiled as she pushed her fringe back out of her eyes, and she wondered what had happened to the spider — where it had been transported to and what had become of it.
It worried her to think of it, still alive, perhaps to harm someone else in a land she could not name and would never see.
Big Momma had struck out when Mrs Popple's large bottom had disturbed her, as she lay under the rim of the toilet-seat.
The effort of her attack on the offending wrinkled mass made her slip backwards into the bow of the lavatory.
She had desperately scrambled at the shiny sides of the toilet-bowl as she slid into the water but to no avail.
Defending her life and being jolted and shaken over the last few days had left her exhausted.
She had no energy to swim in the water and pull herself out on the small strip of toilet paper left from the last flushing of the toilet.
She could have done so once, but now she was too tired.
She gave herself up to the water almost gratefully.
Mr Popple, upon returning home alone, found the spider floating in the toilet-bowl.
He had not seen it before in his panic to ring the ambulance and get Mrs Popple to hospital.
The hospital would ring him in the morning to warn him of what they had discovered of Mrs Popple's death upon doing the post-mortem.
He would be able to tell them that he had disposed of the offending creature and was in no danger.
Albert Popple stared at the small creature for a few minutes and marvelled at its capacity to kill.
It seemed so feeble and spindly floating there next to the toilet paper in the lavatory bowl.
As a tear began to run down his lined face, he pulled the heavy old chain and watched as the water gushed down on the spider.
Its red hour-glass flashed up at him as the spider swirled in the motion of the water.
Mr Popple unravelled some toilet-paper and threw it down to cover up the spider as it was thrown against the ceramic sides of the bowl.
The rushing sound of the water finally subsided and was taken over by the hiss of the cistern refilling.
Mr Popple peered over the side of the toilet, his right hand leaning on the toilet-seat.
The water was clear, Big Momma had gone.
Within minutes her eyes were watering, she was sweating profusely and she began to find it difficult to breathe and speak
Mr and Mrs Popple always argued at least once a week.
They had done so for the last forty-five years
NEWS
Abortion Information: Students Still Determined
On Wednesday, January 23, activists from the London School of Economics (LSE) Abortion Rights Group held a picket outside the Irish Embassy in support of Irish students' campaign to legalise the provision of abortion information in Ireland.
Under Irish law, abortion is a criminal offence and recently the courts ruled that even the provision of information on abortion is now illegal.
Many magazines, including the glossies, have also been forced to remove ads for abortion clinics from their Irish editions.
In 1988, the Union of Student Unions in Ireland (USI) was taken to court for SPUC (The Society for the Protection of the Unborn Child).
An injunction was granted against USI prohibiting them from publishing the phone numbers of British abortion clinics in student union handbooks.
In October 1989, the case was referred to the European Court on the Grounds that SPUC had insufficient evidence for an injunction, and that Irish law may be in breach of the Treaty of Rome.
Under this Treaty, if a service is legally available in one or more EEC countries, then all EEC citizens should have access to this service, and therefore to all relevant information.
However, in December 1989, the Irish Supreme Court, following an appeal from SPUC, granted an injunction against USI, prohibiting them from distributing information until the European Court makes its decision, which could take several years.
The Court also awarded all legal costs — £60,000 — against 17 individual students, even though they were involved in the dispute as members of USI.
On July 18, 1990, Dublin Courts ordered that these costs be lowered to £23,000.
The students have pointed out that although the costs have been lowered, they are still personally liable and are still unable to pay.
The picket attracted over 100 supporters from the Irish  Women's Abortion Support Group (IWASG), NAC, the LSE and several other student unions.
Two hundred and fifty signed letters were delivered to the Irish Embassy, protesting at the Irish government's censorship and refusal to take on the issue.
The students' case is due to be heard at the European Court of Justice in  Luxemburg on Wednesday, March 6, 1991.
The LSE group (which was set up in October 1990 to support the Irish students' campaign and to campaign for abortion rights for women in England and Ireland) will be organising a further picket on that day to highlight this fundamental attack on Irish women's right to choose.
The group will also be organising events to raise funds for the Irish Student Defence Fund which has been st up c/o USI.
The NUS and several other student unions have also taken up the campaign and it is hoped that the campaign will extend beyond the student movement to trade unions and women's groups.
For further information contact: Mel Taylor, Senior Treasurer, LSE Students Union on (071) 955 7471.
ROCHDALE REPORT PUBLISHED
The role of the media in creating ‘crises’ about the sexual abuse of children, which then set an agenda for official investigation, was further underlined when the Social Services Inspectorate published its report on the Rochdale cases in November 1990.
Like many previous reports, including the Cleveland Enquiry, the focus was not on whether children had been abused, but on whether ‘proper procedures’ had been followed.
Concern was not about the complexity of sexual abuse cases for social workers, the police and other workers, but on establishing the ‘right guidelines’.
Despite the furore in the press for months prior to the report (see SR Oct 1990) and in the days before its publication, it actually contained minimal criticism of the social workers actions, and the joint working with the police (a major concern in Cleveland in 1987) was praised.
Apart from The Guardian and the social work press, the content of the report was ignored — the stories had been written months ago.
Trivial issues like ‘factual inaccuracy’ no longer matter in much of the British press.
This irresponsible attitude does nothing to help children, nor parents who are not suspected of abusing them.
In the chase for the ‘story’, the important issues which trouble many who care about protecting children are ignored.
Unfortunately, they also continue to be ignored by those who produce official reports and government guidelines.
We need to know far more than we currently do about the organised abuse of children — and we need to find out from survivors, both child and adult.
There is no doubt that it happens, no doubt that some child sex rings use forms of ‘ritual’, no doubt that many of them produce child pornography, and no doubt that at the centre of some rings are extremely powerful men.
The social workers and foster mothers who have worked with children abused in this way also have much to tell us, as Bea Campbell's recent Channel 4 film demonstrated: not least that they too lived in fear whilst trying to discover what had happened to the children they were working with.
Some were even explicitly threatened.
Several of them have said that they now understand how children feel when adults do not want, or choose not to, believe them.
We also need to understand why some cases are inexplicably dropped by the police.
I am beginning to collect stories from workers about the circumstances in which this happens, and there is no shortage of them.
One common factor seems to be that at least one of the suspected abusers is an extremely powerful man with ‘connections’.
We are not just dealing here with whether local police and social services can work together, but with much deeper and more sinister implications.
It makes no sense to talk of unqualified ‘parents rights’, and parental participation in investigations and case conferences — one of the concerns voiced in the Rochdale report and picked up by the press.
In many cases, one or more of those parents are suspected of abusing the children, and in the case of organised abuse, also facilitating abuse by others.
We have to be able to make distinctions between parents, usually mothers, who are not suspected of involvement and parents, usually — although not exclusively — fathers, who are.
If a child's parent is suspected of committing a crime against them, how can they have a ‘right’ to be consulted about, let alone be involved in the investigation of that crime?
How can a child feel able to tell, and have confidence in those who say they have their ‘best interests’ in mind, when the person they have named as their abuser is to be involved in everything that then happens to them?
This concern with the rights of parents masks a continuing failure to establish as a principle the rights of children and young people to take part, or at the very least, have some say, in meetings where decisions about their future will be made.
Clearly the rights of parents, whether they have acted in outrageous ways or not, are sacrosanct for this government and much of the media.
Shifting this sense of entitlement, making distinctions between parents suspected of abuse and parents who are not, are crucial issues for feminists — be they in the voluntary or statutory sectors.
Reasserting authoritarian and patriarchal models of the family will reinforce, rather than challenge, sexual abuse.
Liz Kelly
BRITAIN GET OUT OF IRELAND NOW!
On Saturday, January 26, 3,000 people took to the streets of London in the annual Bloody Sunday commemoration demonstration.
On 31 January, 1972, the sectarian Six Counties state, founded by Britain to protect British interests, unleashed its force and violence on Civil Rights marchers in Derry on a peaceful demonstration against internment without trial.
14 people were subsequently killed by indiscriminate Army fire.
Marchers and speakers at this year's demonstration called for immediate British withdrawal from Ireland and for self determination for Irish people.
Speakers at the rally included Paul Hill, one of the Guildford Four and Daisy Mules from Sinn Fein.
The march stopped outside Paddington Green Police Station, the main PTA (Prevention of Terrorism Act) detention centre in Britain, where the demonstrators called for the removal of the PTA.
Speaking at the rally, Paul Hill, who in 1976 was the first person to be arrested under the PTA, said:‘The Irish people cannot be oppressed any longer.
They didn't succeed in oppressing me when I was in prison for 16 years and I ask you now, don't stand alone when you can be together’.
Daisy Mules told the rally how she had been on a Dublin student contingent at the march which led to the Bloody Sunday massacre.
She said:‘Our initial horror and disbelief at what happened on that day was replaced over time by the realisation that that day heralded the start of the British Government's Shoot-to-Kill policy in Northern Ireland’.
She also called for the immediate release of the Birmingham Six and other framed Irish prisoners.
Referring to Peter Brooke's statement that the British Government no longer had any interest in staying in Ireland, Daisy said:‘Peter Brooke's talks about talks are all but finished.
There is no partitionist solution to Ireland…getting Britain out is the only move which will allow democratic, national self-determination for all Irish people…
By declaring a war on Iraq the US and Britain are showing their true imperialist agenda.
In the course of this latest war, Douglas Hurd has said that the British state has ‘no interest in interfering in Iraq, any more than we would interfere in the internal affairs of another country’.
What hypocrisy!’
HOME OFFICE CONTINUES UNFAIR DEPORTATIONS
In December 1990, Sonia Malhi, who was facing deportation because her marriage broke down, forcing her to leave her home because of domestic violence, heard that her campaign against deportation had been successful.
However, two other women, Prakesh Chavrimootoo and Dharmowtee (Sheila) Surju, are still being threatened with deportation.
On November 24, 1990, Prakesh, Dharmowtee and Sonia (below, l to r) headed a march of over 500 people through Handsworth, Birmingham to demand that the Home Office remove the deportation orders against them and review their cases.
Like Sonia, Prakesh has had to leave her home because of domestic violence, while Dharmowtee (from Mauritius) is facing the threat of deportation, despite the fact that she is pregnant and in ill health, because the Home Office believe that she married in order to stay in this country.
They have even sent Department of Health doctors around to examine her to see if she is too ill to travel.
As in Sonia's case, the Home Office have turned down Prakesh's application to stay in this country, saying her case has been fully considered, despite the fact that she has never been interviewed by any Home Office officials, and despite the fact that there are compassion circumstances to be considered.
As a result of the 1988 Immigration Act, Prakesh is unable to appeal the deportation order.
Before 1988, people facing deportation could have appealed to an ‘independent Adjudicator’ or an Immigration Officer who would have looked into their cases, including any compassionate circumstances, and could stop the Home Office from deporting them.
However the 1988 Act took away this right of appeal from everyone, except those who have been in the country for more than seven years.
This effectively enables the Home Office to make arbitrary decisions, deporting people as they see fit, without any independent inquiry.
Since this Act came into effect, deportations have increased threefold to a rate where over 300 Black people are being deported every month.
Simultaneously, the avenues for challenging Home Office decisions via the legal system have been consistently reduced.
Sonia's deportation was only reversed because the Home Secretary used his discretion to consider the compassionate circumstances of her case.
The West Midlands Anti-Deportation Campaign are asking people to support Dharmowtee and Prakesh, and to put pressure on the Home Office to stop the numerous unfair deportations of Black people.
For information on what you can do to help, contact; The West Midlands Anti-Deportation Campaign, c/o 101 Villa Road, Handsworth, Birmingham B19.
Panama After ‘Operation Just Cause’
Barbara Day reports from New York
‘No murky ending’ is what President George Bush promised the US public in a nationally televised speech on November 29, 1990 to whip up support for operation ‘Desert Shield’(later renamed ‘Operation Desert Storm’), Washington's latest Middle East military adventure.
Not surprisingly, most political commentators read Bush's astonishingly foolhardy pledge as an allusion to what most of the US military and many civilians consider the unsatisfactory end to the Vietnam war.
The reference, however, might serve equally well for Panama.
One year after the US invaded Panama with 30,000 troops on December 20, 1989, and removed General Manuel Noriega from power (see SR Feb 1990), significant issues surrounding that invasion seem destined for the dustbin of ‘murky endings’.
The number of casualties, for instance, is still unresolved.
Pentagon figures for Panamanians killed during the invasion and the fighting that followed is less than 300.
Yet the in-country investigations of the Independent Commission of Inquiry on the US Invasion of Panama (ICI) put the number at ‘between 1,000 to 4,000’.
Even more horrifying was a recent report aired on CBS which told of Panamanians searching for missing relatives and finding several mass graves containing at least 4,000 people.
The New York-based Commission, composed of respected religious and political activists with knowledge of Central America, collected hundreds of statements from Panamanians who witnessed the invasion.
These testimonies, including interviews with Panamanian human rights monitors, hospital workers, ambulance drivers and funeral home directors, led ICI to conclude that US strategy involved the use of military terror to eliminate or intimidate specific sectors of the population thought to be the most likely to resist.
Commission sources reported thousands of civilian injuries and more than 20,000 people left homeless.
Carl Glenn, a commission investigator, describing events in El Chorrillo, a poor, primarily Black neighbourhood located near the Panamanian Defense Force headquarters, where 10,000 were made homeless, said:US troops bombed the community, shelled it with heavy artillery, strafed it and finally burned it to the ground.
Another resident of El Chorillo told Glenn that on the morning after the invasion, a group of 18 US soldiers came down his street and entered his house.
We saw the residents coming out, followed by the soldiers, and then we saw the houses, one by one, go up in smoke.
They were burning the houses.
The ICI also revealed the arrest of thousands of civilians.
The group concluded that ‘arresting doctors, medical personnel, cemetery and morgue workers was a tactic designed to block accurate reporting of the number of dead and wounded’.
In March 1990, US forces swept into the neighbourhood of Curundu in Panama City under the pretext of looking for drug dealers.
But civilian interviews indicate that the real purpose of the operation, involving helicopter gunships and armored vehicles, was to intimidate a newly emerging and politicised movement of poor people in Panama.
Professor Cecilio Simon, a Black Panamanian and Dean of the school of Public Administration at the University of Panama, said the US action in Curundu may have been linked to a 5,000 strong demonstration two days earlier by people protesting the destruction of their homes.
Simon told the commission that the military action constituted a ‘second invasion’ because of the large number of troops and military hardware employed.
Clear answers as to the types of weapons used in the invasion have also not been given by Washington.
Sources inside Panama insist that the Pentagon used the invasion to test new high-tech weaponry, including lasers, under battlefield conditions.
Pentagon officials acknowledge using two Stealth fighter bombers to drop 2,000 pound bombs.
But Washington has not admitted using new types of anti-personnel weapons, although evidence indicates that it did.
A Red Cross report from the province of Cocle states that ‘personnel providing medical attention to the wounded discovered that weapons of a new experimental character had been used…
Some of the wounded had holes in their bodies that produced extreme haemorrhaging, like a sieve.
Medical personnel were unprepared and had no treatment to deal with the bleeding and consequently many people died’.
A surgeon testifying before the ICI told of wearing ‘armoured masks’ after learning that some of the injured had been shot with bullets designed to re-explode.
Sources said bodies were burned by US soldiers to hide these facts.
A report from the Panamanian National Human Rights Commission states that in Cocle province ‘hundreds of bodies were cremated’ by troops using flame-throwers.
The ICI also has many eyewitness accounts of troops using flame-throwers to incinerate corpses.
Even the question of US military casualties remains murky.
Last June, Newsweek magazine speculated that as many as 60% of injuries and 9 of the 23 military deaths were caused by ‘friendly fire’.
However, a subsequent Pentagon report, released internally, disclosed that of the 312 soldiers listed as wounded, 72 were injured in parachute jumps.
Deaths were put at 26, with the advisory that six may have been the result of US fire.
And more than 14 months after the invasion — despite the violation of numerous international treaties and agreements, and even provisions of the US Constitution, Congress has not yet seen fit to hold hearings on the US invasion of Panama.
The economic effect of the invasion on ordinary Panamanians has been disastrous.
According to official figures, more than 20% of the population is without jobs, with the number of Panamanian poor rising from 33% before the US embargo and invasion to 50% of the population afterwards.
More than 546,200 Panamanian people are living in ‘extreme’ poverty and another 461,100 in poverty — this out of a population of 2.4 million.
Nonetheless the US-installed government of Panama recently approved a $2 million budget for arms and military training.
George Bush, in his first public explanation of the invasion, gave four reasons for the action.
He claimed he had acted to protect US lives; to defend the Panama Canal (control of which was to passed over to Panama on January 1, 1990 — eleven days before the invasion); to ‘restore democracy’ to Panama; and to stop drug trafficking and bring Noriega to justice.
Bush further justified ‘Operation Just Cause’(the Bush euphemism for the invasion) with claims that overthrowing Noriega would provide a major victory in the war on drugs.
Yet many of the Panamanian leaders installed by the US, including President Guillermo Endara, Vice President Guillermo ‘Billy’ Ford and Attorney General Rogelio Cruz, have known connections to drug laundering banks and drug dealers.
Meanwhile, Noriega languishes in a Miami prison.
Two unresolved issues fuel speculation that he might not receive a fair trial.
The first involves Noriega's unsuccessful efforts to gain access to his bank accounts — which were seized by Washington immediately after he was arrested by US troops — to finance his defence.
The second issue arose early in November with the disclosure that telephone conversations between the General and his legal team had been recorded by the government.
Now, amazingly, the government prosecution team in Miami admits it has ‘no hard evidence linking Noriega to drugs’.
Perhaps the murkiest issue of all — certainly an issue never addressed by the Bush administration — is why the US, after paying Noriega $1.2 million during the 1980s, when it clearly knew that Panama — headquarters for the formidable US Army Southern Command (USASC) that monitors all events in Central and Latin America — was a conduit for drugs, turned so suddenly and harshly against Noriega.
The ICI reports that the US carried out at least three complex sets of negotiations with representatives of the Noriega government in Washington in the first five months of 1989.
During the negotiations, the Bush administration reportedly promised to drop the indictment of Noriega, and even wrote out a draft court order dismissing the charges.
In return, the US wanted assurances that it would be allowed to continue leasing its bases in Panama after the year 2000.
According to sources close to the negotiating process, the talks broke apart in May 1989, when the Panamanian side made it clear that the bases would be shut down — as permitted in the 1977 treaties which call for the closing of all US bases in the year 2000.
This policy found little favor with the Pentagon which has said that maintaining these bases, for at least another 20 years, is a central priority in a new military doctrine, publicized under the title ‘Discriminate Deterrence’.
Ultimately, the real reason behind ‘Operation Just Cause’ lies in Panama's importance to US ‘interests’: the Panama Canal and the huge military facilities of USASC — the springboard for any future aggression and wars in Central and Latin America.
PAKISTAN: WAR TESTS DEMOCRACY AND FRIENDSHIP
The domination of the media by the belligerent Anglo-American perspective has made it impossible for audiences in Britain to realise the enormity of the damage inflicted by the Gulf war on the West's relationship with the so-called Third World.
The reaction against the American position in the Gulf has been fiercely vehement in Pakistan.
Shifting from a position of criticism of Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, public opinion has swung to the other extreme, of hero worship of Saddam Hussein, not so long ago viewed as an ally of India rather than of Pakistan.
During the past two weeks, demonstrations have been held in all the major cities with timeless regularity, resulting sometimes in several casualties when police reacted with brutal violence to defend American interests and estates in the country.
The depth and fervour of public response seriously threatens the stability of a new and uncertain government committed to at least a show of support for the US.
The 12,000 Pakistani troops in Saudi Arabia are there only to defend religious sites, not to take part in an offensive against Iraq, it is claimed.
And there have been unconfirmed reports that troops from Pakistan, Morocco and Tunisia refused to take part in active combat against Iraq.
They may have been encouraged to do so by General Aslam Beg's recent public condemnations of the war, couched in accusations of conspiracy by the West to undermine the Muslim world.
Suggesting that Saddam Hussein was deliberately lured into Kuwait to provide a pretext for the war, he urged the states in the region to ‘arrive at a strategic consensus to provide a meaningful deterrent to zionist and western powers’.
His address to army officers clearly underlined the split between the army and Prime minister Nawaz Sharif's civilian government which has confined itself to condemnation of the large scale bombing of Iraq.
At a recent press conference in Lahore, Nawaz Sharif claimed that it was his peace mission which brought about the joint US-Soviet communique which embarrassed the Bush government on the eve of Bush's ‘State of the Nation’ address.
He emphasised that he would continue his efforts towards peace although he had failed to make contact with Saddam Hussein earlier.
He urged the millions of protestors to exercise restraint and respond rationally to a war which can only benefit the enemies of Islam.
Huge national debts, large scale unemployment and an impoverished economy has left no room for active support of Iraq.
And his plans for deregulating the economy continue whilst US aid to Pakistan has already been cut by 2/3 last October.
However, the cautious pragmatism espoused by Sharif in line with Iran's Rafsanjani, finds little support in the streets of Pakistan.
200,000 volunteers have enlisted to fight alongside the Iraqis, even though posters of Saddam Hussein have been banned.
Clearly, the brutal war culture so enthusiastically expressed in the West finds a mirror in the resistance to US hegemony.
And as the action becomes bloodier, chances of a genuine and lasting peace become even more remote.
Rukhsana Ahmad
NEWS IN BRIEF ON OCTOBER 27, 1990 the ANC Youth League was relaunched in South Africa.
The Youth League — banned for 30 years since 1960 — was legalised along with the ANC, PAC and SACP in February, 1990.
It was first launched in 1944 by youth members of the ANC, who were impatient with the conservative approach of the leadership, and led to the adoption of a militant plan of action.
VIRGINIA: A FEDERAL appeals court panel recently upheld an injunction barring anti-abortionists from blocking access to clinics in Northern Virginia.
However, the panel ruled that the protestors have a right to speak to and harass the women who come to the clinics to obtain abortions.
Verbal harassment is constitutionally protected free speech, the panel said.
Richmond Times
THE GOVERNMENT OF the Netherlands, which last year legalised lesbian and gay marriages, is considering permitting lesbians and gay men to adopt children.
The Netherlands Council for Youth Policy has published a report saying that lesbians and gay men should be able to adopt children, which they currently cannot legally do.
The Council sent the report to the Minister of Justice.
OUTRAGED AND CONCERNED PARENTS hope to ban Margaret Atwood's novel, ‘The Handmaid's Tale’, on the grounds that it is too sexually explicit and anti-Christian to be read by high school seniors.
‘The English department,’ one parent said, ‘should get out of the sex education business.’
Other parents said the book ‘defames Christianity in that it uses several biblical passages to justify the totalitarian themes depicted in the novel.’
RECENTLY, 12 WOMEN who accused Barclays Bank of sex discrimination for forcing them to retire at 60 have won a total of £160,000, and their jobs back.
The out-of-court settlement follows an industrial tribunal ruling in 1988 that the bank was guilty of discrimination in a case brought by one of the women, Stella James.
The tribunal rules that Barclays discriminated against her by making her retire at 60, when a man who had joined the bank at the same time could work until 65.
After abandoning an appeal against the decision, Barclays agreed to reinstate the women and compensate them for loss of earnings.
AT A RECENT MEETING of the Women's Institute in London, women were urged to shed a major symbol of male supremacy and patriarchy — their married names — and value themselves as independent members of society.
The West is one of the few places in the world where women still have to change their names upon getting married.
In Egypt, for example, women are not required under law to adopt their partner's name.
Trafalgar Square, January 17, 1991: A protestor participates in a candlelit vigil against the war in the Gulf.
This vigil was just one of the many anti-war demonstrations that have been held in London and around the world in recent weeks.
For further reports see page 10.
There will be an IWD PICKET of Durham Jail in Ireland in support of Irish Women POW's Martina Anderson and Ella O'Dwyer On Sunday March 10 1991 at 1.30pm
November 1990, Above, L to R: Prakesh Chavrimootoo, Dharmowtee Surju and Sonia Malhi march through Handsworth, Birmingham to protest the Home Office's  discriminatory deportation policies.
Panama City, September 1990: Homeless residents of El Chorillo neighbourhood protest the destruction of their homes during the US invasion of Panama on December 20, 1989.
Their neighbourhood was bombed by the US because the headquarters of General Manuel Noriega were located there.
Albrook Fields US Air force Base, Panama City.
More than one year after the US invasion, over 2,400 people made homeless by US forces are still being held in refugee camps.
They are crammed into huge hangars with a ‘living’ space of 10 square feet per family.
Pakistan, January 1991: Demonstrators call for Western imperialist forces to get out of the Gulf.
During the past two weeks, demonstrations have been held in all the major cities with timeless regularity.
PULSE OF THE MOVEMENT
As the US administration and its lackeys in Downing Street drag Britain ever closer towards military catastrophe, the need for a mass movement against war in the Gulf has become a number one priority.
WOMEN AGAINST WAR IN THE GULF (WAW-ITG) was recently set up to build a mass women's campaign within the wider anti-war movement.
WAW-ITG is open to all women opposed to military intervention in the Gulf.
We are demanding that British, US, and other foreign troops be withdrawn from the Gulf immediately and that a peaceful solution be sought to the crisis.
In solidarity with our sisters in the Middle East, we support the basic human right of people in this region to live in peace.
We are alarmed by the British Government's elaborate preparations for war — the reported printing of draft papers, for example,— and we will oppose any future government attempts to conscript people into a bloody war.
We are particularly worried about the implications war holds for women.
As proved by history, women are the ones who have to pick up the pieces in the aftermath of war.
Meanwhile the Gulf crisis is already exploiting women to satisfy soldiers' apparent ‘needs’.
In Turkey, for example, women are being channelled into a sex industry for off-duty GIs.
We are in close contact with other anti-war umbrella groups and have also made links with the Campaign Against Repression and for Democracy in Iraq (CARDRI), the General Union of Palestinian Women, and Greenham women.
To find out more about the group and to take part in an anti-war action on International Women's Day in March, contact Women Against War in the Gulf, c/o 63 Upper Tollington Park, London N4 4DD.
NOTICES
Volunteer Counsellors —
PACE is looking for lesbian and gay volunteers for individual and couple counselling.
For its spring '91 issue, the editors of Hurricane Alice have chosen the theme of ‘Hurricane Alice's Restaurant’.
We are interested in women's views of the joy and pain in eating and preparing food, including diets, anorexia, and bulimia.
Deadline: April 1.
Length: 3,000 words maximum.
Payment in issues.
The editors of SAGE: A Scholarly Journal on Black Women are soliciting essays, personal narratives, and interviews for a special issue on relationships, focusing on intimate friendship, and family relationships.
Deadline: Sept 1.
Manuscripts and queries to the editors at P.O.
Box 42741, Atlanta, GA 30311–0741
I am looking to develop a television programme about women and their attitude and relationship with cars.
I am interested in hearing from women about their fascination and horror with cars, especially women in the Yorkshire region.
On Tuesday Feb 12 there will be a benefit to raise money for the 1991 women's Delegation to Belfast and Derry featuring women's bands, Irish music, food, videos etc.
(Phone for details.)
Tel: 071 737 3906 — ask for Angie or leave a message.
At The Old White Horse Pub, 261 Brixton Road from 6 pm — 11 pm.
Women only.
£3.50/£2.00 unwaged.
Money raised will be used to enable women who are low-waged or unemployed to go on the Delegation (which is in March).
Wheelchair access.
Adopt a family whose breadwinner is a political prisoner or has been executed.
Many such families are living in abject poverty at home or as refugees abroad, cut off from family and friends.
They need your help, not least financially.
IPPAC was formed in 1988, campaigning to highlight the extent and horrors of the Islamic Republic of Iran's terror and repression both at home and abroad.
CALLING ALL DISABLED WOMEN!
Disabled woman Liz Crow is seeking accounts from other Disabled women for her proposed book on Disabled women and sexuality .
She would welcome contributions from all Disabled women, and particularly Black, Lesbian and Working-Class Disabled women.
For info, please phone 071 720 7836 or write to Liz Crow, Ekarro House, Guildford Road, Stockwell, London SW8 2DF.
Please specify print or tape information.
Feminist Book Fortnight 1991 would like to inform readers that the FBF list of authors who have indicated that they would like to be involved can be obtained asap from the telephone number below.
Women's photography/mixed media Exhibition
Submissions/proposals on the theme: ‘The Bottom Drawer’, in relation to women's lives, eg. Suppression, denial/Aspirations, achievements.
ACAW is a women's art/photography collective.
I am currently researching to write a play about prostitution in this country.
As I have not had any personal experience of prostitution, I obviously want to get my fact right.
I would like to hear from women who are now or who have been involved in prostitution.
Obviously confidentiality, discretion and anonymity will be respected at all times.
If you want more info or can help, contact: Corinna Tomrley, 124 Chesterfield Road, St Andrews, Bristol BS6 5DU.
We would like to contact women of above retirement age who live in houses they have had designed and built to their own requirements.
Women's Design Service has received a small grant to carry out research into housing design for older women.
Contact us at  Women's Design Service, 18 Ashwin Street, London E8 3DL, or phone us on 071 241 6910.
Bisexual, Lesbian and Gay Pride Week at University of York will be from Feb 18–22.
The week will feature various lunchtime workshops and speakers and in the evenings we are having entertainments, such as films, a women only meeting/disco and a lesbian and gay night at a local nightclub.
For more info.
contact 0904 433 72314.
I am planning to start a newsletter that will act as an information exchange and support forum for and by female and male survivors of childhood sexual abuse.
If any survivors would like to help with this project in any way, either administratively, with ideas, or as a potential subscriber/contributor, please contact Harvey Milnes, c/o Survivors, PO Box 2470, London W2 1NW, enclosing a SAE.
CONFERENCES
THE NEW WORLD ORDER: FORTRESS EUROPE AND CURRENT NEW ALLIANCES AMONG WOMEN
This is the first London conference of MERAWEC (Middle Eastern and African Research Centre Wales) and MAC (Mozambique Angola Committee).
Previous MERAWEC workshops have included The Image of the Arab and the African in the Western Media ,Portraits of Women from the Middle East and Africa ,Debt and Democracy and we plan seminars on Women and Oil ,Western Feminism and Third World Women ,Migration and Women .
The conference on New Alliances among women will be on Sat Feb 16 at the London Women's Centre, Wesley House, 4 Wild Court, London WC2B.
Registration is from 9.30–10 am with talks and discussions through until 4.30pm.
Participants include: Rose Ayuru on African and European regional integration, Khadiga Safwat on theoretical concepts.
We plan to consolidate the project for a Centre for International Women's Studies which is currently being put together.
Registration charges are £3.00 (waged) and £1.50 (unwaged).
All Women Welcome!
National Solidarity Conference against police attacks on our protests, our movements and our communities…and to defend the right to demonstrate.
On Saturday Feb 9 from 11.00 am — 5.00 pm, Conway Hall, Red Lion Square, London WC1.
With speakers and workshops.
More info.
from TSDC, c/o Haldane Lawyers, Room 205, 38 Mount Pleasant, London WC1X OAP.
The Third Scottish Lesbian Gathering, organised by The Deckchairs Collective, will be held on the weekend of March 16–17.
There will be lots of live music, videos and a range of workshops.
The Gathering is primarily intended for lesbians living in Scotland or with Scottish connections.
At The Pleasance Theatre, The Pleasance, Edinburgh.
(Disabled access is very limited.)
This event has been postponed from last October.
Booking and details from Bridget Johnson, 20 Eyre Crescent, Edinburgh EH3 5EU.
Valentine's Day Meeting
Thursday Feb 14 at 7.30 pm.
Attacking Men To Attack Women and Children: Government plans for child maintenance.
Speakers/discussion on opposing plans to force absent fathers to pay child maintenance whether women want them to or not, and deduct that maintenance from mother on income support.
At Conway Hall, 25 Red Lion Square, London WC1.
All Welcome.
Phone below for access and creche details.
Organized by Wages for Housework Campaign, 71 Tonbridge Street, London WC1H 9DZ Tel: 071 837 7509; and Payday, a network of men organizing against all unwaged work.
WOMEN SPEAKOUT: Count Women's Work — Legislation Now! takes place on March 8 at Manchester Town Hall, Reception Room,(Lloyd St entrance), Albert Square, Manchester.
Women only.
Yes, free childcare.
For access details and more info.: Lillian Winter 061 368 1334.
Event organised by Time Off For Women, PO Box 9, Ashton-Under-Lyne, Lancs OL6 8DH.
NUCLEAR TEST UPDATE —
On the evening of Nov 11 1990, overshadowed by news of the Conservative leadership challenge, British peace campaigners, Jane Gregory, Juley Howard and Lorna Richardson, crossed over the wire of the Nevada test site, scene of over forty British nuclear weapons tests since the 1906s.
The three had been invited to the States by Greenpeace USA.
By trespassing, they hoped to disrupt the latest of the British tests, scheduled for 9pm on Nov 14; and to demonstrate, as Lorna says, ‘that the tests are not happening in our name’.
After a three day trek across the desert, the group reached ground zero, the point directly above the buried bomb, stopping the countdown with only seven minutes to go.
They were arrested and charged with trespass, a very minor Federal charge.
The test authorities refuse to admit that the tests threaten either the immediate or long term safety of the area but frequently postpone tests ‘because of adverse wind conditions’, that is, when the nearby Shoshone Indian reservations fall down-wind of the blast.
The strength of local and international protest was shown in the first week on January this year, when 2,000 protestors from the US, the UK and test sites in Kazakhstan and the Pacific joined with Shoshone representatives in a mass trespass onto the Nevada Site.
The British government admits that these tests are used, not to monitor but to update British nuclear stockpile.
The UK and the US planned to veto a proposed amendment to the Partial Test Ban treaty, scheduled for the Jan 7–16, which would result in a complete ban on testing.
Meanwhile, direct action against nuclear tests becomes more frequent.
Luckily, peace and environmental groups world-wide are beginning to realise just how much common ground they share.
For more info.
contact The Peace Tax Campaign on 071 739 5088 or Greenpeace on 071 837 7557.
GROUPS
We are a group of lesbian feminists (about 30 + years old), who meet regularly to talk about issues around sex, eg: desires and politics in connexion with sex.
We are now opening the group to new members, so if you think you might be interested come to Wesley House, 4 Wild Court, London WC2 on Feb 16 at 2 pm.
PACE the free and confidential counselling service for lesbians and gay men, is setting up a group for lesbian and gay carers facilitated by a PACE counsellor.
To meet weekly on Wed afternoons.
For info.
phone PACE on 071 251 2689.
Lesbian and Gay Foster And Adoptive Parents Network has produced a pack which is available by writing to the Lesbian and Gay Foster And Adoptive Parent Network, c/o London Friend, 86, Caledonian Rd, London N1.
The group meet every 6 weeks in London.
The recently formed AD (ANCIENT DYKES) group hold their meetings in The Women's Centre, Broughton Street, Edinburgh.
Lesbians of over 45 are welcome and if you are younger than this but feel able to identify with older women, please go along.
For info.
ring 031 557 3179 during meetings.
The group meets the first Sat in the month.
Disabled access poor, we are sorry.
Black Women Trainers Group
A practical support group for black women who wish to develop and/or share their skills as trainers/facilitators.
For info.
contact Women's Training Link (WTL) at Wesley House, 4 Wild Court, WC2B 5AU.
Cypriot Lesbian & Gay group meet on the first Sunday of every month at London Friend, 86 Caledonian Road, London N!.
Call 071 837 2782 for info.
Onyx — Group for Black Lesbians and Women of Colour meet every 2nd and 4th Sunday of the month.
Ring 071 837 2782.
Orientations — Chinese and South East Asian Lesbian & Gay group meet every 3rd Sunday of the month.
Ring 837 2782.
There IS a network for those people with multiple personalities.
It is part of ASAP (Association for Sexually Abused Persons).
We run self-help groups and training courses.
ASAP is a voluntary group and believes in and operates total confidentiality.
Please get in touch for more info.
but do enclose an SAE.
ASAP c/o 109 Brays Lane, Coventry (no callers please).
South-East London Older Gay Women's Group (50+) meets Third Sunday of the month.
First meeting Feb 17.
Phone 081 316 5954 or 081 691 0938.
Manchester Women's Bisexual Group meet on the 2nd Thursday of the month at the Gay Centre, Sidney Street at 7.30–9.30 pm.
The group is women only and we are a support group/social and discussion group for bisexual women.
For more info.
phone 061 274 3999 or write to Viv c/o WBG po Box 153, Manchester.
 Parents' Friend are here for parents, relations and close friends of gay, lesbian and bisexual people and also for those people themselves if they have nowhere to turn — or know of nowhere.
For more info:
Lesbians over 40 of African and Asian descent come together once a month.
Ring .
Shakti — South Asian Lesbian & Gay Network meets every 2nd & 4th Sunday of the month.
 Women's Photography Group — Not in His Image — seeks new members.
Next meeting Feb 13 at 7 pm at the Cornerhouse Cafe, Oxford Street, Manchester.
Contact: Esme on 224 9759 or Julz/Effie on 225 6095.
Under 35's Asian Women's group at Kingston Women's Centre, 159, Canbury Park Road, Kingston.
Starts Feb 7 from 1–3 pm.
Disabled access ground floor only.
Further info.
from Fatima on 541 1964/41.
WORKSHOPS
Bristol Lesbian Writers' Workshop.
New group for beginners and for more experienced writers.
Share ideas and work in a workshop environment.
For info.
contact Lucy Kimbell (0272 559 396) or ring the Women's Centre or Lesbian Line.
All lesbians welcome.
Hear Our Voices —
One day women only workshop by lesbian survivors of childhood sexual abuse by women to be held in March.
We Will No Longer Be Silent, Our Voices Will Be Heard.
For info.
on date, venue, cost etc send an SAE to: Steffie Brown Group, C/o Hoxton Collective, 1 Arden House, Myrtle Walk, Pitfield Street, London N1 6QD.
Ever Thought of a Career as a Driving Instructor?
 Women's Training Link is now able to run just such a course starting early in 1991.
To qualify: You will need a 4 year clean driving licence.
For info.
and form send SAE to WTL or phone 071 242 6050 and ask to speak to Elaine.
This course is for women only.
East Midlands Visible Web presents a workshop for women: The Sacred Voice Within with Jana Runnalls.
Jana's work is based on the belief that exploring creative expression is one way of finding and strengthening our inner power.
On Feb. 17 from 10am–5pm, £12 waged/£8 unwaged at Central Leicester (to be advised on booking).
Women's Radio Group.
Writing Radio Drama — A practical course aimed at getting women started on writing plays for radio and giving them the inspiration to carry on.
Cost: £60 waged, £35 part-time.
£15 unwaged/student/OAP.
Irish Women Writers Creative Writing Class —
Open to both complete beginners and writers with more experience with Aine Collins.
From Jan 8 to March 19.
Cost: £1 unwaged, £5 waged.
Venue: London Irish Women's Centre, 59 Stoke Newington Church St. Hackney London N16 OAR.
Lesbian Women with Disabilities and Health —
A 10 week course for lesbian women with disabilities from different backgrounds and situations.
On Thurs from 2–4 pm from Jan 10 till March 14 in Manor Park, N.E. Newham.
For venue and other details contact; Claire Glasman of WinVisible at King's Cross Women's Centre, 71 Tonbridge Street, London WC1H 9DZ.
Tel: 071 837 7509 or Philippa Bragman, Newham Community College, West Ham Centre, Welfare Rd, London E15 4HT.
Tel: 081 555 1422, Minicom 534 3602.
The London Irish Women's Centre are pleased to announce that the Irish language classes for adults will continue with Siobhan Ni Neill on Fridays from 10.30 am to 12.30 starting on Feb 7.
Contact the Centre on 071 249 7318 for further info.
Courses & Study Days at the Women's Therapy Centre:
Working with Women in Groups on Feb 8.
Introduction to Compulsive Eating Issues on Feb 16.
Counselling & Therapy with women who have been sexually abused as children on Feb 17.
Counselling Skills for Advice & Info.Workers on Feb 23.
For info./full courses programme phone 071 281 7879 leaving your name and address OR write to The Women's Therapy Centre, 6–9 Manor Gardens, London N7 6LA.
Creative Writing For Black Women —
These sessions are open and very welcoming to Blackwomen of ALL origin including South and South East Asian, African and Caribbean.
If you are a Blackwoman from anywhere in the world, and you have an urge to WRITE, then come and join us.
Waged £1/unwaged 50p.
For more info.
contact Horizon, Community Arts Resource, PO Box 726, 1a Wendover, Thurlow Street, London SE17 2UY.
On Jan 5, vigils were held at cathedrals all across the country ‘in silence, music and prayer’ to show support for the Birmingham Six's continuing struggle to clear their names.
Photo shows (L to R) Kate McIlkenny (who is married to one of the B'ham 6, Richard McIlkenny), the 5 grandchildren of Kate and Richard McIlkenny, and on the far side is Ann Farrell (Kate and Richard McIlkenny's daughter).
All the McIlkenny grandchildren are holding candles in support of the vigil for their grandfather.
For more info.
contact the Birmingham Six Campaign, Trades Union Council, 8 Milk Street, Birmingham B5 5TS.
PARENTING
SMOKING AND PREGNANCY
More than 8,000 babies die each year in Britain because of their parents' tobacco smoking habit, says a recent report published by the Association for Nonsmokers' Rights (ANSR).
Each year there are over 7,500 miscarriages and more than 450 babies who, due to parental smoking, die just before, during, or very soon after birth, says the author of the report, Dr Tony Lee, of the Princess Elizabeth Hospital, Guernsey.
If smoking-induced miscarriages in Scotland are taken into account, many more than 8,000 deaths are involved.
Smoking by expectant mothers can double the incidence of miscarriage and increases the rate of perinatal deaths by as much as 28%.
‘We are not trying to ‘get at’ women who smoke by publishing these figures,’says ANSR.
We are trying to get to them with the message that smoking kills unborn and newborn babies.
The poisons in tobacco smoke get through to the baby with great efficiency; it's getting this message to the mothers that no one has managed very effectively yet.
The report also notes evidence that secondary smoke from other people's cigarette harms unborn children too.
Smoking by expectant mothers may also increase the chances of brain damage and cerebral palsy.
The good news is that giving up smoking for the sake of the unborn baby is all that has to be done to bring an end to these needless deaths and halt the other harm suffered by these most defenceless of nonsmokers.
Unfortunately the report says that only 12%–15% of smoking women give up smoking during pregnancy.
MATERNITY LEAVE AND THE EC
The UK has the most restrictive maternity leave in Europe, but this could change if plans from the European Commission go ahead.
At present, women only qualify for leave if they have worked for the same employer for two years; five years for women who work less than 16 hours per week.
Although British women who qualify do have the longest leave in Europe (30 weeks), three months of it is unpaid.
In spring the EC is planning to implement proposals that will benefit all women who have worked since the start of pregnancy.
This is based on:
A right to have leave of 14 weeks with 100% of earnings.
Two weeks' paid leave immediately before the birth.
Protection against dismissal on the grounds of pregnancy.
Working conditions and hours to be reorganised to protect health and safety, including protection against risks, such as harmful chemicals.
The document also contains a clause stating that each EC country can continue to give a longer period of maternity leave, which must be paid at 80% of women's wages.
Ironically, this could lead to Britain having the best maternity provisions in Europe — as long as the Government is prepared to back it!
FITNESS VIDEO FOR EXPECTANT MOTHERS
When you're pregnant it is very important to relax and exercise properly.
Not only will it make you and your baby happier it will also help you to have an easier and enjoyable birth.
Entitled Fitness for Expectant Mothers , this 57 minute long video is a carefully graded programme of gentle exercises designed to keep you fit and healthy and is supervised by Jayne Henderson, senior physiotherapist at the North Tees Health Authority.
Broken down into sections for easy replay and reference this video will guide you through every stage of your pregnancy.
Sections include: relaxation; posture; 0–4; 4–7; 7–9 months exercise routines; worries and problems.
TRAVESURA THEATRE
The Tree of One Thousand Nests
Every Saturday morning at Willesden Green Library Centre at 11.00 there is a performance for children of either a theatre show or a film.
Saturday 16 February's show is a performance by the South American Children's theatre company Travesura , ‘a wicker and puppet fantasy’.
LONDON IRISH WOMEN'S CENTRE is holding a series of ‘Irish Sundays’ for children in preparation for a St Patrick's day celebration.
Come along for song, poetry, drama and Irish phrases, 12–4.
All children from ages 7 to 14 are welcome and there is no limit to the numbers who can take part.
For more information contact the London Irish Women's Centre on 071 249 7318.
YMCA CRECHE for under fives.
Experienced workers lead the kids through sand, water play, and bounce along!
Whilst parents can go swimming, use the multi-gym, cycling, saunas, squash etc.
Open Tues, Thurs, Fri 9.30am–12.30pm.
YMCA Great Russell St WC1.
Tel: 071 637 8131 for membership details.
BABY MASSAGE CLASSES
A daytime course held every other Monday between 11.30am–1pm.
Cost £20.
THE SATURDAY CENTRE FOR ADULTS AND CHILDREN offers all kinds of workshops such as arts and crafts, poetry, drama, rhythm and percussion, and science in the home.
All age groups welcome, but 12 year olds and under must be accompanied by an adult who can also pursue their own course within the centre.
Adults 75p per hour, children 10p.
PARENT AND TODDLER DANCE
Every Tues & Thurs 2pm–2.35pm 18mths–2yrs 
ANTE-NATAL APPTS.
Please come prepared for a Short Wait 
THE BRISTOL CANCER HELP CENTRE STUDY
Last September, the authors of a report on the quality of care offered at one of the country's leading alternative therapy centres — the Bristol Cancer Help Clinic — held a press conference to announce their interim findings.
They claimed that the report showed that women who attended Bristol were twice as likely to die as women who did not.
Two months later, after revenue and applicants to Bristol had dropped to practically zero, the authors of the report publicly retracted their claims, but the damage had already been done.
Clare Moynihan takes a closer look.
The Bristol Cancer Health Clinic opened 10 years ago amidst great fanfare and hope for cancer patients who felt the need for a holistic approach seldom  practised by orthodox medicine.
The centre's goal has been to enhance the quality of life of people who have cancer, and to possibly allay progression of the disease; to give people some feeling of control over their lives and their healthcare, and to help them cope better with having cancer.
Bristol offers a range of self-help therapies including a vegan diet, counselling and spiritual healing, none of which is mandatory — patients may or may not follow the treatment advised.
Around 1,500 people come to Bristol each year for treatment, and the waiting list (before the report was published) was three months long.
Since it opened, the Centre has received much positive publicity, including a recent documentary on Channel Four.
It has also come under severe attack from the orthodox medical establishment.
There has been a long, ongoing battle between alternative medical  practice and orthodox medicine — with the establishment maintaining the upper hand.
This is due in part to splits within the alternative movement.
More potent, however, is the power of the medical profession's elite.
They have a particular interest in keeping practitioners of alternative therapies at bay, if they are to maintain their monopolistic position in the health system.
The establishment's insecurity is reflected in a report written in 1986 by the British Medical Association (BMA), which hotly defends the position of medical orthodoxy and is disparaging of alternative methods which, it claims, are ‘unscientific’; not based on systematically conducted trials, and therefore not worthy of attention.
Trials, however, are a catch-22 situation, since they can only take place if money is available, and the research funding bodies are largely under the control of the powers that be in the medical profession.
Thus, as far as the scientific community is concerned, the alternative movement is kept frozen in its subordinate position.
This position was unfrozen when research funds were made available to the Bristol Centre and to specialists of orthodox medicine to compare their respective therapies.
Three years ago, under increasing pressure to ‘prove its worth’, Bristol requested a joint study to assess its work, and to be publicly accountable to the general public, as well as to the sceptical scientific community.
The Centre asked for two studies; one on terms of survival, and one looking at the quality of life (though the latter has never gone beyond the pilot stage).
The first study was duly undertaken with the co-operation of orthodox medical practitioners and researchers.
In the trials, women with breast cancer who had orthodox alone were apparently ‘matched’ for certain variables (such as severity of disease, year of diagnosis, age, number of previous relapses, and the type of conventional treatment) and compared with women with breast cancer who had both orthodox treatment and the alternative treatment offered at Bristol.
The interim results seemed to show that women with breast cancer who went to Bristol were twice as likely to die, and 3 times more likely to relapse, than patients undergoing conventional treatment only.
Immediately, the authors of the paper called a press conference to publicise their findings and to pre-empt the TV documentary.
The message at the press conference — and in the newspapers — was clear: the finger of suspicion must be pointed at the vegan diet offered at Bristol.
It was also stated that the results were puzzling and that the disease itself could be the explanatory factor, but this wasn't emphasised.
Patients were to be warned that going to Bristol might be harmful.
The media, naturally, took these major findings and their interpretation and made a meal of it.
As a result of this, the Bristol Centre is fighting for its life.
Funding has been withdrawn from Bristol and other similar therapeutic centres, and immense harm has been done to what was perceived as a growing trust and co-operation between alternative and orthodox medicine.
More importantly, the report caused needless anxiety to all the women who have attended the centre.
Many were suspicious of the statistical and methodological aspects of the study, and with good reason.
A closer look revealed many discrepancies, the most serious being that the selection procedures had obscured certain factors of the disease itself, and its progress.
A much higher proportion of Bristol women had been treated with mastectomy, suggesting that they may also have had more extensive, but undetected, disease than was recorded.
Certainly those women may have felt more ‘battered’ by their experience and therefore felt in need of support, which is unavailable in a normal hospital setting.
But most importantly, no information was given on the location of recurrence of the disease which may have been of prognostic importance.
After much public correspondence, and a re-check of the data by the study's authors, the original ‘definitive’ interpretation of the results were withdrawn, again publicly, in a letter to the Lancet medical journal.
The Bristol women did indeed have more serious disease.
Not only were the sites of their cancer much more significant compared to their ‘matched’ counterparts, but they had also arrived at Bristol when their disease was already worse and therefore more likely to lead to an earlier death.
But by the time these ‘new’ results had been published, the damage had been done.
And today, the vital questions still remain unanswered.
Why did the researchers involved in the study fail to notice the imbalance of their original data?
Why was the interim report so hastily released?
And why was the medical possibility that the women who attended Bristol had more serious disease not properly investigated or put forward for media consumption?
HEALTH
THE DENTAL DAM FIGHTS BACK or WOT!
NO DENTAL DAMS!
It's no longer so unusual as it once was to discuss openly, in certain forums, the advantages (and heavenly bliss!) of safer sex.
Within this context, the conversations mostly revolve around the use of condoms for penetrative and oral sex (where a penis is involved), and the general advocacy of non-penetrative sexual activities.
This is great as far as it goes, but it needs to go a lot farther!
For instance, isn't it odd that World AIDS Day, the theme of which for 1990 was Women and AIDS , has come and gone, with no change for lesbians — no information, no acknowledgement, no nothing .
We are still culturally invisible around the issue of HIV, at a time when we could and should be educating against all forms of homophobia, as well as sharing information with each other to protect ourselves and others.
Strangely, lesbians have come to be categorised as a ‘low risk group’ for HIV infection.
At least our sexual behaviour (as defined by who , we need to ask) has been classified as low risk — though this appears to have been interpreted by every corner of society as no risk .
So it's no wonder that we have heard very little about dental dams.
A dental dam is a small square (about 5 x 5 inches) of latex rubber, the same material that condoms are made of, only thicker.
Although designed for use by dentists, they were converted to safer sex use by a creative group of women in the US.
To prevent the transmission of body fluids (which may carry HIV; this includes vaginal fluids and menstrual blood) between you and your partner during oral sex, you hold the dam stretched across your partner's clitoris, labia, vagina and anus.
Dental dams can also prevent the transmission of other sexually transmitted diseases.
Unlike condoms, dental dams are not freely available in public places, such a pubs, community centres and clubs.
This is criminal when you consider that almost every woman has oral sex at some time in her life.
She and her partner, woman or man, need to know about dental dams.
Yet in Manchester, where I live, there is no freely available information about outlets for dental dams.
Nor is there even general information about the risk of HIV for lesbians anywhere in Manchester.
Why do the powers that be refuse to supply dental dams on the same basis as condoms are supplied, so that we can make up our own minds as to the suitability or otherwise of the dams?
I find the absence of information for lesbians and our continued invisibility, not only strange, but an indictment on every HIV and AIDS agency.
Why give out the message that certain sexual activities are risky whilst at the same time conveniently ignoring the real needs of lesbians?
If we are serious about making the risks of HIV transmission common knowledge, and I believe we have to be, then we need to ensure that every section of society has full access to the information that is available.
We have to forget about our prejudices, and get on with the task in hand…let's do it!
Monika Montsho
Postscript: One good note — a few weeks ago, after I published a similar complaint in the Pink Paper, I was contacted by a chemist in London who does sell dental dams over the counter (70p each), and is willing to sell them mail order as well (£5 for six, p&p inc).
So don't wait, write or visit: Chris Spinos, Colonnades Chemist, 28 Portchester Road, London W2 6E5.
Medical Records Bill Becomes Law It's About Time!
For ten more months, doctors in Britain can continue, legally, to deny people access to their own medical records.
But in November of this year, the Access to Health Records Act will become law.
All we can say is, it's about time!
For more information about the Act, contact the Campaign for Freedom of Information, 88 Old Street, London EC1V 9AR.
TRADITION TRADITION
A new teaching video challenging negative social  practices affecting women's health and development, Tradition Tradition uses African storytelling, dancing and singing to take a critical look at  practices such as female circumcision and other matters relating to women's health.
The video will be available soon from the Foundation for Women's Health Research and Development (FORWARD).
Phone 071 379 6889 for more information.
LESBIANS, HIV AND SAFER SEX
Low risk isn't no risk is the message of this new booklet produced by the London Lesbian and Gay Switchboard.
Information on transmission, contacts and (yes!) information about dental dams.
Available from the Switchboard for £5 — phone 071 837 7324.
WAYS FORWARD FOR WOMEN IN MEDICINE
Women in Medicine will be holding their next conference March 16–17 at the London Women's Centre, 4 Wild Court, London WC2.
Fees will be on a sliding scale, and there will be a creche available.
For more information contact WIM, 89 Tufnell Park Road, London N7 0PS.
‘OK, now pass the clingfilm’(from Lesbians and AIDS: The Neglected Issue, Square Peg Magazine ), is part of the exhibition Ecstatic Antibodies: Resisting the AIDS Mythology.
The exhibition aims to examine and challenge the ways in which AIDS has been (mis) represented by the media.
At the Battersea Arts Centre, Old Town, Lavender Hill, London SW1 until Feb 24.
DANGER
HEALTH WARNING
BEING A WOMAN IN THIS SOCIETY CAN SERIOUSLY DAMAGE YOUR MENTAL HEALTH