

IFSCC Benefactors
The current list of benefactors, to whom we offer our profound thanks for their continuing support of the IFSCC, are shown below:
The following companies also make a substantial contribution to the IFSCC in supporting members of the Praesidium, and our grateful thanks therefore also go to:
GENERAL PREFACE TO THE SERIES
There are many excellent, authoritative text books covering the differing disciplines which make up Cosmetic Science.
However, certain topics cut across these various disciplines and frequently it is necessary to cover them extensively to provide even an appreciation of the topic.
Monographs already published:
IFSCC Monograph Number 1 Principles of Product Evaluation: Objective Sensory Methods 
FOREWORD
This monograph deals with the practical rather than the theoretical aspects of stability tests on cosmetic products.
It is intended to provide guidance for the chemist or technician in the laboratory.
It considers the objectives of stability tests which are by no means the same in all instances, the stages of development of a product at which stability should be assessed, the test procedures and the interpretation of results.
It particularly recommends that the approach of applying a standard battery of tests in every case and in every situation be avoided.
Clear identification of the precise objectives of each test and the thoughtful planning of every individual test can achieve major economies in time and effort.
I.
General Introduction to Stability Testing
(i)
Definition of Shelf-Life 1
(ii)
Release and Check Specifications 1
(iii)
Product Stability and Product-Container Compatibility 3
II.
Objectives of Stability Testing 5
III.
Principles of Stability Testing
(a)
Elevated Temperatures 6
(b)
Elevated Humidities 6
(c)
Cycling Tests 6
(d)
Freeze/Thaw Tests 7
(e)
Exposure to Light 7
(f)
Mechanical Tests 7
IV.
Test Conditions
(i)
Temperature and Humidity Tests 8
(a)
Standard Test Conditions 8
(b)
Non-Standard Thermal Test Conditions 8
(c)
Specific Test Conditions 8
(ii)
Cycling Tests 9
(iii)
Freeze/Thaw Tests 10
(iv)
Exposure to Light 10
(v)
Mechanical Tests 11
V.
Selection of Samples
(i)
Formulation Samples 12
(ii)
Pilot Plant Samples 12
(iii)
Production Batch Samples 12
(iv)
Regular Production Samples 12
VI.
Examination of Samples
(i)
Examination Schedules 14
(ii)
Use of Control Samples 15
(iii)
Examination Criteria 16
(a)
Product 16
(b)
Pack 17
(iv)
Duration of Tests 18
(v)
Recording of Results 18
(vi)
Interpretation of Data 18
(a)
Product Stability 19
(b)
Product-Container Compatibility 20
VII.
Shelf-Life of Product in Sales Pack 21
VIII.
Conclusions 23
I. General Introduction to Stability Testing
(i) Definition of Shelf-Life
The general objective of a stability test is to determine whether a given product in the container in which it is to be marketed has an adequate shelf-life under the conditions of the market in which it is to be sold.
The term ‘shelf-life’ merits closer consideration and requires clear definition.
In the most general sense, the shelf-life of a product is that period of time between its date of manufacture and the date on which it becomes no longer acceptable for whatever reason.
For practical purposes a definition more precise than this is required.
In this, legislative controls on cosmetics give little help.
For example, European Community legislation on cosmetics requires that products with a stability of less than three years be labelled with an expiry date but it does not elaborate on this.
A practical definition of shelf-life may be: ‘that period of time during which a product remains in compliance with its specification when stored under the conditions of the market’.
From this follows the question of specifications.
Every product undergoes change with the passage of time and sooner or later becomes unsatisfactory, by which is meant in this context that it no longer conforms to its specification.
(ii) Release and Check Specifications
If a batch of a product is close to the specification limit in respect of any parameter at the time of manufacture then even a slight change may mean that it no longer complies with its specification, so that its effective shelf-life is very short.
For this reason it is desirable to have two specifications:
the release specification with which a product must comply at the time of manufacture;
the check specification or shelf-life specification or product life specification with which the product must comply throughout its shelf-life.
The latter specification defines a satisfactory product; it is only when the product has undergone change to the extent that it no longer complies fully with the check or shelf-life specification that it has reached the end of its shelf-life.
In order that the shelf-life shall be sufficiently long it is necessary that at the time of manufacture, the product shall comply with a specification which sets narrower limits, particularly for those parameters in respect of which the product is least stable.
The shelf-life is that period of time during which a product stored under market conditions changes from the limit of the release  specifications to the limit of the check specification in respect of its least stable parameter.
This is illustrated diagrammatically in Figure 1.
In the example shown the least stable parameter has a release specification of ±5 per cent of the nominal value and a check specification of ±10 per cent of the nominal value.
The period which elapses until a product at the limit of the release specification at the time of manufacture, changes until it has reached the limit of the check specification, is the minimum shelf-life; the product which is close to the nominal value at the time of manufacture will continue to comply with the check specification for longer than this.
It should be noted that it is not always the lower limits of the specification that are involved; ingredients that undergo decomposition do obviously fall but other parameters, such as total solids content, rise as the product ages, if the container is permeable to water vapour.
The use of release and check specifications is a normal practice in the pharmaceutical industry.
To those in the cosmetic industry who have not already adopted the use of these two specifications, the practice is to be commended.
Thus the check specification need not always have both its upper and its lower limits different from the release specification.
In the example (Fig. 1) the release specification has limits of 95–105 per cent of the theoretical value and the check specification limits of 90–110 per cent of the theoretical value.
If, however, these were the limits for a constituent that underwent decomposition, it would be more reasonable that the check specification limits should be 90–105 per cent of the theoretical value.
Conversely, in respect of the solids content of a suspension in a plastic container not totally impermeable to water vapour, the check specification could more logically be 95–110 per cent.
(iii) Product Stability and Product-Container Compatibility
While shelf-life is determined by the stability of the product, it is important not to lose sight of the fact that stability is made up of two distinct components.
These are
(i)
the inherent chemical and physical stability of the product or, more correctly, the contents of the pack (product stability) and
(ii)
possible interactions between the product (contents) and its immediate container (product-container compatibility)
Such interactions may have adverse effects on either product or container or both.
The terms ‘product stability’ and ‘product-container compatibility’may be defined as follows:
Product stability is the stability of the product stored in an inert, impermeable container with which it does not interact and which fully protects it from the ambient atmosphere.
Product-container compatibility includes all possible interactions between product and container such as absorption of constituents of the product by the container, leaching of constituents of the container by the product, corrosion or other adverse effects of the product on the container and the barrier properties of the container; that is, its effectiveness in protecting the contents from the adverse effects of atmospheric oxygen and/or water vapour and in retaining water and other volatile constituents of the product.
Hence, while both product stability and product-container compatibility together constitute the total overall stability of the product to be marketed, they are also quite distinct and separate concepts.
It is suggested that recognition of this distinction is fundamental to the efficient and economical design and execution of stability tests.
Figure 1.
Release and check specifications as determinants of shelf-life.
The shelf-life is that period of time during which the value of the least stable parameter changes from the limiting value of the release specification to the limiting value of the check specification.
II.
Objectives of Stability Testing
Fundamental to the proper design of a test is clear definition of the objectives of the test.
For example, a test may have one or more of the following objectives:
assessment of product (contents) stability
assessment of product-container compatibility
comparison of the stability of a product made by a modified method with that of the original product
comparison of the stability of a product made to a modified formula with that of the original product
comparison of the stability of a product made on new manufacturing equipment with that of the original product
comparison of compatibility of a product with a new container with that with the original container
study of the effect of new material(s) from a new source of supply on the stability of the product
This list could be extended.
It is suggested that the specific objectives of any given test be clearly identified before the test is started, since only if the objectives are clearly defined can the test be carried out most efficiently and with the greatest economy of time and effort.
III.
Principles of Stability Testing
Test procedures are designed to provide the desired information in the shortest possible time.
To achieve this, samples are kept under conditions designed to accelerate any changes occurring at ‘normal’ conditions.
Experience shows that the greater the degree of acceleration that a test attempts to achieve, i.e., the further removed are the conditions of test from actual market conditions, the greater is the risk of occurrence of changes which never occur at market conditions, i.e., the test no longer merely accelerates changes occurring under ‘normal’ conditions.
In order to bring about this desired acceleration, samples are subjected to the following test conditions.
(a) Elevated Temperatures
A general approximation is that a 10°C rise in temperature doubles the rate of reaction, but in practice, the usefulness of this approximation is limited by the fact that at temperatures far removed from ‘normal’, other changes often take place which never occur at normal temperatures.
Nevertheless, storage of samples at very high temperatures can be useful.
It can be a valuable indicator of stability, but not of instability.
Thus, a product that shows good chemical stability at 70–80°C is certain to be very stable (chemically, but not necessarily physically) at ‘normal’ temperatures.
Suggested test storage temperatures are discussed later.
(b) Elevated Humidities
Tests at elevated humidities are normally tests of the pack and not of the product, i.e., the contents.
They serve either to show the effect, if any, of storage at elevated humidities on the container and/or as a measure of the barrier properties of the container.
Products may be adversely affected by exposure to atmospheric humidity but if this happens in the product in its sales pack, it indicates that the pack provides inadequate protection from the atmosphere.
Tests at elevated humidities are even less certain only to accelerate changes at ‘normal’ storage conditions, than are tests at elevated temperatures.
If the hazard is ingress of water vapour, elevated humidities do, within limits, accelerate changes; if the hazard is loss of water or other volatile constituents, elevated humidities may retard changes occurring at ‘normal’ conditions.
(c) Cycling Tests
Tests in which the temperature and/or humidity are changed at regular intervals and which, therefore, subject the pack to varying rather than static stresses, are sometimes more severe tests than continuous storage  at one condition.
They can be of particular value in assessing internal lacquers in aluminium tubes.
(d) Freeze/Thaw Tests
Such tests are applicable to:
liquid products as a measure of liability to crystallize or cloud;
emulsions and creams as an indicator of emulsion stability.
(e) Exposure to Light
The effects of exposure to light are difficult to accelerate in the laboratory.
The source of illumination should ideally have the same spectral distribution as daylight; most artificial light sources do not, although xenon discharge lamps do.
In practice, it is useful to expose test samples to daylight (not direct sunlight) and also to expose them continuously to a battery of fluorescent tubes.
Experience shows that it is often difficult to assess the extent of exposure to light that samples receive in the market and hence to estimate the degree of exaggeration or acceleration that any one test gives.
Thus, the interpretation of test results can be difficult.
(f) Mechanical Tests
Vibration tests, for example, may be needed in such situations as the following:
to determine whether classification (demixing) of powders or granular products is liable to occur;
to establish that emulsions do not break or foams collapse.
IV.
Test Conditions
(i) Temperature and Humidity Tests
(a) Standard Test Conditions
The following ‘standard’ test conditions are suggested:
4°C/ambient humidity .
This is mainly useful for control purposes since chemical (but not necessarily physical) changes are minimal.
20°C or 25°C/ambient humidity .
Since ambient temperature and humidity are subject to considerable variation, seasonal and diurnal and geographical, it is greatly preferable to store samples at a controlled constant temperature (20°C or 25°C) rather than‘room temperature’.
If this is done samples stored at elevated temperatures represent a more constant degree of acceleration and render stability predictions based on them more accurate.
37°C/ambient humidity
45°C/ambient humidity
37°C/80 per cent relative humidity
All of the above are proposed as ‘standard’ conditions to which stability test samples should normally be exposed.
These specific storage conditions however, although commonly used, need not necessarily be employed.
It is equally valid to use, for example, 20°C, 30°C and 40°C or 20°C, 35°C and 50°C.
It is important that samples be stored at a minimum of three different temperatures that are spaced sufficiently widely from each other.
80 per cent relative humidity is recommended as the maximum humidity to which samples should be exposed.
At higher humidities, consequences such as the growth of moulds occur, which very rarely happens even in places of very high humidity.
(b) Non-Standard Thermal Test Conditions
Storage at 60°C, 70°C, or 80°C can, in appropriate instances, provide convincing evidence of stability (see above).
Tests at very high temperatures need be, and should be, continued for only a short period, i.e., for days or a few weeks rather than months.
(c) Specific Test Conditions
Storage of samples at the ‘standard conditions’ normally gives evidence on which a prediction can be made with reasonable accuracy of the stability/compatibility and shelf-life of the product in domestic market conditions.
Where a product is to be marketed in export markets which have high temperatures and/or high humidities, or both, prediction of shelf-life is more difficult.
The effects of high temperature and high humidity are often interrelated and while it is possible to accelerate temperature effects by storage at sill higher temperatures, it is not possible to do this with humidities that are already high.
For this reason it is always advisable in such cases to store samples under actual market conditions.
Information on climatic conditions in different parts of the world is available in published data.
It is recommended that samples be stored at mean maximum temperature and mean maximum humidity appropriate to the market concerned.
Thus, when it is intended to export a product to a number of different countries it may, and often will be, necessary to carry out separate tests at several different conditions of temperature and humidity.
Climatic conditions in all the intended markets should be considered.
It will normally be possible to span all of those market conditions by the proper selection of a small number of test conditions.
A product may well have a different shelf life in different markets; alternatively, a product may be released for marketing in certain markets but not in others.
While the climatic conditions in any given market can readily be found from published data, the temperature and humidity conditions to which a product may be subjected during shipment to that market are largely unknown; they may be very sever and potentially damaging.
The temperatures in the holds of ships in the tropics can be very high and goods standing at the dockside in tropical ports may be subjected to very high temperatures.
Hence, their journey to the market may be more damaging than actual conditions in the market.
It is worthwhile to attempt to form some estimate of the hazard by means of transport tests in which products are shipped by the route in question and returned for examination.
If storage is at the mean maximum temperature and humidity, this will give some exaggeration of actual market conditions, the extent of which will depend on diurnal and seasonal variations occurring in the market in question.
(ii) Cycling Tests
Tests under conditions which are periodically changed can, by imposing changing stresses on a pack, reveal inadequacies more quickly than can storage at a constant temperature.
For example, it may be in some cases a more rigorous test to cycle 24 hourly at 45°C and room temperature, than to store continuously at 45°C.
Similarly in tests of water-vapour barrier properties of packs, changing conditions of temperature and humidity sometimes reveal inadequacies that continuous storage at one equilibrium condition does not.
The actual conditions between which packs are cycled will depend on the  conditions likely to be encountered in the market.
Suggested conditions for such tests are:
37°C/80 per cent r.h. — R.T./ambient humidity;
mean maximum temperature/mean maximum humidity — R.T./ambient humidity in each case alternating 24 hourly.
(iii) Freeze/Thaw Tests
Freeze/thaw (minus 30°C/R.T.) tests should be carried out on all solutions, emulsions, creams and all other liquid or semi-solid products.
A suggested minimum number of cycles is six.
These tests provide evidence of emulsion stability, tendency to crystallization, deposition or clouding, and, if these happen, whether they are spontaneously reversible.
Changes that do not revert, e.g., emulsion separation, do not necessarily eliminate a product.
Control products should always be used.
(iv) Exposure to Light
Light can bring about change in products, and products that are likely to be exposed to light in the market should always be tested by exposure to light.
Recommended test conditions are:
north-facing daylight .
Exposure to direct sunlight is generally to be avoided since products are seldom exposed to it, and because it can quickly produce effects that are never seen in practice.
continuous exposure in a light testing cabinet .
Such a cabinet may contain a battery of fluorescent tubes, and samples should be held about one foot away from it.
One tube suitable for this purpose is Polarite-daylight type, 40w (Thorn-EMI).
The tubes are 132 cm in length and a battery of 12 such tubes provides suitable illumination.
A problem inherent in tests to determine the effect of light on products is that of quantifying the extent of the exposure that samples have received.
Daylight varies with location, season and weather.
Artificial light sources age and the intensity and composition of the light they emit changes.
This difficulty may be overcome, at least in part, by storing control samples of similar products known to have satisfactory stability under market conditions.
Test samples that are as table to light as are control samples in the test will almost certainly be stable to light under market conditions.
When the test samples are less stable than the controls, interpretation is less easy since such samples may, nevertheless, be stable under the conditions of the market.
Light exposure and the stability of cosmetic products to light may be assessed by methods developed for colour fastness of textiles of which the following is an example: British Standard 1006: 1978.
‘Methods of  test for colour fastness of textiles or leather.’
In this test, which will not be described in full, quantification of the light received by a sample is achieved by means of standardised strips of wool cloth dyed with different dyes which differ in their fastness to light.
There are eight such standards of which No. 2 requires twice the exposure to fade to a given extent as No. 1, No. 3 twice that of No. 2 and so on.
While the test is designed for textiles, it is possible to adapt it to cosmetic products.
In most instances, however, it is more practicable to base assessments on tests carried out in parallel on carefully selected control products.
(v) Mechanical Tests
Vibration tests on a suitable vibrator for a period of some hours should be carried out in appropriate instances.
It is preferable to treat different samples with different frequencies and amplitudes of vibration.
Emulsions may be centrifuged as a means of assessing stability.
The practical considerations involved in the storage of samples at a number of different conditions of temperature and humidity are related to the scale of the operation.
In larger organisations these take the form of ‘walk-in’ rooms maintained at specified conditions of temperature and humidity.
In smaller units, thermostatically controlled ovens or incubators are more practicable.
Within closed chambers or vessels a given constant humidity can be maintained by the presence of a saturated solution in contact with excess of solute.
Table 1 shows the percentage humidities attainable by different solutes at various temperatures.
V. Selection of Samples
(i) Formulation Samples
It is suggested that stability testing should be a continuing process involving samples from each stage of the development of a product.
It is seldom worthwhile or even practicable to submit to a formal test programme small quantities of products produced by formulation chemists in developing a new formula.
However, it can often be very useful for the formulation chemist to carry out some ad hoc tests on certain aspects of the stability of his/her formulation.
A few samples can, with advantage, be put on test to assess those aspects which the development chemist recognises as being the most likely to give problems.
Such tests are always considerably ahead in time of tests on pilot batches.
They can give early warning of stability problems and enable the corrective action to be taken at an early stage and thus save time and development resource.
It can be advantageous to put each formula on a stability test and to leave earlier formulae on storage when later different formulae are developed; the earlier formula may eventually prove to be more stable than later formulae.
(ii) Pilot Plant Samples
It is suggested that samples from at least two pilot batches should be put on full formal stability test.
It is desirable, as far as is practicable, that the different pilot batches should be made with different lots of raw materials.
(iii) Production Batch Samples
While it is essential to study the stability of pilot batches, it is imperative that the stability of production scale batches also be studied.
The different scales of manufacture can give products which behave differently on stability tests.
The first two production batches should be put on a full stability test programme at elevated temperatures and, if appropriate, at elevated humidities.
The samples at room temperature are kept on test for the projected shelf-life of the product.
(iv) Regular Production Samples
When a product is in regular production, however, there may be, with the passage of time, unsuspected and undetected changes in raw materials, methods of product handling or some other change that can affect the stability of the product.
For this reason it is desirable that there should be a continuing programme of tests of the stability of all products in regular production.
It is highly desirable that from every product in regular production, samples be withdrawn periodically and put on long-term stability test.
In such tests samples should be stored only at room temperature (or in case of samples for export markets at the conditions of the market).
Examinations need to be carried out only at infrequent intervals and in most cases only those aspects of the product or container that are known to be those most likely to undergo change need be examined.
Stability tests on pilot batches and on first production batches should be carried out not only in the case of new products but also where there has been any change in the formulation of the product or in the source of the raw materials used or in the equipment used in manufacture or filling or in the method of manufacture or filing.
Tests must always be carried out in the pack in which the product is to be marketed.
Such tests embrace both product stability and product-container stability.
At the same time the stability of the product must also be studied by the storage of the product in inert tightly closed containers (see controls below).
Only if this is done can any change be attributed to product instability or product-container incompatibility.
In product-container compatibility tests the product to be tested is the product in the immediate container in which it is to be marketed.
All sizes of the pack to be marketed should be included in the test.
Before starting a product-container compatibility test it is essential to ensure that complete detailed specifications for both the product and the primary container concerned have been received.
VI.
Examination of Samples
(i) Examination Schedules
The first action in conducting a stability test must be to draw up an examination schedule.
This should show the time intervals at which samples stored at different conditions will be tested and what tests will be applied at each examination.
A possible test schedule for an imaginary product is shown in Table 2.
Examinations are most frequent in the early part of the test and on the samples stored at elevated temperatures.
It is not possible to prescribe a single examination schedule which is appropriate for all products and all situations.
Examination schedules for each product and/or package should be determined in the light of what is appropriate in each instance.
A schedule of this sort enables the number of individual samples required for the test to be calculated.
A number of samples in excess of the calculated number must be put on storage to enable tests to be repeated when unexpected results are obtained.
The examination schedule represents a best estimate at the start of the test.
It must not be followed rigidly but should be modified in the light of information that becomes available as the test progresses.
For example, if the product proves less stable than had been anticipated it may be necessary to shorten the intervals between examinations.
Conversely if the samples stored at the higher temperatures show little or no change, it may be possible to reduce the frequency of, or even omit, certain of the scheduled examinations at lower temperatures.
There must also be a sufficient number of samples for the investigation of any special problems that may arise.
When samples are removed for examination, the remaining product in an unopened container should be destroyed and a fresh unopened container used for each subsequent examination.
In the case of bulk packages from which the product is likely to be removed in successive quantities over a period of time, separate tests should be carried out to assess the effect of storage in partly filled containers.
These are additional to the above tests.
When the product is packed in a container with a screw cap the cap should always be applied to a predetermined and measured torque.
The release torque should be measured at the beginning of the test, and whenever a container is opened throughout the whole period of the test.
(ii) Use of Control Samples
Wherever possible, a control product and/or pack should always be included in every test.
In stability tests on completely new products an appropriate control product may not always be readily available.
In many instances, however, a related or competitive product of a similar type which is known to, or can be presumed to, exhibit satisfactory stability under market conditions, can often be included and can provide valuable help in the evaluation of the test data.
In tests of products in sales packs, there should always be included in the test control samples of the product packaged in inert impermeable containers.
Without such controls it is not possible to know with certainty whether any changes observed in the product are the results of incompatibility with, or inadequacy of, the package, or are due to the inherent instability of the product.
In tests on products made to a modified formula or by a modified process, or in tests on new packages, the original product or package should invariably be used as a control.
(iii) Examination Criteria
(a) Product
Many of the important properties of products, and particularly cosmetic products, are assessed subjectively, e.g., appearance, colour, odour, taste, texture, and cannot readily be expressed in numerical terms.
Record keeping and the evaluation of results are facilitated if instead of a subjective description, any changes are recorded in terms of a scale such as the following:
barely discernible;
slight;
distinct;
marked;
very marked.
The tests applied to stability test samples are not necessarily identical with those of the quality control specification.
It is appropriate to omit from the examination of stability test samples certain tests which form a necessary part of the quality control specification, such as identification tests for active or other ingredients.
More often it is necessary to include tests additional to those of the quality control specification: examples are tests for specific degradation products.
Where the product contains an active ingredient, possible mechanisms of degradation of the ingredient should be considered and investigated, e.g. decomposition of the active ingredient or interaction of the active ingredient with other compounds present.
Analytical methods used for the determination of ingredients should be stability indicating — i.e., they must differentiate between the active ingredient and possible decomposition or degradation products.
Tests to confirm that the analytical methods used in stability testing are in fact stability-indicating should be conducted.
All analytical methods should be validated in respect of accuracy, precision, linearity and specificity.
The most probable effect of exposure to light is a change of colour, but this is not necessarily the only or even the most important effect.
Some compounds are photo-labile; therefore, samples that have been exposed to light should be examined in full and not only in terms of their colour.
Emulsions should be examined after storage for droplet size of the disperse phase even if this is not included in the product specification.
Challenge tests should always be carried out on stored samples before stability clearance is given, in order to ensure that the product continues to have an effective preservative system.
Some preservatives are inactivated by non-ionic surface-active agents, others tend to be  absorbed by plastic containers and so removed from the produce, while others may undergo degradation.
Challenge tests for the assessment of the antimicrobial efficacy of preservative systems in pharmaceutical products are described in both the United States Pharmacopeia XXII and the British Pharmacopoeia 1988.
While the tests are not identical, both challenge the preservative system with the following organisms: together with organisms to which the product is likely to be exposed during manufacture and use.
The same test and standards of antimicrobial efficacy can also be applied to cosmetic products.
Products must continue to show adequate antimicrobial efficacy at the end of the shelf-life.
Preservatives should also be assayed throughout the test.
It is not always sufficient to rely on challenge tests only.
The degradation products of some antimicrobials may themselves have considerable antimicrobial activity, e.g., thiomersal, the principal degradation product of which has greater antimicrobial efficacy than thiomersal but is also more toxic.
(b) Pack
Except for non-volatile, non-absorbent products, weight loss (or gain) measurements should always be made in order to confirm the adequacy of the pack to retain moisture, oxygen or carbon dioxide.
The package itself should be carefully examined for change during storage, e.g., stress-cracking of plastic tubes, blistering and/or detachment of internal lacquer on cans and tubes, blockage of spray valves, etc., and label adhesion.
As mentioned above, some ingredients, including some preservatives, are absorbed by plastic from solution; evidence of such absorption should be sought.
Changes in the container as well as in the product should be looked for and reported.
It is necessary to draw up a projected examination schedule and to put on storage at each test condition more than sufficient samples to meet that schedule.
The examination schedule drawn up at the beginning of the test may need to be modified in the light of findings in the earlier stages of the test.
Thus, if changes appear at an early stage it may be necessary to carry out more frequent testing; alternatively, the reverse situation may apply.
There must also be enough samples put on test to allow for duplicate examinations and for the proper investigations of special problems.
(iv) Duration of Tests
The duration of tests at any one condition depends on the condition and again must be subject to variation in the light of findings as the test progresses.
The following are suggested durations at different conditions:
4°C for the projected shelf-life of the product;
R.T.
37°C — 3–6 months maximum;
45°C — 1–3 months maximum;
37°C/80 per cent r.h. — 1 month maximum;
light tests — up to a maximum of 1 month.
Tropical market conditions .
Since storage at mean maximum temperature and mean maximum humidity may give little acceleration over market conditions, these should be continued for the projected shelf-life of the product.
(v) Recording of Results
A stability test involves the accumulation of a substantial amount of data over a prolonged period of time and may require the production of reports at several stages of the test.
Results of examinations can be recorded manually on suitably designed cards or forms.
The accumulation of data over a long period of time is a situation that lends itself well to the use of a microcomputer.
Test results can be inputted by the chemist or technician in the laboratory.
All the results are immediately available to the Department Manager at the VDU by his desk.
The production of reports is greatly facilitated.
If the projected examination schedules are retained in the computer, printouts can be obtained of the examinations scheduled for the next day or week, so rendering unnecessary the use of a manual diary for the control of test schedules.
(vi) Interpretation of Data
The ease or otherwise with which test data are interpreted and related to behaviour in the market depends on the type of test.
Tests which are essentially ‘comparison’ tests are relatively easy to assess.
In such tests there is always a control product or pack, the behaviour of which under market conditions is known.
In such instances, interpretation of test data becomes a matter of deciding whether the test product or pack is better than, equal to or inferior to the control.
It is not usually necessary to attempt to reproduce the conditions of a particular market.
The evaluation and assessment of test data on completely new products or packs and the problem of deciding whether they are sufficiently stable or whether they adequately protect the product under market conditions is  more difficult.
The difficulty is greater in relation to overseas markets having temperatures and humidities higher than those of temperate regions.
The stability of the product and shelf-life of the product in its sales pack are considered separately below.
(a) Product Stability
Product stability is, by definition, the inherent stability of the product independent of possible interactions with the immediate container or of questions of the adequacy or otherwise of the protection afforded by the sales package.
Therefore, in assessing product stability, only data on samples stored in inert, highly protective packs, need, or should be, taken into account.
Changes in samples stored at elevated temperatures represent acceleration of changes occurring at room temperature.
The degree of acceleration can be assessed by comparing the extent of the changes occurring at 37°C and 45°C and at other elevated temperatures, with those occurring in samples stored at room temperature (20°C).
Assessment of samples stored at elevated temperatures may be made very approximately on the assumption of a two-fold acceleration for each 10°C rise in temperature.
Even at best this is a rather crude approximation.
It is for this reason that the use of control products is such an important aid to the evaluation of the results of product stability and product-container compatibility tests.
The Arrhenius equation  or  where K = specific reaction rate; A = frequency factor; Ea = energy of activation; R = gas constant; T = absolute temperature is applicable only to the investigation of the chemical stability of single compounds in simple solution.
It is therefore of little value in tests of the stability of products but can be applied in investigations of the stability of, for example, a new cosmetic ingredient.
An estimate of the degree of acceleration over market conditions can be made only if the mean temperature in the market is known.
For UK domestic conditions this presents little problem since the 20°C (R.T.) condition is very close to normal temperatures in the UK market.
Hence, storage at 45°C for 3 months may, but not always, represent 12–18 months at room temperature.
In markets having higher temperatures than the UK, the 37°C and 45°C conditions are less far removed from market conditions.
Hence  storage at 37°C or 45°C represents correspondingly less acceleration over conditions to which the product is likely to be exposed in the market.
Therefore, before a conclusion is reached, tests must be continued for a sufficiently long time to demonstrate an adequate shelf-life in the market concerned.
(b) Product-Container Compatibility
Tests on products packed in market packages involve samples stored at elevated humidities as well as those stored at elevated temperatures.
The effect of such storage may be on either the package or the product or both and these effects may be classified as follows.
Effects of storage environment on package e.g., loosening of cap wads, failure of label adhesive and exfoliation of laminates.
Effects on product from inadequate barrier properties of package.
Such effects are shown by differences between the test samples and control samples stored in impermeable containers, e.g.,(a) adverse effects on moisture sensitive products resulting from the inward passage of water vapour; or on certain products because of the inward diffusion of atmospheric oxygen;(b) adverse effects arising from the outward passage of volatile constituents of product, e.g., water vapour, i.e., evaporation of product; loss of perfume or flavour, or ‘panelling’ of plastic bottles.
Samples submitted to low pressures while being airfreighted have been known to suffer perfume loss.
Effects of incompatibility between product and this primary container, which may be on either product or package or both, e.g., corrosion of metal tubes; stress-cracking of plastic tubes; absorption of constituents of the product such as preservatives by the container; leaching of constituents of the container by the product.
VII.
Shelf-Life of Product in Sales Pack
The evaluation of test results and the establishment of a shelf-life under any given market conditions require a knowledge of the extent of acceleration that the test conditions represent in relation to market conditions.
Such considerations in relation to temperature alone have been considered in an earlier section.
Tests at elevated temperatures and elevated humidities are more difficult to accelerate and interpret.
Since normal ambient conditions in the UK have fairly high humidity, storage at R.T.
(20°C) and 80 per cent r.h. may represent little or no acceleration over normal domestic conditions.
At 37°C/80 per cent r.h. the atmosphere contains very much more water vapour than does air at 20°C/80 per cent r.h.
In assessing the water vapour barrier properties of a container at 37°C/80 per cent r.h. this may represent an acceleration of 8–10 fold over 20°C/80 per cent r.h.
(Based on the vapour pressure of water at 37°C and 20°C respectively and assuming a doubling of the rate of diffusion of water vapour per 10°C rise in temperature.)
In relation to climatic conditions in many other markets, 37°C/80 per cent r.h. (which is the most severe high humidity test condition generally proposed on the basis of experience) represents less acceleration and may be continued for correspondingly longer.
In view of the difficulty of satisfactorily exaggerating conditions in high humidity markets, it is always desirable to put samples on test at actual conditions of the market or markets in which the product is to be sold, i.e., storage at the mean maximum temperature and mean maximum humidity.
Such tests should be continued for the projected shelf-life of the product.
All tests on products for overseas markets need to be interpreted with caution.
However clearly the market conditions are known and however closely the test conditions reproduce them, the conditions to which the product may be subjected during shipment are always unknown and can sometimes be very severe even when the market conditions are not particularly severe.
For example, the temperatures in the holds of ships passing through the tropics may be extremely high.
The temperatures in the cargo holds of aircraft on the other hand may be extremely low.
In neither case are the conditions to which the product may be subjected precisely known.
It is seldom possible to give a general overall clearance of a product for all export markets.
Even if the stability of the product is such that is has adequate shelf-life in the most severe market, it is likely that its shelf-life will be longer in markets having a less severe climate than in areas with more severe climates.
In almost cases it is suggested that specific clearance and a specific shelf-life should be established for a given  product to an identified market, or group of markets.
It is very often assumed, particularly by non-technical persons, that a product is tested for stability and that after a certain time a result is obtained proving stability of the product and/or pack.
In fact, stability testing is a predictive procedure based on data obtained from products stored under conditions which are believed to be likely to accelerate changes occurring at market conditions.
As with all predictive procedures, they are not absolute but have a certain probability of success.
This probability is lowest when based on short tests under conditions of high acceleration.
The probability increases as the test conditions approach market conditions and the duration of the test is longer.
Nevertheless, all have a probability of success which is less than 100 per cent.
In this sense a stability test is never finished in less than the actual shelf-life of the product.
The point at which so-called ‘stability clearance’ can be given will depend on the product and on the information that is available on related products and experience in the market with such products.
It is further suggested that in reporting the results of stability tests and the conclusions drawn from them, care should be taken to avoid any statement which would lead people to believe that the products have been proved to be ‘stable’.
The period for which the product can be expected to be stable under given conditions must also be specified.
An accelerated stability study indicates only a probable shelf-life under given conditions; the longer the duration of the test the greater the probability.
VIII.
Conclusions
This monograph has attempted to review the more important aspects of the testing of product stability and product-container compatibility.
It has considered the objectives of stability tests, their planning, execution and the interpretation of the results obtained.
The point that emerges most strongly is that there are no standard procedures to which all samples can be routinely submitted; to approach the problem in that way is inappropriate and inefficient.
In every test it is necessary first to define the objectives of the test and hence the information required from it; then the test is designed to yield that information.
Time spent in careful planning at the beginning of a test can make the test more efficient and economical and save much time in its execution.
Even when this has been done and the test is in progress, there should be sufficient flexibility to modify the test plan (e.g., by changing examination schedules) in the light of information that becomes available as the test progresses.
Control products or packages should always be used where possible.
In short, every