

INTRODUCTION
WHY did so many people assume that John Cranko's sudden death must have been suicide?
It is easy to see how the sleeping pill he had taken could be misunderstood as an overdose, but an airliner full of his friends would be an unlikely place for anyone to kill himself.
Besides, what motive would he have had?
On the surface, none.
He was a man of forty-five, at the top of his profession, fresh from new triumphs in an international career, with further possibilities just opening ahead of him.
A man who had made his name by his own imagination and energy, not in just one skill but three: as choreographer, as deviser of revues and other shows, as director of a company that he had brought from obscure provincial competence to world-wide acclaim.
A man surrounded by colleagues of exceptional talent, who treated him with a uniquely loving respect, whom he in turn loved more dearly than a family.
True, he no longer had any real family with blood links or domestic ties: separated from his mother since adolescence, so far as any real communication went; his father dead; himself disappointed in love.
Those who knew him best saw the melancholy that went hand-in-hand with the gaiety he showed the world, and because he lived every emotion intensely, his misery went deep.
Anyone could see that there were times when he drank far more than was good for him.
There were whispers, too, about an earlier time when several of his close friends died suddenly and sadly, when he was full of self-doubt, and his despair had become more than he could bear.
For all that, there is no faintest shadow of doubt.
His death was nothing but an absurd, ludicrous accident.
It was also highly theatrical, as his whole adult life had been: an airliner diverted to an unexpected destination, the body found dead on arrival, people already waiting at his destination to greet him before they heard the shocking news, grief and incredulity on all sides as the story spread around the world.
John Cranko lived in the theatre, for the theatre, and like the theatre.
The outlines of his life are familiar but, because it fell into three parts separated by place as well as time, it is obscure in detail even to those who were closest to him at any given time.
I can safely claim that nobody at all can read what follows without learning something new about him, any more than I could have imagined, when I began preparing it, how much unrecorded information I would find.
It does not fundamentally change our view of him: his character was already vivid enough, his achievements large and firmly based.
But it is possible to understand better the man behind those achievements.
There was nothing in his early childhood to hint at the extraordinary life he would lead.
Growing up in a South African mining town, the son of a reasonably successful lawyer, he might easily have settled down to an ordinary, respectable career, following his father into law, perhaps, as one of his cousins did, or becoming an architect like another of them.
But as an adolescent he developed a passion for the theatre, first in the form of puppets, then ballet.
Even before he reached his nineteenth birthday, he had begun to make a name as a choreographer, and one of the works he made then is still danced: only a trifle, but full of the wit that was one of his gifts.
The precociousness of his talent now seems to have been just as well, because by time he left his native land, aged eighteen, more than a third of his life was already gone.
He never went back, because he loathed the way the black people there were treated.
But it was ambition, not politics, that drove him to England.
London was the place to prove himself as a choreographer, and he spent almost exactly the next third of his life there, fifteen years, doing that and much more besides.
Success came quickly, thanks to a happy mixture of talent, determination, enterprise and luck.
At twenty-two, he was already recognized within the ballet world as the most gifted dance creator of his generation, and George Balanchine commissioned him to make a work for New York City Ballet.
At twenty-three, he had his first big hit with the general public:Pineapple Poll , still a crowd-puller after three decades.
At twenty-four, he first ran his own small company.
But success at Covent Garden and Sadler's Wells, invitations from the Paris Opéra and La Scala, Milan, the chance to collaborate with leading composers and painters — all this was not enough to satisfy him or occupy his energies fully.
So he turned to other forms of theatre, directing operas, writing and staging revues and musicals, to which he brought new ideas and methods that were widely admired.
Then came a sudden reversal of fortune: flops (some, but by no means all, deserved) in ballet and the theatre; his father's death; a scandal arising from a prosecution for homosexual activity.
His fame made criticism sharper and more wounding.
His standing as an accepted figure, even a friend of the Queen's sister, Princess Margaret, made him vulnerable to attack.
So at thirty-three he seized the chance of a fresh start.
He pulled up his roots a second time and moved to another new land, Germany, where during the twelve years that were left to him he accomplished a ‘ballet miracle’, building not merely a repertory and a company in Stuttgart, but a whole new public attitude that affected other theatres throughout the country.
Dancers flocked to him; he in return developed their abilities wonderfully and gave them roles to show off their gifts.
As he did all his life, he also found and encouraged new designers and composers.
His own qualities as a choreographer blossomed in this setting.
He became a supreme story-teller in dance, but kept his passion for experiment, too, often disconcerting his admirers and yet still gaining their acceptance.
His achievements alone would have won admiration, but John Cranko had another quality besides.
Everything he did was enriched by a warm concern for other people that inspired affection from even slight acquaintances, and love from his closer colleagues.
No wonder his sudden early death caused such grief.
Yet this man found himself unloved, in that he demanded so much from his friends that he could not find a close, enduring relationship to satisfy him.
That was one cause of the melancholy that dogged him.
So he swung between extremes of mood, darkened towards the end by the death of cherished friends.
Hence the alarmed thought on the part of many that he might have taken his own life.
Far from it: he had come out of the darkness and was full of hope and plans.
He died as active as ever and, although only forty-five, had already crammed more into that space of time than most people manage in a far longer span.
His was a hectic life, becoming more so as it went on.
It was full of extremes: a success story that left the winner dissatisfied, a source of pleasure to many thousands of people while he experienced misery as well delight.
But to be sorry for him would be a mistake: he lived his life to the full, and in all his deeds he enriched the lives of others.
What I have tried to do in this book is to tell how he did it.
ACT ONE
SOUTH AFRICA
ORIGINS
JOHN Cranko was puzzled by his surname; amused, too.
He made a pun on it for the title of his revue Cranks .
More seriously, he thought that it was probably a corrupt version of some such name as Krankovitz or Krankovsky, indicating that one branch of the family had come from eastern Europe.
John's father had told him vague stories about a grandfather who was said to have spent his time in mysterious pursuits of his own, returning home at intervals to sire another child before disappearing again.
He might be the hypothetical Slav ancestor: a Russian, Pole or Czech, perhaps.
I am not sure whether John was aware of a tradition among some of his distant cousins that the family originated from Poland, possibly in a Count Cranko, romantically supposed to have been descended from the founder of the city of Krakow.
Not long before he died, John visited London.
While there, he looked for the first time through papers which his father, Herbert Cranko, had left: two notebooks and a number of typescripts.
Among the confused jottings in the larger notebook he found this:
Grandpa must have arrived early in 19 Century about Napoleonic times —?
When did British occupy Cape?
Assuming he was born 1850 Married 1880–1
His father 1820 settlers?
Huguenots
The ‘he’ born in 1850 must have been Herbert's Pa, not Grandpa.
The argument is not very logical but the notes were enough for John to decide that the family origins must, after all, have been French.
He deduced that the name might formerly have been Craingeau, Graingeau or Gringaud, any one of which would be pronounced sufficiently like Cranko to become transformed.
He told this to Dr Schäfer, the Intendant or general director of the theatre at Stuttgart, who published it after John's death, spelling the hypothetical name differently on various occasions.
Obviously John had no time to investigate the theory, and probably he would not have bothered anyway, since it looks convincing and he was given to quick enthusiasms.
If he had enquired into it, he would have discovered that there are examples among Huguenot families of names changing in that way, but that nobody named Craingeau or Gringaud or anything else that might sound like Cranko is listed among the Huguenot settlers in South Africa.
Since John's death, however, one of his younger cousins, Robin Cranko, has made it his business to search out the beginnings of the family.
His father, like John's, had been still young when their father died, and consequently could not remember him, only the ‘very Victorian mother’ who brought them up, and the tales she told about him.
So Robin Cranko, who wanted to know more about his ancestors, began looking through public and church archives.
He also consulted old copies of the Cape of Good Hope Almanac and Annual Register which, among other practical information, recorded the names and addresses of residents.
Gradually he pieced together the story, visiting or writing to members of the family in several continents to confirm details.
What he discovered caused the jottings by John's father to fall into place, separating fact from speculation, and what follows is based mainly on collating those two sources.
The truth turned out to be stranger than the legend, and it throws light on the qualities of character which John inherited.
The first people to bear the name Cranko were two brothers, James and William, and their sister Miemie, all living in Cape Town in the middle of the nineteenth century.
Their father's name was Theunis Krankoor, and it is probable that either he or his father was the first person to take that name too.
Krankoor is as odd a name as Cranko.
It means, in Dutch, a sick or defective ear.
If you want a colloquial equivalent in English, Thickear might be as good as any.
There are many such names in Dutch and Flemish, dating from Napoleonic times.
Until the Netherlands came under Napoleon's rule, many of the inhabitants had managed perfectly well without surnames.
That did not suit Bonaparte's desire for order and was inconvenient to his need for conscripting recruits to his army.
So those who had no family name were required by law to adopt one.
Resenting this, and probably thinking that the requirement would be as short-lived as the fortunes of war, many of the peasants took derisive and ribald names.
Examples among families who settled in South Africa are Klerenbesem, Koevoet and Krombeck, meaning respectively clothesbrush, crowbar and crooked muzzle.
Krankoor must almost certainly have been another such.
On that assumption, Theunis Krankoor's arrival in Cape Town can be placed within a period of about fifteen years, after the implementation of the full Napoleonic legal code in the Netherlands and before the birth of his first child, James, who, according to his wedding and death registrations, was born in the Cape Colony about 1823 or 1824.
At that time the settlement of Cape Town, which had been just a small staging post on the voyage between the Netherlands and the East Indies, was beginning to grow, but although the English had occupied the Cape in 1806, the white population remained mainly Dutch until the arrival of many new settlers from Britain in 1820.
The supposition that Theunis — or maybe his father — invented the name Krankoor shortly before emigrating comes from the fact that no surviving Krankoors, nor records of such a family, have come to light in Holland; two Crankos live in The Hague but they are recent arrivals from South Africa.
Theunis, whose second name was probably Carel or Carl, had a wife, Maria Dorothea, whose maiden name was Rubenden, but little is known about either of them.
Records of their two sons, however, and of their daughter, also named Maria Dorothea but known as Miemie, remain in the form of wills and marriage or death certificates.
The wills are written in Dutch; their weddings were solemnized in the Dutch Reformed Church.
That they spoke Dutch among themselves is also suggested by the fact that the longest surviving member of that generation, William's widow Sarah (née Weiss, of German origin), continued to speak Dutch or Afrikaans until her death in 1922.
Even so, the beginning of an English influence is suggested by the brothers' first names and by the fact that William's second name, Justavus, is spelled that way, indicating an English pronunciation, instead of the more usual Gustavus.
For obvious reasons, many of the Dutch settlers in Cape Town found it expedient under English rule to become anglicized, although those who had moved inland maintained their national identity.
The Annual Registers record the gradual transformation of the Krankoor family name.
A change from Krankoor to Kranko came between the 1847 and 1848 volumes, soon after Theunis's death.
As you would expect, the change in pronunciation was made once and for all, but either the brothers or the editors of the Register seem to have had difficulty making up their minds how to spell it.
The version Cranko first appears in 1850, but the two versions competed with each other at least until the end of the decade.
(Details are given in Appendix A).
Eventually, the more English-seeming version of the family name, with the initial C, prevailed.
Later generations of the family spoke English as their first language and went over to the Anglican church.
Theunis Krankoor's elder son, James Cranko, married twice.
His first wife, Helena, died in 1845 giving birth to a daughter.
In 1847 he married Fredrica Schoukerk, daughter of an usher in the Cape Town Supreme Court.
They had two sons, the elder of whom, Fredrik Jacob Willem, was born about 1848.
This Frederick (he adopted the English spelling) was the mysterious grandfather that John Cranko was told of, who was supposed to spend much of his time visiting the fleshpots of Cape Town.
James Cranko died in 1852, aged about 28; some say he was poisoned.
His widow married again in 1854; she and her new husband, Hendrik van Blerk, lived on a farm at Kuils River, Cape Town.
Frederick was apparently brought up there with the daughter, Hester, of the new marriage, but he ran away to sea.
He went for a time to Australia, then jumped ship in Cape Town (which caused a scandal) and was subsequently cared for by his uncle Willy, Theunis's younger son.
Since becoming sole owner of the family tailoring business, William had built it up very successfully.
He had his coach and horses, lived in comfort in a fine house and bought property all over the town.
When his sister Miemie (who had married a carpenter, Hermanus Dempers) was widowed, he took her in as companion for his wife and housekeeper to the family.
William travelled in Europe and had an account with a London bank.
He sent his son, William Johan, also known as John, to school in England.
(This earlier John Cranko, incidentally, married a Scottish girl, Annie Scleater, and later settled in England.
He did not die until 1951, five years after his namesake and distant kinsman, our John Cranko, arrived in England.
Two of his daughters were also living not far from London throughout the time the younger John Cranko was living there, but there is no indication that the latter was aware of these kinsfolk).
Old William Cranko and his nephew Frederick both seem to have been fond of feminine company.
Robin Cranko thinks that one of them, if not both, must have been responsible for some branches of the Cranko family whom he came across during his researches.
The name is now widespread in South Africa.
Many of those who hold it live in poor areas and some are Coloured, that is, of mixed European and African descent.
Herbert Cranko used to tell a story about a very dark-skinned man named Cranko turning up one day in his Johannesburg office, calling him uncle and announcing that he was short of money.
Herbert, who had no colour prejudice but a careful attitude about money, was proud of his reply: ‘My dear sir, this is a legal office, not a money-lending office.’
Frederick Cranko in 1876 married Susannah Solomon, a member of a famous Cape legal family, but soon divorced her.
In 1881, in his early thirties, he married again.
His second wife, Bilhah Solomon Jacobson, known as Belle, was a remarkable woman.
She was born in London in 1863, one of the eleven children of a Jewish family.
Old Mr Jacobson emigrated to the Cape in 1880 after a quarrel with his wife, taking with him two of his four sons and all but one of his seven daughters.
He set up in business as an antique dealer but, according to Herbert Cranko, ‘seems to have loved his stock more than his customers, often refusing to sell a cherished piece to a disliked buyer’.
One may be sceptical about that ‘often’.
His grandsons remembered him as a very old man, fond of reading the Encyclopaedia Britannica and so failing in his memory that, when he dozed over one of the volumes, the boys would turn over several pages and he never noticed but read on from there when he woke up.
Herbert's notes give only tantalizing hints of what happened to the other Jacobson children.
Charlie became a ‘jeweller, pawnbroker, fisherman’ and Dave was a ‘poverty-stricken philanthropist’.
Most of the daughters (except Rose, who lost an eye) soon married, but Minnie's marriage to Abe Greenbaum came to an abrupt end when she did a ‘bunk with Claud’— a doctor she met on a visit to London.
The Jacobsons, like the Crankos, were an adventurous family, tending to be foot-loose and adaptable.
In 1885 Frederick Cranko (who, after starting as a sailor, worked as a tailor, an engraver and a clerk) joined the gold rush to Pretoria and thence to Johannesburg, a thousand miles from Cape Town.
South Africa was a big, thinly populated country, its interior only just being opened up as its mineral wealth was discovered.
Frederick went on the new railway as far as the railhead at the diamond mines of Kimberley, and had to join an ox-wagon train the rest of the way.
Belle followed later with their daughter Muriel and their first son, Samuel, known as Toy; the younger children were born in Johannesburg.
Belle's sister Lil went with her as a companion for the long journey.
One of the first houses in the goldfields was built to welcome them and the two children; the roof was not on by the time they arrived but many miners joined in helping to complete it, the sight of two young Englishwoman being a delightful rarity.
In Johannesburg, actually in the mining camp at Ferreira's Town, Frederick and Belle opened an hotel, which according to Robin Cranko was the first in the locality.
It seems to have thrived.
Before leaving London, Belle had been secretary to an hotel keeper and wine merchant, which should have provided useful experience for the venture.
Its success must have been largely through her efforts if it is true that Frederick was often away from home.
We may wonder what was behind those absences.
Belle gave her sons the idea that it was capricious irresponsibility.
Robin Cranko has the impression that his grandfather was ‘rather over-fond of life and living…quite an arty person…an unusual, warm being, fond of the good things’.
Some of those qualities appear to have been inherited by Frederick's youngest son Herbert and, as already mentioned, some of them may have been present in Frederick's uncle William.
Belle, on the other hand, was described by Robin's father as something of a martinet.
In October 1899 the Anglo-Boer War broke out.
All uitlanders, or non-citizens, of British stock had to leave the Transvaal Republic, and in spite of their Dutch antecedents the Crankos had by then become fully anglicized.
So they had to abandon the Ferreira Hotel and most of their possessions.
Mother, father and six children set off first by train in open cattle trucks.
Muriel, the only daughter, was in her early teens, the boys all younger, down to Herbert aged just four.
As they travelled through territory held by Dutch settlers, nobody was willing to sell food to the ‘English’.
Belle devised the trick of waiting by a food stall at a halt until the train was just pulling out again.
Then she hurled some money at the stallkeeper, grabbed loaves and other food, and jumped on the moving train.
The railway took them hundreds of miles east (further away from Cape Town) to Delagoa Bay in Lourenço Marques; from there they were taken by ship to the Cape.
Either Frederick became ill because of their privations, or he may already have been suffering from pneumonia, which was worsened by the hard journey.
In any event, he died in Cape Town during December 1899.
Frederick Cranko's family, who had disapproved of his marrying a Jew, would have nothing to do with his widow.
That may have been one factor in causing her subsequently to bring up the children in the Jewish faith.
Although she was the dominant parent, she had made no attempt to do so until then; Robin's father remembered being circumcised after his father's death, when he was seven.
Presumably other members of the Jacobson family must have given Belle some help, because in spite of having left most of their possessions in Johannesburg, they achieved a state of gentility during the year or two they lived in Cape Town, according to Herbert's notes.
In 1901 Belle went to England for a year, taking the children with her.
The older boys attended a Rabbi's school at Ealing to learn about the Jewish faith.
During 1902 Belle was able to return to Johannesburg and retrieve at least some of her possessions.
In 1906 she moved to Krugersdorp where she ran the Swan Hotel and, according to Herbert, achieved prosperity.
About that time she was married again.
Ten years or so later, she moved to Rustenburg, where she ran the Grand Hotel, which her eldest son took over when she retired.
During the nineteen-twenties she spent some time in London, and after her second husband, Maurice Platner, died in 1929 she moved to Johannesburg, where she died in 1932.
So her former connection with Rustenburg, and the presence there of his brother, may have been among the considerations that prompted Herbert Cranko to choose that town when he found it necessary to settle down after a roving life.
A photograph taken in 1908 shows Belle, strongly matriarchal among her children.
A family likeness can be seen among all the boys, every face dominated by a long curved nose.
It is at least possible that their features came from their father's side of the family, judging from an anecdote which Herbert told of having been on holiday at the Cape as a young man.
He was on Muizenburg Beach, then a popular resort, when a stranger came he up and asked him in Afrikaans ‘Is your name Cranko?’
When he replied that it was, she told him ‘Come this way, your auntie wants to have a talk with you.’
The aunt (actually great-aunt) who had known him from his appearance was Sarah, widow of old William Justavus Cranko, and the companion she sent to fetch him was Miemie Dempers, William's sister.
They had a long chat in Afrikaans; Herbert specially mentioned the language because it was only the survivors of the family's oldest generation who still habitually spoke it.
The Crankos seem to have included more than their share of wanderers.
As well as the journeying already mentioned, others of the family settled in the United States, New Zealand and Australia.
Herbert, too, visited Australia when he was about sixteen.
Five years later, in 1916, he qualified in law, and about that time went through a phase which prompts the single word ‘Bolshy’ in his notes.
Then he went to fight in France from 1917 to 1918.
Back in Johannesburg after the war, Herbert began to practise law in partnership with one of his elder brothers, James, but later went off to Europe for a year to study law in Vienna.
His notes say that it was in 1924, but it must have been sooner, probably 1921 or 1922, because he was back in South Africa in time to get married in 1923.
Herbert Cranko, like his son, was often very vague about dates.
Herbert's papers include an uncompleted short story about living in Vienna as a postgraduate student which, like other stories he left, is evidently only thinly disguised autobiography.
He says that ‘wanderlust and chance’ brought him to the city which he associated particularly with Mozart, Strauss and Lehár, also with Freud and Einstein.
He describes lodging in the beautifully furnished house of a respectable widow with artistic tastes, who had been impoverished by inflation.
That inflation enabled students with money from abroad (English pounds in his own case, he says) to rush from one currency dealer to another, taking advantage of different rates to make a profit.
The story's climax, had he reached it, was obviously to have been the outcome of his meeting with the widow's beautiful and gifted daughter.
In real life, too, there was an intention (perhaps stronger on her side than his) that he should marry his landlady's daughter, but nothing came of that because, on returning to Johannesburg, Herbert met Grace, who was in fact to become his first.wife and John's mother.
Herbert was then twenty-eight and no doubt set in his carefree ways.
Grace, who had a daughter, Peggy van Druten, by an earlier marriage, was twenty-six.
Her family's history, although nobody has recorded it in such detail, seems to have been almost as adventurous as that of the Crankos.
On her father's side, she was descended from Thomas Hinds (thought to come from Essex), who had been shipwrecked off the coast of Port Elizabeth in 1821.
He and his brother George survived by swimming ashore.
Thomas's son, also called Thomas, was Grace's father; she was born on his farm, The Junction, at Magaliesberg, Transvaal, and baptized Hilda Grace in the Anglican church there.
Grace's mother, Alice Jennings, also traced her ancestry to England, in her case to Wiltshire.
Alice's grandfather had been about to embark for Cape Town with the 1820 settlers when he became ill, was taken to hospital in Portsmouth and died before sailing.
The ships in harbour had to leave because of a storm; they sailed away bearing his new widow and her son, aged two, who grew up to become a big game hunter in central Africa.
Alice Jennings was his daughter.
Grace met Herbert through Major Chaplin Court Treatt, the husband of her sister Stella.
He was working for an engineering firm and met Herbert in the course of business.
Grace was staying with her sister and brother-in-law and went with them to have dinner with Herbert at the end of August 1923; her account of the meeting is that ‘lightning struck’ and three weeks later they were married.
Marriage did not immediately cause Herbert to settle down.
Court Treatt had long dreamed of making the hitherto unattempted journey by car from the Cape to Cairo, and had already surveyed the route by air.
Herbert caught his enthusiasm for the idea.
Neither had much money, so they decided to go to London with their wives and look for sponsors.
They set off in November 1923 and it took a year to set up the expedition.
When Court Treatt returned to Cape Town, Herbert remained in London to organize supplies, including petrol, which had to be delivered along the route, then a wilderness without roads or bridges.
The successful Cape to Cairo Expedition, in which Grace's young brother Errol also took part, set out in 1925, but the journey was a long one, and after that there were many arrangements to be wound up, so Herbert's work in London was not complete until late the following year.
During their time in London, which was a happy one, he and Grace went to see the Diaghilev Ballet and also Pavlova's company.
Grace's daughter Peggy had ballet lessons from Seraphina Astafieva, whose most famous pupils were Alicia Markova and Anton Dolin.
Late in 1926, Herbert returned to South Africa to give lectures about the expedition, illustrated by still photographs and moving pictures.
He left Grace and Peggy behind with the intention of travelling for a while in Europe, but he had only just landed in South Africa when Grace realized that she was going to have another child.
She let Herbert know, and he cabled her to cancel all other arrangements and catch the next ship back.
Deciding now to take up the practice of law again, Herbert thought that the best opening would be to build up a country practice.
Rustenburg, where his brother was running the Grand Hotel, offered the right sort of opportunity.
They stayed first in the hotel and were still living there when John was born.
About sixty miles from Johannesburg and the same distance from the provincial capital, Pretoria, Rustenburg's prosperity was based on mining, especially for platinum, but it is surrounded by good farming land in a warm, beautiful valley.
In this sleepy little town, Herbert Cranko set up his business and awaited the birth of his child.
BEGINNINGS
John Cranko was born at about six in the morning of 15 August 1927, a Monday.
He was a big boy, weighing nine and a half pounds at birth.
His mother writes that he was
a strangely good baby, always laughing and talking to himself in his own fashion, kicking in his pram, talking to the trees.
He was strong, crawled about for a short while and walked quite strongly at ten months.
As a child he was always adventurous and found everything a huge joke…
From the time he could say words, he always spoke correctly, no baby talk…
He always adored animals, he had pets all his life.
He was a good horseman from the age of seven.
There was even a time, John said later, when his one ambition was to devote himself to horses, but his father was not especially enthusiastic about that idea.
His mother's collection of family snapshots shows that, whereas most babies look much like any other babies until they begin to grow up a little, John looked recognizably himself at a very early age, thanks largely to his big smile, almost a grin.
In many of the pictures he is accompanied by his half-sister Peggy, about ten years older than he, who was devoted to him.
John may have reciprocated that feeling when very young, but the warmth, at any rate on his side, did not survive into adult life.
At one time he also had a nanny, who came from the German-speaking part of Switzerland.
At six weeks old, he was baptized with the names John Cyril at Holy Trinity Church, Rustenburg.
His godparents came from his mother's side of the family, her brother Errol and Florence Court Treatt, who Grace thinks may have been Major Court Treatt's mother; also a friend, a government official named John Keith, after whom John was named.
His mother says he would never own to his second name, which was that of a friend of Herbert's living in London.
Grace had been brought up in a very religious household and she maintained strict standards for herself but, she says, ‘was not allowed to check or discipline John in any way’.
In that we see Herbert's more easy-going temperament.
He too had been strictly brought up but seems to have shrugged off his mother's influence in that as easily as he resisted her attempts to make him a practising Jew.
Grace insists that for most of his life Herbert's associates, girl friends and other friends were not Jews.
In his fifties, he became involved in an airline flying to Israel, which was later absorbed into El Al, the official airline of the new state of Israel.
At that time, from all accounts, he must have become more outwardly Jewish in his attitudes.
This able and likeable man was admirably adaptable to circumstances and had something of an eye to the main chance.
Robin Cranko tells a story illustrating Herbert's sense of business opportunity.
When Robin had newly qualified in law, Herbert strongly recommended Rustenburg as a place to start practising, and offered to allow his name to be used in return for a small interest in the practice, on the grounds that many people would remember it.
He was somewhat taken aback when Robin pointed out that he was entitled to use the name anyway.
When Herbert came to put paper on his ideas about where his son's gifts had come from, he started trying to develop a theory about ‘mongrelization’, or the mixing of racial and cultural traditions, with some countries such as the United States, Australia, Canada and South Africa acting as crucibles or melting pots.
He wrote of a fusing point at which the mixture becomes homogeneous, like an alloy, but thought that ‘some intransigents never fuse — jews, Scots’.
From that, and from the way his notes keep returning to her, it appears that he regarded the Jewish influence, through his mother, as important in his life and John's.
Yet when John eventually went to make a ballet in Israel, there were arguments among people who had dealings with him about whether or not he was a Jew.
Some were convinced one way, others were equally sure of the opposite.
As an adult, John did not follow any religious observances.
He had a large menorah, the traditional Jewish seven-branched candle holder, in his living-room at Stuttgart, but that was a souvenir of his work in Israel.
Equally, he had a peasant cross, made of embroidered material, hanging on the wall of his bedroom there; he had bought that in Bulawayo when there with a visiting company in 1953.
He sometimes claimed Jewish blood, sometimes denied it, and there is evidence that feelings about how Jews had been treated under the Nazi regime troubled him after he had settled in Germany.
However, in early days he seems to have led a sunny existence.
As a small boy, he did the usual things that boys do.
His mother tells an anecdote about his wanting to join the Cubs, the junior branch of Boy Scout movement, when he was only four or five: much below the permitted age, but he was so insistent that the Cubmaster let him in.
The Governor-General, the Earl of Clarendon, went to Rustenburg and reviewed the Scouts at a garden party.
Overcome by the regalia worn by this very tall man, John went up to the august personage, slipped a small hand into one of his, and asked ‘are you the king?’
Lifting him up, the Earl replied ‘No, son, but I am the next best thing.’
Rustenburg when John was a boy was a small town, or large village, in an area inhabited by many races.
Herbert Cranko enumerated them.
He had gone there expecting ‘to suffer the tedium of a few years living in the backveld, in order to make some very necessary repairs to the fortunes of myself and my small family’ but found that ‘against all expectations I had wandered into a bewilderingly interesting, exciting and varied World’.
The district covered by his law practice ranged ‘from the middle veld north of the Magaliesberg Mountains to the bank of the Crocodile River bordering Bechuanaland’.
The oldest inhabitants were black, though they were not one people but quite a variety.
Many of Herbert's clients were Africans.
Then there were Coloured people of mixed racial descent, and the whites, also ‘of many different origins and races, and also bitterly divided’.
They included the Boers,
highly individualistic, unwilling to accept any authority and already out of touch with Europe, save for their devout and passionate adherence to the Bible (Old Testament) as the sole instructor and guide in all matters.
But even in their religion they could not keep together…
In my village there had been historic upheaval over such questions as whether it was right that hymns should be sung in the House of God.
Some considered that the Psalms, as part of the Holy Book, were fitting, but hymns the work of mortals…a strong faction condemned their performance in church as blasphemy.
Other settlers included ‘stray Italians, Greeks and other Europeans, Syrians and many odd mixtures…escaping from tyranny or crime, or just on the look-out for adventure or fortune’ and, more recent arrivals, many English ex-servicemen, ‘particularly of the officer type, unemployed, with reasonably substantial cash bonuses and other means.
They had discovered the possibilities of cotton growing in the district’ and they puzzled their Boer neighbours by their zest for games (cricket, golf, polo) and for such strange, unnecessary luxuries as electricity or water plumbing in their homes, or even wrought iron gates instead of the traditional wire strands which had to be laboriously fastened with primitive devices.
The development, of platinum, chrome manganese and iron ore mines had brought new white technicians and black workers, and there were Indian and Jewish communities, engaged largely in commerce, who kept themselves to themselves.
The ox remained the chief means of transport, Rustenburg had been built
in a beautiful valley where a kloof gave abundant water.
This was led through the streets in furrows so that each burger could have his turn at the stream to irrigate his garden, with its vegetables and flowers.
The houses were built of home-made brick, whitewashed, and roofed with ugly imported galvanized iron or occasionally with the smooth thatch of the native craftsman.
They were high, cool and comfortable, and surrounded by spacious stoops.
In the middle veld, the climate is hot to discomfort in summer, with warm, pleasant winters, and much of the life of the family was spent on these stoops.
This was where John passed his early years, absorbed in a largely outdoor life.
Even such dancing as he saw there was out of doors and quite different from what was later to occupy him.
He said that, travelling with his father to the kraals, he had the chance to watch the religious dances of the black tribes; Grace thinks it was later, after the family had left Rustenburg, that John first saw the dancing at the Johannesburg mines.
Either way, in later life he looked back on that experience as evidence that dancing could be part of everyday life in a way that it is not for most Europeans.
But for the time being, dancing meant little to him.
If his parents had not separated, and if they had remained living in Rustenburg (two big ifs, not necessarily related), it is likely that we should never have heard of John Cranko.
In fact, the family moved to Johannesburg in 1935, when John was about seven or eight.
Herbert, deciding that he had had enough of provincial life, set up in partnership again with brother James.
By then, his marriage was under strain, but in any event the family's way of life would have been greatly changed in this new environment.
By international standards, Johannesburg is not a great city — about the same size as Stuttgart, in fact — but it has to be remembered that South Africa is a large country, almost half a million square miles in area, with a population that even today is only about 16 million.
The Transvaal is the most northerly and the most populous of its four states, with the capital, Pretoria, and main business centre, Johannesburg, its only towns of any note.
Johannesburg, at that time, was expanding and gaining many new buildings.
Not only were the surroundings very different from Rustenburg, but the climate, too, in spite of being not many miles removed; its elevation caused bitterly cold winters in contrast to the hot summers.
Being a prosperous town, thanks to the surrounding mines, with an ambitious but isolated population (inclined to snobbishness — and, incidentally, to anti-Semitism), social and artistic life was active, and one effect of moving there was that Herbert had the chance to indulge his interest in amateur dramatics.
Herbert did not actually perform, but he produced shows (John specifically mentioned revues) and was quite knowledgeable about the theatre.
He became chairman of the repertory club, and his business sense helped set it on its feet.
John, as a child, loved dressing up; he and his friends played with old clothes kept in a big trunk, and his cousin Petrie writes that the costumes of his father's club gave him opportunities to indulge in this game.
Already, even before the move, Herbert was ‘going his own way’, and there had been a period of separation the previous year when Grace took the children to stay in Cape Town for six months or more.
While they were there, Peggy (who had been at a boarding school in Pretoria) was able to resume her ballet classes.
She studied with Helen Webb, a noted teacher, and later with Madge Mann in Johannesburg, but she never danced professionally.
Grace describes John going to watch her class, and how he sat entranced.
She also has a story of how he disappeared during the dress rehearsal of a performance by Miss Webb's pupils, to be found later ‘in the wings, sitting perched on a pedestal, in a dream world of his own’.
There was a strong influence from his parents pushing John towards an interest in ballet.
From an early age, his mother and father showed him the illustrated books on the subject which they had brought back from London, and described at length the wonders of the ballets they had seen danced there by the Diaghilev company, ‘when they were young and in love’, as John put it later.
They used to talk to him endlessly about it, he said, so he grew up hearing about ‘this enchanted world’ which became for him rather like fairy stories for other people.
He suggested that one reason his parents had talked so much about it was that ‘they really were like oil and water, and the only thing they really agreed about was the ballet.
Sometimes I think I grew interested in it because it was the only common ground we had.’
But it was to be some time before he began putting his interest to any practical application.
After a short time in Johannesburg, Grace and Herbert started living apart.
She took a flat with the children, but then Herbert bought a house for them to live in.
After about a year, however, for some reason he sold the house again.
At that time Grace sent John, aged nine, to a boarding school, St John's College.
She writes that it was ‘one of the best, but it did not suit John, as he was accustomed to follow his whims, and invent or discover for himself, and therefore did not like the regimentation of doing things at a given time.
He had no time for school sports and would rather interest himself in planning and building a village on the school grounds.’
His unhappiness should not have been any great surprise, as St John's was known as a high Anglican school, elitist and exclusive.
Things grew to the point that he ran away and, not having the bus fare, walked the five or six miles home.
On being taken back, he ran away again a few days later and this time was not forced to return, nor permitted to do so.
The headmaster thought him a prime example of naughtiness, but Herbert responded that if the staff were doing their job properly, little boys would not want to run away.
Nowadays, that sort of conduct could lead to a social worker's being asked to take an interest in the child.
It is easy to imagine the conclusion that would be drawn: that the broken home had caused the child to become emotionally disturbed.
There might indeed be truth in that assessment, but it would be far from the whole truth.
The absence of a conventional, stable home ultimately had a beneficial effect on John in two important respects.
It encouraged him towards early independence and self-sufficiency without which he would not have got his career off to so quick a start; and it must have contributed to the ease with which, to further that career, he uprooted himself first from South Africa and later from his adopted second homeland in Britain.
Doubtless he paid a price for that, too, in the misery that darkened his later life, but if he had not felt that misery he could never have created the works he did.
Actually, John nearly went to England much sooner than turned out to be the case.
After he had been withdrawn or expelled from St John's College, Grace sent him to the local government school, Highlands North.
However, in 1937 Herbert had the idea of sending John to Summerhill, a school in Suffolk which had been founded by A. S. Neill, a teacher famous (at that time many would have said notorious) for his views on freedom in education.
Neill had just visited Johannesburg as part of a lecture tour in South Africa.
So that John would not be alone in England, Herbert suggested that Grace should take him there, her daughter Peg also accompanying them.
Grace agreed, with the proviso that she and Herbert should make their break permanent.
A divorce was therefore sought and granted on grounds of incompatibility; Grace initially had custody of John.
But by the time the decree came through, Herbert had discovered that no place was available at Summerhill.
Neill's system of education would have suited John.
One of his principles was that children should not be forced to attend lessons unless they wanted to do so.
With Herbert's support, John seems to have applied that principle to his own education, even in an ordinary school.
Hanns Ebensten, who met John when he was about fourteen and quickly became his best friend, first heard of him from one of John's fellow pupils, Inge May, who with her mother was a lodger at the Ebensten home (they were all German refugees).
Inge told fascinating stories about this boy
who refused to wear the stuffy school uniform but came to classes in a grubby khaki shirt and shorts, would not sit properly on his chair but cross-legged on it, yawned during lessons and often stayed away from school altogether.
When the headmaster telephoned the boy's father, he was told by that unusually permissive parent that, if the teachers could not hold his son's attention, it was better for the boy to educate himself at home.
John showed high intelligence in the subjects that interested him, such as geography, history and music, but would not bother with anything that bored him.
Highlands North was really rather a good school for him: a new state high school set up by what was a remarkably progressive Transvaal Education Department.
It was the first co-educational school of its type, breaking a barrier of sexual segregation as rigid as that of the English ‘public’(i.e. non-state) schools.
St John Nitch was a good and popular headmaster, who inspired his staff and had the same courtesy for everybody.
The staff were young, enthusiastic and of high quality — many of them went on to high positions.
The school was well equipped, too: the geography room, for instance, more like a laboratory than a traditional teaching cell.
Also, the pupils were of high quality.
The catchment area was a growing, upper-middle-class suburb of Johannesburg which attracted a large number of refugees from Hitler's Europe.
John's contemporaries among his fellow pupils were cosmopolitan European as much as South African, with a background of culture which perhaps only Johannesburg, in those special circumstances, could then provide in South Africa.
As often happens, being a group of good intelligences together, they spurred each other on, and John easily held his own among them.
He was enlisted into the running team, too, when an excellent runner was unavailable to compete on Saturdays, and to his own surprise did well.
By now, John had developed several artistic interests which competed with school subjects for his time and attention.
While he was still a child, the family's black servants had taught him to make clay models of animals, using thorns for their horns, and how to paint on stones using natural colours.
There is some divergence of evidence about how far his relationships with black people affected him.
In later life, John put some emphasis upon South African treatment of the black population as an important reason for his leaving that country and refusing ever to return.
It is probable that in retrospect he gave that factor more weight than it carried at the time.
But he gave an account of having grown up being looked after by black servants because both his parents worked, and he claimed that, after they had separated, a black housekeeper named Evelyn became almost a mother-figure to him.
His mother insists that John spent much of the time at the house of his aunt Kay (wife of Grace's brother Errol, then a prisoner-of-war), or in the company of her children, who came to use the swimming pool attached to the flats where Herbert and John lived, so that John was never left to the care of black servants.
But John's remarks are quite specific.
As he told the story, probably with some exaggeration, Evelyn is supposed quite often to have gone out, perhaps only as far as his aunt's house nearby to borrow some sugar, and to have failed to return.
Then, John said, he would know that she had been arrested because she had forgotten her pass, which all blacks had to carry, and would automatically telephone his father to go and fetch her from prison.
John also described an incident when he was about ten or eleven which seems to have had a traumatic effect on him, the horror of which, bottled up for many years, can be felt in ballets which he made long afterwards.
He had gone to stay during the school holidays with the children of a farmer who was one of his father's clients.
One night he heard a loud noise in the yard, looked out and saw a black person apparently being whipped — as he thought, to death.
He possibly over-estimated the severity of the treatment, but what he saw horrified him.
The next day he rang and begged his father to fetch him home, but without explaining why.
Herbert said no, you must stay there, they are nice people.
No, John insisted, I must come home, and home he went, but never told his father about the experience.
His mother says that he talked to her about it and she tried to convince him that he was misinterpreting what he had seen and heard, but as far as I can learn John never mentioned it to anyone else until late in life, when telling Dr Schäfer about the thoughts which led him to make his ballet Spuren .
Such an episode would affect any sensitive child, all the more one who had mixed happily with black people and, as already mentioned, received his first lessons in handicrafts from them.
John acquired many other manual skills.
He learned to knit clothes for himself and others, and on the wall of his Stuttgart home there hung a big, beautifully designed and stitched carpet which he made in 1952 while recovering from an illness.
From quite an early age, his mother told me, John's interest in theatrical things, and specifically in ballet, manifested itself in setting up cardboard boxes as stages, with pipe cleaners for dancers.
At one point, John decided that he wanted to learn about music, although in fact he newer acquired much technical knowledge of the subject, and could not read a score.
Grace, who played the piano herself, writes,
I could see that he would not enter that field by long hours of practice, as he had an impulsive nature.
At that time in Johannesburg an exceptionally artistic conductor of the Colosseum Theatre, named Charles Manning, interested me greatly.
His hand movements were a perfect poem of grace and expression.
I asked him if he would teach John music, and explained the difficulty, as John wanted to know too soon and would not have the patience to practise.
He fortunately knew exactly what was wanted and would talk to John for hours on end, about the making of music, history, composers etc., to such good effect that, when John wanted to put music to ballet, he knew exactly what he wanted.
Petrie Cranko adds that, even if Grace had prepared the way, ‘Herbert told John, who was quite young, to telephone Manning and make the arrangements himself’ for the lessons.
John also travelled into town alone by bus for the lessons; Herbert made him very independent.
Petrie's recollection of Charles Manning is less rosy than Grace's: ‘He had long white hair, was billed as the Svengali of Music, and pranced around, stooping and conducting with hair and fingers dangling as he gesticulated comically and did a little dance on the podium’.
Manning and his orchestra used to rise from the pit of the Colosseum, playing Chabrier's España : his concerts brought the popular classics to a large audience.
John also began building up a collection of gramophone records; Herbert gave him pocket money to buy one a week.
He first acquired a great deal of Gilbert and Sullivan, because his father was keen on the Savoy operas, but eventually John turned to ballet music because of the tales his parents had told him about the Diaghilev Ballet.
One of the first pieces of music he bought then was Stravinsky's Firebird .
Playing records like that and Scheherazade , another early purchase, John tried to imagine what.could be happening in the ballet.
In an interview shortly before his death, he said, ‘I think it was these imaginings and wonderings to music — that sort of fantasizing to music — that started me off to wish to be a choreographer.’
But before choreography, he developed another passion, for puppets.
John took up with puppets by about the age of twelve.
His interest in them, foreshadowed by the pipe-cleaner dancers on their cardboard stages, was provoked by the gift of a puppet theatre from a friend of his father's.
As John's enthusiasm grew, so did his productions, soon outgrowing the original theatre, which he rebuilt and enlarged.
It was this that brought about John's separation from his mother.
Grace, as I mentioned, at first had custody of John but, as she wrote, she had always been very proud and independent and refused maintenance.
She was working but had only a small salary and ‘soon found that it would be impossible to care for John's upbringing satisfactorily.
I therefore approached Herbert for an allowance for John which he refused.’
The outcome was that John moved in with his father, who was now living in a pleasant flat at Houghton Heights, Johannesburg.
His mother writes that ‘it was just a comfortable flat with no frills’, but Hanns Ebensten says that ‘it was one of the most prestigious block of flats in Johannesburg at that time’.
It was intended that John would spend six months at a time with each of his parents, but when Grace was due to have him back, Herbert took her into John's room, which was the larger of the two bedrooms in the flat.
There, to her amazement, was a huge structure built in the form of a stage.
Herbert asked whether Grace could provide similarly for John to develop his ideas and she, ‘absolutely flummoxed’, replied of course not.
John's skill in puppetry was greatly advanced by help and encouragement from John Wright and his wife Zoë, professional puppeteers from Cape Town.
When a tour brought them to Johannesburg, Herbert took John to a performance and afterwards asked whether they could be shown how everything worked.
John was then no more than fourteen, perhaps younger, but John Wright says that his interest in ballet and in puppets was already apparent.
Herbert invited the Wrights to a meal and they became friends.
After that, Herbert sent John to Cape Town to stay with the Wrights during school holidays, and he started to learn to carve puppets properly.
John Wright remarked to me that he met some strange friends through John who, while still a teenager, was obviously finding friends of a congenial bohemianism akin to his own.
But John Cranko profited most from his meeting with the Wrights, because John Wright acted as stage director for the Cape Town Ballet Club and was consequently much involved with the whole ballet world at the Cape, into which John eventually gravitated after his puppet phase.
John carved his puppets himself from wood, sewed the dresses for them, wrote verses to accompany the shows and (with his aunt Kay as assistant) manipulated the strings to give performances for his friends and relations.
Hanns Ebensten describes the puppets as ‘marionettes, on strings, about fourteen inches high.
They were delightful, with carved heads and limbs of dowel sticks, very cleverly dressed and bejewelled.’
John told Myfanwy Piper, after he came to England, that the successes of his puppet repertory had been a version of The Little Mermaid , performed to Ravel's Introduction and Allegro for harp, strings and wind; a dance for three ballet girls on one string to music from The Nutcracker ; and a series of adventures for two invented characters, a small boy named Pee Wee and his aunt, Anunziata.
Hanns, who became John's collaborator on the puppets once they had met, mentions also A Midsummer Night's Dream , some fairy tales and an oriental play by Daniel Varé, which they presented to schools and at fêtes for various charities.
Hanns, when he joined in, ‘did all the décor for the performances and designed costumes, handled the light and sound (and fire!) effects’ and thus presaged their cooperation on John's first ballets.
Herbert's magnanimity in making do with the smaller bedroom, so that John might have plenty of room for the puppets, made Hanns envious; the more so, as he had to sleep on a couch in the dining-room of his parents' boarding-house.
A further example of Herbert's tolerant disposition came when John found, as he grew up, that his sexual interests were exclusively homosexual.
When his mother found out about this (which was not until much later), it was a cause of great heartbreak to her.
But Herbert, for all his bourgeois, very respectable Victorian background and his own tendency to womanizing, made no attempt to dissuade his son.
Instead, he told him he must live his life his own way, and advised John, when he spoke of having fallen in love with a ‘straight’ boy at school, to try to save his love for someone who could return it.
Herbert may have been the less surprised since Robin says that one of Belle's brothers was homosexual, and so was one of Herbert's brothers although, in his case, married and the father of three children.
John, however, had no sexual dealings with women (although he always, from schooldays on, had close female friends); Hanns told me that John never had any doubt about where his inclinations lay.
Another example of Herbert's attitude is that, although he advised John to go into business rather than art, he raised no objection when John insisted on becoming a dancer, and in fact helped him.
Whatever John's mother may have thought about his likely lack of application when he wanted to study music, once he decided to learn ballet he took it seriously and must have worked hard to make up for a late start.
He often said that he never really wanted to be a dancer, and his only purpose was to acquire the knowledge of dancing necessary to become a choreographer.
Certainly he never became an outstanding dancer, but as a performer he did have a feeling for movement and character that enabled him to make a theatrical impact in some roles not needing much technique or classical style.
More important for his choreography, he had an eye for what other dancers could achieve.
Grace had tried to persuade John long before to go to ballet classes, because she thought him small for his age and hoped the exercise might encourage growth, but he refused, saying ‘Oh no, mummy, the boys will call me a sissy.’
When he was about thirteen or fourteen he decided he would like to take classes provided that he could go to private lessons.
Grace writes that he studied first with a teacher he had met named Nina Runich (an Austrian married to a Russian); she used the stage name Nina Pavlochieva.
Once John had made a start, he went to study with Marjorie Sturman, one of the leading ballet teachers in Johannesburg.
All his early interests in music and the theatre, even his puppets (if manipulating them is thought of as a kind of preparation for choreography) came together in this new activity.
Ballet was not well established in South Africa at that time.
There has been hardly any interest until Anna Pavlova took her company at the end of December 1925 — less than two years before John's birth — for seasons at the Opera House, Cape Town, and afterwards at the Standard Theatre, Johannesburg.
It was the first time professional ballet was seen in South Africa, and the performances caused much excitement.
As happened on Pavlova's tours all over the world, many little girls were fired with the wish to dance, and many mothers encouraged their daughters in that ambition.
Some dancing schools already existed in South Africa, and others soon opened to meet the demand.
Among the pioneers teaching before Pavlova's arrival, the most important was Helen Webb (whose father was famous as the first man to swim the English Channel).
She was the teacher with whom John's half-sister had studied in Cape Town.
Miss Webb arrived in South Africa in 1912, intending to start a school in Johannesburg, but was captivated by Cape Town and settled there instead.
Her activities were at first regarded with suspicion by headmistresses of local schools, so, to placate those who did not outright forbid their pupils to attend, she described her lessons as rhythmic exercises to music.
However, she was successful enough to be able to present annual displays by her pupils from 1916 and to show them in other towns, too, from 1923.
Among those pupils were the two women who were chiefly to pioneer ballet in South Africa.
Dulcie Howes was the first of them.
She has recorded how Miss Webb's classes were initially ‘a matter of party frocks and sashes, tambourine dances with decorum.
Later she began to weave the dances of her young pupils into ballet form and gradually accustomed the audiences in South Africa first to accept, and then to appreciate, the combination of music and dance in its more sophisticated form.’
Even so, it was natural that Dulcie Howes, having shown talent, should travel to London to extend her studies.
She danced for a time in Pavlova's company, and returned home in 1928 with the ambition of developing ballet in her native land.
She began to teach, opened her own school in Cape Town in 1931, and soon began presenting her pupils in occasional public performances, with members of the staff taking the solo parts.
In 1934, on the recommendation of Professor Bell, Dean of the Faculty of Music at the University of Cape Town, her school was given a studio in the College of Music and she was taken on the staff of the Faculty of Music.
(Helen Webb had taught at the college earlier, but not since its incorporation into the university.)
Thus began what developed into a full Department of Ballet at the university, offering, from 1941, a three-year certificate course for which pupils were required to attend lectures, read widely and study music appreciation as well as their dance classes.
It was one of the earliest examples anywhere of a ballet faculty attached to a university, and that affiliation meant that students of white and non-white races could be accepted together.
While Dulcie Howes was active at the college, another of Miss Webb's pupils went to Europe: Cecily Robinson, who danced with Ballet Rambert in London, in the opera season at Covent Garden, with Woizikowsky's company and de Basil's Ballet Russe.
While appearing with them in Berlin in 1937 she tore a ligament and had to give up further hope of dancing.
During her short career she ambitiously taught herself the principal and solo roles as well as the corps de ballet parts of the various ballets by careful attention during rehearsal and performance, and by assiduously watching even the works in which she did not appear (such as Le Spectre de la Rose ).
On returning to Cape Town in 1938 she could remember many of the standard ballets.
Wanting to use that knowledge to help form a permanent company, she persuaded several dance teachers to cooperate in letting their best pupils learn Les Sylphides .
The management of the large Alhambra Theatre agreed to put this on for a week as a curtain-raiser to a horror film starring Boris Karloff.
It was given without scenery, and the music was played on the Wurlitzer theatre organ.
A male dancer volunteered for the partnering but it was thought tactful to omit his solo.
Audience reaction was mixed.
That venture was rapidly followed by the founding of the Cape I own Ballet Club in August 1938.
Its first ‘season’(two successive Saturday nights at City Hall) added to Les Sylphides another of Fokine's ballets,Carnaval , again staged by Cecily Robinson.
For the second season, in July 1939, several specially created works were given, with choreography by various dancers and teachers.
Among them was Danse macabre , staged to music of Saint-Saëns by a young dancer, Alfred Rodrigues, who was to make his career, like Cranko, mainly as a choreographer in Europe.
Thus Cape Town acquired two ballet companies that were professional in their attitudes, if not their finances, with high ideals and the best standards practicable at the time.
They had no competition from overseas: only two companies followed Pavlova's example and visited Cape Town, one established by her former impresario Alexandre Levitoff in 1934, and René Blum's Ballets de Monte-Carlo in 1936 (this latter particularly stimulated local enthusiasm).
But standards of teaching were good; just how good is shown by the large number of South African dancers who won leading positions in British companies before and after the 1939 war.
Naturally, it was mainly the best dancers who went abroad to work.
That caused a shortage, especially of male dancers, which was worsened when others were called up for military service during the war.
Some male roles had to be played by women; for instance, Pamela Chrimes was the original Pierrot in Dulcie Howes's ballet St Valentine's Night , and Delysia Jacobs danced the title part in a production of Le Spectre de la Rose .
Actors took some mimed roles, and any available male recruit was eagerly seized upon to dance with both companies, the University Ballet and the Ballet Club.
Cooperation between the two organizations was close.
David Poole, who came into ballet in Cape Town a few months before John Cranko in 1944, described his beginnings: how he saw his first ballet performance on a Saturday night at City Hall, spoke to friends there of his desire to dance, and on the Sunday was told by them that they had arranged with Dulcie Howes for him to attend classes at the University Ballet School.
‘By the Monday evening I was doing classes with Cecily Robinson…
In that first week, Dulcie was planning a programme of ballets with the school, and I was immediately cast as Kostchei — almost entirely a mime role — in her own version of The Firebird , called Russian Tale .
This only illustrates how very scarce male dancers were at the time.’
So it is hardly surprising that John Cranko, already a ballet pupil, although of very limited experience, was able to make himself useful when the two Cape Town companies had seasons in Johannesburg towards the end of 1943.
The University of Cape Town Ballet had been there before, in 1941 and 1942, building up local support to the extent that on their third visit, in September 1943, all six performances in the Great Hall at Milner Park (the theatre belonging to Witwatersrand University) were sold out before the opening night.
John hung around the theatre and lent a hand in any way he could.
Dulcie Howes first met him backstage at one of the performances, given in aid of a war charity.
‘I was aware of the presence of a stranger and asked the stage manager to ‘see him off.
The stage manager told me of John's background and interest in theatre and that he ‘was making himself useful’.
During the war years we were very short of backstage staff, so John was allowed to continue.
He said that he had been allowed to go on stage as an attendant to a goddess in Howes's Pastoral , a ballet to Beethoven's Sixth Symphony.
That was presumably his stage debut, because although his teacher Marjorie Sturman started the Johannesburg Festival Ballet Society about that time, it did not give its first public performance until the following year, when he was already in Cape Town and unable to get away.
Among the cast of Pastoral was Pamela Chrimes, who was to be important in John's early career.
It was clear to John that the opportunities in ballet, both for training and performance, were far better in Cape Town than in Johannesburg.
But to move there would involve a drastic break with his home.
The journey of almost a thousand miles took more than two nights and a day by steam train, along track of narrower gauge than is usual elsewhere, and therefore with slower speeds.
The terrain was so difficult that for part of the journey three locomotives were needed to pull one train.
You left one afternoon and arrived on the morning of the third day.
The intermediate day was spent travelling across the Karo, a desert landscape, hot and dusty, and the trains did not have the benefit of air conditioning.
Herbert Cranko asked to see Dulcie Howes and discussed John's training with her.
She writes that he was not keen
to allow his adored sixteen-year-old son to live alone in Cape Town, so I offered to take John into my home…
He started his training at the University of Cape Town Ballet School in August 1944.
Recognizing his potential ability — not as a dancer, but someone with a great deal to offer to theatre — I obtained permission from the Senate and the Dean of the Faculty of Music (of which the ballet school was a part) for John to be a registered student on the three-year Ballet Certificate course.
This gave him the opportunity to study Ballet, Pas de Deux, Repertoire, History of Ballet, Stagecraft and Lighting, and Ballet Music.
John made full use of all the tuition provided.
Another advantage of being enrolled in the University Ballet School was that his tuition was free.
John described it to many interviewers as if the free lessons were a concession in return for taking part in performances, but it would be more realistic to regard the performances by the University of Cape Town Ballet as a valuable part of his ballet education.
Before joining the Cape Town school, John had seen performances by the Cape Town Ballet Club, which paid its first visit to Johannesburg for a week at the Empire Theatre from 6 December 1943.
It had only one skilled male dancer on its strength, Lionel Luyt, and in the first of their two programmes he had to partner the ballerina in the second act of Swan Lake , then dance both the Prince and Bluebird in Aurora's Wedding (with just three minutes to change costumes) and finally lead the cast of Prince Igor .
Cecily Robinson brought her three leading dancers, Patricia Murphy, Lillian Graham and Luyt, to Johannesburg four days early, so that they could become used to the high altitude, which would affect their breathing, and to the steep rake of the stage.
They stayed at the Carlton Hotel, the best in town, and Cecily Robinson was astonished by her first sight of John, who arrived for dinner with a leg-warmer he was knitting, much to the amusement of all the other diners.
During this season in Johannesburg, John unexpectedly had the chance for the first time to dance a real role in public.
That came about because one of the dancers had fallen ill just before they all set out from Cape Town.
There was nobody else available to take his place in the Chinese dance in Aurora's Wedding , and John cajoled his way into being allowed to dance it at three performances.
The dance is a comic interlude, quite short and making no great demands on technique.
The music is actually from The Nutcracker and was first put into Aurora's Wedding in the Diaghilev Ballet's production.
In this version, the man carried a parasol, and the most memorable sequence is when, brandishing it in front of him like a cross between a broom and a weapon, he opens and shuts it in time with the steps.
A sense of comic character and timing are the main requirements, and John carried it off successfully.
Hanns and another friend, Anne Sproat, made a costume for him out of dyed calico, on which Hanns painted huge chrysanthemums.
In later years, when explaining how he got to Cape Town, John always mentioned having appeared in one or two small parts when the ballet from the Cape came to Johannesburg.
He seemed to think that his success played some part in the invitation to go there to study, but Dulcie Howes's account, already quoted, of her discussions with Herbert Cranko does not bear that out, and anyway people connected with the Ballet Club had forgotten all about John's having danced with them so early, and denied Hanns's account of it until Lionel Luyt, going through old scrapbooks, found a slip in the programme announcing the change of cast.
John was not always a reliable source of information about his own past: he combined a poor memory for dates with an imaginative flair for making the best of any story.
The Ballet Club paid a second visit to Johannesburg in July 1944, and John wrote to Hanns, exclaiming jubilantly that ‘We arranged for me to have meals at the Carlton, so I have been dining in style this week!’
He was by then on friendly terms with several of the dancers, and had made a pact with Jasmine Honoré ‘that we are now brother and sister’.
Lionel Luyt told me that John quickly tagged on to him when they met during those Johannesburg seasons, and was eager for discussions which went on, after performances, into the small hours.
Luyt met Herbert, whom he remembered as more like a friend than a father to John.
He was shown the puppets too, and the performance cannot have gone entirely without excitement, because he mentioned to me explosions backstage and things falling down.
John's letter to Hanns about the second Ballet Club visit, just before he himself left for Cape Town, ends with the remark ‘You will soon be back to gossip and see my new nose!’
Cosmetic surgery was rare in those days, but John had needed an operation on his nose because he suffered from a condition (apparently a deviated septum) which hampered his breathing.
That would be a severe handicap for a dancer, and while he was having it corrected he asked for his nose to be straightened too.
Unfortunately the result was disappointing and years later, in about 1955, he took the trouble to have a second operation to improve its appearance.
Even after that, few people noticed the difference, and his mother confirms that both operations on his nose were a great disappointment to him.
His face was never conventionally good-looking.
It was still dominated by the long nose and wide mouth, also by eyes of an intense pale blue, which always seemed to focus sharply and penetratingly on whoever he was talking to.
The strength of the individual features set in a long thin face gave him a striking and attractive appearance.
Other people found his looks so engaging that it is sad to think that he was deeply conscious of noses, especially when he was worried about Jewishness.
At one time when he had been going out a lot with a Jewish couple he wrote to Hanns ‘I have become a regular ghetto-yid’, going now to a stately home ‘to ride their circumcised horses, now to a vile villa of Bellevue to hear real kosher recordings of Beethoven which none of them liked or understood, though they pretended they did, and now to a café which is inhabited solely by people who look like Schnozzle Durante.’
Characteristically, after this burst of bitter humour he added that ‘it was quite nice’ even though he found his host ‘about as intelligent as a mule and as human as a boa-constrictor’.
The prime purpose of John's nasal operation was remedial, now that he knew he wanted to make his career in ballet.
He had to be able to perform even though already ‘at this young age he had a realistic approach to his future and with his ‘banana feet’ realized that he could not become a danseur noble and that his great interest was in choreography.
He was persuaded that the only entry to this was to join a company as a dancer.’
Dulcie Howes, who wrote that comment to me, had told the Cape Town critic Denis Hatfield at the time that John would never really be a dancer but that he had ‘such a remarkable eye for balletic pattern, an imagination so vivid, and such an ear for music in relation to movement’ that she was certain he would make a choreographer.
Herbert had at first been reluctant to believe that it was better for John to study dance in Cape Town than to return to high school in Johannesburg.
According to Robin Cranko, he consulted John's headmaster, St John Nitch, and the advice he received was that John would not be suited to a rigid academic life, or work in an office or commerce.
So, just before his seventeenth birthday, a thin, gangly boy, but (as Lionel Luyt remarked) completely unselfconscious, with a nose still red from his operation, John Cranko began to work full-time at ballet.
CAPE OF GOOD HOPE
‘I DON'T have much time for visiting, parties, etc., just work damn hard and collapse at home’, John wrote in August 1944 to Hanns Ebensten, back in Johannesburg.
Even so, he managed to spend a Sunday sailing in a friend's boat, had met a potter who was throwing a dinner service for him (‘will you phone my father and ask him if he wants a coffee set as well ?’) and had found ‘some beautiful corduroys.
I have bought some dark blue-black ones — complete heaven and I adore them.’
In the circles where he was now moving, a mixture of the artistic and homosexual worlds, corduroy was the smart thing: working-men's clothes adopted as a badge of nonconformity and made fashionable, just as happened years later with blue jeans.
However hard he was working, John was happy in his work:
Now that I am here in Cape Town, I realize more than ever how vitally necessary it is to study down here.
Every moment I am conscious of those little differences which, although appearing minute to the layman, to the dancer constitute the difference between the amateur and that je ne sais quoi which makes him professional.
Here the ballet is a vital living thing — the classrooms are where the pigments for the choreographer's art are made, whereas in Johannesburg — oh shit!
That weekend found him in a sunny mood.
Dulcie Howes was in hospital with appendicitis, so he had gone to stay again with his puppeteer friends, John and Zoë Wright.
Clearly he found the familiar atmosphere in their house, Glamorgan, more congenial than staying with his director.
He wrote that Cape Town was so very beautiful.
There are three pines outside the house which spring tall, slender and black out of the watery green grass and are silhouetted against an angry battleship grey sky…
Glamorgan is way up on Devil's Peak, and the sight of misty blue clouds hovering over its rocky peaks, so low that you feel that you could touch them, is so awe-inspiring that one feels all it needs is God's voice thundering from the sky to make you fall flat on your face and worship.
Then there is the sea, the cold grey ever-moving winter sea — but you must see it for yourself!!!
Already he was beginning to get roles in the ballets by Dulcie Howes which were being rehearsed.
He had previously written listing them: ‘Pierrot in a wishy washy thing called St Valentine's Eve a man in Our Lady's Mercy , a grasshopper in Carnaval des Animaux and a man in some Russian thing.’
Hanns must have replied teasing him about them, because he now wrote indignantly, ‘My parts are definitely not all ‘A Man’— one (Pierrot) is a lead , the fisherman is a big part and so is the Russian; the other (the owl, not the grasshopper) is not so good.’
The fisherman (not mentioned in John's earlier list) was in a ballet called I Pescatori .
The Russian ballet was Pliaska , a ballet to music by Liadov about the romps and romance in a Russian village; the gaiety of his dancing that impressed one local critic, Dennis Hatfield.
Even more exhilarating was the fact that already his ambitions as a choreographer were making progress: ‘I have been in such a state lately!
There has been a possibility of my doing the Soldier's Tale here in December, but it is still very much en l'air , as we balletists would put it — so don't get excited yet .’
This was just five days after his seventeenth birthday, and in the first weeks of his first term in Cape Town, so there was cause for excitement.
The letter ends with gossip about rehearsals for the opera season in Cape Town (‘It really is pathetic’) and about people with whom he had dinner and drinks.
Instead of a signature it finishes ‘here endeth the epistle of the apostle St Cranko.’
Almost every letter he wrote to Hanns has a different affectionate greeting.
The tone of his correspondence varies from self-mockery to flights of fancy, and the handwriting changes almost as much: angular or rounded, neat or sprawling.
Perhaps that is a reflection of his enthusiastic, volatile nature.
The spelling is frequently eccentric, and remained so all his life, although he read widely and voraciously.
In transcribing, I saw no point in keeping his errors, and I have slightly amended his hasty punctuation too, when sentences dragged on clause after clause, separated only by dashes.
But the letters reveal an intelligent and lively young man, full of ideas and able to express them vividly.
They include frequent recommendations of new books he had found, and much comment on painters he had come across.
He was not often as cheerful as the example quoted.
Here is the opposite extreme, three or four weeks later, when he was still struggling hard to become a dancer but already working hard on his first ballet:
In Johannesburg we have a good, good life; stick to it!
I don't know if you realize what hell it is to leave the life one leads, and go to a new city where one knows no-one and nowhere to go.
I don't know if you know what it is to work every day as if your life depended on it, to work until you feel you are going to bust a gut, until you want to cry or howl at yourself because your own body is so stubborn.
And yet in spite of all this work they cry ‘More, John!’,
‘Harder, John!’,
‘John, you're not trying !’ and you look at your feet in the mirror, ugly, unable to do the things which you want them to do, or see your body collapse in the middle when you know that it should be firm and rigid — and see them all, even the children, doing something, following what you cannot follow.
And just when you think it is coming right they cry ‘No John, not like that!’
I have lost confidence in myself.
With every step I take I say ‘See those knees!
See how they turned in they are, you will never make the grade!’
It is all so much work and nothing may come of it.
The task of writing Soldier's Tale looms so large in front of me — I hear voices calling ‘No no you can't cast her !’
‘How many yards of red?’
‘The setting is disgusting,’
‘Will you be able to finish it in time?’
‘Who is this John Cranko anyway?’
‘Work John — twelve hours a day is not good enough!’
It's maddening — like voices in a dream, I can't sleep at night, they taunt me’
‘You're so inexperienced!’
‘Those steps don't fit!’
‘Who is your designer?’ until I want to go away, but I can't because I have to do my job.
As well as this, I have to remember ‘Eat regularly, you cannot dance on an upset stomach.’
‘Keep your back up!’
‘Don't flap your arms!’
‘Keep your hips square!’ until I just think that suicide is the quickest way out.
No, do not change that lovely, almost dreamy life we had in Joh'burg — I haven't been to any real parties since I've been here — had no fun, but even so, I have lost the desire for them.
I am alone here with a task I must carry out!
I am glad that you have had orgies at Jay's — I am jealous, but I cannot hope to play if I want to work.
Go to the ball, go to Henry's party, and laugh at all the queens sitting round (I could almost name them).
But I feel that never can I join you, for I have found that I have left my training so late that it is ‘work or else!’
This all (this morning) seems a highly coloured raving — but I hope it lets you see how dazed and alone I feel just at present.
What I really wrote to tell you is that the Ballet Club Committee says that the Scarlet Woman must be changed — so please do two new designs for me to choose from — and help me!
(Send as soon as possible).
All my very deepest love to you, John
PS After reading this through, I have come to the conclusion that I am a racehorse.
John had conceived the idea of staging The Soldier's Tale even before he left Johannesburg for Cape Town.
Stravinsky had for some years been his favourite composer, and he had worked with Hanns on ideas for the setting and costumes.
The designs were displayed in an exhibition of stage designs held in Johannesburg in June 1944 in connection with the second visit there of the Cape Town Ballet Club, although the ballet was not actually commissioned and produced until later that year.
It was not to be the work as originally written by Ramuz and Stravinsky for musicians, actors and a dancer, but a ballet with a plot of John's own devising to the suite of Stravinsky's music.
Hanns described the plot:
Soldiers, returning wearily from war, reach a village where they are warmly welcomed by maidens, and their leader succumbs to the charms of the Scarlet Woman.
A Devil, mischievous, destructive but lovable, appears and contrives by various ruses, such as that of disguising himself as a beautiful girl, to amuse himself in causing havoc and death among the soldiers and finally, by playing furiously upon his violin, to force the villagers to dance to death.
Only the chief soldier, stopping his ears, is able to escape — to fall exhausted in front of the dropcloth at the end of the ballet.
Before the end of August 1944 John was able to write to Hanns:
As the days go by, the chances of my writing Soldier's Tale seem to get stronger and stronger.
I think therefore it would be advisable to make the necessary adjustments in the costumes and send them to me as soon as possible.
The adjustments are:
1.
The set is perfect — leave it.
2.
The two devil costumes are perfect — leave them.
3.
The scarlet woman is perfect — leave her.
4.
The soldiers must be changed; what about jaunty tricorne, blue chin, military jerkin, one sleeve torn from shoulder, bare arm, one sleeve tattered, belts, striped culottes torn just below knee, hessian leggings, gartering.
Do not forget gun.
5.
The women must be changed — the skirts remain, but a redder red — the bodice must be changed — no cross garterings as men have these — head fine.
6.
The buffoons are cut out.
The notes about the soldiers' costumes are scribbled all round the edge of a sketch showing what he wanted.
Because Hanns was still living and working in Johannesburg, their collaboration had to be conducted largely by correspondence.
So for once the sort of comment John would make face to face with other collaborators is actually recorded.
Note how specific his criticisms are, and how he always, even so young and immature, boosts the designer's confidence by throwing in praise too.
Later in August, John wrote that ‘Pat Murphy is co-producing with me in Soldier's Tale and on Saturday morning we got the march written.
It hideously complicated music and it needs a lot of concentration…
My idea is to get the whole ballet worked out as a mere skeleton, and then embroider it when the cast know it.’
That is the only mention of a ‘co-producer’ and Lionel Luyt suggests that John was probably using Patricia Murphy to work out steps and phrases on her.
One of the leading dancers with the Ballet Club, she is described by Luyt as having a brilliant technique, and he says she ‘was compact and a dream to do double-work with, and was fearless in trying out death-defying lifts’.
The idea that John was trying out his ideas in private first, getting them carefully developed before he actually faced his cast, is confirmed by another letter to Hanns in which he wrote, ‘I have written the first record, and am starting rehearsals for S. T .
tomorrow.’
David Poole, who was to play the leading soldier, told me that ‘I thought sometimes he worked out his ideas for ballets on his puppets, then simply transferred them to people’.
One point to remember, incidentally, is that in those days all recordings were played at 78 rpm, so each side ran only a few minutes.
One who had faith in him from the start was Dulcie Howes.
She wrote to me that
the choreographic ideas poured out of him.
We would sit deep into the night in my sitting-room while he played the music he had chosen and he explained his ideas for its interpretation.
At times my sleepy little daughter was brought down from the nursery and stood on a stool while John draped pieces of material on her and showed me how he wanted the costume move and flow, and so help to illustrate what he wanted to express and convey to an audience.
We argued and discussed — and in the morning he had scrapped that idea and had several others to offer in its place.
All details of the ballet had to be approved by the Club as he went along.
On 9 September he sent Hanns a telegram: ‘Committee says redesign Scarlet Woman’, an instruction repeated in the depressed letter already quoted.
About a week later he explained at more length that the committee had seen all the drawings and liked them with this one exception.
He also quoted John Wright, who was stage director for the Ballet Club, as saying that ‘if the two low side roofs…were omitted, the design would be far pleasanter and less chaotic.
Don't do anything yet, I shall get John to write you a long technical letter.
As to fees — how much do you think?
John suggests £10 — £15 has been allowed me for costumes.’
Later that month (most of his letters are undated bearing just the day of the week, sometimes not even that; luckily Hanns kept them in order and made a note of the month and year): ‘The Scarlet Woman is a joy!
There is, however, one snag, the skirt.
We may have to cut it off, in which case, what about this — drapes across as you had them!
Only short.’
That was illustrated by a sketch, and another drawing on the next page showed the ‘Victorian bobble fringe’ he wanted on the skirt.
By now he was concerned with practical details: ‘You might scout around for mesh stockings!
Can your father get calico dyed that shade of red for us?
If so, I shall get the exact number of yards.’
Rehearsals were complicated by the limited availability of some members of the cast and the limited technique of others.
For the Scarlet Woman he had Pamela Chrimes, who went to London soon afterwards and was a dancer good enough to be engaged before long as a soloist in the new Sadler's Wells Theatre Ballet.
He had cast himself as the Devil, and David Poole (a couple of years older, although also a newcomer to dancing) as the leading soldier.
At that time Poole, like John, had to rely on stage presence more than technique, but he had a powerful personality and a quick intelligent appreciation of character which enabled him to give memorable performances in many of John's early ballets.
The other women in the cast were students, and Poole told me that the other four soldiers were part-time dancers ‘who came in the evenings from their offices’.
Rehearsals were held in the Club's premises at 136 Bree Street, a former gymnasium acquired and converted only a couple of years before.
They had the advantage of providing adequate studio space and being equipped with showers, but other facilities were primitive and the surroundings were not ideal.
Below the studio and adjoining the changing rooms and showers (because the building stood on a slope) was a ‘bottle store’ selling alcoholic drinks, and its customers sometimes cluttered the doorstep.
Another hazard was that bottles sometimes fell off the shelves because of vibration from above.
Adjoining the studio was a funeral parlour with a window opening into the studio, so it was necessary to stop classes and rehearsals whenever a funeral took place.
As well as working on his own his ballet, John had his shaky technique to battle with in daily classes, and there were performances to prepare for.
A review by M.S.P. in the Cape Times (30 September 1944) of the University's Junior Ballet appearing at the Little Theatre remarked on his ‘debut in Cape Town ballet, and a very impressive one too’ as Pierrot in St Valentine's Night.
—‘He is light and deft in movement, and commendably uninhibited as an actor.’
This was the work which, getting its title not quite right, he had described to Hanns as ‘wishy washy’.
In spite of his derogatory comment, it was a successful work by a choreographer much admired in South Africa (Dulcie Howes's ballets were not seen elsewhere).
When Hanns wrote an article for the London magazine Ballet Today about South African achievements, he described it as having ‘all the qualities which a good valentine should possess…the girls flit, skip and drift hither and thither in pairs or threes, giggle coyly and point with gloved hands, while the sentimental, romantic Pierrot searches among them for his true love.
With such charm and grace does he distribute his roses among them that it is easy to forgive him for having — alas!— one rose too few.
This defect is, happily, soon rectified by an exchange of paper hearts.’
The music was by Mottl.
But The Soldier's Tale naturally occupied most of John's energies.
Although John Wright had been due to send Hanns a letter about the technical requirements, it was actually the choreographer who wrote again in late September, suggesting simplification to avoid distracting the eye and adding ‘You must design several feet around the back cloth , otherwise what you have designed will be cut off by the back legs and flies’.
(Dulcie Howes pointed out that he should have written ‘borders’, the theatre term for the cloths which mask the ‘flies’— platforms above the stage — from public view.
The ‘legs’ are the uprights at the side of the stage which similarly conceal the wings.)
Early in October, with the exact date of the premiere not vet set, but intended to be some time between 25 November and 10 December, John wrote again to Hanns: ‘Million sorries for not writing sooner, but I was waiting for (a) Thursday, the official scrutinization of my ballet to see if it definitely would go on, and (b) Friday, the first night of Miss Howes's show.
S.T .
is definitely accepted, and nothing now can stop it.’
He again promised a letter from John Wright, but instead it was he who again wrote at the end of October, ‘You obviously haven't read my letter carefully.’
He provided a sketch showing the exact stage dimensions, then went on with detailed instructions:
1.
Draw all the below carefully to scale .
2.
You must make your entire backcloth 42 feet by 25 feet.
3.
Now the space A, 32 feet by 20 feet, must be your existing design as this is the size of the proscenium opening.
4.
Now you must design an additional five feet all around (shaded portion), this will be seen by persons in the stalls etc., or in the side stalls.
5.
So the whole proportion of this old backcloth must be altered, with five feet more designed all round.
Have you got this clear?
Now:
1.
The rostrum is too high, it must be redesigned with the following:
a.
It is to be four feet high.
b.
There is to be no lower door but —
c.
A few steps so that she can come back up them to the balcony.
d.
The rails and orange tree must change sides.
e.
The top must measure about six feet by four feet…you can please yourself where you put the steps.
2.
The door must be at least six feet high.
3.
The piece of building on the left (with red tiles and a tree) is bad.
What about changing it?
It is not as plastic as the other buildings, if you understand me.
Have you got this clear?
Now: When the soldiers march across in the beginning , do you remember?
We were having them simply marching across the proscenium curtain.
But now we can have one painted .
So design one on the same scale as the backcloth.
It must (a) try to be a little less Spanish (Jasmine's ballet is Spanish) and (b) give the impression that they are coming to the village.
Have you got all this clear?
PLEASE HURRY HURRY HURRY .
On 25 October a telegram followed: ‘Send set at once else Soldier's Tale will be played in black drapes.’
Even for an experienced choreographer, the suspense could have been hair-raising.
Just a month later, on 25 November 1944,The Soldier's Tale was successfully given its premiere by the Ballet Club at the Alhambra, Cape Town.
There were ten further performances over the next eight days.
The programme was a proud occasion for the club, since apart from the opening ballet,Aurora's Wedding , all the works given were by South African choreographers.
Dulcie Howes had created Fête galante , a comedy of manners set to Prokofiev's Classical Symphony; John's playing of the ‘suave and tenebrous major-domo’ in this was praised by Denis Hatfield as a tiny humorous masterpiece.
Jasmine Honoré's Ritual Night was danced to de Falla's Love, the Magician ; the setting was designed by John Wright and the costumes by John Cranko.
Those two works, like Soldier's Tale , were new.
The bill was completed by a revival of Alfred Rodrigues's L'Ile des Sirènes .
John's roles that night included the pas de trois of Florestan and his sisters, the Chinese dance and the cavalier in the pas de six, all in Aurora's Wedding .
John's involvement with the designing of Honoré's Ritual Night was undertaken out of friendship, keeping their earlier pact to regard each other as brother and sister.
Even while he was desperately busy on Soldier's Tale , he made time to help her by offering to design the costumes, writing to Hanns that he had told her ‘you will be here to put finishing touches on to them.
There was no time to ask you to do the designing.
What I have made are very simple frocks from mattress ticking, which leave a lot of scope for you, anyway you will enjoy playing about with them.’
These were not John's only ballet designs; the press announcement of a performance given by the Eoan Group in March 1946 mentioned that the programme would include ‘The Circus , to music by Suppé, costumes by John Cranko and choreography by Pamela Chrimes (two Cape Town dancers as present seeking fame and fortune overseas) and Walpurgis Night to music by Moussorgsky, costumes by John Cranko and choreography by Jasmine Honoré.’
John always remained very concerned about the designing of his own ballets but was never specifically credited with responsibility for their designs, preferring to collaborate with an artist to whom he could explain his ideas and from whom he expected further ideas to enhance the final outcome.
That attitude can be seen in his correspondence with Hanns during the making of The Soldier's Tale .
From the way his instructions became more explicit, it is clear that he was teaching himself stagecraft as he went along, and learning fast.
So far as choreography is concerned, Poole's opinion is that John then had ‘no craft, but invention poured out of him’.
Poole remarked that the choice of Stravinsky music horrified many people (this was long before the composer had been understood or accepted by general audiences) and the score ‘made great difficulty for the cast but none at all for John’.
Obviously John managed to hide the hard work he had put into unravelling the ‘hideous complications’ he found in it.
Among those who were horrified and given great difficulty by the music were the players of the Cape Town Municipal Orchestra.
It was the first time that score had been played in Cape Town, and John Wright told me that the players in rehearsal threw down their instruments in despair.
Before the ballet started, an announcement was made in front of the curtains that what the audience would hear was the composer's full intention, and not the orchestra playing incorrectly.
The Soldier's Tale was almost banned at its second performance.
A man representing the Cape Town Censor Board arrived at the theatre bearing an order to stop it from being given because Chrimes, as the Scarlet Woman, was ‘improperly dressed’.
Her skirt was split to reveal black stockings held up by suspenders.
Dulcie Howes was not allowed to take the curtain up until a ludicrous compromise was reached by removing the stockings and suspenders, revealing the pink tights that were worn beneath them.
Decency was thus rather quaintly preserved by wearing less.
Poole told me that some people were also shocked because John, in his role as the Devil, ‘disguised himself as a girl in point shoes, a tutu and a blonde wig, with his devil's horns showing through’.
He actually danced on point, in spite of his uncertain technique.
A photograph of him as the Devil (not in female disguise) shows him poised on one foot, the other leg bent so that his whole body is tilted eccentrically.
He holds his violin low down, the bow fastidiously poised above it.
His almost bare chest and the high, curved horns he wears accentuate his height and his slender build.
His expression is quizzical.
Obviously Hanns Ebensten was not an unbiased witness, but he wrote the most vivid account of the ballet:
Rightly speaking, this is not the Soldier's tale at all but the Devil's, for it is he who controls everyone at all times, playing with them like pawns in his game, a game of wrecking and destroying, of interference and final triumph.
But we are thrown a hint that his triumph is hardly long-lived, for when he stands, alone, high above the still forms of the dead below, it is not a look of satisfaction that he throws us, but one of puzzlement at his own work.
Patricia Miller, who was to dance in many of John's later ballets, was then a student in Cape Town.
She did not really like The Soldier's Tale (‘I was all into swans and tutus’, she explained) but was impressed by the duet for the soldier and the Scarlet Woman.
Ebensten drew special attention to a ‘dance of lament of the four maidens amongst the dead bodies of the soldiers, who lie forming a great star with their feet as its centre.’
The ballet was popular enough to be given again the following summer.
Pamela Chrimes had left for England and John wrote that Yvonne Blake ‘is making an excellent Scarlet Woman, but her ankles are too weak for point shoes, so she's doing it in high heels; it looks quite nice.’
John thought the ballet was well performed at the revival, but some reviews suggest that the verve had gone out of it.
Hatfield's view was that ‘the wit is too brittle and the inventiveness too superficial to make more than an ephemeral appeal’ even though he had been enthusiastic when he first saw it.
John never again tried to revive the ballet or rework it, but elements from it reappeared later, for instance in Jeu de Cartes , where the Joker is clearly a cousin of his Devil.
Although the new ballet had occupied much of his time and energy, other aspects of life continued.
One problem that occupied him was trying to dissuade Hanns from joining the army: ‘Don't do anything so foolish…it seems a hopelessly idiotic and pointless idea, and I cannot understand why you want to do this?’
After receiving a reply, he argued
I hope all these very pretty sentiments about not being strong enough to stand watching other people doing things in the war are just part of a passing phase; or maybe it's these ‘books of a higher nature’…but I never credited you with being able to talk such utter balls.
True, the attraction of becoming ‘British’ is a big one, but as far as I can see it is the only one.
You will not go up north straight away, there is such a thing as training you know, I have heard that the absolute minimum for what you call sitting around is six months.
In this time you will be reduced as far as possible to walking cannon fodder and rushed away to some hell hole.
He also quoted a colleague just back from service in Italy who ‘says don't on any account,’
Hanns refused to accept that advice.
John later wrote, ‘I gather from your letters that army life is not a bed of roses?
(Who'd want to go to bed with roses anyway, what a mad idea!)’
As an admitted homosexual, John himself would have been regarded as medically unfit for conscription into the forces.
John's emotional life was having its ups and downs.
While preparing Soldier's Tale he wrote to Hanns describing a party where
a very uncomfortable thing for me occurred — There were quite enough queens to register Casanova impotent, and yet every one of them shied away from me as if I had the plague.
It was probably some arrangement of S– and R—'s, but whenever I came into a room where they were, they trickled out!
After a time it got me down, this continued evasion of me, it was like a form of torture.
I began to wonder if I had halitosis or a snotty nose, or green eyes, or a squint — surely I am not so unattractive!
Anyway, at last I got absolutely blind drunk through depression, went upstairs to Freda's bedroom and cried myself to sleep.
Later I was wakened by someone else in the room fumbling for the light switch.
It was R—.
He found the switch, turned on the light.
When he saw me he smiled and said ‘Why, what's the matter!’ not unkindly.
I suppose my eyes must have been a little red.
I said ‘Nothing.’
R—started to giggle.
‘Aren't you missing something?’ he said.
I just sat.
‘Who are you missing?’
‘No-one.’
R—began to laugh .
‘But you look so upset!’
I was nearly desperate by this time, and in my drunkenness I said ‘Yes, if you want to know I'm in love with Hanns and I'm missing him; now please go!’
He went.
That incident probably made John's triumph all the sweeter a few months later, when he gleefully described flirting with a particularly desirable man, one of the supposed ringleaders of the earlier occasion.
His new admirer escorted John home after a party.
John became ‘rather cool and offhand’ now that he was master of the situation, ‘bringing all my charms into action, but making it seem that I was very blasé about the whole thing.’
He was pressed for a date and told ‘before tonight I always thought of you as a child — but you're not.’
The Cranko response to that was ‘(Bitter laugh) Ha!
(And then wistfully, turning on the full power of my innocent blue eyes) Yes, I'm afraid many people think that.’
Then, ‘after a great deal more chit-chat I let him kiss me a tender goodnight on the doorstep with the promise to phone when he could and, gathering up my ermines, swept into the great portal.
He phoned several times — thank god I was out.’
More mundane matters also occupied his time.
He wrote, for instance, of having bought ‘the yellow wool for a sweater for winter, I shall also make a black one with one side having very narrow yellow stripes.
The kaffir jersey I shall give to Yvonne Blake, she adores it.’
Hanns Ebensten commented, apropos some of these letters, that ‘If both John and I sound rather like silly fairies, it is because in the 1940s that is generally how young homosexual men behaved — only later did the male macho style of gays hit the scene.
Can you imagine young men today being so preoccupied with fancy clothes — never.’
Actually, I can vouch that some young heterosexual men of John's age were also obsessed by fancy clothes, and observation today suggests that the interest has not died out.
John was capable of laughing at himself in respect of attempts at beautification.
He wrote to Hanns about the time when wigs had been needed for Dulcie's ballet Fête galante , and one of the part-time dancers in the Ballet Club, a hairdresser by trade, offered to make them, from papier-mâché.
Doing that on the victim's head ‘leaves your hair in one hell of a mess, so after that we all had camomile shampoos from glamorous coiffeuses in white tunics’.
Then the hairdresser, saying ‘Now I'll keep the hair out of your eyes’, gave John ‘what he called a ‘natural water wave’ and stuck me with a net and brown cotton wool in my ears under the dryer.
I emerged from its jaws a short time later, however, as I couldn't bear the heat — My water wave fell down!’
One thing that made John happy when he went home for Christmas 1944 and the New Year was the presence in Johannesburg of his father's new friend, Phyllis Hirsch.
She had been evacuated from wartime Britain to South Africa with her two young daughters; she was married to the violinist Leonard Hirsch, but when she met Herbert Cranko they fell in love.
John wrote to Hanns (who was now in the army)‘it would be so nice if they could get married.’
Later they did.
John adored the two girls: ‘It's just like having younger sisters.’
Another thing that brightened his life was that he changed lodgings on returning to Cape Town, moving to 71 Bree Street, the home of an artist, Freda Lock.
Hanns described the house as a Bohemian haven for artists and writers.
John loved it and was absolutely at home there.
Before returning to the Cape, he had written ‘I have been idle so long that I doubt if I shall ever do a single grand battement in my life again — I crack when I move.’
But it was not long before he was describing projects for further productions.
During the fifteen months he remained in South Africa after The Soldier's Tale he created three more works and laid plans for others, some of which came to fruition years later.
Of his Cape Town productions, only the little party-piece,Tritsch Tratsch , was ever directly revived, but musical or choreographic ideas from all the others turned up again, transformed, in later works.
The first new project he mentioned in his letters was for a ballet to be danced to the spoken word.
The first reference merely says that ‘It's all about man before birth, during life and at death — very deep and it never does what you expect it to!’
Three months later, in April 1945, he had got further with the idea:
I am planning to do a sort of dance-drama with René Ahrenson in Spotlight.
She runs a sort of company for readings and uncostumed actings of unusual plays, and when I told her about Unisoculous she said she would put it on.
Now I'll tell you about it, terribly roughly of course, because it's very complicated and highbrow.
The ‘music’ consists of orchestrated voices, that is, single or groups of high, low, harsh or shrill voices balanced together as in the orchestration of a symphony.
The idea of the ballet is to sketch a few facets of a man's life as seen by him (hence Unisoculous — one eye).
Such diversions as Before birth — Birth — Infancy — Awakening — Love — Hate — Inhibitions — Growth of prejudice etc., etc.
It's all too complicated to write, but I hope this will give you an idea of what it's about.
The work was never made quite as planned, but several aspects of it occur in the ballet he made in Israel many years later, and some in works for Sadler's Wells in the fifties.
Meanwhile another idea had cropped up.
On 3 February 1945 he wrote ‘I have just bought the Moussorgsky records Pictures at an exhibition .
I think they will be my next ballet!’
By the next letter: ‘I am planning a large and sumptuous ballet on fisherman and his soul, for which I shall use the Moussorgsky.’
But that never happened.
Also in February he was discussing ideas for a Botticelli ballet and for a Debussy ballet; these eventually coalesced into one idea,Primavera .
He met two artists, husband and wife, ‘awfully sweet, she has a bold yet subtle and exotic sense of colour’, and thought of trying her for the costumes; he had already got another artist to try and ‘you never saw such revue in all your life’.
By June he had tried seven different prospective designers without finding one who could give him what he wanted, but was emphatic that he could not work at a distance with Hanns or other Johannesburg artists, ‘so that's that’.
But the ballet itself was shaping well ‘and turns out to be altogether better technically than Soldier's Tale ’.
John was eagerly pursuing other possibilities too.
As early as April he wrote that he was going to start ‘fishing around…all the opera people’ to be allowed to produce an opera.
‘I know this sounds hopelessly conceited of me, but…
Olive MacDonald does the choir, soloists look after themselves, all the producer has to do is arrange a sort of ballet of tableaux to the music.
. which I could do very well.’
But he was going to have to wait until reaching England before he had the chance to branch into opera production.
Then in May came another initiative:
This is probably the most important letter I have ever written to you.
Cecily, Yvonne and I have determined that we are going to tour South Africa — following almost the same route as Merry Wives — with either the Ballet Club or, if they won't cooperate, we will form the South African National Ballet.
René Ahrenson is being our business manager, and right now she and my father are having discussions prior to contacting ACT re the booking of the tour.’
ACT was African Consolidated Theatres, who had been touring Shakespeare's Merry Wives of Windsor with a cast headed by Gwen Ffrangcon-Davies; Dulcie Howes had arranged the dances and performed in them.
John hoped Hanns would be able to design sets and maybe costumes for the ballet tour; meanwhile he was to start straight away to design posters and programme covers.
‘I don't have to tell you how to design a poster!
As long as it's First Class...
You will be paid when we have some funds — if we ever get any funds, as our aim is to pay dancers first.
Now then — make it good .
I await your next letter breathlessly.’
Unfortunately, the idea (which many people have held at different times) of a national ballet for South Africa has not come to fruition even now, four decades later, any more than the dream which John cherished when working in Germany of forming a national company there.
The German plans persisted in his mind for years, but that particular South African aspiration was transitory, because by his next letter he wrote ‘Listen and attend a minute.
The grand tour which I wrote to you about has been postponed until we can all come to Johannesburg for discussions.’
However, the three would-be collaborators for the grand tour each revived one of their ballets for three performances by the Ballet Club at City Hall, Cape Town, in July and August; this was when Yvonne Blake danced the Scarlet Woman.
The critics complained that there was not ‘a single new ballet to spice interest’.
The programme also included the Polovtsian dances from Prince Igor , for which a backcloth was needed.
John wrote at length to Hanns about colour, shapes and general effect desirable, and asked him to ‘do a few rough sketches and send them to me to give to Cecily; number them so that I can just send you back a telegram saying ‘Do number three’ say, unless there is more to be said.’
Meanwhile, a crisis had arisen about the University Ballet's plans for a trip later the year to Johannesburg.
John wrote to Hanns in June that they had intended to bring a programme of ballets by
Jas, myself, Dulcie and Yvonne, with Igor produced by Cecily.
Now,(a) Yvonne has had a row with Dulcie and won't do her ballet, and (b) as the Ballet Club is producing Igor in July, they won't let it out again so soon.
So as you will see, this leaves a hole as big as a goat's backside in the programme, and Dulcie wrote to Jas and I that unless one of us would write another ballet, and a longish one at that, the University Ballet wouldn't be able to go to JHB!!!
Jas can't, so of course yours truly will have to do it — and YOU must do costumes and décor.
NB an interpretative ballet, no story, only dancing.
It was to be to Grieg's ‘Holberg’ Suite: ‘It is all most un-Grieg.
He has used the old classical forms in the suite so that the music is reminiscent sometimes of Mozart, sometimes of Bach, or Handel, or Gluck.
It is for strings alone — try, if you can, to bear it.’
There followed suggestions of the kind of dresses he would like for the women, and much more specific suggestions about what the men should wear, especially two who would have no dancing and were ‘old tatty props who stand around holding up girls and sometimes us.
They must be well covered as you know how awful their figures are.’
Later they were dropped from the cast.
John was proposing to divide the corps de ballet into two groups, the taller girls having slower and more statuesque movements than the shorter ones.
During the Prelude, all the groups and soloists would be introduced.
The Sarabande, ‘very slow and stately’, for the two leaders of the taller girls with Poole and himself.
The gayer, shorter girls would come on for a general dance to the Gavotte.
After that, to the Air, there would be a pas de deux with the taller girls in the background.
Next, the Rigaudon, ‘madly gay’, with solo entries for the leaders of the shorter girls with the men; and of course the whole company in the Finale.
For the setting, ‘I thought just a bare cyclorama would be so nice!
What do you think?
We can't spend much on either costumes or sets.
Now, dear, get your little brain aworking.’
In later letters to Hanns, John mentioned that ‘we have quite a lot of black tarlatan, so if you could use it in your designs, do so’, as about £1 had been allowed for each costume and the tarlatan was free.
He wanted pink point shoes for the girls, not black, because they ‘make for romantic mood…they give that airy feeling…
Try, if you can, to remember the look of the feet in Carnaval where they wear go with the black tarlatan, they wore black shoes tied with pink ribbons.
John insisted that the ballerina's costume must take account of the fact that the pas de deux‘is most unfrivolous and very tender — in all the other movements I have used a faint taint of period, but this, being the most lyrical…is completely classical.’
Wigs were out of the question because of the cost, and most of the changes John asked for in the designs were for simplicity in making and comfort in wearing.
For a time he puzzled over the best title.
‘Not Holberg Suite , as Holberg was a Norwegian contemporary of Molière, and the ballet has no bearing on him whatsoever.
Someone suggested mere Opus 3 , what do you think of that?
A bit affected, perhaps.
But a nice title.’
Eventually, the ballet was first given by the University Ballet as Suite, Opus 3 , but for a revival by the Ballet Club he settled on Suite, ‘Aus Holbergs Zeit ’(‘from Holberg's time’).
Poole remembers the finished ballet as being very classical, and also that John took lessons in some of the historical dances on which the music was based, so as to be able to incorporate elements from them in his choreography.
John wrote to Hanns during rehearsals that ‘Lionel and Lillian say it's most difficult pas de deux they've ever had to do.’
The designs for Primavera , which was in preparation at the same time, were proving a problem.
In the summer, a painter named Johannes Meintjies had come to visit 71 Bree Street.
John thought him ‘a most remarkable boy, and certainly the most talented artist I've yet met in S.A. If he can design costumes or not is another question.
Anyway he has the right approach and I'm sure something will result.’
Meintjies was equally impressed by John, writing in his diary that this ‘young ballet dancer and choreographer, who is undoubtedly brilliant, dominated the guests — although he is only seventeen.’
But their projected collaboration came to nothing, and various other Cape Town artists proved unsuitable, so John began discussing possibilities with Hanns.
Eventually he wrote ‘I am in such a stew over Primavera that I have made some sketches myself.
These I shall send to you for harsh criticism and very helpful suggestions re set.’
But later in that letter he asked:
Will you design a set for it?
It must (1) reflect the colours of the costumes;(2) be abstract, using plant forms etc;(3) be very symbolical of birth etc., etc.
In fact, as I write I realize that the whole mess of Primavera must be handed over to you — TAKE OVER THE WHOLE BLOODY THING and get this tremendous weight off my shoulders — change and edit the costumes, but not too much, as they are designed so as not to interfere with the movement of the ballet, as it includes curling up into small balls, rolling, lying etc.
Please use vivid and numerous colours — the whole thing is rather erotic and sexy.
At first, Hanns was clearly taking the original Botticelli concept too literally for John's wishes, and received the comment ‘Set is quite wrong ; nothing to do with sea shore or shells at all , it must be abstract using plant form…
Think of it as Braque would design it — or if you like Bérard.’
Later John began to worry even about that idea:
Will Primavera stand out in front of such a cut-out?
When she rises in the white garment she must be terribly dominant .
I think the cut-out must have no plant form then, it should be earthy or an old withered tree trunk or some such — because the dancers personify Spring so much that the stage should represent the earth.
You see, the dancers must be the décor —they must decorate the stage, not the background dominate them…
I think Dufy is quite wrong; John Piper is more the type, his peculiar banks and cliffs which have no vegetation on them whatsoever yet look as if they are going to have tiny green shoots peeping out at any minute.
The WHOLE feeling is Spring is about to burst forth but it hasn't quite done so.
The music of Primavera was Debussy's ‘Danse sacrée et Danse profane’, and the ballet incorporated the idea of the goddess being born from a group of girls first seen huddled in near-darkness on the floor.
A similar theme was to recur in Harlequin in April , one of John's first fully successful ballets in Britain, then again in Opus 1 and Song of My People .
John wanted the light misty at first, then becoming brighter, but always radiating from a focal point at the back of the stage; Primavera arising from the floor in white must make a ‘most phallic’ effect.
The notes refer to other dancers representing handmaidens, a bird and winds: rather complex for so short a work.
Suite and Primavera were both given at Witwatersrand University, Johannesburg, on 3 to 6 October 1945 (six performances).
Lillian Graham and Lionel Luyt danced the leads in Suite , but it was remarked that Luyt ‘no longer has to sustain all the male roles himself, and can share them with useful dancers like John Cranko and David Poole’.
Delysia Jacobs had the title part in Primavera , and Renée Feller also attracted attention as the bird.
John's choreography, however, was less enthusiastically received.
Fairly typical was the assessment of both works as ‘picturesque, but at the same time restless, and verging occasionally on the sentimental’.
Lionel Luyt told me that it was only when he reached Europe a few years later that he realized how far ahead of his South African contemporaries John had been, doing things which he must have invented for himself because he had not had the chance to see them put into practice by others.
In retrospect, for instance, he thought that Suite had choreography rather like Balanchine's in the phrasing of sequences and repeats to the music, and in the lines, which were not straight like a corps de ballet of swans or sylphides but went off suddenly at an angle.
He said that The Soldier's Tale , too, was quite unlike anything else being done in South Africa then.
John was full of invention, always making up steps and sequences which he called by odd names: for instance a stamping step he called ‘Sherman tanks’, which he devised for the zephyrs in Primavera and used again for the unicorns in Harlequin in April .
Although people in the Cape Town ballet world thought highly of his promise, John's talent as a choreographer was not regarded as proved by the time he left South Africa (at only eighteen, why should it have been?), and other young choreographers were at least as highly thought of.
Jasmine Honoré's Ancient Lights , premiered with Suite and Primavera , won more praise.
It was a ballet about slum dwellers, set surprisingly to Weinberger's Variations on ‘Under the spreading chestnut tree’, in which John had a comic role as a social worker.
Suite was given in Cape Town by the Ballet Club at City Hall for the week of 3 December 1945, with Joan Grantham in the ballerina part.
Primavera was not seen in Cape Town until the University Ballet's programme at City Hall on 1 March 1946, with Jasmine Honoré in the title part.
It had been provided with a new backcloth and costumes by Alexis Preller.
Dulcie Howes writes that, as far as she can remember, that was at John's own request.
Although Hanns Ebensten's designs were supplanted, he had another commission on that programme, to do new designs for St Valentine's Night.
Tritsch Tratsch was given on the same programme, being hailed with delight for its humour and for the sparkling dancing of Poole and Luyt as ‘two brisk young sailors, and Renée Feller as the sprightly object of their affections’.
(Poole's recollection is that John had made the piece earlier, with himself in the role danced by Lionel Luyt, but there is no record of this.
Luyt remembers it being set very quickly, in the course of an hour or so).
For the first time, one of John's creations received overwhelming and unanimous praise, but he was no longer there to enjoy its success.
Already in July 1945 he had written to Hanns ‘I want sooooooo badly to get to London.
But I really do feel that until my technique develops further I must stay here.
I've had this little Dorp in a BIG way.’
In August, an acquaintance gave him the address of a London representative ‘who will apparently introduce me to Noël and Oliver and Bobby!’
(Coward, Messell and Helpmann).
In October 1945 he obtained a passport.
There were many reasons for wanting to go to England.
The most important was that it offered far more opportunity professionally.
It was to be many years before South Africa could support full-time professional dance companies.
Meanwhile, seasons were short and widely spaced, the dancers were limited in ability, and in John's rather impatient view there were no real designers except for Hanns: ‘I'm sick of working with would-be's’, he wrote.
The strain of trying to do everything himself was taking a toll; after one almost incoherent letter he explained that he had been working from 8 a.m. until midnight, had not eaten and so ‘was thoroughly depressed and vague’.
Also, John often insisted that the treatment of black people in South Africa had been an important factor in his decision.
Some of the people who were most closely associated with him at the time find that hard to believe; they remember him as being liberally inclined but not politically minded.
There is a vagueness in John's later account of his feelings which makes one wonder how far he was reinterpreting events and attitudes with hindsight.
For instance.
he told Dr Schäfer of a friend, a fellow student at the University Ballet School, who came from a Coloured family.
He and one brother, with pale skins, counted as whites, John said, but their siblings with darker skins were issued with passes as blacks.
That cannot be correct, as only those who were actually members of the black races, not Coloureds of mixed race, had to carry passes.
On the other hand it may well be true, as John said, that those with pale skins had an easier life and felt guilty about that.
However, it does seem likely that his father's views influenced him even so early.
Herbert was more politically conscious than John, and is said to have urged him to leave South Africa because he foresaw trouble in future.
Even if John's own feelings were more idealistic than political, it was his feelings about South African treatment of the blacks that prevented him from going back.
Patricia Miller remarked that John never really conformed to the way of life in South Africa, and hated to be tied down.
She quoted to me an odd and illuminating point, that if he wanted to take a bath when he was with friends, he could not see why they should not all be in the bath together, boys and girls, black and white.
That sounds to me like the sort of liberal view which many of John's contemporaries would have expressed at that age, under the influence of reformers like A. S. Neill — a comparison that occurred to me before I discovered that he had been meant to attend Neill's school.
John said (again according to Patricia Miller) that if he left South Africa, he would never return, and he kept to that.
He much disliked being described as South African and he later held a British passport.
But he retained feelings of gratitude for the chances he had been given and he allowed others later to mount several of his works for the University Ballet without expecting any fee.
At the beginning of 1946, John had another reason for fretting; he had to change his lodgings and was living in digs that were ‘too sordid’ to write about.
The address on his letter is that of a hall of residence, so the description must have been exaggerated, but it conveys his exasperation.
One day in February, on the spur of the moment, he walked into an office of Cook's travel agency and enquired about a berth on a liner to London.
Generally they were booked months ahead, but there had been a cancellation on one leaving almost at once.
Herbert agreed to pay his passage and give him an allowance until he could find work.
John left without saying goodbye to his mother, but before leaving Cape Town, he wrote to Hanns:
It's the end of a great chapter in both our lives — we have I'm sure both played a great part, each in the other's.
When shall I see you again?
God knows — I shall make every effort to write to you of course, but I am such a bad writer and after a while it begins to be very difficult to write the essence of one's personality and atmosphere on paper.
So if I do become slack, and I shall try not to, you will, I know, forgive as you always do.
And please remember whatever I do and whatever becomes of me, I shall always do my very best to help you.
And if on your coming to England I am not the first person you look for, I shall be very hurt indeed!
You won't be able to reply to this letter, as when you receive it I shall be on the water.
I shall write to you the moment I arrive.
I haven't the faintest idea of how to spell auf-wie-der-sein, but that's the word.
Entr'acte
HOME COMFORTS
ONCE he had left the modern flat where he lived with his father in Johannesburg, John Cranko always lived in old houses.
Not historic buildings, except for his last home at Schloss Solitude, outside Stuttgart, but elderly, ordinary, slightly shabby houses, planned and built in an earlier age, that had acquired a comfortable individuality in occupation by previous occupants, and lent themselves to his own way of living and working.
He was, in a sense, at home anywhere.
When he got to Stuttgart, he was to make the bare tables and bleak walls of the theatre canteen seem homely.
He looked at his ease there — or almost anywhere else he found himself.
It was partly a gift for adaptability, partly a sense of fun or interest that he brought to any situation.
He could live happily among poor working people on his holidays, but found immense pleasure in staying in a French house so grand that a servant squeezed the tubes of toothpaste between applications.
On a Russian tour when he had a lot of causes for dissatisfaction, snapshots show him still lively: pretending to drop a kopek into the hat Marcia Haydée holds out to him; embracing a Russian colleague, Yuri Grigorovich of the Bolshoi; thoughtfully watching a Russian ballet class.
In New York, Tel Aviv, Athens, at a big reception or among friends, taking a curtain call with his dancers, chatting to a stranger, even just waiting for something, he looks easy, interested, at home.
Yet in another sense he had no home, and no country.
His attitude to South Africa was epitomized when he went not there but to neighbouring Rhodesia in 1953.
He had to supervise dances he had arranged for Aida , one of the productions taken by the Covent Garden Opera to the Rhodes centenary celebrations.
At the sight of white extras, brought specially for the purpose, blacking up their faces to play Ethiopians in a land full of black faces, his indignation was acute.
The one thing that would have persuaded him to accept an invitation for the Stuttgart Ballet to go to South Africa would have been if he could show a really good black dancer working alongside the whites.
He took British citizenship, travelled for the rest of his life on a British passport, and disliked being described as a ‘South African choreographer’.
However thoroughly he had pulled up his African roots, however, he never really felt entirely accepted in England.
Later, in Stuttgart, he was not just accepted but positively idolized; even so, there were barriers: he complained to Frank Tait, ‘They don't know the same nursery rhymes as we do!’
So there was a restlessness that could help explain his  proneness to melancholia, and at the same time account for the extraordinary enthusiasm with which, in later life, he identified himself with the people of different parts of the Mediterranean coastline in turn: Greeks, Italians, Jews, Arabs.
After the break between his father and mother, he could not respond to her affection.
When she occasionally visited him in London or Stuttgart, she always found him busy, although he would certainly have made time for a new lover, and he did put himself out to entertain his cousin Petrie who, with his wife, turned up unexpectedly in Stuttgart during a travelling holiday.
Petrie thought John a little embarrassed to see them, but they were taken to watch rehearsals and John took them in his Mercedes to Alsace-Lorraine to show them museums and other sights, and treat them to a memorable dinner.
Yet it never occurred to John, as his mother aged, that she might be in need of any help, until a visitor from Johannesburg, who had known him as a boy, told him that she was hard up, after which lie made her an allowance.
He also had to be reminded to write to her, which he did (in later years) about every six weeks, just a dutiful account of where he had been, what he had done, with little of his usual animation.
Cut off from her, with his father and stepmother both dying while he was still a young man, John several times tried to live with a man he loved, but it always ended in disappointment.
Sex was no problem; love was.
There were always plenty of boys; they might arrive on a Friday and be gone by Monday, but he wanted an enduring relationship too.
When he thought one might be possible, he was immensely sentimental, would give up everything for a lover; yet it was his own exigence that made it difficult for anyone to live up to him, to match his quick apprehension, his wide range of interests, the fervour with which he experienced everything.
‘Can't you see ?’, he would ask; ‘don't you feel…can't you hear ?’, as he rushed from one place or book or topic to another, expecting others to have the same reactions, so that Frank Tait, a cultured and intelligent man, described how he ‘hurried out of breath to seem less far behind’.
No wonder that John, in his later Stuttgart years living with Dieter Gräfe and Reid Anderson, would say enviously, ‘It's easy for you — why can't I find somebody?’
All the same, he did find eventually a settled domesticity with them.
He had a curious mixture of enthusiasm and impracticability in his approach to some everyday things, as for instance studying a most complicated recipe from one of his cookery books (they included Mrs Beeton and Elizabeth David), then going out to buy not only the ingredients but equipment too.
On one such occasion, he bought a mixer and a special dish in order to make an elaborate terrine.
It turned out to be so big that he invited people specially to help eat it, and then it proved so salty that they could manage only a little of it.
Cooking became a kind of therapy which he greatly enjoyed, but the results could be bizarre: ‘things in pastry’ were a favourite (the things might be tins of beans and of peppers), and sometimes so awful that Dieter and Reid would wait in the car until John had fallen asleep, to avoid having to eat them.
Yet he loved food.
One of the reasons he travelled often from Stuttgart to France was to enjoy meals at Strasbourg or Riquewihr or Illhäusern.
On journeys, he would study both the red and the green Michelin guides, in search of gastronomy and culture, and sit in the back seat issuing careful instructions to the driver that ‘in about a quarter of a mile you come to a place to turn right’.
Just as he ate with relish in the three-star Auberge de lI'll or a Greek working-man's café, so he could be both careless and dandified about his clothes.
Sometimes he would sleep in them and wear them unchanged the next day, but at other times he took hours to choose what he would wear, then positively preened.
His taste was individual: he had a pink suit and matching overcoat, both of thick wool, that cost him 3000 Marks (the fee for a three-act ballet); they were worn with an orange tie.
At the Met in New York, he took curtain calls wearing a beaded gold kaftan.
When Queen Elizabeth, on a state visit to Germany in May 1965, arrived in Stuttgart for a formal lunch, John took care over his clothes but either forgot or did not think it necessary to find a pair of socks less obtrusive than the bright reds or blues he favoured at that time.
The eccentric appearance he presented, together with his having forgotten his invitation card, resulted in his being refused entrance until somebody arrived who could satisfactorily identify and vouch for him.
Others had to look after him: friends sometimes; a Spanish couple he employed at others.
He expressed his thanks obliquely, like saying ‘Some magic fairy came in my room while I was asleep, and put a pile of clean shirts on the dresser’.
He was liable to forget to buy birthday or Christmas presents (one year when he resolved to mark Christmas properly, he bought everyone gift vouchers because he could not decide what to get), but would make a gift out of the blue for no other reason than that it was a nice day.
He wanted to share his joy — or his misery.
Books were what he bought most assiduously.
He bought them literally by the armful, and read as many as three in a day, picked up at random from the piles he had brought home; yet afterwards he could tell of what he had read, so beautifully, according to Reid, that the book itself would be a disappointment by comparison.
Once he stood, a cooking pan in one hand, with tears in his eyes over the sadness of Byron's life.
He would read anything, but there were certain books he returned to, that especially influenced his thought: Dr Schäfer, the Stuttgart theatre director, was astonished to find a man from the ballet who was actually familiar with The Golden Bough , and Robert Graves's The White Goddess was even more important in his work.
Other things, John would see and ask, ‘Can I afford to buy that?’— as when he fell in love with two leather suitcases he saw in a Munich shop window.
He never expressed any special wish to own a Mercedes until he could afford one: then he had to have it, and it had to be bright red.
Even so, he did ask, ‘Wouldn't it be nice to have a Rolls Royce — have you noticed, nobody here has one?’
The most precious possession he had was time.
Life in South Africa, once he started dancing, was one long rush, and his early days in London too, but when he stopped dancing he was in an unusual position.
Most choreographers either have other responsibilities (as a company director, for instance) or are themselves tied to the strict daily schedule of a performer.
John, required to mount his ballets but nothing else, had time to visit art galleries or schools in search of new ideas or designers, to listen to music, to read.
That period of his life also freed him for his experiments in other kinds of theatre which, although he never reverted to them after taking on his Stuttgart responsibilities, enriched his subsequent work.
He went back to the ballet, he said, after a period of doubt, because he walked into a studio and saw a young woman putting her feet into the rosin box to stop her shoes from slipping: the familiar action, a mixture of habit and discipline and grace, made him realize where his heart belonged.
All the other experience that he devoured was put to the one obsessing activity.
ACT TWO
LONDON
MAKING A NAME
LONDON, when John Cranko arrived, was suffering the after-effects of an exhausting war, and it was to be several years before the restrictions and shortages were overcome.
But he wrote to Hanns ‘Don't worry about conditions here: although they can be grim, I've known them a lot grimmer in S.A.’ He declared that ‘being new in London is a full time job’and described the town rhapsodically as
wonderful, friendly yet austere, huge yet intimate and minute, kindly and terrifying all at the same time.
When you've been in London five minutes you never want to leave…
Now to descend to earth…
I am at the Sadler's Wells School until my father arrives in April.
I don't know if I shall join the company yet, I may do, I may go to Paris, I may die, my face may even turn blue.
The classes are not large and I find myself not too bad and rated as ‘senior’ by the Sadler's Wells gods.
Most of the boys' mental age is about eleven.
They are the last people on earth one could imagine to be dancers.
However, some are very good.
His scathing attitude to most of his fellow pupils is only partly accounted for by a difference in age.
At eighteen, he was physically much more mature than most English ballet students, because at that time they left school and began dancing professionally at sixteen or even younger.
While his fellow students were still schoolboys, John was leading a raffish private life, and described how a friend from South Africa had taken him to ‘some Queer pubs which are too fantastic and revolting to be true.
Lewd songs are sung over the microphone…
Leicester Square on a Sunday night has to be seen to be believed, and half the police are queer too!’
His voracious and informed interest in the arts, not only ballet but plays, books, music, painting, also set him apart from most of the other students.
He described plays and revues he had seen, but most of what he wrote to Hanns was about the ballet.
The first work he went to see was The Sleeping Beauty , ‘which you would hate, with sumptuous settings and dresses by Messel which you would adore.’
This had just opened the Sadler's Wells Ballet's first season at Covent Garden, to rapturous acclaim, but a month or two later John had decided that the costumes, ‘although very gorgeous and great fun to wear are, in my opinion, far too ordinary for a ballet, they are more like costumes for a historical play…
The dancing is of a superbly high standard and Margot Fonteyn and Moira Shearer as alternate Auroras are wonderful.’
I am not sure that we would think the dancing, except by some of the principals, quite so wonderful by today's standards, but we saw it with different eyes then, and John would have for comparison his memories of the Cape Town Ballet Club's brave but handicapped attempt at the last act of the ballet,Aurora's Wedding .
His comments on the work of the Sadler's Wells house choreographers are interesting in their percipient mixture of eager praise and sharp criticisms.
Some ballets by them soon joined Beauty in the Covent Garden programmes, others were given by a newly formed second company at the Wells.
John at once decided that
Fred Ashton is a mature choreographic genius, things of his like César Franck's Variations, Nocturne and Dante Sonata just cannot be written about, and have to be seen over and over  again …
De Valois too is wonderful at reconstructing a period.
You remember our idea about Handel?
Well, she's done it in Gods go a'begging , using the same Watteau that we liked so much with the columns and the landscape in the background.
In Rake's Progress she reconstructs Hogarth…in Promenade she gets an atmosphere of Directoire France.
He found The Rake's Progress ‘perspicacious, witty in spite of its stark drama, and thorough as regards research into the period’, but he added that ‘I'm afraid it's not half what it's cracked up to be.’
John wrote scathingly of Robert Helpmann, after seeing his Miracle in the Gorbals , as ‘a pseudo-intellectual who has discovered (after Hollywood) that there exists such a thing as mob psychology’ and later added that ‘his ballets, although all extremely intelligently constructed, and all marvellous theatre, I always find acrobatic and dull from the dancing point of view…
He is a very fine actor, but only with his face — his body is quite inexpressive, when he turns his back on the audience he loses all meaning.’
As implied by his reference to wearing Messel's costumes, John had begun by May, while still working at the Sadler's Wells School, to appear in the corps de ballet at Covent Garden, although only in The Sleeping Beauty which needed a large cast.
‘It is really great fun and I enjoy every minute of it.’
By that time he was sharing a flat at 46 Belsize Square, Hampstead, with Pamela Chrimes, and was making ‘a gorgeous carpet’.
Chrimes, who preceded him from Cape Town to London even before the war ended, had studied at the Sadler's Wells School, then joined the Sadler's Wells Opera-Ballet, the new company started at Sadler's Wells Theatre when the original Sadler's Wells Ballet moved to Covent Garden.
Most of the other dancers in the company were straight from school, some of them taking leading parts while only about fifteen.
However, their leading woman for the first two seasons, June Brae, was a contemporary of Margot Fonteyn, returning to the stage after a break during the war.
She was joined for a short time by another dancer back from war service, Alan Carter.
John wrote to Hanns at the end of May that Tamara Karsavina, a former star of the Diaghilev Ballet, was planning to use Brae and Carter in a ballet ‘for some small society…and it's then to be repeated when Alan Carter is away on tour — and she's trying me out!
Can you imagine the excitement!’
But that came to nothing.
Karsavina duly mounted Valse Fantaisie for the RAD Production Club, but it was another of the Sadler's Wells dancers, Eric Hyrst, who partnered Brae in it.
All the same, John did soon find himself dancing with June Brae, as one of her partners in Assembly Ball , a ballet by Andrée Howard to Bizet's Symphony in C, when he too joined Sadler's Wells Opera-Ballet.
He got into the company because one of its few experienced male dancers, George Gerhardt, was leaving.
In one of the new ballets, Celia Franca's Khadra , which was inspired by Persian miniatures, Gerhardt had to catch Anne Heaton, playing his wife, from a platform at shoulder height, raise her above his head and lower her gently.
The sequence was made to measure for Gerhardt who, in Heaton's phrase, was ‘built like a tank’.
He also had to lift Sheilah O'Reilly, in the title part, in a ‘lotus position’ above his head.
The young men at Sadler's Wells had neither the strength nor the training for that sort of feat.
But in South Africa, because male dancers were scarce, every available man willing to go on stage and hold up one of the women had to be encouraged and enabled to do so; consequently, even the most rudimentary beginners were taught partnering.
With that background, John went to Peggy van Praagh, ballet mistress of the young company, and asked whether he could have the vacant post provided that he could manage those lifts.
She agreed.
John trained frantically hard with press-ups to increase his strength and, as Pamela Chrimes described it, ‘used me as a dumbbell until he could cope’.
The first time he tried it, with elastic supports round his wrists, Anne Heaton was terrified and wondered whether she would live to tell the tale, but it worked.
So he obtained the job, unfortunately at the cost of giving himself a hernia for which he needed hospital treatment.
The reason he wanted desperately to get into the company was that Ninette de Valois, to whom he had already spoken about his choreographic ambitions, had told him that experience of working with other choreographers and dancing their ballets was essential to learn his craft.
Peggy van Praagh told me that, even so early, de Valois had said to her ‘I think he'll make a choreographer’, but she was already trying out several other aspirants, so could not give him immediate chances.
Also she was greatly occupied with the other company at Covent Garden, and it was van Praagh to whom John turned.for help.
Her home was on the other side of Belsize Square, and he would often drop in at night to tell her about his latest ideas, just as he had done earlier with Dulcie Howes and was to continue doing with one friend or another all his life.
Van Praagh became a close friend of the Cranko family, Herbert and Phyllis as well as John; she proved a valuable ally, not only for her position within the company but also because she had a flair for bringing out the best qualities of young dancers and choreographers, and guiding them in their careers.
There were quite a few South Africans within the Opera-Ballet during John's time there.
Besides Pamela Chrimes, Nadia Nerina had been one of the company's early members; John had known her briefly in Johannesburg when they were both schoolchildren, and they met again in Cape Town just before she left for Britain in October 1945.
David Poole, who arrived in London in January 1947, was accepted for the company in May, but later that year Chrimes went back to South Africa and Nerina to Covent Garden.
Hanns, although not in the company, was one of John's group once he arrived in Britain about the same time, and another of the dancers, Peter Darrell (who also became, in time, a choreographer and ballet director) was closely involved with them, although he was English.
He described the coterie around John as ‘a kind of Chelsea-Bloomsbury Group’ and said that they were in and out of each other 's flats all the time.
Some of the other dancers made life difficult for them at first, resenting the physical advantages the South Africans had enjoyed, growing up far away from the hardships of wartime Britain.
On the other hand, Maryon Lane, one of two further South African girls (the other being Patricia Miller) who joined in August 1947, thinks the chief cause of ill-will had been the obnoxious behaviour of one person, and says she herself never suffered from resentment but was accepted by the company where everyone seemed like family.
When Poole arrived, he and John sometimes spoke to each other in Afrikaans.
Jane Shore, a dancer in the company at that time, remembers it only with amusement: ‘We were always simply dying to know what rude words they were using.’
But it only increased the suspicion with which they were regarded by some of the boys, and there were those who were upset by the homosexuality which John and some of his friends made no attempt to hide.
Not all the other dancers were in sympathy with the intellectual attitudes of John and his friends, either, but he needed all the intellectual stimulation he could get because, although his work as a dancer was meant to help him develop as a choreographer, the repertory was far from ideal for that purpose.
The only role created on him by an experienced choreographer was that of a Negro pugilist in Andrée Howard's Mardi Gras , and that ballet, although striking in its strange, suggestive drama, was such an idiosyncratic, atmospheric piece that he was unlikely to learn much from it about form or structure.
The other new works given that season were by apprentice choreographers.
John's roles were mostly, in Hanns Ebensten's teasing phrase, ‘A Man’: in Anthony Burke's The Vagabonds , Celia Franca's Bailemos , de Valois's The Haunted Ballroom (where he was actually ‘A Ghost’), Howard's La Fête étrange , and the tumblers' dance by de Valois in the opera Snow Maiden .
The Spanish dance in  The Nutcracker and the Yodelling Song in Ashton's Façade gave him slightly more chance to make an individual impression, but his only leading part was in Fokine's Carnaval , where he played Pierrot, not very memorably, sharing the role with Poole, whose interpretation was universally admired.
More important for John was the chance to do choreography.
His first opportunity at the Wells was to stage the dances in Humperdinck's opera Hansel and Gretel mounted at Christmas 1946.
That is not the sort of thing that is going to make anyone's reputation.
His contribution was professional, but not more than that, within the limited scope available.
The angels promenaded in neat and pleasing lines, three witches cavorted wildly for a brief moment, and some of the singers were given a few simple but effective steps.
I did not see the production until the following Christmas, when it contained an amusing touch which I imagine John must have added that year, after Leonide Massine had revived The Three-cornered Hat at Covent Garden: Hansel and Gretel danced a few steps with a bunch of grapes, a good-humoured quotation from the dance of the miller and his wife in Massine's ballet.
His first real ballet for the company was also slight.
This was Adieu , which John described as ‘a sadly romantic story of a nymph, whose lover is called away to war’.
As well as the two principal characters, there were a warrior, to do the calling away, and two attendants.
The music was by Scarlatti (‘Les Adieux’) and the designs were by Hugh Stevenson, who was also responsible for giving John the chance to make the ballet.
They had met when John danced in the creation of Mardi Gras , which Stevenson both wrote and designed.
He was helping with the ‘Vic-Wells’ charity costume ball in January 1947 and Adieu was given as part of the entertainment there.
De Valois saw it and accepted it for the repertory.
Its public premiere was at the Theatre Royal, Brighton, on 19 May 1947, first night of a tour which also brought the company a change of name, to Sadler's Wells Theatre Ballet.
The setting for Adieu consisted of a couple of pillars and a couch that was all too obviously a crude wooden structure draped with material, giving the clear impression that the ballet had been mounted on the cheap.
The dresses, by contrast, were ornate to a fault.
The nymph wore an encumbering baroque skirt and a headdress with tall feathers.
Her lover had a romanesque skirted tunic and a short cloak.
Although John was generally a quick worker, Anne Heaton remembers him as taking a long time over this work and seeming nervous about it.
The result was not without promise, but distant memory suggests that the piece was as artificial as the clothes, a minor and mildly amusing exercise in an old-fashioned style.
Although given a total of fifty-four times on two tours, which was not bad for an apprentice work mounted as a try-out, the nearest Adieu got to central London was the open-air theatre at Finsbury Park, where they danced that summer.
It must have been discouraging that Adieu was not thought worthy to be given at Sadler's Wells, and that the more handsome setting which Stevenson had designed for it was not used at that time.
But within a month of its first public performance, John had another premiere, admittedly in the modest circumstances of an experimental matinée, presented by the Royal Academy of Dancing Production Club at the New Theatre on Sunday 15 June.
For this, he used Debussy's piano suite, ‘Morceaux enfantins’, as the inspiration of dances whimsically reflecting both memories and fantasies of childhood.
The cast was drawn from the Sadler's Wells School, with Stella Claire as the heroine, a wooden doll, and Poole as a golliwog (complete with cakewalk, of course).
There were a little husband and little wife, who had a duet during which she manipulated a parasol to comic effect, and the other characters were three tinsel fairies and a monkey.
The dolls became amusing, and at times touching, symbols of childhood moods, and although the treatment was at times sentimental it also had a genuine gaiety.
The ballet's most notable virtue, widely remarked upon in the reviews, was the sensitivity with which John had matched movement to music.
The work was successful enough to be repeated at the Club's next performance, given at Sadler's Wells in November, this time with Nadia Nerina as the wooden doll.
Hanns Ebensten designed the scenery and costumes for the original production of Morceaux enfantins ; his backcloth imaginatively showed a page from a child's copybook with rows of carefully copied letters.
During the early months of 1947, he and John had shared lodgings in Upper Berkeley Street, just north of Marble Arch.
In the week before the premiere, John, out on tour with the company, sent several telegrams there, asking Hanns about tickets for the performance (‘two plus one if possible’), about where he would stay, where they would meet and, on the day before the performance, ‘Please buy gift for dressmaker’.
His work was encouragingly received, but about that time his emotional life was thrown into turmoil because his closest friend in the company began an affair with another member of their circle.
The postcard he wrote to Hanns at the end of the tour reveals John plunged into deepest gloom: ‘My dear — The past weeks have been like an unforgettable nightmare.
I don't know what to do with myself.
It all seemed so sure — and it's all so utterly, utterly useless.
We arrive 6 o'clock Sunday evening.
Couldn't you fix something with Neville?
If I had his address I would write myself.
Perhaps we three could go and eat at the Cross Keys in Chelsea.’
Long afterwards, in fact only a year or so before his death, at a party after the London premiere of his ballet Poème de l'Extase , John sat up until about four in the morning, in a mood of black melancholy, talking to his friend Peter Rosenwald about the misery of a homosexual life.
The theme of his unhappiness was that ‘I can't have continuity, and I need continuity for my work’.
It is true that the homosexual world is less inclined than heterosexual society to long-lasting and exclusive sexual relationships, partly because it is not subject to the pressure for such relationships imposed by family economics.
That was even more true when John was young, because a discriminatory law forced most homosexuals to keep their preferences secret.
Even so, many succeeded in establishing a relationship similar to a heterosexual marriage, and Hanns Ebensten believes that ‘had he not been a homosexual, John would have had the same occasional hours of despair and misery, and maybe had a succession of failing marriages and affairs.
Like many homosexual men, he had a longing for a fine, close, loving relationship with some men, and a frantic exciting rough-trade sexual fling with others.’
John's problems seem to have arisen mainly from his own nature, the other side of the very qualities that brought him success.
All his life he had an urge to know and experience as much and as deeply as possible.
Hence, on the one hand, his wide knowledge of books, paintings, music, his interest in the specialist knowledge of people he met from other walks of life, his responsiveness to many artistic influences, and his concern for people.
On the other hand, that attitude complicated his relationships.
He had a desire for strong and lasting friendship, but he judged his friends severely, expecting them to be as eager as he was to know, see and feel everything.
He also had a real enjoyment of brief, casual relationships, sexual or otherwise; one of his gay friends remarked to me that even with a passing infatuation, a pick-up, John never tried to impress people with who he was, never used the glamour of his position to dazzle them, but was interested most in finding out who they were, what kind of person.
To look at large numbers of photographs of him, most of them unposed, is revealing: his eyes are always concentrating on someone or something, never bored or inattentively gazing.
All that accentuated the swings of mood in a man capable of intense enjoyment but subject also to persistent melancholy.
Both moods were apparent during that summer of 1947.
He ended the tour so upset and disorganized that he had no plans for the summer holiday.
Hearing that Peggy van Praagh was going to the south of France with a friend and had a spare seat in her car, he asked if he might come too.
So he found himself unexpectedly spending his holiday in the little port of Cassis.
That quickly brightened his spirits, and he wrote to Hanns:
I can't begin to write it all down, it's so lovely.
One sees at a glance all the blue period of Picasso — the wild horses of Chirico — the extraordinary landscapes of Dali — the Italian primitives — Botticelli.
Colour intensifies, the sun dries out all the sogginess of the soul.
The air glitters like diamonds and the night air is like warm honey.
The men are so lovely, enormous and gentle, brown as amber — enormous black eyes and stiff bristly black hair which spurts off their foreheads like solidified jet and glitters blue in the sunshine.
Their clothes — culottes in white, green, blue of the most vivid shades, cork-soled sandals through which one sees their gleaming brown toes — such men inhabited Olympus, truly.
He spent most of his time watching the fishermen at work, and wrote with enthusiasm about having made friends with a family of ‘three brothers, each surpassing the other in beauty’ and the Spanish wife of one of them, ‘yellow skin like a magnolia and hair black as moonshine.
No wonder great art has been inspired from here for countless centuries — all is beauty and colour, harmony and affability are everywhere.
At night we sit in the cafés on the front, people come and go, there is an excited bustle…
Tonight we are going fishing.
God bless us every one!’
Several photographs from that holiday went into the huge scrapbook which John compiled at that period.
It is a curious miscellany, where photographs of his early ballets are mixed in with family snap-shots, pictures of his friends, souvenirs of journeys, Christmas and other greetings, a book of clothing coupons from the days of rationing, costume drawings and various illustrations cut from magazines, including a feature on Roland Petit's ballet Carmen and examples of the ‘new look’ in women's clothes when long skirts came back to fashion for the first time since the war; he proposed a ballet about that, but it was rejected.
The jumble of different contents suggests a double motive in keeping the book: to remind him of past happiness and to provide ideas for the future.
The collection provides insights into his enthusiasms: he got both Margot Fonteyn and Alexandra Danilova to sign photographs of themselves for him, tor instance.
It also provides examples of his sense of humour.
Down the edge of one page, adjoining a big picture of Markova and Dolin in Giselle , is a series of pictures showing John clowning with a length of gauze, as if burlesquing one of the Wilis in that ballet.
Characteristically, a photograph showing a back view of himself sitting gawkily in his bathing drawers beside the Mediterranean at Cassis is captioned ‘An English Tourist’.
(Note, incidentally, that already he was thinking of himself as English, not South African).
On the way back from that holiday in Provence, the party stopped in Paris, which John was also seeing for the first time.
There, too, he was overwhelmed by what he saw; so much so that he went back with Hanns for a hectic fortnight at the end of September.
By then, John had something to celebrate.
Tritsch Tratsch had been mounted for Sadler's Wells Theatre Ballet (the first performance was at a matinée on 20 September 1947) and was an immediate success.
So much so that, although it had not been mentioned at all in the advance publicity, it was given no fewer than 87 times that season and remained in the programmes for the next six seasons, by which time the company had danced it more often than any other work in their repertory except Les Sylphides and two of Ashton's ballets,Façade and Les Rendezvous .
Tritsch Tratsch lasts only about three minutes but in that time it does not waste a second.
The three characters are portrayed with vivid detail and lively humour: two sailors who flirt with a girl but find her more than a match for either of them.
Many casts followed Elaine Fifield, Michael Boulton and Poole into the work and all delighted audiences.
The costumes for the Sadler's Wells production were designed, at de Valois's insistence, by Hedley Briggs, an old associate of hers, but they seem not to have differed materially from the ones by Hanns Ebensten which were used for the original Cape Town production.
Could de Valois have thought that it would be too much to risk giving chances to two hardly known South Africans in one production?
More likely, she did not share the admiration others Felt for Hanns's work.
Although it was eventually pushed out of the company's programmes by the success of Pineapple Poll , another comedy in which John developed further the idea of sailors getting their come-uppance,Tritsch Tratsch has never lost its popularity as a number suitable for galas and concert programmes.
During John's brief stay in Paris, his father remarried; John's mother had married again in June 1946, becoming Mrs Aubrey Martin.
Herbert Cranko and his bride, Phyllis, were already living together at 6 Montpelier Walk, Knightsbridge.
They would have married sooner but had to wait for her divorce; Pamela Chrimes told me that it took some time to obtain the evidence of adultery which was then necessary.
They adopted the time-honoured device of spending the night together at an hotel, but Herbert, nervous that something might go wrong, overtipped the chambermaid, who then through misplaced gratitude would not give the required evidence against him.
Later, an appointment was arranged for a private detective to call at Montpelier Walk.
That was before John had moved in with them; he and Chrimes happened to call there that morning on some business errand before the detective had arrived, and the door was opened by Herbert in his dressing gown, begging them to hurry away again in case their presence spoilt the evidence.
About that time, Herbert became managing director of a new airline, Universal Airways, with headquarters in Johannesburg, flying a regular weekly service from there to Israel.
The founder was a man who had become interested in aviation during the thirties, spent the war in the South African Air Force and, on returning to civilian life, foresaw the opportunities that could be won with cheaply acquired and converted military aircraft.
He had the expertise and financial backing; Herbert was recruited to provide the business sense and organization.
Herbert's work involved travelling to various parts of Africa, Europe and the Middle East, and although theoretically based in Johannesburg, he told an interviewer that he had never spent more than six weeks continuously in his office there.
London was the family's real home, and the time John spent there with his father, his stepmother and her two daughters was a happy period for him.
Clover Roope, who later became a dancer, remembers going there to take lessons from a governess she shared with John's stepsisters, and described how absolutely devoted she and they were to this young man with ‘a fantastic nose and fantastic eyes and this rather long, lanky figure, who was not really a dancer and not really yet a choreographer, but gave the sense already that here was somebody important.’
With the beginning of the 1947–8 season, John was transferred to the Sadler's Wells Ballet at Covent Garden to give him more chances to work as a dancer with experienced choreographers.
He took small parts in ballets by Ashton (a courtier at the ball in the premiere of Cinderella , one of the revellers in the cave scene of Apparitions ) and de Valois (Checkmate, Don Quixote and Job ), walked on as a pall-bearer in Helpmann's Hamlet , and appeared in the classics, where his most prominent parts were a mazurka dancer in Swan Lake and a marquess in the hunting scene of The Sleeping Beauty .
It was Massine's ballets which suited him best, especially Mam'zelle Angot , in which he took several parts at different times; the sardonic humour he showed as the bootmaker in the market scene still lingers in my memory.
He also occasionally appeared at Sadler's Wells, and even learned and danced a leading role there, as the Reveller in White in Mardi Gras , when its creator, Leo Kersley, was ill in December 1949.
He continued performing only until July 1950, then gave up completely and seems — unlike many choreographers — never to have been tempted to dance publicly again.
At Covent Garden, John was joined by Nerina and Heaton from the group of dancers he had worked with at Sadler's Wells, and he quickly made new friends, including Ray Powell and, especially, Henry Legerton, an Australian who had also just joined the company after dancing for Massine in a play with ballets, based on the novel A Bullet in the Ballet .
John was not universally popular with his new colleagues any more than he had been at the Wells; his ambition aroused suspicion, scorn, envy or fear in some, and his sense of fun (including a rather observant line in mimicry) left barbs in some of its victims.
All the same, his scrapbook shows him obviously happy with his cronies.
John's only choreographic activities at Covent Garden that first season were a couple of tiny opera-ballets, in Rigoletto and The Mastersingers which made no great impression.
At Sadler's Wells, he mounted Morceaux enfantins for the Theatre Ballet and, having no new ballet to work on, spent time preparing the new cast for its public premiere on 6 April 1948.
It was given this time under the English title of the music,Children's Corner , and de Valois insisted on the ballet's being redesigned.
Jan le Witt, best known then as a designer and illustrator (he later gave up graphic design for painting), provided a semi-surrealistic backcloth and not particular helpful costumes.
The ballet was quite well liked, and offered the most substantial evidence of John's ability since his arrival in Britain two years earlier, but without causing any great stir.
From this point of view, opportunities must have seemed slow to come, but de Valois gave him at least one chance every year from the time of his joining the company:Adieu and Tritsch Tratsch in 1947,Children's Corner in 1948 and, for the following year, his most ambitious production to date,Sea Change .
As she was also trying out several other would-be choreographers and having new ballets made for Sadler's Wells by Ashton and Howard too, she could hardly have done more for someone who was regarded as promising (by some people as highly promising) but unproven.
Besides, the promise John had shown now attracted his first outside commissions.
One brought his first, none too successful, attempt at staging dances and ensembles in a revue,Calypso , produced by Hedley Briggs at the Playhouse.
The other was a ballet at the request of Alan Carter who (having left Sadler's Wells) formed and directed the St James's Ballet, a company of only thirteen dancers sponsored by the Arts Council of Great Britain to tour small towns with no proper theatre.
John's ballet for them was given in their first programme, presented at Chatham on 20 September 1948.
The School for Nightingales was danced to music by Couperin and set (in the period when he lived) in a singing academy where ‘the arrival of a visitor suggests that singing is not the only lesson to be learned’.
John explained in a programme note that he had tried ‘to get the robustness of the early eighteenth century as well as the extremely mannered movements of the period’ and, although I saw it once only, memory suggests that he succeeded to good effect.
The cast list shows his sense of literary style, with a maestro named Scintillo, his wife and protegée Philomele, and ‘Jacques, a distraction’ as the chief characters.
John told me that he himself never saw the work performed on stage, being busy elsewhere by the time it went on.
The designs were by Hanns Ebensten, his last collaboration with John, because he gave up his ambitions to make a career in stage design after he had visited the homes of two other ballet designers, both highly regarded and much in demand, but both living in very modest circumstances.
He decided that he was never likely to do even as well as they and that he had better look for another career, which eventually he found successfully in the world of travel.
The School for Nightingales marked not only the end of one collaboration but the beginning of another, since the cast included, among the ‘young ladies of the Academy’, a dancer using the stage name of Anne de Mohan.
She was also the company's assistant ballet mistress and later became, under her real name of Anne Woolliams, John's ballet mistress in Stuttgart.
She remembers him, from those early days, attending class at Vera Volkova's studio.
Volkova was the best ballet teacher in London.
John used to enter very simply, did his class ‘not very well but with complete concentration, and between exercises, when others would talk, adjust their clothes, or wipe the sweat from their faces, he stood perfectly still and watched closely as the next group went through the exercises; Margot Fonteyn would do that too.’
John worked hard and played hard.
For his summer holiday he went with Henry Legerton to Positano, seeing Italy for the first time, and sent a card to Hanns: ‘We have lounged like lizards.
Life is very cheap and food excellent.
Vermouth is threepence and brandy sixpence!
Treasures abound, one keeps itching to buy, but then thinks better of it.
Life is smarter and more pre-war than anywhere I have yet seen.’
Then in September, when the Sadler's Wells Ballet danced in Paris (opening the day after the premiere of School for Nightingales ), he added to his scrapbook, besides snapshots of Legerton, Powell and himself in the obvious tourist spots, a picture of two puppets; he also pasted a picture of Marie Antoinette in the middle of a page otherwise devoted entirely to gargoyles from Nôtre-Dame.
The new season again brought some work on opera-ballet, with a new production of Die Fledermaus at Sadler's Wells on 10 January 1949 giving a bigger opportunity than he had yet enjoyed in that genre.
So far, everything he had produced in London had been lighthearted, but his next creation,Sea Change , was a complete contrast in mood.
It was also on a bigger scale and, for the first time, he was to collaborate with a distinguished painter for the designs.
It was Ninette de Valois who put him in touch with John Piper, whose work he had already known and admired before leaving Cape Town, although only from reproductions, just as much as his musical knowledge came from recordings.
But Myfanwy Piper, John Piper's wife, remarked how penetrating and imaginative John Cranko's taste and judgement already were, in spite of limited opportunities in South Africa, and that since his arrival in England he ‘never stopped looking, listening and absorbing’.
She described by implication the Pipers' first impression of him when she wrote that
those who met him…were exhilarated by his ardour, his generosity and his receptiveness.
He knew how to extract ideas and information from people without ever making them feel sucked of vitality — because he never failed to give back as much as he took.
For someone who needs, as a choreographer needs, the imaginative cooperation of artists and musicians, as well as the enthusiastic obedience of dancers, that is a great gift.
The first inspiration for Sea Change came from the attraction which the sea and the fishermen's lives exercised on the choreographer during his holiday at Cassis in 1947.
He wrote that ‘all the activity on the beach had a great fascination for me — the nets hanging out to dry, people mending them, various types standing round watching, all the usual incidents that happen in a fishing village.
Certain movements such as boys kicking a football gave me ideas tor the choreography.’
But I cannot help wondering whether the dark mood of the ballet was at least partly influenced by Britten's opera Peter Grimes , which also included episodes of fishermen mending their nets.
Having to use existing music, John considered several possible scores, all of which were rejected as unsuitable for one reason or another.
Among the rejected choices was Sibelius's Tapiola , and, at that stage in planning, the story was to have been of
a rather simple girl who hangs about on the outskirts of a village…
She finds a fisherman who has been washed up on the shore.
She revives him and looks after him until he gets strong.
During this time he becomes all the world to her, and he is grateful but unaware of her affection.
When he is completely recovered, he sees some other villagers and returns to the world he knew, leaving the girl to her solitary existence.
When he rather reluctantly accepted the suggestion of another Sibelius score,En Saga , he found that ‘the music suggested rather a different story’.
It eventually showed fishermen preparing and setting out on a peaceful evening for a night's work; while they are at sea, a storm blows up.
The women wait anxiously and when the boat returns one of its crew has been lost, causing inconsolable grief to his young wife.
It was a simpler and better story.
The music finally chosen helped greatly in creating a sombre mood, but John did not find it interesting or easy to work with.
He closely questioned Charles Lisner, who had come from Australia to join the Sadler's Wells Ballet, about a ballet which Laurel Martyn had made for the Victorian Ballet Guild using that score: her subject matter, general treatment and what Lisner thought of the ballet.
John repaid his debt of gratitude two or three years later, when Lisner was wondering whether to return to Australia and try to start his own company.
He showed that he understood Lisner's thoughts and encouraged him in his dream; Lisner wrote to me that ‘John was excited about my plans…my enthusiasm stimulated him and his own infectious enthusiasm affected me in turn.’
John had always a group of dancers within the company whom he particularly liked to work with, and the cast of Sea Change included two of them: Poole as the skipper and Jane Shore as an old woman.
John was always prepared to take suggestions from his chosen dancers and also from Peggy van Praagh, who told me that her function was most often to suggest that he was attempting too much and ought to take something out.
One day during rehearsal of Sea Change , she remembers, when things were getting too complicated, she simply told him to stop and leave it altogether until the next day.
The cast of Sea Change included, among the fisherfolk, a dancer new to the company who became closely associated with John in later years, Peter Wright.
John gave the leading part, of the woman whose husband is drowned, to a young dancer he had not previously created for, although he had partnered her in Khadra , Sheilah O'Reilly.
She was beginning to attract attention in dramatic roles but had never been given such an opportunity for anguished emotion, and she rose to it whole-heartedly.
The ballet had some rough edges to its structure and the groupings, like the emotions, were sometimes a little too obviously contrived, but it marked a step forward for its choreographer in its attempt to achieve dramatic seriousness and depth.
He took the trouble to work on it further when it was given again the following season, eliminating the somewhat superfluous role of a pastor, for instance, and putting the women into soft shoes instead of point shoes so that the movement looked more natural.
Piper's designs were admired for their sombre beauty.
He had previously designed only two ballets, working with Ashton on The Quest and with de Valois on a revision of her ballet inspired by Blake's drawings,Job .
In fact Sea Change was a better example of his art than either of those.
Most of his earlier stage designs had been for opera, and the latest of them,Simon Boccanegra , had been the big hit of the preceding season.
That, together with his high reputation as a painter, made it possible for John to feel much less responsibility on his own shoulders than in former collaborations.
He became close friends with the Pipers and gained great benefits from their taste, experience and enthusiasm.
John could hardly have found a better influence.
John Piper had seen the Diaghilev Ballet in his twenties, had gone as often as possible because ‘the excitement — the tinge of exultation — in the dancing married to modern music and modern art, worked in my blood and bones.’
From that experience, he derived an ideal of stage unity stemming from a close collaboration ‘regardless as far as possible of individual prestige and personality’, which was reinforced by working in the Group Theatre of the thirties with Auden, Isherwood, Spender, Britten and others.
Offstage, too, the Pipers became like second parents to John, and he picked up from their example many influences on his daily life as well as art.
They affected his taste in food, for instance, his liking for antiques — even, one friend thought, the way he walked.
Years later, he described to friends in Stuttgart, with whom he was sharing a house, what he thought a kitchen should look like.
When they visited the Pipers' home they recognized the source of John's description in every detail.
Shortly before the first performance of Sea Change , unhappiness struck John's domestic life.
His stepmother Phyllis died of cancer in a nursing home in Guildford on 29 June.
She and Herbert had enjoyed only a few years of happiness together.
The blow was almost as great for John, who had begun to enjoy a family background after years of being on his own or part of a split family.
just a few weeks before her death he had written fondly to her on a postcard from Florence (where the Sadler's Wells Ballet went for the Maggio Musicale festival) that she ‘would love it so.
So much to see it's quite overwhelming.
Florence quite unspoilt and Florentines charming.
Prices on the whole good…
We open tonight, expect wonderful reception judging by other performances.’
Herbert was there too and wrote the same day that ‘It's heavenly here — the air is wonderful and one never feels tired…’
The intention had been to give the premiere of Sea Change at Sadler's Wells to open the Theatre Ballet's new season there, but it was thought that by then John would already have left for New York to take part in the Sadler's Wells Ballet's first American tour, so the decision was made to present the ballet first on 18 July 1949 at the Gaiety Theatre, Dublin, where the company concluded its summer tour.
John went over with them and, an indefatigable sightseer as ever, found time to visit Trinity College as well as being photographed looking proud and happy beside the poster outside the theatre.
In fact, too, he was still in London when Sea Change was first given there on 28 September; the other company did not leave until five days after that.
At the Sadler's Wells Ballet's historic debut in the Metropolitan Opera House on 9 October 1949, with Fonteyn dancing The Sleeping Beauty , John played his customary small role as one of the four marquesses in the hunting scene (Kenneth MacMillan was another of them).
It was characteristic that he stuck into his scrapbook not only the programme of that performance and the rave review from Dance News , but also such memorabilia as publicity photographs and sketches about the clothes and accessories which all the women in the company were given as ambassadors of British fashion, and, significantly, the handsome illustrated brochure of Balanchine's School of American Ballet.
He was an exception among the British dancers in wanting to find our as much as he could about American ballet teachers.
Before the American tour, John had already prepared his next new production, and he came back in time to supervise the final rehearsals before its premiere at Sadler's Wells on 20 December.
This was one of his enduring pieces,Beauty and the Beast .
Although it has a cast of only two, it is a complete short story-ballet, not just a showpiece duet.
He had seen Cocteau's film on the subject several times, was full of admiration for it and wanted to achieve a similar of Cocteau.
John kept his plot very simple and concentrated on expressing the emotions of the two characters at every moment.
At the same time he was equally concerned that the dancing itself should be interesting.
Poole was again his choice for the male role, with another of the young South African dancers, Patricia Miller, as Beauty.
He told her ‘I'm going to do a ballet for you and I will make you or I'll break you.
I'm going to give you all the things you can't do.’
That drastic formula meant, for instance, that the ballet turned out to be full of controlled balances on one leg, which until then she had just not been able to sustain.
Somehow John forced or persuaded her to achieve what she had found impossible before and, more important, he also won from her a performance of quietly expressive lyricism.
Some people complained that the realistic sobbing of the Beast, slumped on the ground at the ballet's opening and again when Beauty hurls the rose back at him, was out of place in a ballet, but it conveyed the point without needing any artificial mime — something he always tried to get away from, wanting anyone to be able to understand his work without needing to learn the conventions first.
In fact, the choreographer's growing skill was manifest in the way he combined different elements, from that sobbing at one extreme to the rapturous final duet at the other (in which influences from Balanchine and Ashton could be seen), into one fluent whole, and fitted it all so smoothly to the music he chose, Ravel's ‘Mother Goose’ Suite with one section omitted.
The designer was Margaret Kaye, who had just had an exhibition of collages made with fabric, and she used a similar technique to try to provide the mixture of fantasy and realism needed to match the ballet.
That succeeded only partially in the setting, but the costumes were attractive.
The Beast wore a tunic with a special inside breast pocket in which (with back turned to the audience) he could hide his mask and gloves when transformed to human form by Beauty's kiss, and that ingenious idea must have been John's own.
Beauty and the Beast proved highly popular and was given with many casts during later seasons; it has also been revived for several other companies, with various designers.
John was happier with this work than any of his others, and Myfanwy Piper recorded that it was the first of his own ballets which John seriously believed in.
The success of Beauty and the Beast was fortunately timed.
New York City Ballet was hoping to have its first London season in the summer of 1950 and Lincoln Kirstein, its director, wanted to commission a work from a young British choreographer.
He asked Ashton, who was an old friend and had just created Illuminations for the company, to suggest who would be most suitable.
Ashton nominated John as the most promising newcomer.
Balanchine, City Ballet's artistic director, came to Britain to mount his Ballet Imperial for Sadler's Wells Ballet, was able to see Beauty and the Beast , and approved the choice.
Unfortunately, the commission did not work out well.
John was invited to have dinner with Balanchine, and to his surprise the latter proposed to him the theme, music and designer to be used.
He was so overwhelmed and flattered that he could not argue, but when he started working on the ballet he found that the music (an orchestrated version of Schubert's four-handed piano pieces)‘said nothing to me’.
All the same, he did not dare tell Balanchine ‘it's not working’, he thought he must try.
In that unhappy mood he went to Paris to meet the designer Balanchine had stipulated, Dorothea Tanning, who followed the surrealist manner she had previously applied to one of Balanchine's own ballets,Night Shadow .
When John saw the costume designs, he was horrified, finding them quite impracticable for dancing.
In spite of that, he got on well with Tanning, whom he found a ‘nice woman’, and with the man who shared her studio, always painting away while John was there.
They had some good meals together, and when John left, the man gave him an inscribed copy of the lithograph being used as poster for his exhibition.
Back at his hotel, packing for his return to London, John wondered how to fit this large acquisition into his luggage, could not think of a way, decided that he did not want a souvenir of the trip anyway because of his gloom about the impending ballet, so tore it up and threw it in the wastepaper basket.
It was only later that he realized he had destroyed a Max Ernst.
Eventually, John summoned up courage to ask permission to use different music: Ravel's two-handed piano concerto in G. Presumably he was happier working with that, but few people found it an apt choice for the subject of the ballet, about a witch who destroys her lover.
Kirstein wanted to see the ballet in preparation before confirming the commission, so John began working on it with dancers of Sadler's Wells Theatre Ballet, including Miller as the heroine.
She was represented as a nice girl temporarily turned into a witch by strange creatures (including, in Tanning's designs, men described as Owl Heads and Bald Heads) who interrupt a rendezvous with her lover in a mysterious castle.
Balanchine, Kirstein and Tanning went down to Bournemouth at the end of June to watch a run-through by the company, which was on tour.
The critic Richard Buckle accompanied them and described how they sat in the stalls of the empty theatre afterwards while Balanchine told them ‘what he liked and did not like about it and how it could be improved’.
The tenor of his advice was that every step must be given its full measure of beauty and significance; he wanted John to guard against falling back on clichés between moments of happy invention.
This must have been the only time John ever had his work discussed in detail by a choreographer of Balanchine's gifts and experience, and although Buckle described him as ‘looking somewhat quelled’ his nature was such as to profit from it.
But that was not enough to save The Witch .
The leading parts were given to two of City Ballet's most interesting dancers, Melissa Hayden and Francisco Moncion.
There were a lot of complicated lifts, and Hayden found some moments of the opening duet highly erotic; the witches and other apparitions were given some ghoulishly eccentric movements.
The ballet was not originally announced for the London season, but the company was persuaded to stay for an extra week and The Witch was premiered on 18 August the night before the last.
It was the first real ballet of John's to be seen at Covent Garden, since his dances for operas had so far all been on a small scale, and it was far from being a success.
John was relieved when the executors of Ravel's estate announced their objection to the use of that concert music for a ballet, so that no further performances could be given and, in consequence, the ballet was never shown in New York.
Also, it was no longer possible to take it into the Sadler's Wells repertory, as had been intended.
Although the ballet flopped, simply to have been invited to work with a major American company was already a valuable recognition of John's gifts.
There was better recognition still to come, adding professional achievement to a period of happiness in his private life.
Towards the end of 1949 he had met a young psychiatrist from Australia, Frank Tait.
They soon became close friends and decided to buy a house together at 19 Alderney Street, between Victoria Station and the River Thames: a mixed but lively and convenient neighbourhood.
This remained John's London address for the rest of his life.
They moved in during September 1950 and just about that time Ninette de Valois announced that she was appointing John resident choreographer of Sadler's Wells Theatre Ballet for the following season.
The time of proving himself was over; John Cranko now held an official and important post in the Sadler's Wells organization, only four and a half years after arriving in Britain as a student at the Sadler's Wells school.
He was just twenty-three.