

PART I: the Setting
WHEN I BEGAN to write about Thrush Green in 1958, I described it in the first few pages of the book I called Thrush Green , and a little later as seen by Ruth Bassett from the bedroom window of her late grandfather's beautiful house overlooking the green.
Thrush Green stood on high ground at the northerly end of Lulling, a small sleepy prosperous town, which had been famous in the days of the wool trade.
The town itself lay some half a mile distant, its gentle grey houses clustered, in a hollow, on each side of the twining silver river, like a flock of drowsy sheep.
The streets curved and twisted as pleasantly as the river, but were shaded by fine lime trees, now breaking into delicate leaf, instead of the willows, soon to shimmer summer through, above the trout-ringed reaches of the River Pleshey.
The High Street tilted abruptly to rise to Thrush Green.
It was a short sharp hill, ‘a real head-thumper of a hill’ in hot weather, as old Mr Piggott, sexton of St Andrew's, often said.
In the grip of winter's ice, the same hill was feared by riders, drivers and those on foot.
Years before, a wooden handrail, polished by generations of hands, had lined the high pavement, but the town council had decided that it served no useful purpose and detracted from the charm of the stone-walled cottages perched high on the bank above, and when the handrail had become shaky with age it had been dismantled, much to the annoyance of the Thrush Green residents.
The green itself was triangular, with the church of St Andrew standing at the southerly point.
The main road from Lulling to its nearest neighbouring Cotswold town ran along one side of Thrush Green, and a less important lane threading its way to half a dozen or so sleepy little hamlets, skirted the other side.
Across the base of the triangle at the northern end ran a fine avenue of horsechestnut trees, linking the two roads and, behind them, facing towards St Andrew's, across the green, stood five sturdy old houses, built of that pleasantly sunny Cotswold stone which reminds one of honeycombs, golden afternoons and warm and mellow bliss.
[THRUSH GREEN]
The view from its window across Thrush Green never ceased to enchant Ruth Bassett.
If she looked left she saw the wider road to Lulling, with a few comfortable houses standing well back in leafy gardens.
The tallest one belonged to old Doctor Bailey, who had attended to Lulling's ills for almost fifty years, and who had known the Bassett girls since they were babies.
To the right, on the narrow dusty lane, lay the village school behind a row of white palings.
A stretch of mown grass lay between the palings and the road, and on hot days the children left their stony playground and lay and rolled on the grass just outside.
Only if their teacher were with them were they allowed to cross the dusty lane to play on the greater green, for Miss Watson was a woman who had no doubt at all that each and every pupil would be run over and either maimed or killed outright if she were not there to keep an eye on their movements.
Beside the school stood the little school house, and beside that a row of small cottages.
In the last lived old Mr Piggott, the sexton of St Andrew's.
As The Two Pheasants stood next door to his house, he was handy not only for his work at the church on the green, but also for his only pleasure.
He had been a source of fear to the two Bassett girls when they were small.
Always grumbling, he had threatened them with all kinds of dreadful punishment if he had caught them walking in St Andrew's churchyard or sheltering in the porch.
Now, bent and rheumaticky and crosser than ever, Ruth and her sister Joan Young found him a figure to be pitied rather than feared, but both agreed that he was an evil-tempered old man and they felt very sorry for his only daughter Molly who kept house for him.
[THRUSH GREEN]
It was Molly Piggott, later to be Molly Curdle, who took out Ruth Bassett's little nephew Paul Young each afternoon.
In the winter they kept to the roads or, if the earth were hard with frost, they might play on Thrush Green with a bat and ball in view of Paul's home.
Occasionally they walked down the steep hill to Lulling to shop for something which Joan had forgotten.
But more often they took the little leafy lane which led from Thrush Green to Upper  Pleshy , Nod and Nidden, the lane that threaded half a dozen or more sleepy thatched villages, like hoary old beads upon its winding string, before it emerged upon the broad highway which led to Stratford-upon-Avon.
Sometimes their expeditions were more adventurous.
Molly and Paul knew all the true joys that were within an hour's walking time of Thrush Green.
There was the pond that lay, dark and mysterious, along the lower road to Lulling Woods, mirroring the trees that stood around it.
Sometimes in the summer Paul had taken a bright wooden boat on a string and floated it there, beating at the water's edge with a fan of leaves to make waves.
In the spring, vast masses of frogs' spawn floated just beneath the surface, like submerged chain-mail cast there by some passing knight.
And on one day of hard frost, Paul and Molly had slid back and forth across the shining ice, screaming with delight, watched by a bold robin who sat fearlessly nearby on a low bare branch preening the pale grey feathers that edged the bronze of his breast.
There were other places that they loved which were accessible only in the summer.
There was the steep path through Lulling Woods, cool as a cathedral, even on the sultriest day.
There was the field path to Nod, where the grass brushed Paul's shoulder in high summer and he looked at marguerites and red sorrel at eye-level.
A bower of briar roses guarded the final stile that led into Nod and, in later life, Paul never smelt that sharp breath-taking sweetness of the wild rose without remembering the languor and warm happiness of those golden afternoons with Molly Piggott.
[THRUSH GREEN]
In the course of Thrush Green , Molly received a proposal of marriage from Ben Curdle.
While the preparations for the fair were in progress, the young man made his way from the green to The Drover's Arms by way of Lulling Woods.
Ben's heart was light as he swung along through the meadows that lay before the heights of Lulling Woods.
In the sunshine, the buttercups were opening fast, interlacing their gold with the earlier silver of the daisies.
For the sheer joy of it, young Ben left the white path and trod a parallel one through the gilded grass, watching his black shoes turn yellow with the fallen pollen.
The field fell gently downhill to his left, tipping its little, secret, underground streams towards the River Pleshey, a mile distant.
Dotty Harmer's cottage was the only house to be seen here, basking among the buttercups like a warmly golden cat.
Dotty herself was in the garden, a straw hat of gigantic proportions crowning her untidy thatch of hair.
She waved to the young man and called out something which he could not catch.
He waved back civilly.
‘Nice day, ma'am,’ he shouted, for good measure.
‘Rum ol' trout,’ he added to himself, noting her eccentric appearance.
‘Not quite the ticket, I should think.
Or else gentry.’
He forgot her as soon as the cottage was behind him.
A bend in the path brought him to a stile at the entrance to Lulling Woods.
It was nearly a mile of steep climbing, he knew, before he would emerge on to the open heathland where The Drover's Arms stood.
His spirits were buoyant.
So she'd missed him!
She hadn't forgotten him!
Everything pointed to happiness.
He forged up the narrow path, slippery with a myriad pine needles, as though his feet were winged.
It was very cool and quiet in the woods after the bland sunshine of the meadows.
Above him, the topmost twigs of the trees whispered interminably.
An occasional shaft of sunlight penetrated the foliage and lit up the bronze trunks of the pines, touching them with fire.
A grey squirrel, spry after its winter sleep, startled Ben by scampering across his path.
It darted up a tree with breathtaking ease, and the young man watched it leaping from bough to bough, as light and airy as a puff of grey smoke.
The primroses were out, starring the carpet of tawny dead leaves, and the bluebells, soon to spread their misty veil, now crouched in bud among their glossy leaves in tight pale knots.
The faint but heady, perfume of a spring woodland was to stay with Ben for the rest of his life, and was connected, for ever, with a lover's happiness.
[THRUSH GREEN]
Some hours later, Ben returned to his duties at the fair.
There was much to do before the festivities began.
Although twilight had not yet come, the lights of the fair were switched on at a quarter past six, and the first strains of music from the roundabout spread the news that Mrs Curdle's annual fair was now open.
The news was received, by those who heard it on Thrush Green, in a variety of ways.
Sour old Mr Piggott, who had looked in at St Andrew's, let fall an ejaculation quite unsuitable to its surroundings, and emerging from the vestry door, crunched purposefully and maliciously upon a piece of coke to relieve his feelings.
Paul Young, beside himself with excitement, was leaping up and down the hall, singing at the top of his voice.
Occasionally, he broke off to bound up to Ruth Bassett's bedroom where she was getting ready.
The appalling slowness with which she arranged her hair and powdered her face drove her small nephew almost frantic.
Would she never be ready?
To young newly-appointed Doctor Lovell, returning from a visit to Upper Pleshey in his shabby two-seater, the colour and glitter of the fair offered a spectacle of charming innocence.
Here was yet another aspect of Thrush Green to increase his growing affection for the place.
He could settle here so easily, he told himself, slipping into place among the friendly people of Lulling and Thrush Green, enjoying their companionship and sharing their enchanting countryside.
[THRUSH GREEN]
PART II: Where They Live
IT MAY SEEM paradoxical to describe Mrs Curdle's gipsy caravan first, for it only stood on the green for a day or two at the end of April and beginning of May each year.
But then it was the focal point of Thrush Green's interest, and the fair, the fun, and the great Mrs Curdle herself dominated the scene.
For the rest of the year, the Thrush Green inhabitants remembered it, and looked forward to her next visit.
As it happened, in the first book, Mrs Curdle paid her final visit to the place, but her grandson Ben took over the fair and continued in the old lady's footsteps for several years.
Her spirit still dominated Thrush Green, and her remains lay at rest in St Andrew's churchyard.
Here is a description of her home.
Mrs Curdle heard St Andrew's clock strike seven as she lifted the boiling kettle from her diminutive stove.
She had been up and about for over an hour, moving slowly about her caravan, straightening the covers on the bunk, shaking the rag rug and even giving the brass on her beloved stove an early rub with metal polish.
The stove was the delight of her heart and had been built especially by a friend of her late husband's to fit neatly into the end of her tiny home.
The top was of gleaming steel which Mrs Curdle rubbed up daily with emery paper, hissing gently to herself like a groom to a horse, as her busy hand slid back and forth across the satin of the surface.
A circular lid could be lifted off and the fire then sent up its released heat to Mrs Curdle's kettle, stew-pot or frying-pan.
When the food was cooked, or the teapot filled, it could be kept hot by standing it further along the hob, and frequently the top of the little stove was filled with a variety of utensils each giving off a rich aroma, for Mrs Curdle was a great cook.
The front of the stove was black but decorated with a great deal of brass.
The knobs and hinges of the tiny oven door gleamed like gold against the jetty blacklead.
Another door, covering the bars of the fire, could be let down and formed a useful ledge.
It was here that Mrs Curdle heated her great flat-iron, propping it up on its back with the ironing surface pressed to the glowing red bars.
[THRUSH GREEN]
Paul Young, like all the local children, was fascinated by Mrs Curdle.
Molly had told him all about Mrs Curdle and gipsies' ways.
She would be standing by her glittering stove, cooking hedgehogs, Paul had no doubt.
He had once, fearfully, climbed the three steps to Mrs Curdle's caravan and had gazed, fascinated, at the glory within, the half-door had been shut, but by standing on tiptoe he had seen the shelves, the tiny drawers, the cupboards, the gleaming brass and copper and the rows of vividly painted plates as breathtakingly lovely to the child as the bright birds which he had seen the week before at the Zoo, sitting motionless upon their perches, in a splendour of tropical plumage.
No one had been in the caravan.
Only a clock ticked and a saucepan sizzled, now and then, upon the diminutive stove.
Molly had stood beside him and had pointed out one particularly small drawer close by the door.
It had a curious brass handle, embossed with leaves and fruit.
‘She puts the money in there,’ had whispered Molly, in the child's ear.
‘What money?’
Paul had asked.
‘The fortune-telling money.
See, she leans over this door and reads your palm and you pays her a bit of silver, sixpence say, or a shilling, and she pops it in this little drawer just beside her.
Real handy, isn't it, Paul?’
He had nodded, open-mouthed, and would have liked to have stayed longer, just gazing at the beauties, but Molly had hurried him away.
[THRUSH GREEN]
If Mrs Curdle's abode was the smallest on Thrush Green, then the Youngs' house was certainly the largest and one of the oldest.
Travelling clockwise round the green, Joan and Edward Young's house stood at twelve o'clock, a dominant position well suited to its size and dignity.
The finest house at Thrush Green, everyone agreed, was that occupied by Joan and Edward Young.
Built of honey-coloured Cotswold stone, some hundred or so years ago, it had a beautiful matching tiled roof, mottled with a patina of lichen and moss.
It looked southward, across the length of the green, to the little market town of Lulling hidden in the valley half a mile away.
The house had been built by a mill owner who had made a comfortable fortune at the woollen mill which straddled the river Pleshey a mile or two west of Lulling.
It was large enough to house his family of six, and three resident maids.
A range of stone-built stables, a coach house and tack room, stood a little way from the house, and at right angles to it.
Above the stable was the bothy where the groom-cum-coachman slept, and immediately above that was the stable clock.
The Youngs often wondered how on earth people managed without such storage space.
Nowadays the buildings were filled with furniture awaiting repair, lawn-mowers, deck chairs, tea chests full of bottling equipment or archaic kitchen utensils which ‘might come in useful one day’, two deep freezers and a decrepit tricycle and a rocking horse, the property of Paul Young, their only child.
Everything needing a temporary home found its way into the stable and then became a permanency.
Sagging wicker garden chairs, shabby trunks, cat baskets, camping stoves, old tennis racquets, fishing waders, and Paul's pram, unused for nine years, were housed here, jostling each other, and coated with dust, bird droppings and the debris from ancient nests in the beams above.
‘If ever we had to move,’ said Edward to Joan one sunny afternoon, ‘I can't think how we'd begin to sort out this lot.’
He was looking for space in which to dump two sacks of garden fertiliser.
‘Those new flats in Lulling,’ he went on, ‘have exactly three cupboards in each.
People seem to cope all right.
How do we get so much clobber?’
‘It's a law of nature,’ Joan replied.
‘Abhorring a vacuum and all that.
However much space you have, you fill it.’
[RETURN TO THRUSH GREEN]
Here we are, thought Joan, surveying the garden through half-closed eyes, in mid-April and the daffodils and narcissi are only just in their prime.
Would the primroses be starring the banks along the lane to Nidden, she wondered?
As children, she and her sister Ruth had reckoned the first outing to pick primroses as the true herald of spring.
How lucky they had been to have grandparents living at Thrush Green, thought Joan, looking back to those happy days with affection.
She and Ruth lived most of the year in Ealing, where their father owned a furniture shop.
They lived comfortably in a house built in King Edward's reign.
The garden was large for a town house.
The common was nearby, and Kew Gardens a bus ride away.
But to the little girls, such amenities were definitely second-best.
‘It's not the country !’ they protested.
‘Why can't we live in the country ?
Why don't we go to Thrush Green for good?’
‘Because my living's here,’ said Mr Bassett, smiling.
‘There are four of us to keep, and the house and garden to care for, and your schooling to be paid.
If I don't work, then we have nothing.
You must think yourselves lucky to be able to go to Thrush Green as often as you do.’
He too adored Thrush Green, and when his parents died, the house became his.
Barely fifty, he intended to continue to live and work in Ealing.
By this time, Joan had married Edward Young, an architect in Lulling known to the Bassetts since childhood, and the young couple had lived in the house ever since.
‘But the day I retire,’ Mr Bassett had said, ‘I'll be down to take over, you know!
‘I'll build a house in readiness,’ promised Edward.
That was over ten years ago, thought Joan, stretching out her legs into the sunshine, and we still have not built it.
Perhaps we should think about it, instead of drifting on from day to day.
Father must be in his sixties now, and had not been well this winter.
The time must come when he decides to retire, and it's only right that he should come to Thrush Green to enjoy his heritage.
They had been wonderfully blessed to have had so long in this lovely place.
The telephone bell broke in upon her musing, and she left the sunshine to answer it.
[RETURN TO THRUSH GREEN]
Within fifty yards of the Youngs' home, across the road which led northward to the Midlands, stood the house called Tullivers at one on our imaginary clock.
Tullivers, as it was called, had been the home of old Admiral Josiah Trigg and his sister Lucy for almost thirty years, and when he died, suddenly one hot afternoon, after taking the sharp hill from the town at a spanking pace, his sister continued to muddle along in a vague, amiable daze for another eighteen months before succumbing to bronchitis.
‘If it's not the dratted hill,’ pronounced old Piggott the sexton gloomily, ‘that carries off us Thrush Green folks, it's the dratted east wind.
You gotter be tough to live 'ere.’
You certainly had to be tough to live at Tullivers after the Admiral had gone, for Lucy Trigg, in her eighties, could not be bothered to have any domestic help, nor could she be bothered to light fires, to cook meals for herself, nor to clean the house and tend the garden.
Winnie Bailey, the soul of tact, frequently visited, did what she could in an unobtrusive way, but knew she was fighting a losing battle.
The curtains grew greyer, the window panes misty with grime, the doorstep and path were spattered with bird droppings, and the docks and nettles rioted in the borders once tended by Lucy's brother and kept trim and shipshape with pinks, pansies and geums neatly confined within immaculate box hedges.
It wasn't as if Lucy Trigg were senile.
Her mind, in some ways, was as clear as ever.
She played a good game of bridge with her neighbours.
She attacked, and overcame, the challenge of the Daily Telegraph crossword puzzle each morning, and played her dusty piano with fingers still nimble despite arthritis.
It was simply that the squalor of her house did not affect her.
Her world had shrunk to the few things which still had interest for her.
The rest was ignored.
It was fortunate that Tullivers was a small house with a small garden.
Doctor Bailey, as a young man, had been offered the major part of the next door garden by the Admiral's predecessor.
He had bought it for thirty pounds, enclosed it with a honey-coloured Cotswold stone wall, and planted a small but fine orchard, now at the height of its production.
Thus the Baileys' garden was L-shaped, and the remaining portion of Tullivers' land, a mere quarter of an acre, allowed room for only a lawn, a few mature lilac and may trees and the flower border which had been the Admiral's particular pride.
An Albertine rose grew splendidly over one end of the house, and winter jasmine starred the front porch in the cold of the year.
Inside were two fairly small square rooms, one each side of the front door, with a roomy kitchen built on at the back.
Above stairs were two modest bedrooms and a bathroom with Victorian fittings and a geyser which made threatening rumbles, wheezes and minor explosions when in use.
Tullivers, in its heyday, was always known as ‘a snug house’ by Thrush Green people.
It stood at right angles to the road, and rather nearer it than most of the larger houses which stood back in their well-kept gardens.
It faced south, across the Baileys' front garden, towards the roofs of Lulling in the valley below, a mile distant.
It crouched there, as snug as a contented cat, catching the sunshine full on its face.
To see Tullivers so neglected had grieved Thrush Green.
Its dereliction over the past two years had been a constant topic of conversation.
It had been left to a nephew of Lucy Trigg's, also a naval man, who put it in the hands of a London estate agent to sell for him whilst he was abroad.
‘Pity he didn't let the local chaps have it,’ was the general opinion.
‘Keep a sharper eye on it.
Should have gone within the month.’
There had been one or two prospective buyers, pushing their way through the tall weeds, with papers describing the property's charms in their hands, but the general neglect seemed to dishearten them.
Heavy snow in January and February kept other possible buyers away, and by the time the crocuses and daffodils were decking the rest of the Thrush Green gardens, Tullivers was looking at its worst.
Birds nested in the porch and in the guttering, and a bold jackdaw started to build in the cold unused chimney.
Mice had found shelter in the kitchen, and spiders spun their webs unmolested.
The children at the village school eyed the blank windows speculatively, and the bigger boys fingered the catapults hidden in their pockets, longing to pick up pebbles and let fly at this beautiful sitting target.
What could be more exhilarating than the crack of a glass pane, the dramatic starring, the satisfying hole?
Two of the most daring had been observed in the garden by Miss Watson, the headmistress, who lived across the green at the school-house, and she had delivered dire warnings during assembly the next morning.
The two malefactors had been displayed to the assembled school as ‘Trespassers Loitering with Criminal Intent’, and were suitably abashed.
Thrush Green parents, fortunately, were still unspoilt by modern educational theories, and heartily approved of Miss Watson's strong line.
Miss Fogerty, who was in charge of the infants' class, added her own warnings when she regained the classroom, and the infants approached their morning's labours in a suitably sober mood.
It says much for the two ladies, and the parents of Thrush Green, that the little house remained safe from children's assaults, despite temptation.
[NEWS FROM THRUSH GREEN]
Luckily, succour was at hand.
the months of winter which had added to Tullivers' dereliction had kept buyers away, now gave way to spring.
One bright April day, a red Mini stopped outside Tullivers and a tall woman, paper fluttering from a gloved hand, made her way into the house.
Miss Fogerty was on playground duty that morning.
Standing on the sheltered side of the school, teacup in hand, she watched with mounting excitement.
Around her squealed and shouted the sixty or so pupils of Thrush Green Church of England Primary School.
During those delirious fifteen minutes of morning play-time, they were variously spacemen, horses, footballers, boxers, cowboys or — among the youthful minority — simply mothers and fathers.
The noise was ear-splitting.
The bracing Cotswold air produces fine healthy lungs, and the rumpus made at play-time could be clearly heard by fond parents who were safely half a mile away.
Agnes Fogerty, quiet and still as a mouse, and not unlike that timid animal in her much-pressed grey flannel skirt and twin-set to match, stood oblivious of the chaos around her.
Somehow, she sensed that the stranger would take on Tullivers one day.
There was something purposeful about that stride towards the front door, and the deft slipping of the key into the lock — almost is though the house were hers already, thought little Miss Fogerty.
Needless to say, many other people observed the stranger's entry to Tullivers.
Thrush Green, to the uninitiated, might have seemed remarkably quiet that morning.
The school-children apart, not more than two or three people were to be seen.
There were, of course, almost a dozen unseen — hidden behind curtains, screened by garden shrubs, or cocking a curious eye from such vantage points as porches and wood sheds.
Albert Piggott, languidly grubbing up the dead winter grass at the foot of the churchyard railings, kept the stranger comfortably in view.
He approved of the red Mini.
Must have a bit of money to drive a car, and that great leather handbag had cost something, he shouldn't wonder.
He knew a decent bit of leather when he saw it.
Plastic never deceived Albert Piggott yet.
A handsome gal too, with a nice pair of long legs.
[NEWS FROM THRUSH GREEN]
The stranger, who did indeed take Tullivers, was a young married woman called Phyllida Prior, who had a small son Jeremy to keep her company.
But, to the great interest of all at Thrush Green, no husband was to be seen when she moved in.
Dr Bailey and his wife Winnie lived next door, at two o'clock on the green, and promptly befriended Phyllida Prior when she arrived.
Their house was the tallest on Thrush Green, and when we first meet the good doctor, in the book of that name, he is an elderly man contemplating retirement.
His link with the redoubtable Mrs Curdle is a long one, and strengthened by her annual visit at the time of the fair.
Always she brought with her a rather odd bunch of flowers for her old friend.
‘Those flowers!’ said the old man, shaking his head.
‘A bigger and brighter bunch each year it seems.’
Mrs Curdle's annual bunch of flowers constituted something of a problem in the doctor's house, for they were artificial and lasted for ever.
They were  indeed works of art, great mop-headed beauties made from finely-cut wood shavings which curled into unbelievable shapes.
Mrs Curdle had learnt this handicraft as a young girl and was an expert.
When the flowers had been made, she dyed them yellow, pink, orange and scarlet and mounted them among evergreen twigs of laurel.
They made a dazzling bouquet, not without charm, but the bunch which was presented each May Day by Mrs Curdle in person to the doctor was of such gargantuan proportions that Mrs Bailey was hard put to it to find a suitable place for it.
Each year Mrs Curdle asked to see how the previous year's bouquet had worn, so that the doctor and his wife were in honour bound not to destroy these offerings.
‘Do you realise, my dear.’
said the doctor, ‘that we've had a bunch of Curdle blooms ever since 1915?’
‘Forty-odd years with the top shelf of the pantry occupied,’ commented Mrs Bailey.
‘And then having to remember to unearth them before the day!
Really, I shan't know myself.’
Outside, the blackbirds scolded and the sound of children playing on the green, glorying in the first few outdoor games of spring, could be faintly heard.
Mrs Bailey stole a glance at her husband.
His blue eyes were gazing far away and his wife knew that he was thinking of that distant evening when he and Mrs Curdle had first met, on just such an April evening, many years ago.
Doctor Bailey was then a young man in his twenties, newly qualified and recently married and settled in this his first practice.
The tall house on Thrush Green had been but sparsely furnished for the young couple had great  aspirations but little money, and most of the furniture was solid Victorian stuff given by their parents.
The large room to the left of the graceful hooded front door was young Doctor Bailey's surgery.
Later, as his family came into the world, it was to be the dining-room and a new surgery was built at the side of the house, but when Mrs Curdle first knew him, the doctor and his wife dined in the sunny little room at the back of the house, conveniently near to the kitchen.
They had been at supper on that far-distant evening when Mr Curdle, white with panic, had drummed madly on the glass of the hall door.
The little maid-of-all-work had been disdainful, telling the wild-eyed rough-looking man that Doctor Bailey had finished his evening surgery and was not at home.
At this, the sorely-tried husband had broken into such cries of frustration and wrath that the good doctor had thrust aside his plate and gone out into the hall to discover what all the hullabaloo was about.
‘It's me missus, sir,’ had said Mr Curdle, clutching the doctor's arm.
‘It's on the way — afore time.
Ain't never seen her this way afore!’.
‘I'll come,’ had answered the doctor, picking up his bag from the hall table.
The maid had retired, tossing her head at the thought of such low people as them gyppos having the sauce to interrupt the master at his supper.
[THRUSH GREEN]
On the same side of the road, some hundred yards farther south, at four o'clock, stood a small cottage where Dimity Dean and her friend Ella Bembridge lived.
At first sight they seemed an ill-assorted pair.
Ella Bembridge was a formidably hearty spinster of fifty-five who had lived, with a wilting friend of much the same age, in a small cottage on the Lulling corner of Thrush Green for the past ten years.
It was generally agreed that Ella ruled the roost and that ‘poor Miss Dean’ had a pretty thin time of it.
Deborah Dean had been nicknamed Dimity so long ago that the reason for the diminutive had been lost in the mists of time.
Now, at the age of fifty-odd, the name was pathetically incongruous, calling up as it did someone fresh, compact and sparkling, with an air of crisp, but old-world domesticity.
Dimity nowadays resembled a washed-out length of grey chiffon, for she was a drooping, attenuated figure, with lank, mouse-grey locks and a habit of dressing in shapeless frocks, incorporating unpressed pleats and draped bodices, in depressingly drab shades.
Doctor Lovell, who knew both women slightly, suspected that she was brow-beaten by the dominating Ella and would have liked to try the effects of an iron tonic on Dimity's languid pallor.
It was an odd thing, mused Doctor Lovell, that it was Ella who was the artistic one of the pair.
Dimity ran the house, it appeared, and it was her slender arms that bore in the coal scuttles, the heavy shopping baskets and the laden trays, while Ella's powerful hands designed wood blocks, mixed paint and stamped the lengths of materials which draped their little cottage.
Occasionally Ella took the train to town with a portfolio of hand-blocked patterns, and usually she returned, blown but jubilant, with a few orders from firms who appreciated her strong shades of olive green, dull beetroot and dirty yellow madly ensnared in black mesh.
[THRUSH GREEN]
But the friendship endured, and when Dimity did get married later, their affection survived the break.
Their snug cottage looked across the road to the ugliest house on the green, the Rectory, which stood at six o'clock, dead opposite the Youngs across Thrush Green, and was consequently a source of continuous irritation to Edward, the architect, who could see it from every south-facing window of his house.
The rectory, some hundred yards from St Andrew's, was a high Victorian monstrosity, facing north, and perched on a small mound the better to catch the chilly winds of the Cotswold country.
It was, thought Harold Shoosmith, the newcomer to Thrush Green, as he waited on the doorstep, the most gloomy house in Thrush Green.
Unlike its neighbours which were built of local stone, the vicarage had been encased in grey stucco early in its life.
The ravages of time had caused pieces to break away here and there, so that newer patches of different grey made the whole affair appear shabbier than ever.
Large sash windows and a tall narrow front door were all in need of paint, but there was little money to spare, as Harold knew too well.
In any case, Charles Henstock cared little for creature comforts, and had lived there for several years, alone, in appalling conditions of cold and discomfort, until his marriage to Dimity Dean, a few years before, had brought companionship and a slight mitigation of the hardship of his surroundings.
Dimity opened the door to Harold and greeted him with cries of welcome.
‘What a day you've brought with you!
I'm in the kitchen, and the sun is just streaming in.’
She led the way, still chattering, down the long dark corridor which acted as a wind tunnel, and kept the rectory in a state of refrigeration during the winter months.
Harold's feet echoed on the shabby linoleum, and he thought guiltily of his own carpeted home across the green.
[BATTLES AT THRUSH GREEN]
Charles and Dimity's bleak surroundings worried Harold continuously but there was little he could do.
But one winter evening, Charles Henstock paid a call upon his friend Harold Shoosmith.
It was clear and cold.
The stars were already pricking the sky, and frost was in the air.
Charles was glad to settle by Harold's log fire, and to accept a small whisky and water.
He looked about the room appreciatively.
There was a fine cyclamen on the side table, leather-bound books on the shelves, and a well-filled tantalus on the sideboard.
Everywhere the hand of Betty Bell was apparent in the glossy furniture, the plump cushions, the shining glass.
‘You manage to make things so very comfortable,’ commented Charles.
There was a wondering note in his voice.
‘Somehow the rectory never achieves such snugness.’
Harold could hardly point out that good curtains and carpets were one of the basic requirements for soft living, and an ample income another, to supply other amenities including first-rate domestic help.
‘I have the advantage of lower ceilings, for one thing,’ said Harold, ‘and not such an exposed position.
Those Victorian Gothic buildings never were designed for cosiness.’
‘Dimity does wonders,’ went on Charles, nursing his glass.
‘When I think how bleak the house was when I lived there alone, I never cease to be thankful for her presence.
Do you remember Mrs Butler who kept house for me?’
‘I shall never forget her,’ said Harold firmly.
‘I have never, in all my travels, met a meaner, tighter-fisted old harridan.’
Charles looked shocked.
‘Oh, I wouldn't say that,’ he protested.
‘Of course, you wouldn't.
But it's true.
I remember the disgraceful way she allowed you to be neglected when you had flu, only bringing up a water biscuit or two when she deigned to climb the stairs!
You were sorely put upon, you know that, Charles.
Saints often are.’
‘She was rather frugal ,’ admitted the rector.
‘But why I mentioned her was that I heard by chance that she has married again.’
‘Poor devil,’ said Harold.
‘I hope he belongs to a good club.’
The night air was sharp as the rector crossed the green a little later.
Already the grass was becoming crisp with frost.
Two miles away, at Lulling Station, a train hooted, and from Lulling Woods, in the valley on his right, an owl quavered and was answered by another.
His tall house loomed over him as he unlocked the front door.
It looked gaunt and inhospitable, he realised.
His thoughts turned on the conversation he had just had with Harold.
He found Dimity in the sitting-room, close to the fire.
It was half the size of the one he had just left, he noticed, unusually observant.
One could see the edges of the iron basket which held the fire.
The coals were burning only in the centre of the container.
He looked aloft at the distant ceiling, and at the expanse of sparsely-curtained window space.
Although the night was still, some wayward draught stirred the light drapings.
The lamp by which Dimity was seated had a plain white shade which threw a cold light upon the knitting in her hands.
Harold's lampshades, he remembered, were red, and made a cheerful glow.
‘I've just come from Harold's.
His fire seems enormous.
I'm beginning to think we must give a very chilly welcome to visitors here.
But my main concern is for you.
You know that you tend to be bronchial.
We really must keep a better fire, or see if we can put in some central heating of some sort.’
‘Charles dear,’ said Dimity, ‘it simply can't be done.
Do you know how much coal costs?’
‘Harold told me.
I couldn't help thinking that he must have made a mistake.
Why, as a boy, I remember coal carts coming to the house with a large ticket displayed, saying two-and-six a hundredweight.’
‘And that,’ pointed out Dimity, ‘was over half a century ago!
Times have changed, and I'm sorry to say that Harold's figure is the correct one.’
‘There must be many ways of making this place snugger,’ argued Charles, looking about him with fresh eyes.
‘What about a red lamp shade, like Harold's?’
‘We could do that,’ said Dimity, nodding.
‘And a screen?
My mother had a screen.
She said it kept off draughts.
And a sausage filled with sand at the bottom of the door.
That would help.’
Dimity suddenly burst into laughter.
‘Oh Charles!
To see you as a domestic adviser is so funny!
And such a change!
What this house really wants is double-glazing, central heating, thick curtains and carpets, cellars stuffed with coal, and a log shed filled with nice dry logs.
But we should need to find a crock of gold, my dear, to provide ourselves with all that.’
‘But the shade,’ pleaded Charles.
‘And the screen?’
‘We'll manage that, I think,’ smiled Dimity.
‘And I'll make the door sausage before the week is out.
By the way, its proper name is a draught-excluder.’
‘Let's hope it lives up to it,’ said Charles, recklessly putting two lumps of coal on the fire.
The subject still occupied Charles's mind later that night.
Beside him, Dimity slept peacefully, but the rector could not rest.
There was no doubt about it, he was failing as a husband if he could not provide such basic things as warmth and shelter for his wife.
The poor rector tossed unhappily.
Something must be done.
He had certainly been failing in his duty towards Dimity.
Because she was so uncomplaining, he had let things slide.
‘Sins of omission!’ sighed Charles, thumping his pillow.
‘Sins of omission!
They must be rectified.’
He fell asleep soon after three o'clock, and dreamt that he was stuffing a red draught-excluder with sausage meat.
[BATTLES AT THRUSH GREEN]
Albert Piggott's cottage stood at seven o'clock.
It was even closer to St Andrew's church than the Rectory, which was useful, as Albert was sexton, verger and general caretaker to the building and the churchyard.
Not that this Pooh-Bah of a person let his duties worry him, even though they were within his sight at all hours.
His first wife, Molly's mother, had died some time before, and the girl kept the cottage clean and sweet until marriage to Ben Curdle removed her.
After that Albert was content to live in squalor, taking most of his refreshment next door at The Two Pheasants to save cooking.
Doctor Bailey, and later Doctor Lovell, remonstrated in vain about a diet of beer, pickled onions, pork pie and cold sausages, occasionally varied by Albert's own cooking in a disgusting frying pan when the spirit moved him.
Every now and again, Albert's digestive system revolted, and his hard-pressed medical advisers were called in, prescribed tablets, and read the riot act yet again.
The arrival of Nelly Tilling, an old school friend, soon altered the interior of Albert's abode.
Her first sight of it gave her a severe shock.
Wind-blown and panting, Mrs Tilling thankfully accepted the armchair which Mr Piggott indicated.
‘I'll just tidy these up,’ said her host, stuffing a dozen or so unwashed socks behind the grubby cushion.
Mrs Tilling viewed the proceedings with some misgivings, but sat herself down gingerly on the edge of the seat.
Make yerself at 'ome, said Mr Piggott, passing her an out-of-date copy of the parish magazine.
‘I'll put on the kettle.’
He moved into the little kitchen which led from the sitting-room and soon Nelly could hear the tap running.
Her eyes wandered round the unsavoury room.
If ever a house cried out for a woman's hand, thought the lady dramatically, this was it!
She noted the greasy chenille tablecloth which was threadbare where the table edge cut into it — a sure sign, Nelly knew, that the cloth had been undisturbed for many months.
Her eyes travelled to the dead fern in its arid pot, the ashes in the rusty grate, the festoons of cobwebs which hung from filthy pelmets and picture rails and the appalling thickness of the dust which covered the drab objects on the dresser.
The only cheerful spot of colour in the room was afforded by St Andrew's church almanack which Mr Piggott had fixed on the wall above the rickety card table which supported an ancient wireless set.
Mrs Tilling, who began to find the room oppressive and smelly, left her sock-laden armchair (from whence, she suspected, most of the aroma emanated), and decided to investigate the kitchen.
Mr Piggott was standing morosely by the kettle waiting for it to boil.
It was typical of a man, thought his guest with some impatience, that he had not utilised his time by putting out the cups and saucers, milk, sugar and so on, which would be needed.
Just like poor old George, thought Nelly with a pang, remembering her late husband.
‘One thing at a time,’ he used to say pompously, as though there were some virtue in it.
As his wife had pointed out tartly, on many occasions, she herself would never get through a quarter of her work if she indulged herself in such idleness.
While a kettle boiled she could set a table, light a fire, and watch over a cooking breakfast.
Ah, men were poor tools, thought Mrs Tilling!
The kitchen was even dirtier than its neighbour.
A sour fustiness pervaded the dingy room.
In a corner of the floor stood a saucer of milk which had long since turned to an unsavoury junket embellished with blue mould.
Beside it lay two very dead herrings' heads.
A mound of dirty crockery hid the draining board, and the sight of Mr Piggott's frying pan hanging on the wall was enough to turn over Mrs Tilling's stout stomach.
The residue of dozens of past meals could here be seen embedded in grey fat.
Slivers of black burnt onion, petrified bacon rinds, lacy brown scraps of fried eggs and scores of other morsels from tomatoes, sausages, steaks, chops, liver, potatoes, bread and baked beans here lay cheek by jowl, and would have afforded a rich reward to anyone interested in Mr Piggott's diet over the past year.
‘Where d'you keep the cups?’ asked Nelly Tilling, when she had regained her breath.
Her gaze turned apprehensively towards the pile on the draining-board.
Mr Piggott seemed to sense her misgivings.
‘Got some in the other room, in the dresser cupboard.’
he said.
‘My old woman's best,’ he explained.
‘Molly used 'em sometimes.’
‘You get them while I make the tea,’ said Mrs Tilling briskly.
‘This the pot?’
She peered into the murky depths of a battered tin object on the stove.
‘Ah!
Tea's in,’ said Mr Piggott, making his way to the dresser.
The kettle boiled.
With a brave shudder Nelly poured the water on the tea leaves, comforting herself with the thought that boiling water killed germs of all sorts.
Five minutes later she put down her empty cup and smiled at her companion.
‘Lovely cup of tea,’ she said truthfully.
‘I feel all the better for that.
Now I must go over to Doctor Lovell's for my pills.’
‘It's still raining,’ said Mr Piggott.
‘Have another cup.’
‘I'll pour,’ said Nelly.
‘Pass your own.’
‘It's nice to have someone to pour out,’ confessed Mr Piggott.
He was beginning to feel unaccountably cheerful despite the disappointment of missing his customary pint of beer.
‘This place needs a woman.’
‘I'll say it does!’ agreed Nelly, warmly.
‘It needs a few gallons of hot soapy water too!
When did your Molly see this last?’
‘About a year ago, I suppose.
She's coming again Christmas-time — she and Ben and the baby.
Maybe she'll give it a bit of a clean-up then.’
‘It wouldn't hurt you to do a bit,’ said Nelly roundly.
‘Chuck out that milk and fish for one thing.’
‘The cat ain't had nothing to eat for days,’ objected her host, stung by her criticism.
‘That don't surprise me,’ retorted Nelly.
‘No cat would stay in this hole.’
‘I got me church to see to,’ began Mr Piggott, truculently.
‘I ain't got time to-’
‘If Molly comes home to this mess at Christmas, then I'm sorry for her,’ asserted Mrs Tilling.
‘And the baby too.
Like as not it'll catch something and die on your very hearth-stone!’
She paused to let the words sink in.
Mr Piggott mumbled gloomily to himself.
The gist of his mutterings was the unpleasantness of women, their officiousness, their fussiness and their inability to let well alone, but tie took care to keep his remarks inaudible.
‘Tell you what,’ said Mrs Tilling in a warmer tone, ‘I'll come up here and give you a hand turning out before Christmas.
What about it?’
Mr Piggott's forebodings returned.
What would the neighbours say?
What was Nelly Tilling up to?
What would happen to his own peaceful, slummocky bachelor existence if he allowed this woman to have her way?
Nelly watched the thoughts chasing each other across his dour countenance.
After a few minutes she noticed a certain cunning softness replacing the apprehension of his expression, and her heart began to beat a little faster.
‘No harm, I suppose,’ said the old curmudgeon, grudgingly.
‘Make things a bit more welcoming for Molly, wouldn't it?’
‘That's right,’ agreed Mrs Tilling, rising from her chair and brushing a fine collection of sticky crumbs from her coat.
‘One good turn deserves another, you know, and we've been friends long enough to act neighbourly, haven't we, Albert?’
Mr Piggott found himself quite dazzled by the warmth of her smile as she made for the door, and was unable to speak.
The wind roared in as she opened the front door, lifting the filthy curtains and blowing the parish magazine into a corner.
Might freshen the place up a bit, thought Nelly, stepping out into the storm.
‘Thanks for the tea, Albert.
I'll drop in again when I'm passing,’ shouted the lady, as she retreated into the uproar.
Mr Piggott nodded dumbly, shut the door with a crash, and breathed deeply.
Mingled pleasure and fury shook his aged frame, but overriding all these agitations was the urgent need for a drink.
‘Women!’ spat out Mr Piggott, resuming his damp raincoat.
‘Never let a chap alone!’
His mind turned the phrase over.
There was something about it that made Mr Piggott feel younger — a beau, a masher, a man who was still pursued.
‘Never let a chap alone!’ repeated Mr Piggott aloud.
He pulled on his wet cap, adjusting it at an unusually rakish and dashing angle, and made his way, swaggering very slightly, to his comforts next door.
[WINTER AT THRUSH GREEN]
True to her word, Nelly Tilling called frequently at Albert Piggott's house, and enjoyed cleaning up the place and cooking her old friend a meal.
Two hours later Nelly sat, blown but triumphant, on the kitchen chair and surveyed her handiwork.
She had cause for pride.
A bright fire glowed behind gleaming bars, and the bacon pie was already in the oven beside it and beginning to smell most savoury.
The thin little cat, her repast spread on a newspaper in the corner, dug her sharp white teeth into the cod's head, closing her eyes in bliss the while.
The floor, the walls and the wooden table had all been lustily scrubbed.
Albert's dingy sink had been scoured to its original yellow colour, and the window above it gleamed and winked with unaccustomed cleanliness.
Taking a steady look at it, thought Nelly to herself, easing off her shoes for  greater comfort, it wasn't such a bad little house, and certainly very much more conveniently placed for shopping than her own cottage at Lulling Woods.
Two rooms up and two rooms down would be just a nice size for Albert and herself, and her own furniture would look very handsome in these surroundings.
The few poor sticks that Albert had collected over the years were fit for nothing but firewood.
She allowed her mind to dwell for a minute on her old schoolfellow in the role of husband.
True, he was no oil painting, but she had long passed the age of needing good looks about her, and anyway, she admitted to herself with disarming frankness, her own beauty had long since gone.
And, of course, he was a miserable worm.
But, Nelly pointed out to herself, he had some justification for it.
The drink had something to do with it, no doubt, but lack of a decent woman in his house was the real cause of the trouble.
She cast an appraising eye over the clean kitchen and listened to the music of the sizzling pie.
With a cheerful place like this to come home to, thought Nelly, The Two Pheasants would lose its appeal.
And if by any chance it didn't, then Nelly Tilling would put her foot down — for hadn't she seen, with her own eyes, young Albert Piggott in a Norfolk jacket much too small for him, signing the pledge all those years ago?
The advantages of the marriage were solid ones.
Albert earned a steady wage, was a good gardener and could afford to keep a wife in reasonable comfort.
There would be no need for her to go out to work.
The Drovers' Arms was a pleasant enough place to scrub out, but Nelly disliked seeing people drinking.
She would not be sorry to give up the job there.
At Thrush Green she would be able to pick and choose her employers.
Miss Ruth or Miss Joan, as she still thought of Mrs Lovell and Mrs Young, could probably do with a hand.
She remembered the great flagged kitchen floor at the Bassetts' house and her heart warmed.
Or better still, there was the village school practically next door!
The thought of those yards of bare floorboards, pounded day in and day out by scores of muddy boots, fairly crying out for a bucket of hot suds and a good brush, filled Nelly's heart with joy.
There was a cloakroom too, if she remembered rightly, with a nice rosy brick floor that really paid for doing.
And there was something about a large tortoise stove, freshly done with first-class blacklead and plenty of elbow-grease, that gladdened your eyes.
She had heard that Miss Watson wasn't best pleased with the present cleaner.
A word dropped in the right ear, Nelly told herself, might bring her the job if she decided to earn an honest penny at Thrush Green.
She heard the sound of Albert's footsteps approaching, heaved her bulk from the chair, and opened the oven door.
A glorious fragrance filled the room.
On top of the hob, the winter greens bubbled deliciously.
The mingled scents greeted Albert as he opened the back door.
‘Cor!, breathed Mr Piggott with awe.
‘That smells wholly good, Nell.’
His face bore an expression of holiness and rapture which his habitual place of worship never saw.
Albert was touched to his very marrow.
Nelly was not slow to follow up this advantage.
‘Sit you down, Albert,’ she said warmly, ‘in a real clean kitchen at last, with a real hot meal to eat.’
She withdrew the fragrant dish from the oven, and put it, still sizzling, before the bedazzled sexton.
‘There!’ breathed the widow proudly, setting about her wooing with a bacon pie.
[WINTER IN THRUSH GREEN]
Nelly Tilling's plans went ahead steadily, despite little or no encouragement from the man of her choice.
At last she decided upon action, and set out one afternoon to clinch the matter.
She found him in his kitchen, immersed in the newspaper spread out before him on the table.
The odour of fried bacon surrounded him, and a dirty plate and cutlery, pushed to the corner of the table, showed that Albert had just finished his evening meal.
He grunted by way of greeting as the fat widow dumped herself down on the other chair, but did not raise his eyes from his reading.
‘It says 'ere,’ said Albert, ‘that that fellow as robbed the bank yesterday got away with twenty thousand.’
His voice held grudging admiration.
‘I just been up the school,’ answered Nelly, undoing her coat.
‘Oh, ah?’ said Albert, without interest.
‘This chap knocked three o' the bank fellows clean to the floor, it says.
Alone!
Knocked three down, alone!’
‘I can 'ave that job if I want it,’ said Nelly.
‘I've said I'll start Monday.
It's a good wage, too.’
‘He told our reporter,’’ read Albert laboriously, ‘‘that he was lying in a wolter of blood.’
Think of that!’ said Albert ghoulishly.
‘A wolter of blood.’’
He began to pick a back tooth with a black finger-nail, his eyes still fixed upon the print.
‘It'll be quite a step every day from Lulling Woods,’ went on Nelly, delicately approaching her objective.
‘I'm supposed to go in first thing in the mornings too, to light the stoves and dust round.’
‘Oh, ah?’ repeated Albert absently.
He withdrew a wet forefinger from his mouth and replaced it damply on a line of print.
‘He was detained in hospital  with a suspected skull fracture and rather serious injuries to the right eye.’’
‘I wish you'd listen,’ said Nelly, exasperation giving an edge to her tones.
‘I got something to tell you.’
Albert stopped reading aloud, but his eyes continued to follow his moving forefinger.
‘Don't you think the time's come, Albert,’ wheedled Nelly, ‘when we thought of setting up here together?
I mean, we've known each other since we was girl and boy, and we seem to hit it all right, don't we?’
A close observer might have noticed a slight stiffening of Albert's back, but otherwise he gave no sign of hearing.
Only his finger moved a little more slowly along the line.
‘You've said yourself,’ continued Nelly, in cooing tones, ‘how nice I cook, and keep the house to rights.
You've been alone too long, Albert.
What you wants is a bit of home comfort.
What about it?’
A slight flush had crept over Albert's unlovely countenance, but still his eyes remained lowered.
‘It is feared,’’ Albert read, in an embarrassed mutter, ‘‘that 'is brain 'as suffered damage.’’
‘And so will yours, my boy!’
Nelly burst out, rising swiftly.
She lifted Albert's arms from the table, sat herself promptly down on the newspaper in front of Albert and let his arms fall on each side of her.
She put one plump hand under his bristly chin and turned his face up to confront her.
‘Now then,’ said Nelly, giving him a dark melting glance.
‘What about it?’
‘What about what?’ asked Albert weakly.
It was quite apparent that he knew he was a doomed man.
At last he was cornered, at last he was caught, but still he struggled feebly.
‘You heard what I said,’ murmured Nelly seductively, patting his cheek.
‘Now I've got the job here, it'd all fit in so nice.’
Albert gazed at her mutely.
His eyes were slightly glazed, but there was a certain softening around his drooping mouth.
‘You'd have a clean warm house to live in,’ went on his temptress, ‘and a good hot meal midday, and all your washin' — done.’
Albert's eyes brightened a little, but he still said nothing.
Nelly put her head provocatively on one side.
‘And me here for company, Albert,’ she continued, a little breathlessly.
Could it be that Albert's eyes dulled a little?
She put her plump arms round his shoulders and gazed at him closely.
‘Wouldn't you like a good wife?’ asked Nelly beseechingly.
Albert gave a great gusty sigh — a farewell, half-sad and half-glad, to all his lonely years — and capitulated.
‘All right,’ said he.
‘But get orf the paper, gal!’
[WINTER IN THRUSH GREEN]
Almost next door stood Albert's second home, The Two Pheasants, at eight o clock on our time-piece.
It was a snug little inn, well furnished with beams and cushioned settles.
Mr Jones the landlord and his wife lived in comfort above the two bars, and were as cheerful and welcoming as the best hosts should be.
He was also well skilled in diplomacy, hearing a great deal of gossip and complaint but discreet enough to keep it to himself.
Here he listens to Albert's diatribe about the churchyard.
It was generally agreed that the churchyard of St Andrew's was an exceptionally pleasant place.
Albert did not agree, as he told his long-suffering neighbour, Mr Jones of The Two Pheasants, one bright morning as soon as the pub was open.
‘Them dratted tombstones was put too close to the outside wall when they done the job.’
He took a noisy slurp of his beer.
‘Young Cooke,’ he went on, replacing the dripping glass on Mr Jones's carefully polished bar counter, ‘can't get the mower between them and the wall.’
‘Oh, ah!’ replied Mr Jones without much interest.
Albert and his young assistant had been at loggerheads for years now.
The publican had heard both sides of the many arguments between the two, and for far too long.
‘Means I had to get down on me hands and knees with the bill-hook, round the back like.
Not that easy at my age.
Not after me Operation.’
A shadow fell across the sunlit floor Percy Hodge a farmer from the Nidden road hard by, was seeking refreshment.
‘You ain't still on about your innards, are you?’ he queried.
‘I reckon all Thrush Green knows about them tubes of yours.
And fair sick of 'em too.
Half a pint, please.’
Albert's face grew even more morose.
‘All right for you.
Never had a day's illness in your life!’
‘Ah!
But I got my troubles.’
He pushed some coins across the counter and settled on the next stool to Albert.
‘Oh?
Your Doris come back?’
Percy drew in his breath noisily.
‘Now, Albert,’ began Mr Jones.
‘We don't want no trouble between old friends.’
‘Who's talking about old friends?’ enquired Albert nastily.
Percy's breathing became heavier.
‘You keep Doris's name out of this,’ he said.
‘I don't keep on about your Nelly, though we all know what she is!’
‘Gentlemen !’ cried Mr Jones in alarm.
Percy and Albert fell silent and turned their attention to their glasses.
A distant clanking sound, followed by a steady chugging, proclaimed that the cement mixer was at work on the new retirement homes.
‘By the time them places is finished,’ said Albert, ‘our lot'll all be in the graveyard.
Be about ready for young Cooke, I reckon.’
‘Wonder who they'll choose?’ asked Percy, secretly glad to pick up this olive branch.
‘You put your name down?’
‘What, with my Nelly to look after me?
And my girl Molly across the green at the Youngs?
No point in me havin' a try.
They'll be looking for old folk on their own.’
‘Well, I've put my name forward,’ said Percy.
‘I'm old, and on my own.’
His listeners seemed taken aback.
Albert was trying to work out how, much younger Percy was than he himself.
Mr Jones was shocked at the cheek of a man who was only middle-aged, and had a house and a living, in applying for one of the new homes.
But he forbore to comment.
He did not want any trouble in his respectable hostelry, and both customers were touchy.
‘You'll be lucky!’ commented Albert at last, putting his empty glass down.
‘Must get back to my bill-hook.
I'd like to meet the chap as set them tombstones round the wall.
I'd give him a piece of me mind.’
‘He got hurt in a car crash, other side of Oxford,’ volunteered Percy.
‘My cousin told me.
Broke his arm, he said.’
‘No more'n he deserved,’ said Albert heartlessly, and hobbled back to his duties.
[AT HOME IN THRUSH GREEN]
At nine o'clock, looking across the green to the Baileys' house, stood the village school, a sturdy one-storey building of Cotswold stone in a playground of generous proportions.
There were two classrooms, one occupied by Miss Dorothy Watson, the headmistress, and the other by the young teacher in charge of the lower juniors.
Miss Agnes Fogerty is the infants' teacher in a temporary building across the playground.
The school-house, standing at ten o'clock, is a small Victorian building, erected at the same time as Thrush Green school.
It was a pleasant two-bedroomed house with a long garden running between the school playground and the Shoosmiths' garden next door.
Some of the most exciting events have occurred in this imaginary place, and I am always disappointed when I visit Wood Green to find that no school, no schoolhouse, no children and, above all, no Miss Watson or Miss Fogerty are to be seen.
It gives me quite a shock.
I grew increasingly fond of Dorothy Watson, the headmistress, and her assistant  Agnes Fogerty.
When we first meet them, Dorothy is living alone in the schoolhouse and Agnes is in lodgings along the main road which leads eventually to the Midlands.
Little Miss Fogerty was in considerable awe of Miss Watson, but a burglary was to alter their relationship.
The school was empty when Miss Fogerty clattered her way over the door-scraper to her classroom.
That did not surprise her, for Miss Watson lived at the school-house next door, and might be busy with her last minute chores.
She usually arrived about a quarter to nine, greeted her colleague, read her correspondence, and was then prepared to face the assembled school.
Miss Fogerty hung up her tweed coat and her brown felt hat behind the classroom door, and set about unlocking the cupboards.
There were little tatters of paper at the bottom of the one by the fireplace, where the raffia and other handwork materials were kept, and Miss Fogerty looked at them with alarm and suspicion.
She had thought for some time that a mouse lived there.
She must remember to tell Mrs Cooke to set a trap.
Mice were one of the few things that Miss Fogerty could not endure.
It would be dreadful if one ran out while the children were present and she made an exhibition of herself by screaming!
After surveying the jungle of cane, raffia and cardboard which rioted gloriously together, and which could well offer a dozen comfortable homes to abundant mice families, Miss Fogerty firmly shut the door and relocked it.
The children should have crayons and drawing paper this afternoon from the cupboard on the far side of the room, she decided.
Mrs Cooke must deal with this crisis before she approached the handwork cupboard again.
The clock stood at five to nine, and now the cries and shouts of two or three dozen children could be heard.
Miss Fogerty made her way to the only other classroom, and stopped short on the threshold with surprise.
It was empty.
Miss Fogerty noted the clean duster folded neatly in the very centre of Miss Watson's desk, the tidy rows of tables and chairs awaiting their occupants, and the large reproduction of Holman Hunt's ‘The Light of the World’, in whose dusky glass Miss Fogerty could see her own figure reflected.
What should she do?
Could Miss Watson have overslept?
Could she be ill?
Either possibility seemed difficult to believe.
In the twelve years since Miss Watson's coming, she had neither overslept nor had a day's indisposition.
It would be very awkward if she called at the house and Miss Watson were just about to come over.
It would look officious , poor Miss Fogerty told herself, and that could not be borne.
Miss Fogerty was a little afraid of Miss Watson, for though she herself had spent thirty years at Thrush Green School, she was only the assistant teacher and she had been taught to respect her betters.
And Miss Watson, of course, really was her better, for she had been a headmistress before this, and had taught in town schools, so large and magnificent that naturally she was much wiser and more experienced.
She was consistently kind to faded little Miss Fogerty and very willing to show her new methods of threading beads and making plasticine crumpets, explaining patiently, as she did so, the psychological implications behind these activities in words of three or, more often, four syllables.
Miss Fogerty was humbly grateful for her goodwill, but would never have dreamt of imposing upon it.
Miss Fogerty knew her place.
While she hovered on the threshold, patting her wispy hair into place with an agitated hand and looking distractedly at her reflection in ‘The Light of the World’, a breathless child hurried into the lobby, calling her name.
‘Miss Fogerty!
Miss Fogerty!’
He rushed towards her so violently that Miss Fogerty put out her hands to grasp his shoulders before he should butt her to the ground.
The child looked up at her, wide-eyed.
He looked awe-stricken.
‘Miss Watson called me up to her window, miss, and says you're to go over there.’
‘Very well,’ said Miss Fogerty, calmly.
‘There's no need to get so excited.
Take off your coat and hang it up.
You can go to your room now.’
The child continued to gaze at her.
‘But, miss,’ he blurted out, ‘Miss Watson -she — she's still in her nightdress and the clock's struck nine.’
Miss Watson's appearance when she opened the side door alarmed Miss Fogerty quite as much as it had the small boy.
Her nightdress was decently covered by a red dressing-gown, but her face was drawn with pain and she swayed dizzily against the door jamb.
‘What has happened?’ exclaimed Miss Fogerty, entering the house.
Miss Watson closed the door and leant heavily against it.
I've been attacked -hit on the head,’ said Miss Watson.
She sounded dazed and vaguely surprised.
A hand went fumbling among her untidy grey locks and Miss Fogerty, much shocked, put her hand under her headmistress's elbow to steady her.
‘Come and sit down.
I'll ring Doctor Lovell.
He'll be at home now.
Tell me what happened.’
‘I can't walk,’ answered Miss Watson, leaning on Miss Fogerty's frail shoulder.
‘I seem to have sprained my ankle as I fell.
It is most painful.’
She held out a bare leg, and certainly the ankle was misshapen and much  swollen.
Purplish patches were already forming and Miss Fogerty knew from her first-aid classes that she should really be applying hot and cold water in turn to the damaged joint.
But could poor Miss Watson, in her present state of shock, stand such treatment?
She helped the younger woman to the kitchen, put her on a chair and looked round for the kettle.
‘There's nothing like a cup of tea, dear,’ she said comfortingly, as she filled it.
‘With plenty of sugar.’
Miss Watson shuddered but made no reply.
Her assistant switched on the kettle and surveyed her headmistress anxiously.
Her usual feeling of respect, mingled with a little fear, had been replaced by the warmest concern.
For the first time in their acquaintanceship, Miss Fogerty was in charge.
‘The door-bell rang about half-past five, I suppose,’ began Miss Watson hesitantly.
‘It was still dark.
I leant out of the bedroom window and there was a man waiting there who said there had been a car crash and could he telephone.’
‘What did he look like?’ asked Miss Fogerty.
‘I couldn't see.
I said I'd come down.
I put on my dressing-gown and slippers and opened the front door —’ She broke off suddenly, and took a deep breath.
Miss Fogerty was smitten by the look of horror on her headmistress s face.
‘Don't tell me, my dear, if it upsets you.
There's really no need.’
She patted the red dressing-gown soothingly, but Miss Watson pulled herself together and continued.
‘He'd tied a black scarf, or a stocking, or something over his face, and I could only see his eyes between that and his hat brim.
He had a thick stick of some kind — quite short-in his hand, and he said something about this being a holdup, or a stick-up or some term I really didn't understand.
I bent forward to see if I could recognise him — there was something vaguely familiar about him, the voice perhaps — and then he hit me on the side of my head —’ Poor Miss Watson faltered and her eyes filled with tears at the memory of that vicious blow.
The kettle's lid began rattling merrily and Miss Fogerty, clucking sympathetically, began to make the tea.
‘I seem to remember him pushing past me.
I'd crumpled on to the door mat and I remember a fearful pain, but whether it was my head or my ankle, I don't really know.
When I came round again, the door was shut and he'd vanished.
It was beginning to get light then.’
‘Why didn't you get help before?’ asked Miss Fogerty.
‘It must have been getting light at about seven o'clock.
He will have got clear by now.’
‘I was so terribly sick,’ confessed Miss Watson.
‘I managed to crawl to the outside lavatory and I've been there most of the time.’
‘You poor, poor dear!’ cried Miss Fogerty.
‘And you must be so cold, too!’
‘I couldn't manage the stairs, otherwise I should have got dressed.
But I thought I would wait until I heard you arrive, and then I knew I should be all right.’
Miss Fogerty glowed with pleasure.
It was not often, in her timid life, that she had been wanted.
To know that she was needed by someone gave her a heady sense of power.
She poured out the tea and put the cup carefully before her patient.
‘Shall I lift it for you?’ she asked solicitously, but Miss Watson shook her head, raising the steaming cup herself and sipped gratefully.
‘The children —’ she said suddenly, as their exuberant voices penetrated the quietness of the kitchen.
‘Don't worry,’ said Miss Fogerty with newly-found authority.
‘I'll just speak to the bigger ones, then I'll be back to ring the doctor.’
‘Don't tell them anything about this,’ begged Miss Watson, with sudden agitation.
‘You know what Thrush Green is.
It will be all round the place in no time.’
Miss Fogerty assured her that nothing would be disclosed and slipped out of the side door.
The children were shouting and playing, revelling in this unexpected addition to their pre-school games’ time.
Miss Fogerty leant over the low dry-stone wall which separated the playground from the school-house garden.
She beckoned to two of the bigger girls.
‘Keep an eye on the young ones, my dears.
I'll be with you in a minute, then we'll all go in.’
‘Is Miss Watson ill?’ asked one, her eyes alight with pleasurable anticipation.
Miss Fogerty was torn between telling the truth and the remembrance of her promise to her headmistress.
She temporised wisely.
‘Not really, dear, but she won't be over for a little while.
There's nothing for you to worry about.’
She hastened back to her duties.
Her patient had finished her tea and now leant back with her eyes closed and the swollen ankle propped up on another chair.
She opened her eyes as Miss Fogerty approached, and smiled faintly.
‘Tell me,’ said Miss Fogerty, who had just remembered something.
‘Did the man take anything?’
‘He took the purse from my bag.
There wasn't much in it, and my wallet, with about six pounds, I believe.’
Miss Fogerty was profoundly shocked.
Six pounds was a lot of money for a schoolteacher to lose even if she were a headmistress.
‘And I think he may have found my jewel box upstairs, but of course I haven't been up there to see.
It hadn't much of value in it, except to me, I mean.
There was a string of seed pearls my father gave me, and two rings of my mother's and a brooch or two — but nothing worth a lot of money.’
‘We must ring the police as well as Doctor Lovell,’ exclaimed Miss Fogerty.
‘Must we?’ cried Miss Watson, her face puckering.
‘Oh dear, I do hate all this fuss — but I suppose it is our duty.’
Miss Fogerty's heart smote her at the sight of her patient's distress.
It reminded her too that she should really get her into bed so that she could recover a little from the shocks she had received.
She sprang to her feet, with new-found strength, and went to help her headmistress.
‘Back to bed for you,’ she said firmly, ‘and then I'm going to the telephone.
Up you come!’
Five minutes later, with her patient safely tucked up, Miss Fogerty spoke to Doctor Lovell and then to Lulling Police Station.
That done, she went over to the school playground to face the forty or more children for whom she alone would be responsible that day.
Normally the thought would have made timid little Miss Fogerty quail.
But today, fortified by her experiences, feeling six feet high and a tower of strength, Miss Fogerty led the entire school into morning assembly and faced a host of questioning eyes with unaccustomed composure and authority.
For the first time in her life Miss Fogerty was in command, and found she liked it.
[WINTER IN THRUSH GREEN]
Some time later, Dorothy suffered a more severe accident and broke a hip.
She invited Agnes to share the school-house with her, and the two settled down  together very happily.
Agnes had no relations, and relished the companionship of her headmistress.
Dorothy had a brother Ray, and did not always welcome his visits with his wife Kathleen, particularly when they were accompanied by their spoilt dog Harrison.
On one occasion they called at the school-house for tea, leaving the dog outside in the car.
Conversation was carried on against a background of ear-splitting barking.
Agnes asked after Kathleen's health.
At once, Ray's wife assumed a melancholy expression.
‘I'm having some new treatment for my migraine attacks,’ she told them, accepting a second cup of tea.
‘It's terribly expensive, and I have to make two trips a week, but I think it may be doing me good.’
‘I am so glad,’ said kind Agnes.
‘And I've been having attacks of vertigo,’ volunteered Ray, with a hint of pride.
‘Something to do with the middle ear.
Very disconcerting.’
Agnes wondered if the dog's powerful voice could contribute to this discomfort, but thought it wiser to remain silent.
Not once, she noticed, with rare warmth, had they enquired after poor Dorothy's broken hip — a much more serious business, surely!
‘But there,’ continued Kathleen, with sad recognition.
‘I suppose we can't expect to be as spry as we were twenty years ago.’
‘Indeed no!’ agreed Dorothy, rising to cut the splendid sponge.
She walked across to Kathleen, plate in hand.
Was her limp rather more pronounced than usual, Agnes wondered?
A little stiff from sitting perhaps, she decided.
‘And how is the leg?’ enquired Ray, somewhat tardily.
‘I do my best to ignore it,’ replied Dorothy.
‘No one wants to hear about the troubles of the elderly.’
Kathleen greeted this pointed remark with a swiftly indrawn breath, and a meaning glance at her husband.
He, man-like, pretended to be engrossed with his tea cup.
‘And where are you proposing to go tomorrow?’ asked Agnes hastily.
Before Ray could answer, Kathleen spoke.
‘It's amazing how quickly people get over these hip operations these days.
Why, a young curate we know was actually dancing six months after he fell from his bicycle.’
‘He was fortunate,’ said Dorothy.
‘Oh, I don't know,’ said Kathleen, shouting above the racket from the imprisoned dog.
‘I'm sure it's just a matter of attitude of mind.
He intended to get better just as quickly as possible.
I think some people enjoy being invalids.’
Agnes noted with alarm that a pink flush was suffusing Dorothy's face, a sure sign of temper, and really, thought her loyal assistant, she had every right to be cross under the circumstances.
‘I don't,’ said Dorothy shortly.
‘Of course not,’ agreed Ray.
‘It was exactly what I said to Kathleen when she was so worried about you in hospital.’
‘Really?’ replied his sister icily.
‘Kathleen was a martyr to her migraine at the time, as you know, otherwise we should have invited you to stay with us when you were discharged.
But we knew you wanted to get home and pick up your normal life again.
I said so at the time, didn't I, Kathleen?’
‘You did indeed, dear,’ said Kathleen, dabbing her mouth with a spotless linen napkin and leaving lipstick as well as jam upon it.
Before any civilised reply could be made, there was a rapping at the front door.
Agnes, glad to escape, hurried to open it, and was confronted by Dotty Harmer with Flossie on a lead.
A battered metal milk can dangled from the other hand.
Without being invited, Dotty pushed past Agnes and entered the sitting-room.
She was in a state of considerable agitation, and burst into speech.
‘Oh, Dorothy my dear, there is a poor dog absolutely stifling to death in a car outside.
No window left open, and it is in a terrible state of anxiety.
Aren't people thoughtless?
Really they need a horse-whipping, and my father would have administered it, I assure you, if he had come across such fiends!
Someone calling at The Two Pheasants, I suppose, or at the Shoosmiths.’
‘The dog belongs to my brother here,’ said Dorothy, with a hint of smugness in her tone.
‘I'm sorry it upset you so, Dotty dear.
I'm afraid it must have upset a great many people at Thrush Green during the past hour.’
Dotty was not the slightest bit abashed.
‘I don't think I have had the pleasure of meeting you before,’ she said, transferring Flossie's lead to her left hand and entangling it dangerously with the milk can, whilst proffering her right.
‘My sister-in-law, Kathleen.
My brother, Ray.
My friend, Miss Harmer,’ intoned Dorothy.
Ray bowed slightly.
Kathleen gave a frosty smile.
Outside, the barking changed to a high-pitched squealing, even more agitated than before.
Ray began to make for the door.
‘Excuse me, I'd better bring Harrison in,’ he said.
He was through the door before anyone could stop him.
Dorothy waved at the tea tray.
‘Let me give you some tea, Dotty.
Do sit down.
‘So kind of you, Dorothy, but I'm on my way to Ella's and mustn't delay.’
She began to make her way to the door.
Flossie's lead was now hopelessly tangled round Dotty's wrinkled stockings.
At that moment, Ray's labrador, slavering at the mouth, burst into the room, gave a demented yelp, and rushed at Flossie.
The noise was indescribable.
Flossie, the meekest of animals, screamed with alarm.
Harrison charged into the table, knocking the sponge cake, chocolate biscuits, two tea cups, milk jug and a flurry of knives and teaspoons to the floor.
Dotty, pulled off balance, fell across Agnes's chair, driving her mother's cameo brooch painfully into her throat.
Dorothy, ever quick-witted, sat down abruptly before her own precarious balance added to the confusion, and Kathleen, cowering in her chair, gave way to hysterics.
This scene of chaos confronted Ray when he regained the sitting-room.
With commendable promptitude, he caught Harrison by the collar and held him firmly, while Agnes and Dotty recovered their balance.
The milk can had rolled under Agnes's armchair and was dispersing a rivulet of goat's milk over the carpet.
‘I apologise for this mess,’ said Dotty.
‘You must let me pay for any cleaning you have to have done.
Goat's milk can be so very pervasive .
I'd better return home and fetch some more for Ella.
Luckily, Dulcie is giving a splendidly heavy yield at the moment.’
Quite in command of herself, she smiled politely in the direction of the hysterical Kathleen, now throwing herself about alarmingly in her chair, waved to Ray, and took the shaken, but now well-behaved Flossie into the hall.
Agnes accompanied her, hoping that the blood on her throat from the brooch's wound would not stain her best silk blouse.
‘Are you sure you would not like to rest for a little?’ enquired Agnes.
‘The dining-room has a most comfortable armchair, if you would like a few minutes, peace.’
‘Thank you, my dear, but I am quite all right.
The air will refresh me.’
Agnes watched her walk to the gate, as spry as a sparrow, and none the worse it seemed for her tumble.
She returned, full of foreboding, to the scene of battle.
‘Who is that interfering old busybody?’
Ray was asking, as she returned.
‘A dear friend of mine,’ replied Dorothy, ‘and a true animal lover.
I absolutely agree with her that it was monstrous of you to leave that dog shut in the car.’
Kathleen's hysterics were now slightly muted, but had turned to shattering hiccups.
‘If you remember,’ she began, and gave a mighty hiccup, ‘you yourself refused to have poor Harrison indoors.’
‘I should have thought that even you knew better than to leave the car hermetically sealed.
Calling yourselves animal lovers,’ said Dorothy, with withering scorn.
‘And the poor thing so badly trained that it cannot be brought into a Christian household.’
She bent down to retrieve the best china from the floor, whilst Ray picked up teaspoons with one hand and dabbed at the goat's milk with the other holding his handkerchief.
‘Please , Ray,’ said Dorothy, ‘leave the mess to Agnes and me.
We don't want it made worse by the use of your handkerchief.’
Agnes felt that, provoked though Dorothy might well be, such a slur on the cleanliness of her brother's personal linen was carrying things rather far.
‘I will fetch some clean water and a cloth,’ she said hastily, and made her escape.
A wild wailing noise followed her.
Obviously, Kathleen was off again!
‘I think,’ Ray was saying, when Agnes returned with her cleaning materials, ‘that we had better be going.’
‘I whole-heartedly agree,’ said Dorothy, standing facing him.
‘You have thoroughly upset poor Kathleen,’ he went on, ‘and you know how she suffers with migraine.’
‘When it suits her,’ responded Dorothy.
‘Are you implying,’ cried her incensed brother, ‘that Kathleen pretends to have these dreadful attacks?’
A terrible hiccup arrested Kathleen's wailing.
She was now on her feet, eyes blazing.
‘How dare you say such things?
You know I'm a martyr to migraine!
Not that I've ever had the slightest sympathy from you.
You are the wickedest, most callous, unfeeling —‘Another hiccup rendered her temporarily speechless.
Ray took the opportunity to put his arm about his wife, and to shepherd her and the panting Harrison to the door.
‘Come along, my dear.
We'll go straight back to The Fleece, and you must lie down with one of your tablets.’
‘But poor Harrison hasn't had his tea,’ wailed Kathleen.
‘You know he likes it on the hearth rug!’
‘There is plenty for him,’ observed Dorothy, ‘wherever he looks on the carpet.’
It was Agnes who saw them to the door, and then into their car.
‘I shall never come here again,’ cried Kathleen, still hiccuping violently.
‘We are deeply wounded,’ said Ray.
‘I don't think I shall want to see Dorothy — sister though she is — for a very long time!’
They drove towards Lulling, Harrison still barking, and Agnes returned to break the dreadful news that Dorothy might never see the pair again.
‘What a relief!’ said her headmistress, with infinite satisfaction.
‘Now, we'll just get this place to rights, and have a quiet evening with our knitting, Agnes dear.’
[GOSSIP FROM THRUSH GREEN]
As it happened, the rift between Dorothy and her brother and his wife did not last long, much to Miss Fogerty's relief.
The two friends continued to live in harmony and, for Agnes in particular, the change from her lodgings was a lasting joy.
Miss Fogerty had never been so happy as she was now, living with Dorothy and next door to another old friend, Isobel Shoosmith, who had been at college with her years before.
Although she had not realised it at the time, looking back she could see that her life at Mrs White's had been quite lonely.
True, she had had a pleasant bed-sitting room, and Mrs White had cooked for her and always been welcoming, but on some cold summer evenings, sitting in her Lloyd Loom armchair by a gas fire, turned low for reasons of economy, Agnes had experienced some bleakness.
It was such a pleasure now to wake each morning in the knowledge that she was near to her friends, and had no need to make a journey, in all weathers, to the school.
She was usually down first in the kitchen, happy to see to the kettle and the eggs and toast in readiness for Dorothy, who was still rather slow in her movements since breaking a hip.
It was that accident which had led to Agnes being asked to share the schoolhouse, and she looked forward to several years together before retirement age.
What happened then, Miss Fogerty sometimes wondered?
But time enough when that day loomed nearer, she decided, and meanwhile life was perfect.
Willie Marchant had brought two letters, one from the office obviously and one which looked as though it were from Dorothy's brother, Ray.
Miss Fogerty sipped her tea whilst the headmistress read her correspondence.
‘Ray and Kathleen are proposing to have a week or ten days touring the Cotswolds next month,’ she told Agnes, as she stuffed his letter back into the envelope.
‘How nice,’ said Agnes.
‘Are they likely to call here?’
‘A call I should like,’ said Dorothy, with some emphasis, ‘but Ray seems to be inviting himself and Kathleen to stay here for a night or two.’
‘Oh!’ said Agnes, somewhat taken aback.
The school-house had only two bedrooms.
The one which had once been the spare room she now occupied permanently.
Before then, she knew, Ray had sometimes spent the night there on his travels as a commercial salesman.
Since Dorothy's accident, however, things had been a little strained.
She had confidently expected to convalesce with her brother and his wife, but they had made no offer, indeed nothing but excuses.
If it had not been for Agnes's willingness to help, poor Miss Watson would have been unaided in her weakness.
It was quite plain to Miss Fogerty that she had not forgiven or forgotten.
would like to have mine.
Then they could have the twin beds in your room.’
‘It won't be necessary, Agnes dear,’ said Dorothy, in the firm tones of a headmistress.
‘We are not going to put ourselves out for them.
They have quite enough money to afford a hotel.
They can try The Fleece if they must come and stay here .
Frankly, it won't break my heart if we don't see them at all.’
‘Oh Dorothy!’ begged gentle little Miss Fogerty, ‘don't talk like that!
He is your own flesh and blood — your own brother!’
‘No fault of mine,’ said Dorothy, briskly, rolling up her napkin.
‘I didn't choose him, you know, but I do choose my friends !’
She glanced at the clock.
‘Better clear up, I suppose, or we shall be late for school.
I really ought to look out some pictures for my history lesson this morning.’
‘Then you go over to school, dear,’ said Miss Fogerty, ‘and I'll see to the breakfast things.’
‘You spoil me,’ said Miss Watson, limping towards the door.
And how pleasant it was to have someone to spoil, thought Agnes, running the tap.
More often than not, she did stay behind to do this little chore but never did she resent it.
Looking after others, children or adults, was little Miss Fogerty's chief source of pleasure.
Miss Watson, making her way carefully across the playground, thought fondly of her assistant.
She was the soul of unselfishness, as her ready offer to vacate her bedroom had shown yet again.
But Miss Watson was determined that Agnes should now come first.
She had been a loyal colleague for many years, respected by parents and children alike, and since the accident had proved a trusted friend and companion.
All that stuff about blood being thicker than water, thought Miss Watson robustly, was a lot of eyewash!
She had had more help and affection from her dear old Agnes than ever Ray and Kathleen had shown her.
It had to be faced, they were a selfish pair, and she had no intention of upsetting Agnes's comfort, or her own, to save them a few pennies.
‘You can come and help me to carry some pictures, George dear,’ she said to young Curdle, who was skipping about the playground.
It was by way of being a royal command.
She swept ahead to enter her domain, followed by one of her willing subjects.
[GOSSIP FROM THRUSH GREEN]
Next door, at eleven o'clock, stood a fine Edwardian house which for many years was called Quetta.
When we first hear of it, the house had been empty for some time, and Albert Piggott deplored its neglect.
Mr Piggott straightened his aching back, clasped his hands on top of the broom, and surveyed Thrush Green morosely.
Behind him lay the bulk of the church, its spire's shadow throwing a neat triangle across the grass.
To his right ran the main road from the Cotswold hills down into the sleepy little market town of Lulling, which Thrush Green adjoined.
To his left ran a modest lane which meandered northward to several small villages.
Within fifty yards of him, set along this line, stood his cottage, next door to The Two Pheasants.
The village school, now quiet behind its white palings in the morning sunshine, was next in the row, and beside it was a well-built house of Cotswold stone which stood back from the green.
Its front windows stared along the chestnut avenue which joined the two roads.
The door was shut, and no smoke plumed skywards from its grey chimneys.
The garden was overgrown and deserted.
Dead black roses drooped from the unkempt bushes growing over the face of the house, and the broad flagged path was almost hidden by unswept leaves.
Mr Piggott could see the vegetable garden from his vantage point in the churchyard.
A row of bean poles had collapsed, sagging under the weight of the frost-blackened crop.
Below the triumphant spires of dock which covered the beds, submerged cabbages, as large as footballs, could be discerned.
Onions, left to go to seed, displayed magnificent fluffy heads, and a host of chirruping birds fluttered excitedly about the varied riches of the wilderness.
Mr Piggott clicked his false teeth in disapproval at such wicked waste, and shook his head at the ‘FOR SALE’ board which had been erected at the gate the week before.
‘Time someone took that over,’ he said aloud.
‘What's the good weeding this 'ere if all that lot's coming over all the time?’
He cast a sour look at the leaves which still danced joyously in his path.
Everlasting work! thought Mr Piggott gloomily.
The clock began to whirr above him before striking ten.
Mr Piggott's face brightened.
Someone came out of The Two Pheasants and latched the door back  to the wall hospitably.
The faint clinking of glasses could be heard and a snatch of music from the bar's radio set.
Mr Piggott propped his broom against the church railings and set off, with unaccustomed jauntiness, to his haven.
[WINTER IN THRUSH GREEN]
Fortunately, Quetta was bought a few months later by a retired man, Harold Shoosmith.
Conjectures about the newcomer were many and various.
Ella's lively interest in Harold Shoosmith was shared by the rest of Thrush Green.
It was said that he was retired from the army, the navy, the civil service and the BBC.
He had been a tea-planter in Ceylon, a cocoa-adviser in Ghana, and a coffee-blender in Brazil.
It also appeared that he had owned a sugar plantation in Jamaica, a rubber plantation in Malaya and a diamond mine — quite a small one, actually, but with exceptionally fine diamonds — in South Africa.
Thrush Green was sorry to hear that he had never been married, had been married unhappily and was now separated from his wife, had been happily married and lost his wife in childbirth, and (disastrously) still married, with a wife who would be coming to live with him at the corner house within a few days.
The inhabitants of Thrush Green were able to gaze their fill at the stranger on the first Sunday after his arrival, as he attended morning service in a dove-grey suit which was far better cut, everyone agreed, than those of the other males in the congregation.
The rector and one or two other neighbours had called upon him already and pronounced him ‘a very nice man’ or ‘a decent sort of fellow’according to sex.
To the rector's unfeigned delight, the newcomer was among the very few communicants at the altar rail at the eight o'clock service on the following Sunday.
About half a dozen faithful female Christians kept the rector company at early service usually.
It did the rector's heart good to see a man among his small flock, and he hoped that others might follow his example.
Betty Bell was the chief informant about Harold Shoosmith for she had been engaged for three mornings and three evenings a week.
The morning engagements Thrush Green could readily understand, for a man living alone could not be expected to polish and clean, to cook and scrub, and to wash and iron for himself; though, as Ella pointed out, plenty of women lived alone and did all that with one hand tied behind them, and often went out to work as well into the bargain, and no one considered it remarkable.
The evening engagements were readily explained by Betty Bell herself.
She went for an hour and a half to give him a hot cooked dinner, which she had prepared in the morning, and to wash up afterwards.
‘He's a very clever kind of man,’ said Betty to her other employer, Dotty Harmer, one morning.
‘He wants to learn to cook for himself.
Being out in those hot countries, you know, he's never had a chance to learn.
The kitchen's full of black people falling over themselves to do the work, and he's never been allowed to see his own dinner cooking, so I hear.’
[WINTER IN THRUSH GREEN]
Before long though, Harold meets his future wife Isobel, who had been at college with Agnes Fogerty, and they live happily ever after.
And this brings us to the end of our clockwise tour of Thrush Green and our brief meetings with the chief inhabitants.
But there are two more establishments, a little farther away, whose inmates play their parts in Thrush Green's gentle dramas.
Dotty Harmer, a spinster and stout friend of all animals, lived some quarter of a mile westward towards Lulling Woods.
Her schoolmaster father had been a disciplinarian who firmly believed that sparing the rod spoilt the child and whose memory caused many a local male heart to tremble.
Dotty Harmer was an eccentric old maid who lived alone in a ramshackle cottage in one of the meadows which bordered the path to Lulling Woods.
Her father had been a history master at the local grammar school and Dotty had kept house for the old man until his death, when she sold their home, bringing some of the furniture, all the books, four cats, two dogs and a collection of medicinal herbs to her new home.
The herbs flourished in her tiny garden, with roses, peonies, lilies and carnations which were the envy of all the gardeners in Lulling.
Dotty concocted alarming potions from the herbs and these she pressed upon her unwilling neighbours and friends if they were unwary enough to admit to any slight ailment in her presence.
So far, she had killed no one, but the vicar of St Andrew's had once had to call in Doctor Bailey as he was in agony with severe stomach pains, and had had to admit that he had taken tea and sandwiches with a peculiar and pungent filling, at Dotty Harmer's a few hours before.
The doctor had dismissed his troubles airily, diagnosing ‘Dotty's Collywobbles’, a fairly common Lulling complaint, and had warned him about accepting further hospitality at that lady's hands.
[THRUSH GREEN]
Dotty's way of life sometimes alarmed her friends.
Ella Bembridge, exhausted by Christmas shopping, called into the local tea shop, The Fuchsia Bush, in Lulling High Street and encountered her old friend.
‘Well, Dotty, expecting anyone?’ boomed Ella, dragging back the only unoccupied chair in the tea shop.
‘No, no,’ replied Dotty, removing a string bag, a cauliflower and a large paper bag labelled ‘LAYMORE’from the seat.
‘Bertha Lovelock was here until a minute ago.
Do sit down.
I'm just going through my list once more.
I think I've got everything except whiting for my cat.
It's usually rock salmon, you know, but I think she's expecting again and whiting must lie less heavily on the stomach, I feel sure.’
‘Tea, please,’ said Ella to the languid waitress who appeared at her side.
‘Set-tea — toasted-tea-cake — jam-or-honey — choice-of-cake-to-follow — two-and-nine,’ gabbled the girl, admiring her engagement ring the while.
‘No thanks,’ said Ella.
‘Just tea.’
‘Indian or China?’
‘Indian,’ said Ella.
‘And strong.’
The girl departed and Ella unwound the long woollen scarf from her thick neck, undid her coat and sighed with relief.
‘Wonder why its ‘Indian or China’?'she remarked idly to Dotty.
‘Why not ‘Indian or Chinese’?
Or ‘India or China’?
Illogical, isn't it?’
‘Indeed, yes,’ agreed Dotty, breaking a digestive biscuit carefully in half.
‘But then people are illogical.
Look at Father's man trap.’
Ella looked startled.
Sometimes Dotty's conversation was more eccentric than usual.
This seemed to be one of her bad days.
‘What's your father's man trap got to do with it?’ demanded Ella.
‘I just want it back,’ said Dotty simply.
She popped a fragment of biscuit into her mouth and crunched it primly with her front teeth.
The back ones had been removed.
She had the air of a polite bespectacled rabbit at her repast.
‘Oh, come off it!’ begged Ella roughly.
‘Talk sense!’
Dotty looked vaguely upset.
‘You know Father gave his valuable man trap to the museum.
It was quite a fine working model used in the eighteenth century by Sir Henry — a great-great-grandfather of the present Sir Henry.
Father used to demonstrate it to the boys at the grammar school when he was teaching history there.’
She paused to sip her tea, and Ella, fuming at the delay, began to wonder if that were all Dotty would say.
Dotty replaced her cup carefully, patted her mouth with a small folded handkerchief, and continued.
‘Well,’ she said, ‘now I could do with it.’
Ella made a violent gesture of annoyance, nearly capsizing the tea tray which the languid girl had now brought.
‘What on earth do you want a man trap for?’ expostulated Ella.
Dotty looked at her in surprise.
‘Why, to catch a man!’ she explained.
Ella made a sound remarkably like ‘Tchah!’ and began to pour milk violently into her cup.
I suspect,’ continued Dotty, unaware of Ella's heightened blood pressure, ‘that someone is stealing my eggs.
I could set the man trap at dusk and let the police interview him in the morning.’
‘Now, look here, Dotty,’ said Ella, in a hectoring tone, don't you realise you'd probably break the chap's leg in one of those ghastly contraptions?’
‘Naturally,’ replied her friend coolly, ‘a man trap works on that principle, and ours was in excellent condition.
Father saw to that.
He would be quite safe in it till morning.
I get up fairly early, as you know, so he wouldn't be in it more than a few hours.’
She spoke as though she would be acting with the most humane consideration, and even Ella was nonplussed.
‘But man traps are illegal,’ she pointed out.
‘Fiddlesticks!’ said Dotty firmly.
‘So are heaps of other traps, but they're used, more's the pity, on poor animals that are doing no wrong.
This wretched man knows quite well he is doing wrong in taking my eggs.
He deserves the consequences, and I shall point them out to him — from a safe distance, of course— as soon as I've trapped him.’
There was a slight pause.
‘You know what?’ said Ella.
‘You're absolutely off your rocker, Dot.’
Dotty flushed with annoyance.
‘I'm a lot saner than you are, Ella Bembridge,’ she said snappily.
‘And a lot saner than those chits of girls at the museum who won't let me have Father's property back.
I very much doubt if they are legally in the right about refusing my request.
After all, Father left all his property to me, and as I say, that man trap is exactly what I need at the moment.
‘You forget it,’ advised Ella, rolling a ragged cigarette.
‘Pop up to the police station instead and get Sergeant Stansted to keep his eyes skinned.
And, what's more,’ she added, for she was fond of her crazy friend, ‘don't tell him you want the man trap back, or you're the one he'll be keeping his eye on.’
She drew a deep and refreshing inhalation of strong cigarette smoke.
This was an occasion, she thought to herself, when a woman could do with a little comfort.
[WINTER IN THRUSH GREEN]
The second establishment was located halfway down Tilling High Street and was occupied by the Misses Lovelock — Ada, Bertha and Violet.
It was a handsome Georgian house, with a white-painted front door, approached by three steps and two elegantly curved iron handrails.
We meet them here at a party given by Ella and Dimity.
Ella made her way to the ladies' end to replenish Violet Lovelock's glass.
The three Miss Lovelocks had seated themselves on the window-seat, their silvery heads nodding and trembling, and their glasses, as Ella was not unsurprised to see, quite empty.
These three ladies, now in their seventies, lived in a Georgian doll's house in Lulling's High Street.
There they had been born, their wicker bassinette had been bumped down the shallow flight of steps to the pavement by their trim nursemaid, young men had called, but not one of the three tall sisters had emerged from the house as a bride.
They lived together peaceably enough, busying themselves with good works and their neighbours' affairs, and collecting objets d'art for their overcrowded gem of a house with a ruthless zeal which was a byword for miles around.
charming paper-weight when the Misses Lovelock rose to leave, for they had brought the art of persuasive begging to perfection.
Continuously crying poverty, they lived nevertheless very comfortably, and the inhabitants of Lulling and Thrush Green were wary of these genteel old harpies.
Tales were exchanged of the Lovelocks' exploits.
One told of their kind offer to look after her garden while she was away and how she came back to find it stripped of all the ripe fruit and the choicest vegetables.
‘Such a pity, dear, to see it going to waste.
We knew you would like  us to help ourselves, and it does keep the crop growing, of course.
We must let you have a bottle of the raspberries — so delicious.’
Neighbours who were unwary enough to let the Misses Lovelock look after the chickens in their absence rarely found any eggs awaiting them on their return, and in some cases a plump chicken had died.
‘Terribly upsetting, my dear!
It was just lying on its poor back with its legs stuck up and a dreadfully resigned look on its dear face!
We buried it in our garden as we didn't want to upset you.’
The ladies now smiled gently upon Ella as she retrieved their glasses.
All three were drinking whisky, barely moistened with soda water, with a rapidity that had ceased to startle their friends.
Ella noticed, with some alarm, that their eyes were fixed upon the silver basket which Dimity was proffering.
‘Do you like salted nuts, Bertha?’ asked Dimity anxiously of the youngest Miss Lovelock.
Bertha, Ada and Violet took two or three daintily in their claw-like hands.
Their eyes remained appraisingly upon the gleaming little dish.
‘What a charming little basket!’ murmured Violet.
‘We have its brother at home,’ said Ada, very sweetly.
‘I believe this should be one of a pair.’
[WINTER IN THRUSH GREEN]
And so, from 1958 onwards, these characters became my dolls, and their way, of life and the houses they inhabited became so real to me that it was quite a shock when I occasionally returned to the place which had started it all, Wood Green, near Witney.
Where was the village school?
Why had Witney Urban District Council taken over Harold Shoosmith's house?
Where was the statue to Nathaniel Patten which had caused such consternation at Thrush Green?
And how had my chestnut avenue suddenly dwindled to one or two trees?
This clash of reality and imagination was disturbing.
I had no such problem with the village of Fairacre, about which I also wrote, for that was entirely my own creation.
Nevertheless, I grew fonder of Thrush Green with every book I wrote about it, and I liked the characters as they developed.
I found it interesting to take one person, say the rector, Charles Henstock, and make him the chief character in one book and follow his fortunes, as I had in the first book about the great Mrs Curdle.
Naturally, the other people appeared and  something would crop up which made me Plan to give their adventures an airing in a future book.
Thus it was that I decided to give Edward Young a greater part to play in At Home in Thrush Green for, having burnt down the rectory in an earlier book, it seemed only right that I should hand over the job of replacing my act of arson to the architect I had created.
Now that I had my dolls and their dolls' houses, I set about playing with them with the greatest pleasure, and when I visited Wood Green I shut my eyes to some of the realities.
I didn't look down the footpath which led to the buttercup fields where Dotty Harmer lived, for they were there no more, and I ignored the traffic which came down the New Yatt Road.
But there was still enough to enchant me.
The Three Pigeons stood as comfortably as The Two Pheasants, and the major houses round the green endured in all their Cotswold serenity.
There was no doubt about it.
Thrush Green was an ideal place to play, and I set about moving my dolls along their allotted paths during the next few years.
PART III: What Happened To Them
AS YOU CAN imagine, the dozen or so habitations, and their inmates, became very dear to me over the years, and gradually took over from reality.
After more than forty years, strangers now dwelt in the houses I knew at Wood Green.
To go back to our first port of call, the Youngs' lovely house (at twelve o'clock).
When I knew it, during the war years, it was occupied by an elderly bachelor who was one of the several mill owners in Witney, the town famed world-wide for its blankets since the seventeenth century.
I only once went into his garden, a beautifully kept one, even in war-time, when he kindly picked a bunch of tulips for me and showed me some new potatoes he was growing in pots in the greenhouse.
There were some splendid Cotswold-stone outbuildings and these I turned into a retirement cottage years later for the elderly Bassetts.
On my last visit to Wood Green, I saw that an attractive house had been built on that part of the garden.
I am not sure if this is a case of Nature following Art, or the other way round, but the result is most satisfactory.
Joan Young, her architect husband Edward, and their young son Paul, grew clearer to me with every Thrush Green book that emerged.
Joan and her sister Ruth appeared early in the saga, and young Paul opened the very first book of the series.
As soon as he opened his eyes the child remembered, and his heart soared.
This was the day he had waited for so long — the day of the fair.
He lay there for a minute, beneath his tumbled bedclothes, savouring the excitement.
His mind's eye saw again, with the sharp clarity of a six-year-old, the battered galloping horses with flaring nostrils, the glittering brass posts, twisted like giant barley sugar sticks, the dizzy red and yellow swingboats and the snakes of black flex that coiled across the bruised grass of Thrush Green waiting to ensnare the feet of the bedazzled.
His nose tingled with the remembered scent of the hot oily smell which pulsed from the blaring roundabout and the acrid odour of his own hands, faintly green from clutching the brass post so tightly.
In his head rang the music of the fair, the raucous shouting, the screams of silly girls in swingboats, the throbbing of the great engine which supplied the power, and over all, the head-hammering mammoth voice which roared old half-forgotten tunes from among the whirling horses of the roundabout.
At last— at last , Paul told himself, it was the first day of May!
And at this point he sat up in bed, said ‘White Rabbits!’ aloud, to bring luck throughout the coming month, and looked eagerly out of the window into the dewy sunshine which was beginning to shimmer on Thrush Green.
[THRUSH GREEN]
Molly Piggott, later Ben Curdle's wife, was general help in the Youngs' house, and Paul liked nothing better than to watch her cook.
One of his favourite cakes was a sticky gingerbread which she made frequently in the cold days of winter.
He watched her putting the ingredients into two vessels, the dry ones in a large bowl on the kitchen table, and the rest into a saucepan on the massive Aga cooker.
When the winter wind whistled through the bare branches, the fragrance of this spicy cake was comforting.
But when the chestnut avenue outside the Youngs' house was making ‘a tunnel of green gloom’ in high summer, Molly made bottles of lemon essence to quench the thirst of Paul and his friends.
It gave Molly great pleasure to bake for Paul and his young friends, and these are a few of their favourites.
Edward and Joan Young remained on excellent terms with John and Ruth Lovell, the two sisters meeting almost daily.
All four were fond of playing cards, and they met occasionally for whist or bridge, either at the Youngs' or the Lovells' newer house along the road to the north.
Both men had arduous jobs, and were conscientious.
John Lovell coped with his admirably, and seldom worried his wife with any problems connected with it.
But Edward, more volatile and moody, was often in need of his wife's common-sense.
When the Victorian vicarage at Thrush Green burnt down, it was replaced by a set of one-storey retirement homes for old people.
Edward was given the contract and threw himself into it with vigour, aided no doubt by his life-long abhorrence of the building which he was now about to replace.
Everyone agreed that the result was most successful.
It was practical and in harmony with the surroundings.
But there was one fault in the design which did not escape the sharp eyes of the Thrush Green neighbours, and John Lovell was one who pointed out the weakness to his brother-in-law.
Edward Young, as architect, took a keen interest in the residents' reactions to his work, and on the whole was gratified.
All agreed that the houses were light, warm, well-planned and easy to run.
The main objection came from John Lovell one day when he met his  brother-in-law by chance, as he returned from a visit to the Cartwrights, the wardens at the new homes.
‘All going well there, Edward?’
‘No great problems so far,’ said the architect.
‘There will be,’ replied John.
Edward looked taken aback.
‘How d'you mean?’
‘Well, those outside steps, for instance.
You've been extra careful to have no steps inside, but that flight outside could be a menace, particularly in slippery weather.’
‘I don't see,’ said Edward frostily, ‘how you can overcome a natural incline except by steps — and these are particularly shallow ones — or a ramp.
As it happens, I've provided both.
And an adequate handrail.’
‘No need to get stuffy!’
‘I'm not getting stuffy,’ retorted Edward, ‘but I do dislike outsiders criticising something they don't understand.
You don't seem to realise the difficulties that confronted us when facing the problems that this site gave us.’
‘I'm not such an outsider that I can't see what a mistake you made with those steps —‘
‘Mistake ?
What rubbish!
You stick to your job, John, and leave me to mine.’
‘Unfortunately, I shall have to patch up the results of your mistakes!
Mark my words, a few slippery leaves, or later on some snow and ice, and I shall have some old people in my surgery with sprains and breaks.
It could all have been avoided with proper planning.’
‘Are you suggesting that I'm a bad architect?’
‘Not always.
But to design an old people's home with a hazard like that, is not only stupid, it's downright criminal.’
By this time, both men were flushed with anger.
They took their work seriously, and were sensitive to criticism.
The fact that normally the two brothers-in-law got along very peaceably made this present exchange particularly acrimonious.
‘The steps are perfectly safe,’ said Edward, with considerable emphasis.
‘You're getting a proper old woman, John, seeing danger where there is none.
I shan't come criticising your healing methods, though I gather that some of them leave much to be desired, so I'd be obliged if you left well alone in my field.’
He strode off across the green to his home, leaving John fuming.
‘Pompous ass!’ said John to the retreating back.
‘You wait till I get my first casualty from the homes!
I shan't let you forget it!’
[AT HOME IN THRUSH GREEN]
The two men said nothing at the time to their wives, but a day or two later, the question of an evening of cards cropped up.
The tiff between John and Edward still made itself felt.
The two couples frequently had an evening together playing cards, but when Joan broached the subject to her husband, she was surprised at his response.
‘Oh, skip it for a bit!
John's in one of his awkward moods.
Let him simmer.’
‘How do you mean?’
‘Oh, he was rather offensive to me the other day.’
‘John?
Offensive?
I can't believe it.’
Edward began to fidget up and down the room.
‘Nothing too personal, I suppose, but he was throwing his weight about over the steps at the old people's place.’
‘Well, he may be right.
Mr Jones mentioned them to me the other morning.
He hoped the residents there wouldn't slip on them.’
‘Oh, don't you start!
There's absolutely nothing wrong with those steps,’ exploded Edward.
‘The point is I don't particularly want to spend a whole evening in John's company at the moment.’
‘Well, calm down,’ begged Joan, taken aback at such unaccustomed heat.
‘You'll have a seizure if you get into such a state, over such a silly little thing.’
‘It isn't a silly little thing to me,’ almost shouted her incensed husband.
‘It's a criticism of my work, and I'm not standing for it.’
At that Joan shrugged her shoulders, and went out, without comment, to do her shopping.
Ruth Lovell, Joan's sister, was also perplexed by her husband's moodiness.
She knew from experience that he took everything seriously.
It was one of his qualities which his patients appreciated.
He was willing to give time, as well as his medical expertise, to their troubles and this they warmly appreciated.
Such dedication frequently exhausted him, and Ruth did her best to provide a relaxing atmosphere in their home.
Their occasional evenings at the card table with the Youngs were one of John's few outside pleasures.
But he too, it seemed, did not want to spend an evening with his brother-in-law, but said less about his reasons than the voluble Edward.
‘Perhaps later on,’ he said when Ruth suggested a card-playing evening.
‘I'm rather tired these days, and Edward can be a bit overpowering, I find.’
‘Just as you like,’ answered Ruth.
‘And if you're feeling tired, what about a dose or two of that tonic you make up for the patients?’
‘That stuff?’ exclaimed her husband.
‘Not likely!
It tastes appalling.’
[AT HOME IN THRUSH GREEN]
It so happened that the first person to come a cropper on the steps was the warden Jane Cartwright, who was a good deal younger and more agile than those in her care.
Across the green, Doctor Lovell heard for the first time about the accident at the old people's homes, and was magnanimous enough not to make any comment about Edward Young's steps in front of his partners.
Nevertheless, he felt a certain satisfaction in hearing that his fears were not groundless, although he had every sympathy for poor Jane Cartwright's mishap.
‘I hope all the old dears over there will hold tight to the handrail,’ was his only remark when he was told the news, but he said more to Ruth when he went home at lunch time.
‘Well that's the first casualty at Edward's famous edifice.
And won't be the last, as far as I can see!’
‘What's happened?’ asked Ruth, soup spoon suspended in mid-air.
‘Jane Cartwright's broken a leg on those idiotic steps.
Asking for trouble to put steps like that where there are old people.
I told Edward so months ago.’
‘But Jane isn't old,’ protested Ruth.
‘Oh, don't quibble!’ snapped her husband.
‘I know she's not!
All I'm pointing out is that those steps are a hazard, and one which any sane architect would have omitted from his plan from the start.’
Ruth continued to sip her soup in silence.
When John was so short-tempered, it hardly seemed possible to conduct a civilised conversation.
However, by the time the apple tart stage had been reached, Ruth spoke.
‘I'm taking the children to watch the bonfire just after six.
Paul is home and Jeremy Prior's going to be there as well.
Joan suggests we have a drink with them, before or after, just which suits you best.’
‘I suppose Edward is attending this bean feast?’
‘Naturally.’
‘Well, I'll come along for a little while to the bonfire, but don't accept for me later.
I'm on surgery duty tonight.’
‘Fair enough.
We won't be late back.
Mary will be tired out with all the excitement.’
‘You'll be a lot tireder, I surmise,’ said John with a smile.
He pushed back his chair, kissed his wife, and went back to his duties.
Well, he seemed to have cheered up, thought Ruth, clearing the table.
But if only he would try some of his own tonic!
[AT HOME IN THRUSH GREEN]
The coolness between the two men, but not between the sisters, continued until one day when Edward was obliged to seek medical advice.
He, poor fellow, was being driven to distraction by the pain in his right shoulder.
It seemed to have spread to his neck and down the right side of his back.
Joan, over the last week, had applied calamine lotion, witch hazel, petroleum jelly, and had even contemplated using a sinister looking ointment concocted by Dotty, but did not take this final drastic step.
Nothing seemed to alleviate the torment, and Edward grew more fractious daily.
When, at last, some nasty little spots began to appear, and he had spent the last night of the year sitting up in bed and holding his pyjama jacket away from his afflictions, Joan put her foot down.
‘I'm calling John in to have a look at you,’ she said firmly.
‘Oh, don't fuss!
Anyway, I suppose I'd better go to the surgery, if I must see him.’
‘Not with those spots.
You may have something infectious.’
‘Thanks.
Very reassuring, I must say.
What's your guess?
Leprosy?’
‘Don't be childish.
You'll stay there in the morning, and I shall ask John to come after surgery.
No arguing now.
You need some expert treatment.’
Edward grunted, but  forbore to argue.
He knew when he was beaten, but it was clear to his wife that he was still reluctant to be obliged to his brother-in-law.
Joan Young was as good as her word, and later John Lovell called to see his brother-in-law.
‘Let's have a look at this rash,’ said the doctor, helping Edward off with his shirt.
He surveyed the spots in silence, whilst the patient awaited the worst.
‘Well,’ he said at last.
‘You know what you've got, I expect?’
‘Far from it!
That's why you're here!’
‘Shingles.
I don't think it will be too bad a dose, but it's a beast of a complaint.’
‘I'll endorse that,’ said Edward.
‘I wonder where I got it?’
‘Lots of chickenpox about.
It's connected, you know.
Have you been in contact with anyone particularly?’
Edward thought, as he did up his shirt buttons.
‘Young George Curdle's got it, of course, and I've visited him now and again.
Playing snakes and ladders and draughts and other thrilling games.’
‘Sounds as though that's it.’
‘Am I infectious?’
‘No, no!
It's one of those things that we think lies dormant, and can flare up if the patient has been under strain or run down.
Or, of course, in contact with chickenpox.’
‘Well, to tell the truth, John, I am having a devil of a time with a contract in Cirencester.
Have had for weeks now.
Might be that partly.’
‘Quite likely.’
He smiled at his patient.
‘We all worry too much,’ he went on.
‘I've had a few guilty twinges about ticking you off about those steps.
No business of mine really.’
‘Oh, forget it, John,’ said Edward.
‘Can you give me something to stop this plaguey itching?’
‘Yes.
I'll write you a prescription for a lotion and some tablets.
and off work for a week at first.
Lots of drink — not spirits, old boy — nice healthy stuff like water and orange juice!’
‘An evening's card-playing might help.
Take your mind of your troubles.
Come to us on Thursday.
It's my evening off surgery.’
Within five minutes he had gone, leaving Edward to try to decipher the hieroglyphics of his prescriptions.
‘Why do doctors have such terrible handwriting?’ he asked the cat, who had wandered in.
But, rather naturally, there was no reply.
[AT HOME IN THRUSH GREEN]
Across the road at Tullivers, Phyllida Prior and Jeremy soon became friendly with the older residents of Thrush Green.
The girl's solitary state occasioned a good deal of sympathy, and in some cases, even stronger feelings.
Harold Shoosmith, the bachelor who had retired to live at Quetta, the corner house, was one whose kind heart was moved by this newcomer.
He admired her efforts to make a little money by freelance writing, whilst awaiting a divorce from the husband who had deserted her.
He returned thoughtfully to his quiet house and sank into an armchair.
What exactly was happening to him?
He didn't mind admitting that he was attracted to Phil Prior, but then he had been attracted to many girls in the past.
He had always enjoyed the company of intelligent women, and if they were pretty, then so much the better.
This protective feeling for Phil Prior, he told himself, was the result of her unfortunate circumstances.
Anyone with a spark of humanity would want to help a poor girl left defenceless and hard up, especially when she had to cope with the rearing of a young child, single handed.
Harold rose from the chair and walked restlessly about the room.
Was he really becoming fonder of the girl than he realised?
Dammit all, this was absurd!
He was a steadfast bachelor and intended to remain so.
He was old enough to be Phil's father.
Well, nearly —
He walked to the end of the room and studied his reflection in the handsome gilt-framed mirror which lay above the little Sheraton side-table.
He was tall and spare, his eyes bright, and his hair, although silver, still thick.
As a young man, he had been reckoned good-looking.
He supposed now, trying to look at himself dispassionately, he still had a few good points — but he  was old, old, old, he told himself sternly.
No young woman would consider him now, and quite right too!
He returned to his chair, dismissing these foolish thoughts, and opened the paper.
It was as inspiring and exhilarating as ever.
Four young men were appearing on chargers of peddling drugs, an old lady had had her hand chopped off whilst attempting to retain her purse, containing just two and eightpence, and a motorway to end all motorways was proposed which would wipe out six particularly exquisite villages and several hundred miles of countryside.
Harold threw it to the floor, leant back and closed his eyes.
How pleasantly quiet it was!
The fire whispered.
The clock ticked.
Somewhere, across the green, a car changed gear as it moved towards Lulling, and hummed away into nothingness.
This was what he had looked forward to throughout those long hard years of business life in Africa.
He would be mad to try and change his way of life now.
And yet Charles Henstock had found a great deal of happiness in later life since his marriage to Dimity.
Charles, Harold pointed out to himself, had nothing to lose when he married.
Ruled by that dreadful old harridan Mrs Butler, that desiccated Scotswoman who half-starved the poor rector, enduring the chilly discomfort of that great barn of a rectory all alone — of course marriage would be attractive!
Besides, Charles was the sort of man who should be married: he was not.
That was the crux of the matter.
He took up the poker and turned over a log carefully.
Watching the flames shoot up the chimney, he told himself firmly that marriage was out of the question.
Once that poor girl's divorce was through, he hoped that some  decent kind young man would appear to make her happy, and take some of her present burdens from her.
Meanwhile, he would do what he could to help her, and would frankly face the fact that her presence gave him enormous pleasure.
But for her sake, he must guard his feelings, he reminded himself.
Thrush Green was adept at putting two and two together and making five, and she had enough to contend with already, without being annoyed by foolish gossip.
‘Avuncular kindness!’ said Harold aloud, and was immediately revolted by the phrase.
He hit the flaring log such a hefty thwack that it broke in two.
He dropped the poker and went to pour himself a much-needed drink.
[NEWS FROM THRUSH GREEN]
Later, Winnie Bailey's nephew, Richard Bailey, was also to become an admirer of her young neighbour.
Winnie's nephew Richard arrived the following week.
He seemed genuinely grateful for his aunt's hospitality, and set himself out to be exceptionally charming to Doctor Bailey.
To Winnie's eye, he looked very fit and lively, having acquired a fine tan in America which set off his pale hair and blue eyes.
But it was not long before symptoms of the hypochondria which had always been present showed themselves in strength.
Two small bottles of pills stood by his plate at the first evening meal, and naturally excited the professional interest of his uncle.
‘I find them indispensable,’ said Richard.
‘Otto — Professor Otto Goldstein, you know, the dietician — prescribed them for me.
The red ones take care of the cholesterol, and these yellow and black torpedoes check acidity and act as a mild purge.
Constipation is a terrible enemy.’
‘You need a few prunes,’ said the doctor, ‘and a bit of roughage.’
‘Donald!’ protested Winnie.
‘Must you?
At table?’
‘Sorry, my dear, sorry,’ said her husband.
‘Too bad of me,’ apologised Richard.
‘Living alone such a lot makes one over-interested perhaps in one's natural functions.’
Winnie felt that this could lead to somewhat alarming disclosures which might be regretted by all.
She changed the subject abruptly.
‘You must meet our new neighbour,’ she said brightly, passing her nephew Brussels sprouts.
He held up a stern denying hand.
‘Not for me, Aunt Winnie.
Not cooked greens, I fear.
Quite forbidden by Otto because of the gases.
You haven't two or three raw ones, by any chance?’
‘Not washed,’ replied Winnie shortly, passing the rejected dish to her husband.
She was keenly aware of the smile which hovered round the old doctor's lips.
‘A pity’ murmured Richard, tackling pork chops en casserole with faint distaste.
‘She plays bridge and whist, and is a very nice person to talk to.
She writes.’
‘Really?’ replied Richard vaguely.
Clearly his mind was concerned with his digestive tract.
‘Will you have any spare evenings?’ pursued Winnie.
Richard gave a gusty sigh, the sigh of one who, overburdened with work, still enjoys his martyrdom.
‘I very much doubt it.
I shall be writing the notes on my experiments, of course, and I intend to spend as much time as I can refuting Carslake's idiotic principle.
An obstinate fellow, if ever there was one, and a very elusive one too.
I must thrash things out with him during the next few months.’
Winnie felt a wave of pity for the absent Professor Carslake.
Richard, on the rampage, must be an appalling bore.
She decided to put aside the idea of arranging Richard's social life at Thrush Green.
Richard obviously did not want it, and was it really fair to her friends to inflict her nephew on them, she added reasonably to herself?
She watched him swallow a red pill and then a yellow and black one.
It was quite apparent that he enjoyed them far more than the excellent dinner which Winnie had spent hours in preparing.
‘Coffee?’ she asked, rising from the table.
‘Or does Professor Goldstein  forbid that too?’
There was an edge to her tone which did not escape her observant husband.
‘No, indeed,’ replied Richard, opening the drawing-room door politely.
‘He approves of coffee, provided that the berries are really ripe, well roasted and coarsely ground.
He doesn't agree with percolators, though.
He always strains his through muslin.
Do you?’
‘Not with Nescafé,’ said his aunt, with a hint of triumph, leading the way.
[NEWS FROM THRUSH GREEN]
Luckily, Phil Prior found a market for her work with an editor friend of Harold's, called Frank Hurst.
Both men were fond of the girl, and when her husband — from whom she was estranged — was killed in a car crash, their sympathy was great, and shared by the rest of Thrush Green.
For the girl herself it was a sad time.
Christmas, for Phil Prior and for her young son, was made less painful by the kindness of her neighbours.
Jeremy's natural joy in the festivities found fulfilment at the Youngs' house, where a children's party and innumerable presents helped to put his father's tragedy into the background.
The arrival of the long-awaited kitten added to his excitement.
But, inevitably, it was more difficult for his mother.
Memories of past Christmases were inescapable.
She saw again John lighting the red candles on the Christmas tree, with wide-eyed two-year-old Jeremy gazing with wonder at each new flame.
John pulling crackers, and showing Jeremy the small fireworks inside — setting fire to the ‘serpent's egg’, waving a minute sparkler, making a flaming paper balloon rise to the ceiling, whilst Jeremy applauded excitedly.
John wrapping her in a scarlet cashmere dressing gown, which she considered madly extravagant but adorable of him.
John had always been at his best at Christmas, gay, funny, sweet, considerate.
It was more than Phil could bear to think that he would never again be there to make Christmas sparkle for her.
It was strange, she thought, how the bitterness of the last year was so little remembered.
The humiliation, the misery, the wretched effort of keeping things from Jeremy, were all submerged beneath the remembrances of earlier shared happiness.
She marvelled at this phenomenon, but was humbly grateful that her mind worked in this way.
When the subject of his father cropped up, which was not very often, Phil found that she could speak of him with true affection, keeping alive for the little boy his early memories of a loving father.
She was relieved when the New Year arrived and things returned to normal.
Jeremy started school during the first week in January, and she was glad to see him engrossed in his own school affairs and friendships again.
Meanwhile, she set herself to work with renewed determination.
It was plain that she must work doubly hard.
John's affairs had been left tidily, with a will leaving his wife everything unconditionally.
But when all had been settled, it seemed that Phil could expect a sum of only about six thousand pounds.
There was no doubt about it — things were going to be tight if she decided to continue to live at Tullivers.
But she was determined to stay there.
She loved the little house and she loved Thrush Green.
The friends she had made were the dependable, kindly sort of people whose company would give her pleasure and support in the years to come, as their affection towards her, in these last few terrible weeks, had shown so clearly.
She had settled in Thrush Green as snugly as a bird in its nest, and so had Jeremy.
Whatever the cost, Tullivers must remain their home.
[NEWS FROM THRUSH GREEN]
Jeremy loved it at Thrush Green, and as well as the kitten, hoped to add to his pets.
He was a regular visitor at Dotty Harmer's, glorying in the variety of animals to be found there.
One spring Saturday morning he bounded down the path by Albert Piggott's cottage and gained the path leading to Dotty's and finally to Lulling Woods.
The air was balmy, his spirits high, and he carried a large bunch of grass and greenery from the hedges as a present for Daisy, the milker, and Dulcie, the younger goat.
Charles Henstock privately thought that Dulcie was poorly named — neither sweet nor gentle, and very quick to use her horns on unsuspecting visitors, as he had found to his cost one wet day.
His clerical grey trousers had never completely recovered from their immersion in the puddle in which Dulcie's sly butting had landed him.
Jeremy, however, was rather more alert to Dulcie's wiles, and his passion for her was unclouded.
On this particular morning he found Dotty in a somewhat agitated mood.
She was having difficulty in fixing a chain to Dulcie's collar.
Daisy, taking advantage of the disturbance, was adding gleefully to the chaos by bleating continuously, and rushing round and round in circles so that her tethering chain was soon shortened to a couple of feet.
This gave her the opportunity to bleat even more madly, puffing noisily between bleats to prove how sorely she was being tried.
Dulcie, unduly skittish, kicked up her heels every time that Dotty approached her.
Dotty, red in the face, greeted Jeremy shortly.
‘Get Daisy undone, boy, will you?
And give her some of that stuff you've brought to stop her row.’
Jeremy obediently accomplished this task.
In the comparative peace that followed, Dotty captured the younger goat, mopped her brow and sighed noisily with relief.
‘Where's Dulcie going?’ asked Jeremy.
‘To be mated,’ said Dotty flatly.
‘What d'you mean —mated ?’ queried Jeremy.
‘Married, then,’ said Dotty, hitching up a stocking in a preoccupied way.
‘Married ?
But only people get married!’ exclaimed Jeremy.
‘I know that,’ said Dotty, nettled.
Dulcie began to tug powerfully at her lead.
‘But you said —‘
‘Here, you clear off home,’ said Dotty forthrightly.
‘I'm up to my eyes this morning, as you can see.’
The boy retreated very slowly backwards.
‘Will she have baby goats when she's been mated?’
‘Kids , you mean,’ said Dotty pedantically.
‘Do use the right expressions, child.’
‘Well, will she?’
‘What?’ said Dotty, stalling for time.
‘Have baby goats.
Kids, I mean?’
‘Maybe,’ said Dotty, with unusual caution.
Difficult to know how much  children knew about the facts of life these days, and anyway it wasn't her business to enlighten this one.
‘Can I have one when they come, Miss Harmer?’ begged Jeremy longingly.
‘Please , can I?’
Dotty's slender stock of patience suddenly ran out at her heels like gunpowder.
Her voice roared out like a cannon.
‘Look, boy!
I don't know if she'll have kids,when she'll have kids, or if your mother would let you have one if she did have kids!
You're far too inquisitive, and a confounded nuisance.
Get off home!’
She raised a skinny, but powerful arm, and Dulcie, sensing joyous combat, lowered her head for action.
In the face of this combined attack, Jeremy fled, but even as he ran determined to come again as soon as things at Dotty's had returned once more to their usual chaotic normality.
Meanwhile, he decided, slackening his pace as the distance between Dotty's and his own breathless form increased, he must set about persuading his mother that a little kid would be very useful for keeping Tullivers' grass down.
But, somehow, he sensed that that would be an uphill battle.
[NEWS FROM THRUSH GREEN]
It was some months later that Harold and Richard realised that Phil Prior had found a husband elsewhere.
‘I've some wonderful news,’ said Phil, ‘and I want you to be the first to know.
Can you guess?’
Harold looked at her.
He had always thought that poets grossly overstated things when they talked of eyes like stars.
Now he began to understand.
‘I was never good at guessing,’ he confessed.
‘I only knew myself yesterday.
Frank has asked me to marry him.
Say you're pleased.’
Harold took a deep breath.
If he felt a pang of jealousy, it vanished at once.
Wholeheartedly, he congratulated her.
‘He's the luckiest devil in the world,’ he told her sincerely, taking her hands in his.
‘He's coming here tomorrow to arrange things with the rector,’ said Phil.
‘We had the longest telephone talk ever known to the Lulling exchange last night.
We shall get married this summer.’
She leant forward and kissed Harold on the cheek.
‘And will you give me away?’ she asked.
‘It's like asking me to part with my heart,’ replied Harold, half-meaning it, ‘but since you ask me, I shall count it an honour, my dear.’
They stood up and gazed across the garden.
‘Will you leave Thrush Green?’ asked Harold.
‘We haven't got that far,’ smiled Phil, ‘but I don't think I could ever leave Tullivers.
We could build on.
I suppose.’
She looked about her vaguely, trying to envisage the future, and suddenly became conscious of the wonder of a life which contained such a precious element as sure joy to come.
[NEWS FROM THRUSH GREEN]
Next door to Tullivers stood the Baileys' house.
As I have said already, it was in just such a position that the doctor who attended us in wartime lived.
Not that I ever went into the house, for the doctor's surgery, which he shared with one other, stood in Witney High Street where it widened into the market place.
Fortunately, we seldom needed to call upon the doctor, but our daughter, as an infant, was obliged to submit to various injections, and usually responded with great violence to these administrations.
The doctor was so used to being called in a second time to cope with the results of his first visit that eventually he dug in his heels and advised against another jab dealing with whooping-cough.
When the child caught this later and went off her food, I found that tiny Marmite sandwiches handed over whilst I pushed the pram round Wood Green and along the New Yatt Road, seemed to be acceptable to the invalid.
Our perambulations were interrupted now and again when other young friends with babies, hove in sight and, being infectious, we had to wave from a distance and hurry away from each other.
Luckily, this leprous condition did not last long, and the doctor's visits grew less frequent as the child thrived.
This real doctor was a much younger man than the Doctor Bailey I created to live in his old house.
In fact, we only meet this good man in the last few months of his life.
Before nightfall, the news that Doctor Bailey was sinking was common knowledge at Thrush Green.
There was general sadness.
Even Albert Piggott had a good word to say for the dying man, as he drank his half-pint of bitter at The Two Pheasants.
‘Well, we shan't see his like again,’ he commented morosely.
‘He done us proud, the old gentleman.
I s'pose now we has to put up with young Doctor Lovell dashing in and out again before you can tell him what ails you.’
‘There's the new chap,’ said the landlord.
‘Seems a nice enough young fellow.’
‘Him?’ squeaked Albert.
‘Nothing but a beardless boy!
I wouldn't trust my peptic ulcer to him, that I wouldn't.
No, I'll put me trust in strong peppermints while I can, and hope Doctor Lovell can spare a couple of minutes when I'm real hard-pressed.
You mark my words, we're all going to miss the old doctor at Thrush Green.’
It was the older people who were the saddest.
Doctor Bailey had brought their children into the world, and knew the family histories intimately.
He had not been active in the partnership for some years now, so that the younger inhabitants were more familiar with Doctor Lovell, who had married a Thrush Green girl, and was accepted as a comparatively worthy successor to Doctor Bailey.
But it was the old friends and neighbours, the Youngs, the Henstocks, Ella Bembridge, Dotty Harmer, Phil Prior and the comparative newcomer, Harold Shoosmith, who were going to miss Donald Bailey most keenly.
Most of them had visited the invalid often during the past few months, marvelling at his gallant spirit and his unfailing good temper.
Now, as the day waned, their thoughts turned to that quiet grey house across the green.
The rector had called during the afternoon and found Winnie Bailey sitting by her husband's bedside.
He was asleep, his frail hands folded on the white sheet.
A downstairs room, once his study, had been turned into a bedroom for the last few months, and his bed faced the french windows leading into the garden he loved so well.
Propped up on his pillows, he had enjoyed a view of the flower beds and the comings and goings at the bird table all through the summer.
His particular joy was the fine copper beech tree which dominated the scene.
He had watched it in early May, as the tiny breaking leaves spread a pinkish haze over the magnificent skeleton.
He had rejoiced in its glossy purplish midsummer beauty which had sheltered the gentle ring-doves that cooed among its branches.
And now, in these last few days, he had watched its golden leaves fluttering down to form a glowing carpet at its foot, as the autumn winds tossed the great boughs this way and that.
For once, the boisterous wind was lulled.
Wisps of high grey cloud scarcely moved behind the copper beech.
The garden was very still, the bird-table empty, the room where the dying man lay as quiet and tranquil as the grave to which so soon he would be departing.
Charles Henstock sat beside his old friend for a short time, his lips moving in prayer.
After a little he rose, and Winnie went with him into the sitting-room.
She was calm and dry-eyed, and Charles admired her control.
‘He's very much in our thoughts and prayers, as you know,’ said Charles.
‘I know that Ella and Dimity — everyone in fact — will want to know how he is and would like to call, but they don't wish to intrude at a time like this.
Shall I tell them the latest news?
Or would you like one of us to sit with you?’
Winnie smiled.
‘You tell them, please.
Doctor Lovell says it is only a matter of hours now.
I shall stay by him.
He has a few lucid moments every now and again.
Why, he's even doing the crossword, bit by bit, but I think visitors would tire him too much.
I know that they will understand.’
Charles nodded.
‘Jenny is with me,’ continued Winnie.
‘She insisted on staying today, and I'm grateful to have someone here to answer the door.
I will keep in touch, Charles dear, and I'll tell Donald you called.’
The sun was setting as the rector set off homeward.
Long shadows stretched across the grass from the chestnut avenue and the houses round the green.
Above The Two Pheasants, a curl of blue smoke hung in the still air.
The bar fire had been lit ready for the customers.
Willie Bond, the postman, was pushing his bicycle along the road to Nidden, at the end of his last delivery, and in the distance the rector could see Ella vanishing down the alley that led to Lulling Woods and Dotty Harmer's house.
No doubt, she was off to collect her daily pint of goat's milk.
Sad though he felt, there was a touch of comfort in these manifestations of life going on as usual.
Donald Bailey, he knew, would agree with him.
He remembered his philosophy so clearly.
We are born, we live our little lives, we die.
Our lives are cut to the same pattern, touching here, overlapping there, and thus forming rich convolutions of colour and shape.
But at the end, we are alone, and only in the lives and memories of our children, our friends and our work can we hope to be remembered.
Charles Henstock, whose belief in an after-life was absolute, had never been able to persuade his old friend to share his convictions, and he had once told Donald, after an amicable exchange of views on the subject, that he considered the doctor to be the finest unbeliever he had been privileged to meet.
In some ways, thought the rector, observing the cock on St Andrew's spire gilded with the setting sun, one could have no better epitaph.
[BATTLES AT THRUSH GREEN]
The subject of an after-life was also being discussed by those two indomitable ladies Ella Bembridge and Dotty Harmer in the latter's cluttered kitchen near Lulling Woods.
Ella had called for the goat's milk.
‘Jolly sad,’ boomed Ella, ‘snuffing it like that.
The end of everything, I suppose.’
Dotty, scrabbling for change in a jar which, long ago, had held Gentlemen's Relish, gave a snort.
‘If you were a true Christian, Ella, you would look upon it as a new beginning.’
‘But who's to know?’
Ella's voice was almost a wail.
Dotty looked at her friend sharply.
‘Well, I for one, know!
If my dear father believed in the hereafter, and all the good and intelligent clergymen we have met in our lives do so too, then I am quite confident .’
‘But what do you think happens, Dotty?’
‘We are simply translated,’ said Dotty briskly.
She looked at the coins in her hand.
‘Are you giving me five pence or five peas for the milk?
I quite forget.’
‘It started at sixpence, if you remember, but now things have got so out of hand I thought you ought to have five peas.’
‘But isn't that a shilling?
That's far too much.’
‘The milkman charges more than that for his homogenised muck, so take the bob, Dotty dear, and we'll all be content.’
‘It s more than generous.
And I shan't have to bother with change, shall I?’
‘No.
And now, how do you mean translated ?
Drift off into other new babies, d'you mean, or daffodils, or wireworms?
Some other form of life, as it were?’
Dotty grew scarlet with impatience.
‘Of course not.
I've no time for all that wishy-washy muddled thinking!
When you die you simply leave your worn-out body behind, and your spirit takes off.
Don't you ever pay attention to the teachings of the Church?’
‘But takes off to where , Dotty?’
‘To heaven, of course,’ said Dotty tartly, seizing an enormous wooden spoon and advancing upon an iron saucepan which had been rumbling and grumbling to itself throughout the conversation.
‘And don't fuss any more about such things,’ said Dotty, ‘I really haven't time to explain it all when the chickens are waiting to be fed.’
‘Quite,’ agreed Ella, talking up the goat's milk.
‘It makes me sad, though, to think that we shan't see Donald Bailey again.’
‘Speak for yourself,’ replied Dotty, stirring furiously.
‘I have every expectation of seeing the dear man again, in a better world.’
‘That must be a comfort,’ rejoined Ella, as she shut the kitchen door behind her.
‘But not for me,’ she added sadly to herself, setting off homeward through the twilight.
[BATTLE AT THRUSH GREEN]
After Donald's death, his widow Winnie did her best to come to terms with her new and sad circumstances.
She was lucky, she realised, that her financial situation remained much as it was in Donald's life time.
For many widows, the sudden drop in income was the greatest worry they had to face, and that she was spared, although steeply rising costs, in fuel and rates alone, meant that the old house would be expensive to run.
Repairs too, would be another hazard to face, but the structure was sturdily built and had always been well maintained.
With any luck, it should not need much doing to it over the next few years.
The thing was, of course, that it was really too big for one woman.
Winnie felt guilty, sometimes, when she read of people crowded into tenements, and thought of her own empty bedrooms.
On the other hand, she loved the house, and could not bear to leave it.
Its sheltering walls had enclosed their happy life together.
The furniture, the pictures, the loved knick-knacks, all told their story of a lifetime spent together in this small community where both had played useful parts.
No, the house was not the main problem.
She intended to stay there, and was willing to retrench in other ways so that she could continue to live in Thrush Green among her friends, and also have room to entertain more distant friends who would be invited to stay.
The worry which most perturbed Winnie was one of which she was deeply ashamed.
She had found, since her return to the house, that she was horribly nervous of being alone in it at night.
She tried to reason with herself about this.
After all, she argued, poor Donald could not have protected either of them if burglars had broken in.
They never had been so unfortunate as to have intruders, and were unlikely to start now.
What would there be, of any value, for a thief to find?
There were far more profitable houses to burgle within a stone's throw of her own modest establishment.
But such sweet reasoning did not comfort her.
As soon as nightfall arrived, she found herself locking doors, shutting windows, and finding strange solace in being barred and bolted.
She made up her mind never to open the doors after dark to people knocking.
Stupid though it might appear, she went upstairs and spoke to them from an upper window.
There were far too many accounts in the papers, of unsuspecting women who opened doors and were hideously attacked by those waiting.
As far as lay in her power, Winnie took precautions against violence.
Nevertheless, her feelings worried her.
She tried to analyse them as she took an afternoon walk along the road to Nidden one winter's day.
The wind was fresh, and although there was no rain, there were puddles along the length of the chestnut avenue, and water lay in the furrows of the ploughed fields.
A pair of partridges whirred across the road in front of her, and Winnie remembered that Ella had told her that they mated for life.
What happened, she wondered, to the survivor of such a devoted couple?
Was it too as bereft as she now was?
Things were not too bad during the day.
There were so many little jobs to do, and trips into Lulling for shopping when she met friends and had company.
And Jenny, of course, was a constant comfort.
Winnie grew to look forward to Jenny's mornings more and more.
She was deft and quiet, with the rare gift of speaking only when something needed to be said, but her friendliness warmed the house for Winnie, and the knowledge that Jenny would do anything, at any time, to help her, was wonderfully comforting.
She supposed that she must face the fact that she was run down after the years of nursing and the final shock of Donald's death.
She refused to look upon herself as an invalid, but it might be sensible to take a tonic, say, during the coming winter months, and to catch up with the loss of sleep she had so cheerfully endured.
With returning strength, these unnatural fears might vanish.
It was natural too, she told herself, to feel vulnerable now that Donald had  gone.
For years now, she had been the protector, taking decisions, fending off unwelcome visitors, sparing Donald all unnecessary cares.
It was understandable that there should be some reaction.
She had reached the new housing estate by now, which stretched away to the left, and covered the fields she so well remembered that overlooked Lulling Woods.
The houses were neat and not unpleasing in design, though to Winnie's eyes they appeared to be built far too close together, and the low wire fences gave no privacy.
Washing blew on most garden lines, and a number of toddlers played together in the road, jumping in a big puddle to the detriment of their clothes and their obvious delight.
Winnie smiled at them and walked on by.
‘Who's that old lady?’ asked one child, in a shrill treble that carried clearly through the winter air.
Old lady, thought Winnie, with sudden shock!
Well, she supposed she was.
But how surprising!
An old lady, like that ancient crone who lived in the cottage she had just passed, who had a hairy mole on her chin and squinted hideously.
Or like Jenny's mother, whose grey head trembled constantly, so that she reminded Winnie of a nodding Chinese doll she had owned as a child.
An old lady, an old lady!
The houses were behind her now, and the lane stretched ahead bounded by high bare hedges.
On her right stood an empty cottage, fast becoming derelict.
She stooped to lean on the stone wall and rest.
The house stood forlorn and shabby, shadowed by a gnarled plum tree.
Ivy was growing up its trunk and the recent gales had wrenched some of it from the bark.
It waved in the wind, bristly as a centipede's legs.
The garden was overgrown, but the shape of submerged flower beds could still be seen, and the minute spears upthrusting by the house wall showed where there remained a clump of snowdrops.
Behind the house, a rotting clothes line stretched, a forked hazel bough still holding it aloft.
Bird droppings whitened a window sill, and from the bottom of the broken front door Winnie saw a mouse scurry for cover in the dead grass by the door step.
Neglected, unloved, slowly disintegrating, the house still sheltered life, thought Winnie.
Although no children played, no parent called, no human being opened and shut the door, yet other creatures lived there.
Spiders, beetles, mice and rats, many birds, and bats, no doubt, found refuge here from the cruelty of wind and weather.
It was, she supposed, simply a change of ownership.
She looked kindly upon the old quiet cottage.
An old cottage!
An old lady!
She smiled at the remembrance.
Well, in many ways they were alike.
They had once been cherished, had known warmth and love.
Now they were lonely and lost.
But the house was still of use, still gave comfort and shelter.
There was a lesson to be learnt here.
She must look about her again, and try to be useful too.
There were so many ways in which she could help, and by doing so she might mitigate the fears which crowded upon her when dusk fell.
It was growing colder.
The wintry sun was sinking.
The sky was silver-gilt, against which the black trees threw their lacy patterns.
She turned and made her way homeward, feeling much refreshed.
[BATTLE AT THRUSH GREEN]
Winnie's natural nervousness about living alone continued, until one happy day when Jenny, her friend and daily help, arrived looking excited.
‘Had good news, Jenny?’ asked her mistress.
‘Yes.
Willie Bond brought a letter for the old folks.
They've got a new house at last.
One of those old people's homes the council built.’
Jenny's honest plain face glowed with pleasure.
‘How wonderful!
Just what they've always wanted.
And when can they move in?’
‘About a month's time.
There's got to be an inspection or something, to make sure everything works.
As soon as that's done, they can go in.’
‘And what about your present house, Jenny?’
‘Well, that'll come down.
All our row will, and a good thing too.
It's been condemned for years now.
We knew it would happen one day.’
‘So what will you do?’
‘I'll face that when the time comes,’ said Jenny cheerfully.
‘I'll find a room somewhere I expect.
Might even go nursing — I did a bit once — and I could live in the hostel.’
‘Would you want to do that?’
‘Not really,’ said Jenny.
‘Besides, I'm a bit old.
I don't know if they'd have me.
But I shall find something all right.
Just get the old folks settled, and I'll start thinking.’
She went humming upstairs to clean the bathroom, while Winnie turned over in her mind a plan which had been lurking there for some time.
It continued to engage her thoughts as she sat knitting that afternoon.
Her dislike of being alone after dark had certainly diminished as the weeks went by, but she could not honestly say that she was completely carefree.
She had wondered if it would be sensible to let two rooms upstairs.
She would still have a spare bedroom, quite enough for the modest entertaining she proposed to do in her widowed state.
The two rooms adjoined.
Both had wash-basins, one of which could be changed to a kitchen sink.
There would be plenty of room for an electric stove and for cupboards, and it would convert easily into a comfortable kitchen.
The room next door was larger and would make an attractive bed-sitting room.
Both rooms overlooked the green and were light and sunny.
The difficulty was, who would be acceptable?
Winnie did not want a married couple, and such a minute flat would not be suitable for people with babies or pets.
A single man might be useful for attacking the marauders that Winnie feared, but then he might expect his washing and ironing to be done, and his socks darned, and Winnie was beginning to feel rather too old for such mothering.
No, a pleasant single woman was the answer!
One with a job during the day, who enjoyed looking after her small domain, and who did not demand too much attention from her landlady.
The financial side was something of a problem to Winnie, who had not the faintest idea what should be charged.
Nor did she know if there should be some legal document setting out the terms upon which landladies and lodgers agreed.
And then, supposing they did not get on?
It was common knowledge that one really had to live with people before one knew them properly.
Look at that terrible Brides-in-the-Bath man!
No, thought Winnie, don't look at him, with dusk already beginning to fall!
She rose to draw the curtains and to switch on the lamp.
Across the green, she saw the rector marching purposefully toward The Two Pheasants.
Unusual, thought Winnie.
Perhaps he was calling on his sexton, Albert Piggott, or on Harold Shoosmith nearby.
But the rector was opening the wicket gate at the side of the public house, and vanished from sight.
Winnie resumed her seat and her knitting.
Over the past few weeks she had come to the conclusion that the person she would most like to share her home was quiet, devoted Jenny.
That is, of course , if she would come.
And now, with this morning's news, it looked as though there were a chance.
She would await her opportunity, and put the proposition before Jenny.
How lovely, thought Winnie, letting her knitting fall and looking at the leaping flames, if she agreed!
The bogey of loneliness would be banished and the tiresome business of trying to find out what would be a fair rent would also be solved, for Jenny would live there rent-free.
Winnie allowed herself to indulge in happy daydreams for some five minutes, and then pulled herself together sharply.
It was no good getting too hopeful.
Jenny might well have other plans, besides the vague ones she had mentioned and, in any case, a shared home at Thrush Green might be abhorrent to her.
Well, time would show.
Winnie picked up her knitting again, determined to remain cool-headed over the whole affair.
But hope warmed her throughout the evening.
[BATTLES AT THRUSH GREEN]
And so it happened that Jenny came to live with Winnie Bailey, rejoicing in her new flat and the modern kitchen where she had full scope for her passion for cooking.
One of Thrush Green's favourite confections was a dish of Jenny's hot cheese scones, and here is her recipe.
If you walk up the steep hill from Witney to Wood Green on the main Woodstock road, on your right you will notice an attractive building on a high bank.
It was once the Friends' Meeting House, and a flight of stone steps led to it when I first knew it.
Here, during the war, a nursery playgroup met one or two mornings a week.
In charge was a vivacious Viennese lady who had fled from danger, and who now put her outstanding skills in child welfare to good account.
Accompanied by our daughter, I spent many happy hours helping there.
It was a lively place and did good work.
I always felt that it was typical of the Quakers' practical Christianity to allow their building to be so used.
I liked too to see the toddlers playing happily in the small grassy graveyard which adjoined it, their blue and white checked overalls gay against the sober grey of the simple tombstones.
Here the living and the dead were in harmony.
It was near here, at roughly four o'clock on the green, that I placed the small house where the two friends Ella and Dimity lived amicably together for a number of years.
Although it was generally believed in Thrush Green that ‘poor Dimity was put upon by Ella’, it was not the case.
It was true that Dimity appeared to fall in readily with any of Ella's demands, but if it came to a matter of principle, then Dimity was unshaken.
This Ella knew.
Her gruff mannish exterior hid a sensitive and complex nature.
Those large and lumpish hands could produce exquisitely fine work when required, and she relished the thoughts of others.
She kept a commonplace book unknown to all but Dimity, who sometimes pointed out a passage in her reading which she felt might appeal to her friend.
One of them was an extract from the prayer of St Theresa of Avila.
Teach me the glorious lesson that occasionally it is possible that I may be mistaken.
Keep me reasonably sweet.
I don't want to be a saint; some of them are hard to live with, but a sour old woman is one of the crowning works of the devil.
Help me to extract all possible fun out of life.
There are so many delightful things around us, I don't want to miss any of them.
Ella was a great admirer of Anthony Trollope, partly because she was impressed with the industry and perseverance of the man.
Another of her private heroes was Isambard Kingdom Brunel, for the same reason.
She admired few men, considering them selfish, lazy and weak, so that the one or two who won her respect by sustained endeavour were doubly honoured.
Doggedness was one of the virtues which Ella prized.
Loyalty was another.
It came to the fore most strongly when she faced the fact that some day Dimity might marry.
It was Harold Shoosmith she had in mind then, mistakenly thinking that Dimity was attracted to him.
She went for a walk one spring afternoon to think things out.
It was one of those clear mild days which come occasionally in mid-winter and lift the spirits with their hint of coming springtime.
Catkins were already fluttering on the nut hedge behind Albert's house and the sky was a pale translucent blue, as tender as a thrush's egg-shell.
Two mottled partridges squatted in the grass not far from the pathway, like a pair of fat round bottles.
Ella looked upon them with a kindly eye.
She knew they mated for life, and though she did not think much of married bliss, yet she approved of constancy.
Her mind turned from the partridges, naturally enough, to the possibility of Dimity marrying.
Nothing had been said between the two friends, and Ella often wondered if she had imagined a situation which did not, in fact, exist.
But ever since the day when she had faced her own fears she had held fast to her principles.
If Dimity chose to leave her, then she must wish her all the happiness in the world and make her going easy for her.
It was the least one could do in gratitude for so many years of loyal friendship, and the only basis on which that friendship could continue.
[WINTER IN THRUSH GREEN]
Ella's thoughts that day did, in due course, become reality.
It was at the little house that she shared with Ella that Dimity received the proposal of marriage which was to change her life.
The rector, as he had intended, found Dimity alone in the house, for he had observed Ella striding towards Lulling Woods, basket in hand, and had remembered that this was the day on which the eggs were collected.
‘Why, Charles!’ cried Dimity.
‘How lovely to see you!
I didn't know you were allowed out yet after that wretched flu.’
‘This is my first walk,’ admitted the rector.
‘But I wanted to come and thank you properly for all that you have done.’
How convenient, at times, thought the rector, was the English use of the second person plural!
‘Ella's out, I'm afraid,’ said Dimity, leading the way to the sitting-room.
But I don't think she'll be very long.’
The rector felt a little inner agitation at this news, but did his best to look disappointed at Ella's temporary absence.
He handed Dimity the flowers with a smile and a small bow.
‘Freesias!’ breathed Dimity with rapture, thinking how dreadfully  extravagant dear Charles had been, and yet how delicious it was to have such treasures brought to her.
‘How very, very kind, Charles.
They are easily our favourite flowers.’
The rector murmured politely while Dimity unwrapped them.
Their fragrance mingled with the faint smell of wood smoke that lingered in the room and the rector thought, yet again, how warm and full of life this small room was.
Ella's book lay face downward on the arm of a chair, her spectacles lodged across it.
Dimity's knitting had been hastily put aside when she answered the door, and decorated a low table near the fire.
The clock ticked merrily, the fire whispered and crackled, the cat purred upon the window sill, sitting foursquare and smug after its midday meal.
A feeling of great peace descended upon the rector despite the preoccupations of the errand in hand.
Could he ever hope, he wondered, to have such comfort in his own home?
‘Do sit down,’ said Dimity, ‘while I arrange these.’
‘I'll come with you,’ said Charles, with a glance at the clock.
Ella must have reached Dotty's by now.
He followed Dimity into the small kitchen which smelt deliciously of gingerbread.
‘There!’ gasped Dimity, ‘I'd forgotten my cakes in the excitement.’
‘Could you pass that skewer, Charles?’ she asked, intent on the oven's contents.
Obediently, the rector passed it over.
‘Harold is coming to tea tomorrow,’ said Dimity, ‘and he adores gingerbread.’
She poked busily at the concoctions, withdrew the tins from the oven and put them on the scrubbed wooden table to cool.
The rector leant against the dresser and watched her as she fetched a vase and arranged the freesias.
His intentions were clear enough in his own mind, but it was decidedly difficult to make a beginning, particularly when Dimity was so busy.
‘I must show you our broad beans,’ chattered Dimity, quite unconscious of the turmoil in her old friend's heart.
‘They are quite three inches high.
Harold gave us some wonderful stuff to keep the slugs off.’
Fond as the rector was of Harold Shoosmith, he found himself disliking his intrusion into the present conversation.
Also the subject of slugs, he felt, was not one which made an easy stepping-stone to such delicate matters as he himself had in mind.
The kitchen clock reminded him sharply of the passage of time, and urgency lent cunning to the rector's stratagems.
‘I should love to see them sometime,’ said Charles, ‘but I wonder if I might sit down for a little?
My legs are uncommonly feeble after this flu.’
Dimity was smitten with remorse.
‘You poor dear!
How thoughtless of me, Charles!
Let's take the freesias into the sitting-room and you must have a rest.’
She fluttered ahead, pouring out a little flow of sympathy and self-reproach which fell like music upon the rector's ears.
‘Have a cushion behind your head,’ said Dimity, when the rector had lowered himself into an armchair.
She plumped it up with her thin hands and held it out invitingly.
The rector began to feel quite guilty, and refused it firmly.
‘Harold says it's the final refinement of relaxation,’ said Dimity, and noticed a wince of pain pass over the rector's cherubic face.
‘Oh dear, I'm sure you're over-tired!
You really shouldn't have ventured so far,’ she protested.
‘Dimity,’ said Charles, taking a deep breath, ‘I want to ask you something.
Something very important.’
‘Yes, Charles?’ said Dimity, picking up her knitting busily, and starting to count stitches with her forefinger.
The rector, having made a beginning, stuck to his guns manfully.
‘Dimity,’ he said gently, ‘I have a proposal to make.’
Dimity's thin finger continued to gallop along the needle and she frowned with concentration.
Inexorably, the little clock on the mantelpiece ticked the precious minutes away.
At length she reached the end of the stitches and looked with bright interest at her companion.
‘Who from?’ she asked briskly.
‘The Mothers’ Union?’
‘No !’ said the rector, fortissimo.
‘Not from the Mothers' Union!’
His voice dropped suddenly.
‘The proposal, Dimity, is from me.’
And, without more ado, the rector began.
‘Oh, Charles,’ quavered Dimity when he had ended.
Her eyes were full of tears.
‘You need not answer now,’ said the rector gently, holding one of her thin hands in his own two plump ones.
‘But do you think you ever could?’
‘Oh, Charles,’ repeated Dimity, with a huge happy sigh.
‘Oh, yes, please!’
When Ella came in, exactly three minutes later, she found them standing on the hearthrug, hand in hand.
Before they had time to say a word, she had rushed across the room, enveloped Dimity in a bear-hug and kissed her soundly on each cheek.
‘Oh Dimity,’ said Ella, from her heart.
‘I'm so happy!’
‘Dash it all, Ella,’ protested Charles, ‘that's just what we were going to say!’
[WINTER IN THRUSH GREEN]
Thrush Green Rectory, standing at six o'clock, was Charles and Dimity's first home and here they settled very happily — apart from the draughts.
The ugly rectory is a figment of my imagination, for there was never such a building on Wood Green.
However, I quite enjoyed describing the horrors of my creation, and shared with Edward Young, the architect, his revulsion for the hideous house, covered in peeling stucco, as chilling within as without.
It was with great relish that I prepared to burn it down — while Charles and Dimity were conveniently away for a few days.
Harold Shoosmith discovered the fire and promptly summoned the fire brigade.
Within five minutes, a little knot of helpers was gathered at the blaze.
The sight was awe-inspiring.
The collapse of part of the roof had let in air which intensified the conflagration.
Flames were now shooting skyward, and the upstairs windows showed a red glow.
Smoke poured from the main bedroom window, and there were terrifying reports as the glass cracked in the heat.
Mr Jones, the landlord of The Two Pheasants, was organising a chain of water carriers from the tap in his bar, and Albert Piggott, stomach pains forgotten, had trundled out an archaic fire-fighting contraption which had been kept in the vestry since the Second World War and had never been used since the time when a small incendiary bomb had set light to the tassels of the bell ropes, and an adjacent pile of copies of Stainer's ‘Crucifixion’, in 1942.
This relic, when attached to a nearby hydrant well-hidden in nettles in the churchyard, spouted water at a dozen spots along its perished length and saturated several onlookers.
‘Get the damn thing out of the way!’ yelled Harold Shoosmith.
‘We'll have someone falling over it!’
He and several other men, including Edward Young and Ben Curdle, were busy removing furniture, books and papers, and anything they could grab downstairs, before the inevitable happened and the whole top floor collapsed.
These were being piled, well away from danger, by willing hands.
Ella Bembridge, for once without a cigarette in her mouth, worked as stoutly as the men, and would have forced her way into the building to collect some of Dimity's treasures if she had not been forbidden to do so by Harold, who had taken charge with all the ready authority of one who had spent his life organising others.
The welcome sound of the fire brigade's siren sent people scattering to allow its access across the grass to the blazing house.
It was a joy to see the speed and economy of effort with which the hoses were turned on.
‘This started some hours ago, by the look of things,’ said the captain to Harold.
‘I can't think how it went undetected for so long.’
Harold explained that the house was empty, and at that moment a second fire engine arrived from Nidden, and started work at the side of the building where the flames seemed thickest.
A terrible roaring sound began to emanate from the doomed building, and the bystanders were ordered to get well away.
With a thunderous rumbling the top floor of the rectory now collapsed.
Sparks, smoke and flames poured into the air, and the heat became intense.
People began to cough in the acrid air, and to rub eyes reddened with smoke and tears.
Now it was quite obvious that nothing more could be rescued.
The rector's modest possessions which were still inside the house must be consumed by the fire.
It was a tragedy that few could bear to witness, and Winnie Bailey, in dressing-gown and wellingtons, led the redoubtable Ella away to her own house across the green.
It was the only time she had seen her old friend in tears.
[GOSSIP FROM THRUSH GREEN]
Harold Shoosmith undertook the unenviable task of ringing Charles and Dimity in Yorkshire where they were on holiday, and breaking the news to them.
Luckily, it was Charles who answered the telephone.
Harold had already rehearsed what he should do if Dimity had lifted the receiver.
Charles would have to be summoned.
This was the sort of thing the men must cope with, thought Harold, true to his Victorian principles.
‘Nice to hear you,’ was the rector's opening remark.
‘You're up early.
Everything all right at your end?’
‘I'm afraid not.
Charles, I have to tell you some bad news.
Are you sitting down?’
‘Sitting down?’ came the bewildered reply.
‘Because this is going to be a shock,’ continued Harold doggedly.
‘There was a bad accident here last night.’
‘No!
Not anyone hurt!
Not killed , Harold, don't say that!’
‘Nothing like that.
Perhaps accident was the wrong word.
The fact is your house has been badly damaged by fire.’
There was a brief silence.
‘Hello!’ shouted Harold.
‘You there, Charles?
‘Yes, yes.
But I can't have heard right.
The house damaged by fire?
How badly?’
‘I hate to tell you — but it is completely gutted.
I think it is quite beyond repair, Charles, as you will see.’
‘I can't take it in.
I really can't,’ said the poor rector.
‘How could it have happened?
We switched off everything, I'm sure, and we hadn't had a fire in the grate for days.
Surely no one would be so wicked as to set fire to the place?’
‘I'm sure it wasn't that,’ said Harold.
‘I just felt you should know that our spare room is waiting for you and Dimity when you return.’
‘We'll be back during the day, Harold, and our deepest thanks for offering us shelter tonight.
What a terrible affair.
I must go and break it to dear Dimity, and then we must clear up things here, and set off for Thrush Green without delay.’
‘We shall look forward to seeing you,’ said Harold.
‘And Harold,’ said Charles in a firmer tone, ‘I very much appreciate your telling me the news so kindly.
It couldn't have been easy.
You have prepared us to face whatever awaits us there, quite wonderfully.’
He rang off, and Harold thought how well he had taken it.
No one saw Charles and Dimity arrive, and for that they were grateful.
They halted the car on the edge of the battered and rutted grass which was still sprinkled with the ash and trodden cinders of last night's activities.
Dimity covered her face with her hands and her thin shoulders shook.
Charles's face was stony as he gazed unwinking at the scene.
He put his arm round his grieving wife, but was quite unable to speak.
They sat there, silent in their distress, for five terrible minutes.
Then, sighing, Charles opened the car door and stepped into the desolation of what had once been Thrush Green rectory.
He stirred the damp black ashes of the study floor with his foot.
He could scarcely see for the blur of tears behind his spectacles, but he bent to investigate a glint of metal among the dust.
Turning it over in his hand, he recognised it.
It was the silver figure of Christ which had been mounted on the ivory cross behind his desk.
It was distorted and blackened by the heat, but Charles knew immediately what it was.
He slipped it into his pocket, and turned to help Dimity over a low sooty wall which was all that was left of her kitchen.
[GOSSIP FROM THRUSH GREEN]
Of course, all their Thrush Green friends rallied round them, and Joan and  Edward Young gave them comfort and a meal that evening.
Later the Youngs accompanied them to Harold and Isobel Shoosmith's house where they were to spend the night.
The Youngs took a turn around the green before returning home.
They walked on together, past the silent school and the public house, until they rounded the bulk of St Andrew's church and stood facing the ruins.
The acrid stench which had hung over Thrush Green all day was almost unbearable here.
Joan looked with pity and distaste at the mess which had once been the rectory.
She caught a glimpse of Edward's face in the dying light.
‘Edward!’ she said accusingly.
‘You're pleased !
How can you be so heartless !’
Edward hastened to explain himself.
‘My darling, three-quarters of me grieves for dear old Charles and Dim, just as much as you do.
But the other quarter — the professional bit — is so relieved to see the end of that ghastly place that it can't help rejoicing in a perverse sort of way.’
Joan gazed at him with disgust, but then began to smile.
She took his arm, and they turned their backs upon the wreckage, and set off towards their home.
‘I suppose you are already planning a new house, monster that you are,’ she observed.
‘How did you guess?’ asked Edward.
[GOSSIP FROM THRUSH GREEN]
The Henstocks were lucky enough to find lodgings in the village while they awaited a new home.
But fortune favoured them when Charles was summoned to meet his Bishop.
The Bishop lived in a fine red-brick house at the end of a long drive bordered with lime trees.
Charles parked his car in as unobtrusive a spot as possible beside a flourishing prunus tree, and tugged at the wrought-iron bell pull by the white front door.
A very spruce maid welcomed him and showed him into the Bishop's drawing-room.
‘I'll tell the Bishop you are here,’ said the girl.
‘At the moment he is telephoning.’
She departed, leaving Charles to admire the silver cups on a side table, and the oar hanging above the fireplace.
The Bishop was a great oarsman, Charles remembered, a true muscular Christian.
Perhaps that contributed to his good  looks, thought Charles, and bent to pull up his wrinkled socks as Dimity had told him.
The solemnly ticking grandfather clock by the door said two minutes to the half hour when Charles heard the Bishop approaching.
He stood up as the door swung open.
‘My dear fellow!
I hope I haven't kept you waiting.
You are wonderfully punctual.
Come into my study.
We'll be unmolested there.’
He strode through the hall, followed by the good rector who admired the clerical grey suit which clothed those broad shoulders and neat waist.
He certainly was a handsome fellow.
But at least, thought Charles, I remembered to pull up my socks.
[GOSSIP FROM THRUSH GREEN]
Later that afternoon he and Dimity stop for tea on their way home.
It was one of their favourite cafés, renowned for its tea cakes.
‘And how did you find the dear Bishop?’
‘As upstanding as ever.
He inquired most kindly after you.
Ah!
Here comes the girl!’
The girl was approximately the same age as the rector, must have weighed thirteen stone, and was dressed in a rather tight flowered overall.
‘Could we have some of your delicious toasted tea cakes?
And a pot of China tea for two?’
The waitress wrote busily on a little pad.
‘Any jam, honey or other preserve?
We have our home-made apricot, mulberry and quince.’
‘How lovely that sounds!’ cried Dimity.
‘Like a list of jams from Culpeper!’
‘We only keep our own, madam,’ said the girl with some hauteur.
‘Then shall we try mulberry, dear?’ asked Dimity.
‘I don't think I've ever had it.’
The waitress added MJ to her pad and departed.
‘And now tell me, what happened, Charles?’
The rector began to look quite shy.
‘Did you know that Anthony Bull is leaving Lulling?’
‘Really?
Now you come to mention it, I believe Bertha Lovelock said something about it.’
The rector's look of shyness was replaced by one of startled exasperation.
‘But how on earth could she know?
It isn't general knowledge yet!’
‘Well, you know how things get about in a small community,’ said Dimity soothingly.
‘Anyway, where's he going?
Not retiring, surely?’
‘Far from it.
He's been appointed to a splendid living in one of the Kensington parishes.
Rather High Church, I gather, and a most beautiful building.
Anthony will be just the man for it, the Bishop said.
I'm so glad he has got preferment.
I always felt that Lulling was only a stepping stone to greater things for Anthony.’
The waitress reappeared with the tray and set out the tea pot, milk jug, hot water container and a large dish covered with a silver lid.
A small bowl containing a wine-coloured confection aroused Dimity's interest.
‘And this is the mulberry jam?
What a beautiful colour.’
‘We make it on the premises,’ replied the waitress, thawing in the face of Dimity's enthusiasm.
‘We have a tree in the garden.
It is reputed to be a hundred and fifty years old.’
‘How wonderful!’
The waitress made off again, and Dimity applied herself to pouring out the tea.
‘But what about us, darling?
Did he mention anything about our new house?’
‘He did indeed.
I think two of those sugar lumps.
They seem rather small.’
‘They're called fairy lumps, I believe,’ said Dimity.
‘Well, go on.’
‘I'm afraid there won't be a new house, my dear.’
Dimity dropped the sugar tongs in her dismay.
‘Not a new house?
Then where on earth are we to go?’
Her husband had now bent down to retrieve the tongs from beneath the table.
When he reappeared his face was very pink.
‘To an old one, Dimity.
I have been offered the living of the four merged parishes, and we should live at Lulling Vicarage.’
Dimity gazed at him open-mouthed.
‘Charles!, she croaked at last.
‘I can't believe it!
That lovely, lovely house!’
‘Don't cry, Dimity!
Please don't cry,’ begged Charles.
‘Aren't you pleased?’
Dimity unfolded a snowy handkerchief and wiped her eyes.
‘Of course I'm pleased.
I'm just completely overwhelmed, that's all.
Oh, Charles dear, this is an honour you so richly deserve.
Won't it be wonderful to have our own home at last?’
‘I'm glad you are pleased.
It means we shall still be among our friends, and I shall still be able to take services at St Andrew's.’
‘And when do you take over?’
‘Probably before Christmas.
Anthony expects to be inducted in October or November.’
‘And then we shall be able to move in,’ said Dimity happily.
She spread mulberry jam in reckless bounty upon a slice of tea cake.
‘What a blessing I didn't fall for some curtaining remnants this afternoon.
They would never have done for the vicarage windows.’
She looked with surprise at the jam dish.
‘Oh dear, Charles!
I seem to have taken all the mulberry preserve.’
‘I think we might be able to afford some quince as well,’ said Charles.
‘By way of celebration, you know.’
And he raised a plump hand to summon the girl.
[GOSSIP FROM THRUSH GREEN]