

CELLS AND EMBRYOS
WHAT COULD be more important or intriguing than our own origins?
Like all animals we come from one cell that develops into an embryo which forms the adult.
This embryonic development presents a fundamental problem of biological organization.
From the single cell, the fertilized egg, come large numbers of cells — many millions in humans — that consistently give rise to the structures of the body.
How do these multitudes of cells become organized into the structures of, for example, our body — nose, eyes, limbs, and brain?
What controls their individual behaviour so that a global pattern emerges?
And how are the organizing principles, as it were, embedded or encoded within the egg?
It is remarkable that a cell as overtly dull and structureless as the fertilized egg can give rise to such varied and complex forms.
The answer lies in cell behaviour and how this behaviour is controlled by genes.
Genes control development.
Genes are specific parts of the DNA in the chromosomes that all animals inherit from their parents.
Genetics deals with how genes are passed on from parents to their offspring and a great deal is known about the mechanisms governing this process.
Very much less well understood is how the genes control embryonic development.
To link genes with fingers and brains is the    enormous challenge that the problem of development presents.
To understand how the development of different structures is controlled by genes, how the genes in the fertilized egg of a sea-urchin, frog or chimpanzee result in the emergence of that animal.
Drawing of three-day old chick embryo by Marcello Malpighi in 1672
We know that changes in genes — mutations — can alter the colour of our eyes, can cause the development of extra fingers, and can result in flies with a leg growing out of the head instead of an antenna.
What is not known is how the genes exert these effects during development.
We want to know the relationship between genes and structures in the body; are there, for example, special genes for the arm?
Is there a gene for each nerve cell?
To put the problem in an extreme form, if we had access to all the genetic information in the egg and knew all the genes in detail, could we compute the animal to which it will give rise?
ORIGINS
Ideas, in a scientific sense, about the nature of development, started with Hippocrates in the fifth century BC.
His understanding was couched in terms of fire and humidity, wetness and solidification.
But at least it was a start towards trying to find a mechanism.
Embryology proper really began a century later with Aristotle defining a basic question which was to dominate the field until the end of the nineteenth century.
Do, Aristotle asked, all the parts of the embryo come into existence together, or do they appear in succession?
Is everything preformed from the beginning, or is development more like the knitting of a fisherman's net?
He thus defined the preformation/ epigenesis controversy.
Aristotle favoured the knitting metaphor, which he termed epigenesis.
His rejection of preformation was on philosophical and experimental grounds.
Since he believed the embryo was formed from the menstrual blood by the male dynamic in the semen it was clear to him that preformation must be excluded.
He also opened fertile chicken eggs and concluded, falsely, that the heart was the first organ to develop.
In the end he was correct about epigenesis, but for quite the wrong reasons.
Aristotle's influence was enormous, and even the great English physician, William Harvey, who laboured so long on the chick embryo, could not shake it off.
Like Aristotle, he supported epigenesis but with as little reason.
The contrary view, that all embryos existed from the beginning of the world, was first formulated in the 1690s by, among others, Malebranche in France and Swammerdam in the Netherlands.
These embryologists could not accept the explanation of epigenesis provided by the French philosopher Descartes, who suggested that there were mechanical forces which moulded the embryo.
It seemed to them naïve to suppose, like Descartes, that physical forces could lead to the formation during embryonic development of such complex structures as animals possessed, particularly since Descartes in no way explained how the forces could mould the embryo.
They believed, by contrast, that all the parts of the embryo were preformed from the very beginning and merely grew during embryonic development and so gradually became visible.
In their view, the first embryo of a species contained all future embryos.
To Malebranche, for example, it appeared not unreasonable that there were an infinite number of trees in a single seed; this, he argued, would only seem extravagant to those who measured God's powers by their own imagination.
Even Malpighi, the brilliant Italian biologist, could not break free of such ideas.
While he provided a remarkably accurate description of the development of the chick, he remained convinced, against his own evidence, that the embryo was present before the egg was laid.
Because the parts, early on, are so small, he thought that they could not be observed, even with his most powerful microscope.
The eighteenth-century preformationists had an answer to all criticisms.
When the Frenchman, Charles Bonnet, was confronted with the argument that if preformation were true the first rabbit would have had to contain 10 10000 preformed embryos, he merely responded by saying that it was always possible, by adding zeros, to crush the imagination under the weight of numbers.
For him preformation was ‘one of the greatest triumphs of rational over sensual conviction’.
For their part, the problem faced by the proponents of epigenesis was that  no one could provide a reasonable explanation of how the embryo was formed.
Proponents of epigenesis could only invoke a ‘master-builder’ within the embryo, or a vis vitalis .
Experiments and observations failed to resolve the controversy.
And that was for a very good reason.
It was, in principle, insoluble without an understanding of cells and genes.
Only in the latter half of the last century did these ideas begin to emerge and it was recognized that embryos developed by epigenesis.
As we shall see, DNA provides the programme which controls the development of the embryo and brings about epigenesis.
CELLS
Cells are the basic units of life.
They are the true miracle of evolution.
Miracle in the figurative sense, since although we do not know how cells evolved, quite plausible scenarios have been proposed.
Miraculous, none the less, in the sense that they are so remarkable.
Most remarkable, and, in a way, a definition of life, is their ability to reproduce themselves.
They are able to take in chemicals and convert them into usable energy and to synthesize all the components of the cell during growth that eventually leads to cell multiplication.
Animals are made up of specialized cells, such as blood cells, cartilage cells, fat cells, muscle cells, nerve cells — humans have about 350 different cell types while lower animals, like hydra, only 10 to 20.
Cells carry out an amazing range of specialized functions, such as carrying    oxygen, transmitting messages, contracting, secreting chemicals, synthesizing molecules, and multiplying.
The cells in the embryo are initially much less specialized and differ from each other in more subtle ways.
All have certain basic characters and in order to understand their role in development it is helpful to be aware of four cell activities, three cell structures, and two main kinds of molecule.
The four cell activities are cell multiplication, cell movement, change in character, and cell signalling.
These are mainly self-explanatory.
Cells multiply by dividing and this usually requires cell growth, the cells doubling in size before dividing in two.
Cells can also change shape, exert forces, and move from one place in the embryo to another.
They can also change character: during development cells change from having rather unspecialized characters to mature cells with very specific functions.
Cells in different parts of the embryo can be thought of as developing along quite different pathways, diverging more and more in character.
Finally, cells give out and receive signals from neighbouring cells.
Cells cannot normally be seen without a microscope, being about one-thousandth of a millimetre in diameter.
However, some cells, like the large eggs of frogs, are easily visible, and the human egg is just visible to the naked eye.
The three key cell structures are the cell membrane, the cytoplasm, and the nucleus.
Surrounding the cell is a very thin cell membrane which controls the entry and exit of molecules, and maintains the integrity of the cell.
On the surface of the membrane are special receptors for signals from other cells, as well as molecules that enable cells to adhere to one another.
Confined by the cell membrane the cytoplasm contains all the machinery for production of energy and cell growth; and there are also structures in the cytoplasm which can generate forces to change the shape of the cell, resulting in cell movement.
Embedded within the cytoplasm is the cell nucleus surrounded by its own special membrane.
Within the nucleus are the chromosomes of the cell, which contain the genes.
The life of the cell is dependent on the chemical reactions among the many million constituent molecules.
Two key classes of molecules are nucleic acids and proteins which will be described much more fully in   Chapter 5 and can be largely ignored for the present.
Genes are made of the nucleic acid DNA, and they exert their effect by determining which proteins are made in the cell.
Proteins are fundamental to the life of the cell because they are essential for all the key chemical reactions as well as providing the main framework of all the structures in the cell.
Almost all the chemical reactions in the cell such as the provision of energy or the synthesis of key molecules will only take place in the presence of special proteins, known as enzymes, which allow the reactions to occur.
Proteins are also the major structural molecules in the cell, providing, for example, the forces for cell movement, receptors at the cell surface, and the adhesive links between cells.
Proteins also give different cells their special character.
For example, the protein haemoglobin carries oxygen in the red blood cells, and insulin, another protein, is made in particular cells in the pancreas.
An eight-cell stage mouse embryo
The wide variety of proteins in the cells are all coded for by the genes in the nucleus.
While proteins themselves are synthesized in the cytoplasm, whether or not a protein is made is dependent on whether or not the gene that contains the information for that protein is active (Chapter 5).
The only function of genes is to determine which proteins are made, thereby determining which chemical reactions take place and which structures will be present in the cell.
In this way, genes control cell behaviour.
Cell behaviour can thus provide the crucial link between genes and animal structure and form.
If we can understand how cells behave during development so as to make arms and brains we can then begin to ask how genes control the behaviour of the cells and so establish the link.
Cells thus provide the key to understanding development because their behaviour brings about embryonic development and is controlled by gene activity.
In very general terms there are, in development, three kinds of genes — those that control spatial organization, those that control change in form, and those that control cell differentiation.
THE MODERN ERA
We are now in the midst of a most exciting stage in cell and developmental biology.
The revolution that resulted in molecular biology enabled us to begin to understand many of the processes in the cell at the molecular level, although it must be stressed that we have a long way to go.
The fundamental achievement was the elucidation of the structure of DNA and proteins together with the mechanisms by which genes code for and control the structure of proteins.
Part of the beauty of this revolution was the recognition that at the level of genes and proteins the mechanisms used by all animals are almost universal.
Developmental biology also hopes to reveal such general mechanisms.
The powerful techniques of molecular biology are now being applied to the classical problems of embryonic development that were studied by an older generation of biologists.
Their work laid the foundation for understanding developmental mechanisms and was largely descriptive, carefully recording the changes in the form of the embryo during both normal development and when it was experimentally perturbed.
Many of the experimental perturbations involved rearranging or removing the parts of the early embryo and seeing what effect this had on the embryo's development.
These experiments led to theories about how development was controlled in terms of cell and tissue properties, but it was very difficult to link these theories with gene action.
The modern approach is descriptive too, but at the molecular level.
More important, the modern approach can lead to explanations at the molecular level thus linking gene action to developmental process.
The emphasis of the molecular level of description requires some justification.
Development of the embryo can be described, and explained, at various levels of organization such as that of the tissue, cell, or molecule.
This is true of many biological processes and no one level is intrinsically preferable to another.
One would not try to explain the flight of birds at the molecular level, whereas that level is most appropriate if we wish to understand how muscles contract.
For development, the importance of explanations at the molecular level is  that genes act at this level.
That is, genes control the synthesis of protein molecules, and, for that reason, there is general acceptance that it is at the level of molecular interactions that the behaviour of cells and embryos needs to be understood.
Molecules are the natural language of the cell.
Another reason is that when processes are understood at the molecular level then there is at once a natural link to chemistry, a most powerful body of knowledge to advance further understanding.
While explanations at the molecular level are the aim, much of this book will still look at embryos at the cellular level, reflecting the current state of knowledge.
In order to understand how embryos develop, it is necessary to do experiments on the embryo itself, which may involve opening chicken eggs and observing their development as Aristotle did, grafting parts from one region to another, or adding specific chemical agents to observe their effects.
Embryologists are sensitive about issues relating to animal experimentation and the vast majority of experiments are done on very early embryos which are rarely allowed to develop to maturity.
Of crucial importance is that none of these experiments require the animals to suffer any pain whatsoever.
The vast majority are performed long before a nervous system is present and in the small number of cases where this is not so, the animal is anaesthetized.
Can we expect to find the fundamental and universal principles in development?
Or is development just the accretion of a variety of different mechanisms?
I find it hard to believe that so fundamental a process is not governed by principles just as elegant and universal as those uncovered in relation to molecular genetics.
Once evolution had discovered successful ways of constructing organisms it would surely have used those same mechanisms again and again.
This book is based on that conviction; it has the crucial implication that understanding how one kind of animal develops will help us understand the development of all the others.
I will show that there is no ‘master builder’ in the embryo, no vital force.
Each cell has its own developmental programme which makes use of a limited number of processes that have been used again and again, for hundreds of millions of years.
MOULDING OF FORM
FORM EMERGES due to changes in cell shape and these provide direct evidence for epigenesis.
Development begins with the fertilized egg, which is a single cell, giving rise to a number of smaller cells.
Cell divisions cleave the egg, like cutting a cake, and result in a multicellular structure.
These cell divisions simply divide up the egg to give a population of smaller cells that form the early embryo and are thus different from the cell division associated with cell growth and multiplication.
Because growth is not required the early cleavage divisions typically transform the egg, within a few hours, into a hollow ball with the cells arranged as a spherical sheet.
This simple structure, the blastula, must now be moulded by cellular activities into all the shapes that emerge during development.
Eggs come in a wide range of sizes depending on how much yolk they have.
Chicken eggs are large because of the yolk which acts as a source of nutrients for the growth of the developing embryo.
The chick embryo proper comes from a very small region resting on the yolk and which is equivalent to the mammalian egg.
The human and mouse eggs are about one tenth of a millimetre in diameter and are just visible to the naked eye.
Unlike the chick they contain no yolk and their growth is dependent on nutrients being supplied by the mother.
Frog  eggs are about one to two millimetres in diameter and, like the chick, have enough yolk to enable them to grow to a stage when they can feed themselves.
The blastula gives no visible indication of the complex animal into which it will develop.
It is only after the next stage, gastrulation, that the form of the animal begins to emerge.
GASTRULATION
I have been quoted as saying that it is not birth, marriage, or death, but gastrulation which is truly ‘the important event in your life’.
Excessive perhaps, but the occasion was the attempt to convince the clinician of the importance of studying early development.
Gastrulation occurs in the development of all animals.
It is the process that occurs when the cells of the blastula rearrange and move so that the hitherto rather simple, and often spherical or flat embryo is transformed into something approaching the form from which the animal will develop.
During gastrulation the front and back, top and bottom become evident, and the basic body plan is laid down.
Also, the cells move so as to take up new positions.
The development of the gut illustrates the point.
Surprisingly, cells that will form the gut are on the outside surface of many early embryos.
However, the gut in all animals is an internal structure.
It is during gastrulation that the cells leave the outer surface and move inside the region where they will form the gut.
Similarly, in early vertebrate embryos, the cells that will form the vertebral column and the muscles are also on the outside and must move inwards to an appropriate location.
It is only after gastrulation that the organs, like limbs, liver, and eyes, begin to develop.
In most vertebrates in which they have been intensively studied — amphibians and birds — gastrulation movements are rather complicated.
Movements occur simultaneously over many parts of the embryo with sheets of cells streaming past each other, contracting and expanding.
It taxes the minds of determined embryologists to try and visualize what is going on.
Fortunately, there are animals in which the process is not only much simpler but can be observed directly.
We can follow gastrulation in the early development of the sea-urchin and actually see the gut forming.
Sea-urchin embryos are very attractive for developmental biologists since the eggs are available in large numbers, are easy to handle and fertilize, but most importantly, they are transparent.
One can, looking down the microscope, observe the behaviour of individual cells as the embryo develops.
Because the cells move very slowly the process is best seen when speeded up in a time-lapse film.
One frame of the film is exposed every six seconds and if the film is then shown at 24 frames a second, the motion is speeded up 144 times and provides a dramatic picture of the cells' behaviour.
Because the embryos begin to swim at the blastula stage they must be trapped in a nylon net to keep them still, the square holes providing micro-aquaria through which sea water is slowly passed.
After forty-eight hours the egg has developed into a free-swimming and feeding larva.
Following fertilization, the egg divides into two after an hour, and then there are further cleavages at half-hour intervals.
The second cleavage is at right angles to the first and the third again at right angles.
This regular pattern only continues for a short time, and after about eight hours, the embryo is a blastula comprising a hollow ball of about 1000 cells.
The cells form a sheet just one cell thick enclosing a hollow interior.
And then the blastula undergoes gastrulation.
This involves a major change in shape, for the cells that will form the gut are a small patch on the outside and so must move inwards; this infolding of the wall will move right across the hollow interior to meet    the wall on the other side where the mouth will form.
The process can be modelled by taking a balloon filled with water and pushing a finger in at one point until it touches the other side.
The tube made by the indentation is the gut and the point where it starts will become the anus.
The embryo has been transformed from a sphere into a torus; from a bun into a doughnut.
Gastrulation begins, not with the formation of the gut, but with the entry of the cells that will lay down the skeleton.
In time-lapse films the first signs are pulsations by the cells where the gut will form.
The cells seem to jostle for position and about 40 cells leave the wall and enter the hollow interior.
These cells will later lay down the skeleton and move on the inner wall of the blastula to take up a characteristic ring-like pattern.
When these 40 or so cells have moved out of the wall they begin to put out fine extensions — very long thin filopodia — which can attach to the wall, contract, and so pull the cell towards the point of attachment.
The force for contraction is provided by very fine muscle-like filaments within the filopod.
Some filopodia simply fail to make contact with the wall and are withdrawn.
Often, several make contact with the wall and then there is a tug-of-war between them.
The winner seems to be determined by how strongly the extension adheres to the wall, and the cell eventually moves to the site where the attachments are strongest.
It is not unlike climbing out of the sea on to a slippery rock.
One comes out where one can get the best grip.
Sea-urchin gastrula held in a nylon net
By filopodial extension and contraction the cells migrate, and take up a ring-like pattern of the wall of the embryo.
They do not go there directly.
In fact, the pathways taken vary considerably from embryo to embryo.
But gradually the pattern emerges and it can be seen that the cells' filopodia attach best in the ring region.
The pattern of adhesiveness on the wall has a high point in the form of a band around the wall and so this is where the cells, through repeated explorations by their long filopodia, come to rest.
This is where they make their most stable contact.
With their fine processes they are always exploring their environments, even when they are in the band, finding the most stable contact regions.
So it is the pattern of adhesiveness in the wall that determines where the cells go; and when, later on in development, this pattern changes, the cells follow — they seek stability.
The wall thus provides a template for the pattern of the migrating cells.
Only after the entry of the skeleton-forming cells do the group of cells that will form the gut begin to pulsate on their inner surfaces and a small inward indentation of the wall occurs.
This continues until there is a well-developed inward bulge which goes about half-way across the interior.
Often there is no further change for an hour or so.
But then the cells at the tip begin to shoot out long filopodia which make contact with the wall and contract pulling the future gut further in.
The filopodia pull the sheet right across the cavity until it makes contact with the other side where it meets and fuses with another but much smaller invagination which is the future mouth.
After fusion the cells in the centre of the zone of contact break down and there is now a channel — from an open mouth, through the tube of the gut, and out through the anus.
The filopodia at the tip of the gut guide the tip to the mouth region.
When viewed in speeded-up films one sees a vigorous activity at the tip.
Like the skeleton-forming cells, these cells send out many fine filopodia, some of which make contact with the wall.
If they make stable contacts they pull the sheet to the site of contact, but others merely lose contact and are withdrawn.
Since the future mouth region provides the most stable contact sites, the gut is pulled gradually to that region.
A DEVELOPMENTAL PROGRAMME
If the cells in the embryo ‘know’ where and when to change shape, contract, or move, then it begins to be possible to envisage a programme for the development of form.
It becomes possible to think of accounting for all the changes in form of early sea-urchin development in terms of a changing pattern of cell contractions and cell contacts.
We can think of this pattern of cell activities as being part of the embryo's developmental programme.
It is a programme that does not describe the final form, but a generative programme that contains the instructions for making the shapes.
A key feature of a generative programme is that it can be made up of quite simple instructions, yet generate very complex forms.
An analogy is origami — paper folding.
The instructions for folding a piece of paper involve only a few operations like folding and unfolding.
But the final form, a paper hat or a bird, can be very complex.
It is very much easier to describe how to make the hat, than to describe the hat itself with its complex folds.
The instructions provide a generative programme, the folding and unfolding are like the contractions and changes in contact in cell sheets in the embryo.
Thus, what the egg contains is not a description of the adult but a set of instructions of how to make the animal and, using the same mechanisms, very different forms can be generated.
Contractions and changes in contact are only part of the programme and an essential component is the specification of where and when they occur — the process of pattern formation.
But first I will look at some other changes in form, particularly those involving changes in shape in cell sheets, changes in contact, and cell migration.
I am proceeding in the belief that there is a unity in developmental mechanisms, and whilst the sea-urchin provided an excellent model, there are other examples to be considered.
FOLDING SHEETS
Folding of cell sheets forms the basis of the early development of many structures as varied as the heart, lungs, brain, eye, and teeth.
The early development of the vertebrate brain, known as neurulation, is not only important in its own right but provides a good model.
Neurulation results in a major change in shape of part of the embryo — a flat sheet of cells on the upper surface folds up to form a tube that will develop into the brain and spinal cord.
It is a process that can be directly observed in the embryos of amphibians and birds when gastrulation is completed.
In amphibia the first sign of neurulation is the flattening of the upper surface of the embryo into a broad plate bounded by two ridges or folds.
At the anterior end of the embryo where the brain will form the folds are well separated with a broad area between them, but the folds run close together towards the rear end.
Now, these folds  become more prominent, rise up, and approach each other, the sheet between them sinking down.
The folds meet and fuse forming a broad tube, the neural tube, that will be the brain, with a narrower tube, to be the spinal cord, behind it.
After fusion the tube sinks below the surface and is covered by a sheet of cells that will eventually form the skin.
We will follow the later development of the brain and neural tube in Chapter 8.
The failure of the neural tube to close is one of the causes of spina bifida.
The transformation of a flat sheet of cells into a tube during neurulation is mainly brought about by forces generated by cells within the tube, by the cells actively changing shape.
On the upper surface of the sheet the cells contract, causing the sheet to bend, with the contractions on the concave side.
Like the contracting filopods the contraction is due to the action of muscle-like microfilaments.
When the sheet is examined in the electron microscope filaments are seen to be localized at the upper surface.
It has been possible to measure directly the forces that the cells generate during the formation of the neural tube.
Minute dumb-bell-shaped pieces of metal were embedded in the two sides of the neural folds of an amphibian embryo and a magnetic field applied to prevent the folds coming together.
The forces were found to be very small and use very little of the embryo's energy.
Development of the lens also involves bending of sheets.
The eye has two different origins: the eyecup that forms the retina is an outgrowth from the brain, while the lens comes from the sheet of cells covering the embryo.
At the same time as the eyecup approaches the sheet of cells covering the head region the lens begins to develop.
(The co-ordination between the two will be discussed later.)
The cells of the future lens actively elongate and then begin to fold inwards towards   the eye, in a manner not unlike the early formation of the gut in sea-urchins.
In this case the bending continues, now rather like neurulation, until an almost spherical sheet of cells protrudes inwards, and then detaches from the surface layer.
This ball of cells will then develop into the lens.
This example of lens development shows how important it is to follow through the development of any particular organ.
It is impossible by looking at any structure to work out how it developed.
The only way is to actually see how it develops.
There is no way, for example, that one could work out that the lens came originally from an overlying sheet of cells without following its development.
It should be a condition, for anyone thinking about development to resist trying to infer how a structure develops by only looking at the final result.
just as the formation of the neural tube and lens involves changes in the shape of a sheet of cells, so the formation of many other organs also arises from the folding and movement of cell sheets, which are caused by active change in the shape of the cells that make them up.
Lungs initially develop from an outgrowth of the sheet that lines the gut near the mouth and then this outgrowth branches repeatedly to give the millions of microscopic lobes in the lung.
The mammalian heart starts off as a straight tube and then bends, folds, and, together with further growth and subdivision, gives the four chambers that pump the blood.
Even the shape of our teeth is largely determined by the foldings of the sheet of cells that will lay down the enamel.
Many human developmental abnormalities arise from abnormalities in the moulding of sheets of cells.
Sheets fail to separate, or close, or fold properly.
As spina bifida can result from incomplete closure of the neural tube, so abnormalities in the development of the gut can be due to failure of tubes to seal properly.
Again certain kidney abnormalities arise because cell sheets that form tubes do not connect up correctly.
It is possible to make computer models that simulate many of these changes in shape, the model being based on the asymmetric contraction of microfilaments.
Imagine a hollow tube made up of a layer of cells just one cell thick with contractile filaments located near the outer surface.
Imagine now that from a point — say the top — contraction is   initiated that spreads.
Depending on how fast the cells contract and how far contracting cells extend, a variety of different shapes result.
In one case the sheet folds in a way that is very similar to the formation of a neural tube; in another it is very similar to the way the lens forms; yet in another it is like the early formation of the gut in sea-urchin development.
Even small changes in how fast and how far the contraction spreads can have profound effects on form.
How these processes could be controlled, particularly by the genes, is a central problem.
REPEATED STRUCTURES
The famous molecular biologist, Francis Crick, once remarked that embryos seemed to be very fond of stripes.
What he meant was that there are numerous examples of repeating patterns, and embryos seem to like breaking up into repeated units.
One has only to glance at a human skeleton to see the numerous segments of the vertebral column.
Each vertebra may be different from its neighbour but is, clearly, also very similar.
Repeated segments are also found in insects, worms, crustacea, and many other animals.
If one looks at the early development of vertebrae it becomes clearer just how segmental much of our own early development is.
In vertebrates, shortly after gastrulation, the brain can be seen forming at the anterior end of the embryo.
Behind it, stretching backwards, like two lines of paving stones, are the somites.
The somites are blocks of tissue that will form the vertebrae and the muscles of the    back.
They develop, pair by pair, lying either side of the future spinal cord.
First, just two appear at the front end as distinct blocks of tissue and then, about each hour, another pair are added behind them and a wave of formation proceeds backwards so that at the end of a few days there are 46 somites.
The first few pairs of somites that form do not persist; they disappear and are incorporated into the head.
This is thought to reflect our evolutionary history in that as the head became larger, the development of the anterior somites was modified.
The mechanism whereby the somites develop is still not well understood.
What is clear is that the mechanics of the process, that is, the breaking down of the tissue into discrete blocks, involves an increase in adhesion between the cells in each somite.
But what specifies just which cells will form an adhesive block separating each somite from its neighbours is not known.
However, the sequence of somite formation and what they will form seems to be programmed early in development long before the somites themselves appear and provides a good example of how, once the programme is specified, the cells follow it even when they are placed in abnormal relationships.
If a strip of the tissue that has yet to segment into somites is cut out of a chick embryo, turned through 180 degrees and replaced, the somite formation proceeds normally up to the site of the graft, but will then continue from the rear edge of the inverted piece, the sequence now going in a direction opposite from normal until the operated piece is fully segmented, and will then continue normally, again from the rear edge.
It is as if there were a built-in timetable as to when somites are formed.
The wave of somite formation that is observed progressing from the front to the back of the embryo thus does not involve any propagation of a message.
It merely reflects the implementation of a programme laid down much earlier.
CELL AFFINITIES
The importance of cell adhesion in moulding form has already been referred to.
During gastrulation, differences in cell adhesion guide the cells; during lens formation the lens cells lose adhesion with adjacent   cells at the time of detachment; and somite formation is essentially an increase in adhesiveness locally.
Changes in adhesiveness are an essential part of the developmental programme.
Somites in a two-day chick embryo
The molecular basis of adhesiveness lies in cell adhesion molecules — CAMs — at the cell surface.
CAMs allow cells to bind to each other by a mechanism in which the molecules of the CAMs show a specific affinity for each other.
These molecules are proteins, which are embedded in the cell's surface membrane and have one portion that sticks out and binds to a similar or complementary molecule on adjacent cells.
Part of the binding mechanism may involve ions like calcium, so when calcium is removed, the cells of some early embryos just separate into individual cells, and restoring the calcium causes the cells to adhere again.
The crucial point about CAMs is that they can provide specific adhesion between cells, and that cells express different CAMs at different stages in development.
For example, at the time when the neural plate starts to fold up, the CAMs on the surface of the embryo are all the same .
As the tube folds, the CAMs of the future nervous system change and become different from those of adjacent cells.
This allows fusion and separation of the tube.
Similarly, the future lens cells cannot detach from the sheet unless their CAMs change to allow them to let go of the neighbouring cells.
Molecules like CAMs at the cell surface can provide the basis for self-assembly of some organisms, in a manner that is analogous to crystal growth.
The molecules which form the crystals, under the right conditions, assemble spontaneously and the form of the crystal arises directly from the property of the molecules.
The crystals of salt look different from those of, say, sugar because of the way the molecules assemble.
The key point about self-assembly is that the forms generated derive from the nature of the elements that make them up.
In a similar manner, if cells of the sponge (the bath sponge is the skeleton laid down by the sponge) are separated into a random mixture of individual cells they will actively move around and become reorganized into a normal sponge, with the cells in the correct relationship with one another.
It can be explained largely by adhesive affinities leading to self-assembly.
The crucial nature of the adhesive  surfaces of the cells is again illustrated if the cells of two different species of sponge are mixed together; they sort out to give the two normal sponges.
The cells will not adhere to cells of a different species.
It is not just sponges that can self-assemble.
The small freshwater hydroid, hydra, has a glove-like form, its tentacles being used to capture prey.
(Hydra has remarkable powers of regeneration, see Chapter 13.)
Hydra, too, can be separated into its individual cells, which will reassemble to form more hydra.
Even the early sea-urchin embryo can be separated into single cells and will reform a more or less normal embryo.
But with higher animals this does not occur.
One cannot separate a frog into its individual cells, mix them together, and get a frog; the results will be a chaotic mixture.
One can, however, disaggregate some embryonic organs into cells which will reaggregate into patterns resembling the tissue from which they come.
Cells generally associate with those of their own class.
They seem to enjoy contact with like cells.
So, if groups of cells are removed from the early amphibian embryo, separated into individual cells, and then reaggregated, the cells mill about and sort themselves out so that, for example , cells that are normally on the outside of the embryo, such as the future skin cells, surround those that are normally on the inside, like future muscle cells.
Or if liver and limb bud cells are mixed they too sort out into large clumps; but they make neither a proper liver nor limbs.
MIGRATING CELLS
When cell sheets are deformed and folded the cells tend to keep contact with their neighbour and the sheet behaves as a coherent social group of cells.
But cells may also move as individuals over quite long distances, such as the skeleton-forming cells in sea-urchins.
In vertebrates, there are two groups of cells that show a remarkable capacity for migration — the neural crest cells and the nerve cells.
Neural crest cells are a group that arise at the site where the folds of the neural tube fuse.
At the site of fusion, cells leave the sheet and form two clumps of cells on either side of the neural tube.
These cells    then migrate to many different parts of the embryo.
Some cells migrate beneath the future skin and will give rise to pigment cells.
Other cells give rise to sensory nerves, to nerves in the gut, to cells in glands like the adrenal, and to cells that provide the insulation for nerves.
Yet other neural crest cells migrate into the head region and form tissues of the head and face such as cartilage and bone.
If insufficient cells migrate into the front of the head the face will be abnormally small.
The pathways taken by the cells may be determined by the nature of the extracellular matrix and contacts with other cells en route .
Embryonic face
Probably the most impressive migration of cells is that of nerve cells — neurons.
These have special features and are described in Chapter 8.
Another dramatic migration is that performed by the primordial germ cells (Chapter 9).
These cells have their origin a long distance from the sex organs.
Because they are larger than other cells and have special staining cytoplasm that is easily recognizable, a trail of migrating cells can be seen in the embryo.
The cells seem to migrate along a track of extracellular material that covers cells which are oriented along the pathway they take.
It may be wondered if gradients in some chemical might guide cells to their destination.
There is no doubt that some cells can exhibit chemotaxis, that is, move towards the source of chemical which is diffusing in the medium.
Certain white blood cells do this in response to an infective agent.
The cellular slime moulds, a primitive organism related to fungi, aggregate in response to a chemical gradient.
But for most developmental systems, there is, perhaps disappointingly, little evidence for such a mechanism.
GROWING A FACE
Growth is an important mechanism for generating changes in form.
In general, growth is a moulding process, and occurs at later stages of development when the main body plan has already been laid down.
For example, our face and how we look very much depends on the relative growth of the different parts.
At an early stage in development the human face is made up of a series of bumps, which looks quite grotesque, and there is little hint of the face that will emerge.
The bumps, or processes, as they are called, contain many cells covered by a cell sheet.
There are two processes, one on either side that will develop into the lower jaw; two further processes that will form the cheeks and upper jaw, and a central process that will give rise to the nose.
Each process has its own characteristic growth pattern and together these generate the face.
For example, the little depression in the centre of the upper lip is where two of the processes meet.
One can think of the differences of being handsome, beautiful, or just ordinary, in terms of small differences in the growth programme for each region.
Beauty can be just one more cell multiplication away.
FORM AND PATTERN
Contractions, changes in adhesion, cell movement, and growth are all cellular activities that go to mould the form of the embryo.
These are by no means the only mechanisms but they are amongst the most important.
The mechanisms for generating form are in some cases poorly understood.
Even so, we can see how form can emerge during development from the varying patterns, both in space and time, of such cellular activities.
If we can understand the cellular forces that bring about changes in the shape of the embryo then we can begin to ask further questions.
Why do particular cells exert these forces and not others?
Why do some groups of cells grow while others do not?
These are really questions about the organization of the spatial organization of cellular activities.
To follow the analogy with origami, we need to know where  to fold the paper.
The same set of cell activities are used again and again — contraction, movement, change in adhesion — and what makes organs different is how these activities are organized in space and time.
That is the problem of pattern formation.
PATTERN FORMATION
COMPARE ONE'S body to that of a chimpanzee — there are many similarities.
Look for example, at its arms and legs, which have rather different proportions from our own, but are basically the same.
If we look at the internal organs there is not much to distinguish a chimpanzee's heart or liver from our own.
Even if we examine the cells in these organs we will again find that they are again similar to ours.
Yet, we are different,very different from chimpanzees.
Perhaps you may wish to argue, the differences lie within the brain.
Perhaps there are special brain cells which we possess that chimpanzees do not.
This is not so.
We possess no cell types that the chimpanzee does not, nor does the chimpanzee have any cell types that we do not have.
The difference between us and chimpanzees lies in the spatial organization of the cells.
Now compare your arm with your leg.
They contain the same cell types — muscle, tendon, skin, bone, and so on— yet they are different.
Again, the explanation lies in how these cell types are spatially ordered.
The principle of different spatial patterning accounting for the differences in animals applies right across the vertebrates.
While there are some differences in the cell types that make up fish, frogs, birds, and ourselves, the main difference lies in the spatial organization of the cells.
All vertebrates have basically the same building blocks but they are put together in different ways.
How this is done is the process of pattern formation.
Patterning poses the problem of how the cells know what to do, how to behave.
In the moulding of form we saw that changes in shape of the embryo could be accounted for in terms of localized contractions and changes in cell adhesion.
How are the cells that will change shape specified to do so rather than all the other cells?
As in the origami analogy (Chapter 2), what specifies where the paper will be folded?
To use yet another metaphor, moulding of form can be thought of as metalworking; patterning like painting.
A HARMONIOUS SYSTEM
Belief made them see it.
In the seventeenth century some preformationists claimed they could detect in the head of the sperm cell a tiny person in miniature — a homunculus — just waiting to emerge.
Other preformationists thought the adult was present in miniature in the  egg.
Although cruder versions of such theories had been abandoned by the end of the nineteenth century, preformationist ideas still present an important theory.
The question is to what extent the pattern of development is already present in the egg.
To what extent is the pattern already preformed?
Could it not be that during cleavage, when the egg divides up, each cell acquires special determinants, either cytoplasmic or nuclear, which would control the cell's future development?
With further cell divisions there would be a further unequal distribution of such determinants.
In essence, this was the preformationist theory proposed in the 1890s by August Weismann, one of the uncles of modern embryology.
He drew an analogy with an army: the nucleus of the fertilized egg contained the whole army and as the egg cleaved, so different brigades, like the muscle brigade, or the cartilage brigade, would be distributed to different cells.
Although he helped make development a causal science his theories were largely wrong; even so, his preformationist ideas, in which nuclear determinants were unequally distributed during cleavage did stimulate the key experiments.
Another German biologist, Wilhelm Roux, has a better claim to being the father of our subject.
He coined the term ‘developmental mechanics’ and was one of the first to attempt a causal analysis of early development.
With a hot needle, he killed one of the two cells of the frog embryo after the first cleavage and then watched the development of the surviving cell.
A typical half embryo was seen to emerge just as if an older embryo had been sliced in two with a razor.
It seemed that the detailed pattern of the embryo was laid down in the egg and became partitioned during cleavage, thus supporting Weissman's claim.
But his fellow countryman, Hans Driesch, was not persuaded:
Roux's results were published for the first time in 1888: three years later I tried to repeat this fundamental experiment on another subject and by a somewhat different method, It was known from the cytological researches of the brothers Hertwig and Boveri that the eggs of the common sea urchin are able to stand well all sorts of rough treatment, and that, in particular, when broken into pieces by shaking their fragments, will survive and continue to cleave.
I took advantage of these facts for my purposes.
I shook the embryos rather violently during their two-cell stage, and in several instances, I succeeded in killing one of the cells, while the other one was not damaged…
Let us now follow the development of the surviving cell.
It went through cleavage just as it would have done in contact with its sister-cell…
So far there was no divergence from Roux's results…and indeed the next morning a whole diminutive blastula was swimming about.
I was so much convinced that I should get Roux's result in all its features, that even in spite of the whole blastula, I now expected the next morning would reveal to me the half-organization of my subject once more; the  gut, I supposed, might come out quite on one side of it, as a half-tube, and the ring of cells might be a half one also.
But things turned out as they were bound to do and not as I expected; there was a typically whole gastrula on my dish the next morning, differing only by its small size from a normal one; and this small but whole gastrula developed into a whole and typical larva…
That was just the opposite of Roux's result and was the first clear demonstration of the process known as regulation: the ability of the embryo to develop normally even when some portions are removed or rearranged.
Driesch provided further examples of regulation, for, even at the four-cell stage each cell could develop into a perfectly normal embryo.
This showed quite unequivocally that the pattern was not laid down in the egg.
For if all the parts were neatly laid down in the egg like a little homunculus, then separating the embryo into two or more separate parts would divide the pattern in two or more and each should form just a fragment of the whole.
Clearly this was not the case.
Driesch went on to isolate other fragments of the sea-urchin embryo and he claimed that each fragment, or combination of fragments, no matter how they were arranged, gave rise to a small but normal embryo.
He concluded, in the language of the time, that the early sea-urchin was a ‘harmonious equipotential system’ in the sense that the parts all functioned so as to generate a normal organism.
More specifically, his experiments showed, he claimed, that the cells always developed according to their relative position within the embryo, and this sense of position required that there be a self-organizing coordinate system which told the cells their position and that they then knew what to do.
Such self-organization of a coordinate system was, he claimed, quite beyond conventional science, and required a special biological force — entelechy.
The essence of his argument was that life in general, and development in particular , could not be encompassed or explained in terms of physics and chemistry.
He was a Vitalist, searching in vain for a mysterious life force.
Driesch was wrong for two reasons.
First, isolated parts of embryos do not always develop normally.
He was perfectly well aware of this  but chose to ignore it.
Secondly, as I will show, it is quite easy to imagine a self-organizing system which specifies the relative position of cells.
Driesch chose to ignore experiments in which parts of the embryo do not develop normally.
He was quite right to claim that each of the four cells at the end of the cleavage would form a normal larva.
But if at the eight-cell stage the embryo was separated along the plane of the third cleavage into two groups of four cells, then each of these two fragments developed quite differently.
One developed into nothing more than a simple ball of cells with no gut at all, the other into a more or less normal larva.
So much for ‘harmonious equipotentiality’.
We now know that the sea-urchin egg has a well-defined polarity from the beginning and that there are cytoplasmic differences along the egg.
The site where it is attached to the ovary is known as the animal pole and the other end the vegetal pole.
The vegetal pole is the region where the cells of the gut will develop and where the group of skeleton-forming cells will enter.
The animal and vegetal poles define the main axis of the embryo and the first two cleavages are parallel to it while the third is always at right angles to it.
Experiments separating  the cells at the two- and four-cell stages give cells with a complete animal vegetal axis and each, in isolation, develops normally.
However, if the embryo is divided into two along the animal-vegetal axis the two halves do not develop normally.
This is most easily done after the third cleavage which is at right angles to the first two, and so divides the embryo into four animal and four vegetal cells.
The animal  half, if isolated, will only develop into a simple hollow sphere.
Thus, there is something in the cytoplasm of the egg, from the very beginning, which makes the animal region different from the vegetal.
In some species there is even a row of coloured granules near the vegetal pole which are a visible marker of this polarity.
Even though Driesch was wrong in assigning limitless regulative properties to the early sea-urchin embryo, he did demonstrate that the embryo had a remarkable capacity for regulation.
Considerable experimental rearrangement of the cells can still result in normal development.
We are thus faced with the following problem: what organization in the early sea-urchin embryo ensures that the proportions of cells that form the skeleton, the gut, and the surface layers, will be the same in embryos whose cells can be quite extensively rearranged and whose size varies over a factor of eightfold?
From quarter embryos to giant embryos, formed by fusing two eggs together, normal larvae emerge.
Yet for the early mammalian embryo, it seems that Driesch was correct for there is no polarity laid down in the egg.
In the mouse egg and at least up to the 16-cell stage all the cells seem equivalent with no fixed fate.
It is possible to rearrange the cells of the early mouse embryo in numerous combinations and normal development will still occur.
Even if several mouse embryos are pushed together so that they fuse and this large mass transferred back into a mother a normal mouse will still develop.
In humans, the development of identical twins or more dramatically, quintuplets, again illustrates the absence of a fixed pattern in the egg.
Surprisingly, identical twins rarely arise from the separation into two cells at the two-cell stage.
Instead, the separation occurs much later when the embryo is made up already of many hundreds of cells.
This means that in human embryos even when there are several hundred cells present the fate of the cells is not fixed and if divided into two, two normal embryos can still develop.
THE FRENCH FLAG PROBLEM
How then do the cells ‘know’ to make the right pattern?
It is quite convenient to simplify the problem, and instead of thinking about sea-urchin or mouse embryos, to think about flags.
Consider the following problem.
Imagine there is a line of cells, each of which can turn blue, or white, or red.
The problem is to generate a pattern that looks like a French flag, that is the first third of the line of cells is blue, the middle third is white, and the last third is red.
What organizing principles must the cells have so that they reliably give this pattern, even when the cells are rearranged and the length of the line varies?
(It is not unhelpful to imagine oneself standing in such a line: how would one decide whether to be blue, white, or red?)
There are a number of solutions, but the most interesting solution is for the cells to ‘know’ their position in the line.
If they know their position with respect to the ends, then they can ‘work out’ which third they are in and so decide whether to be blue, white, or red.
They could do this by ‘numbering’ from the two ends and so know their position in the line.
It is then quite easy to work out which third the cell is in, and so whether to be blue, white, or red.
Moreover, if the cells keep monitoring their positions it will not matter if, at an early stage, some of the cells are removed from the line.
We can begin to see how the system would regulate back to normal when parts are removed.
Even if flags are not embryos there are many cases in development where the embryo does behave rather like a regulating French flag.
There are, then, two quite difficult things that cells have to do.
The first is to know where they are, that is, acquire positional information, and the second is to use this information appropriately.
We know much more about the former than the latter.
But given that they can have their position specified, and can interpret this position so as to form the pattern, then this provides a very powerful means of generating patterns.
For example, if we extend the pattern to two dimensions then, again, just using cells that can become blue, white, or red, we can have a French flag, or a Stars and Stripes, or the Union jack.
The method provides a way of generating very complex patterns.
Imagine the cells as if they were in a spectator stand.
Each cell would have row number and seat number and so be uniquely identified.
In addition, each cell must have a set of instructions — possibly analogous to genetic information — which lists what every cell must do in every position.
The cells just look up their position in this set of instructions and behave accordingly.
It may be, as we will see later, that for each pattern the cells have the same positional information but just have different rules for interpreting what to do.
The rules for interpretation will depend on the genetic constitution of the cells and their developmental history.
If cells are to have their position specified as in a coordinate  system then it is essential to have a boundary region or origin, from which position is measured.
It is also essential to have some way of measuring distance from this boundary region.
One way would be to have a chemical whose concentration was fixed at one end of the line, and this concentration decreased as one moved down the line.
This would provide a gradient in the concentration of the chemical and if the cells  could read the concentration they would know their position in the line, with respect to the boundary.
Using the concentration of chemicals is just one of several possible ways of specifying position.
It may well be that the main cross-talk between cells involves specifying position.
If we could listen to the conversation between cells talking to each other during development it might be anything but fascinating.
If all the talk is about position all we might hear would be equivalent to  ‘You be number 33’, ‘OK, you be 32 and I'll tell my neighbour to be 34’.
Not a very interesting conversation but crucial for patterning.
Communication between cells takes place in a limited number of ways.
The obvious one is by a chemical message leaving one cell and diffusing to the next — rather like speaking.
If the chemical diffuses a long way it is more like shouting and a larger number of cells could receive the signal.
Another type of communication requires direct contact between the membranes of cells because fine pores, known as gap junctions, develop at the site of contact and then allow direct communication between the cytoplasm of the two cells.
The signal can only be a small molecule as the pores are so fine as to prevent passage of larger substances.
These channels have the advantage that the signal remains within the cell membrane and never enters the external medium — rather like a private line.
One further possibility is that the extracellular material provides a means of communication.
If cells have their position specified as in a coordinate system and also have rules for interpreting the positional information, then it is possible, with the appropriate rules for interpretation, to generate any pattern that is required, from faces — even the Mona Lisa — to limbs.
The extent to which cells actually use such mechanisms is still being investigated.
How big are positional fields?
Over what distance do cells have to communicate in order to establish their position?
Remarkably, the distances are very small.
In the sea-urchin, positional signals would not have to travel across more than 20 cells.
No system has been described in which positional signals have to be transmitted over more than about half a millimetre, or about 30–50 cells.
The small size of positional fields has two important implications.
First, simple diffusion of chemicals could provide the signals; secondly, if patterns are laid down in such small fields, their later development may largely be due to programmed growth.
Embryos are organized so that interactions between cells occur on a small scale.
Returning to the sea-urchin embryo, it can be seen that the animal-vegetal differences could be used to establish the boundary regions, that is, which end is to be which.
The cell-to-cell interactions could  provide the cells with positional information.
A classical experiment illustrates this possibility.
The animal half of the early embryo develops as a simple ball of cells — but if it is combined with cells from the vegetal pole a normal, but smaller embryo will develop.
It is as if the vegetal cells have set up a new boundary region for specifying positional information.
EGGS AND AXES
Eggs are spherical but give rise to animals with well-defined axes with heads at one end and ‘tails’ at the other.
There are in almost all animals two main axes, the antero-posterior which defines the ‘head’ and ‘tail’ends and the dorso-ventral axis which is at right angles to it.
Our faces are ventral, the back of our heads are dorsal; one sits on the dorsal surface of a horse.
How are these axes specified in development?
In some eggs like the sea-urchin and the frog egg there is, from the beginning, a well-defined polarity in the egg which defines an axis with respect to which the antero-posterior axis and dorso-ventral axis will be specified, but in a manner which is not straightforward.
The antero-posterior axis of the frog egg more or less corresponds to the animal-vegetal axis.
But the dorso-ventral axis is specified by the point where the sperm, which fertilizes the egg, enters.
That site defines the ventral side.
fur the mouse egg there are no axes and both the antero-posterior and dorso-ventral are specified, in a manner which is not yet understood, during development.
REGULATION AND FATE
It is a fundamental belief of developmental biologists that the regulatory processes, just discussed, are central to how the pattern is established in normal development, and are not just a bizarre result of experimental interference.
But does regulation continue throughout development, or is it just a property of the early embryo?
It is possible to label the cells of the early embryo and follow what they do during development.
This provides a way of finding out their  normal fate.
The cells in one region of the embryo can be marked with a dye, or one can inject, with a very fine hollow tube, a fluorescent dye into a single cell so that a specific cell and all its offspring can then be followed through development.
In this way it has been shown, for example, that the muscles of the newt always come from a particular region of the early embryo, and the eye from quite a different region, and the gut from another.
The origin of all organs can thus be mapped and so a ‘face map’ can be plotted which indicates to what the normal embryo will give rise.
The gut comes from the yolky part of the early embryo, the skeleton and muscles from the middle region, and the nervous system from the upper part.
In some ways this fate map might present a puzzle.
How could it be that the cells that will form the gut and the bones and muscles are on the outside of the early embryo, yet they will form structures that are clearly on the inside of the animal?
The answer, in part, lies in gastrulation.
The cells from the outside move into the interior during gastrulation and only at the end of the gastrulation are they more or less in their proper position.
It is during gastrulation that the main body plan is laid down (Chapter 2).
The fate map should be regarded rather like a train timetable — it tells you only what will normally happen.
It in no way means that other outcomes are not possible, particularly if the system is perturbed by say, bad weather, or a strike, or in the case of embryos, by experimental manipulation.
If cells from the region of the early embryo that will normally give rise to the eye are grafted into the region that will form the gut the cells do not form an eye any more but just part of the  gut.
This is just another example of regulation but it also shows that in the early frog embryo the fate of the parts is not fixed.
In general, if cells of vertebrate embryos are moved from one part to another of the early embryo they develop according to their new location and not from where they are taken.
Their fate is dependent on their new position in the embryo: they respond to their new address.
This flexibility of fate does not last for long.
The fate of the cells becomes, with time, more and more restricted until it is effectively fixed.
So, if at a later stage in development, such as after gastrulation, the region that will form the eye is grafted to the belly region of the frog embryo, on this occasion it continues to develop there as an eye.
The result is the development of an eye, isolated and unseeing, in the belly of the embryo.
This result is quite a general one.
Whereas early on cells develop according to their position in the embryo, with time their fate becomes fixed.
When they are grafted to a foreign site, they continue to develop as they would have done at the site of origin.
The cells, with time, acquire an autonomous developmental programme and no longer respond to new positional cues.
The process by which cells have their fate fixed is known as determination.
An almost universal feature of determination is that it involves subtle chemical changes, almost certainly turning on or off genes, and the overt result may not be seen for many hours.
When the presumptive eye is grafted, after gastrulation, to the belly region and develops into an eye, the tissue shows no outward sign that it will develop into an eye.
Thus, by the end of gastrulation, one can draw a map on the embryo showing the developmental path to which various  regions are now committed.
The embryo has been broken up into a number of regions whose development is largely independent of one another.
positional signals are only one kind of communication between cells.
Of equal importance are signals between groups of cells, a process known as induction, which historically at least, is considered to be the major mode of interaction in the development of embryos.
INDUCTION
There has been only one Nobel prize in embryology.
It was awarded to Hans Spemann, yet another German embryologist, in 1935 for discovering the organizer.
In 1924, he and his collaborator, Hilde Mangold, grafted a piece of tissue from a region in the early newt gastrula where cells from the outside are just beginning to stream inside, to the opposite side of another embryo.
The result was astonishing — a whole second embryo developed in the region of the  graft.
The graft had induced the host tissues adjacent to it to completely change their fate and form a second embryo in relation to the graft, and for this reason it was called the organizer.
It was as if the graft was setting up a whole new embryo and re-specifying the positions of the cells in its vicinity.
A further very important feature of this type of experiment was the demonstration that the nervous system will only develop if future muscle and adjacent cells on the outside move in  underneath the outer layer.
These migrating sheets of cells produce a signal which induces a nervous system in the overlying sheet.
The discovery of induction had a profound influence on experimental embryology.
It was, foremost, the first unequivocal demonstration of cell-to-cell interactions.
While the idea of such interactions could be inferred from earlier experiments, here the result was much more dramatic and clear-cut.
One tissue — the organizer — could so influence other tissues with which it was placed in contact that a whole new embryo could be formed.
Another important feature lay in the way the experiment had been done.
In order to make sure that the grafted tissue really induced a new embryo in the host, it was necessary to have markers that would enable graft and host cells to be distinguished.
Spemann used the natural difference between two species of newt to this end, one being pigmented, the other not.
The graft was from the unpigmented species into a pigmented embryo, and the new axis was clearly pigmented.
Spemann and Mangold's discovery of the organizer did not come as a surprise to Spemann, nor did it involve any element of luck.
It was the result of a carefully planned experiment based on numerous other experiments performed over a long period.
It is possible that the experiment had been done by an American embryologist many years earlier but its significance was overlooked.
Spemann is supposed to have said ‘A discovery can be unexpected, but not un-noticed’.
Embryonic induction seemed to provide an excellent system for further analysis.
It led, for example, to the quest for the nature of the signal from the organizer that caused the second embryo and the second nervous system to form.
Hopes were high when it was found that even if the organizer tissue were killed it could still induce, for this offered the possibility of extracting the responsible chemical signal.
Alas, this turned out to be much more difficult.
All sorts of substances and tissues could act as inducers; from rat liver to heat-killed neural tissue itself.
Too ‘many substances had positive effects.
In spite of thousands of experiments the nature of the signal to this day remains unknown.
One case where the inductive signals may have been identified is in early amphibian development.
In the fertilized amphibian eggs, the upper animal region is heavily pigmented whereas the lower, vegetal, half is white and heavy with yolk.
The pigmented animal portion — the animal cap — will develop into skin and nervous system, the yolky vegetal portion will form the gut, and the middle portion the skeleton, muscle, and soft tissues.
These are the normal fates, but for muscles at least, that pathway is not specified from the beginning but requires signals from the lower vegetal position.
If the future muscle-forming region is isolated from the rest of the embryo at an early stage and cultured it will not develop into muscle.
For muscle development an inductive signal must pass from the vegetal region.
The standard experiment to demonstrate the inductive signal from the vegetal region makes use of the animal cap.
An isolated animal cap will never form muscle and will only form a simple sheet of cells.
But if the animal cap is combined with the vegetal region some of its cells will now make muscle.
Recently, the inducing chemical agents from the vegetal region have been identified and if added at very low doses to isolated animal caps, muscle will develop.
These inducing molecules, the first to be characterized, are proteins that are, surprisingly, identical to growth factors (Chapter 11) that operate at late stages in development and which also act as signal molecules in the adult.
One of these molecules, activin, is involved in the hormonal control of reproduction.
So the same signals can be used for quite different purposes.
It may even turn out that these growth factors are the signals from the organizer which specify the main body axis.
This experimental system has also illuminated the social nature of cells, since their response to the inducing signal in early amphibian development is enhanced by being in a crowd.
The animal cells’ ability to respond to induction by the vegetal region was tested by placing them in a sandwich between two vegetal regions.
If the cells were placed as a solid clump in the sandwich, induction was good and many of the cells developed into muscle; but if the cells were placed in the sandwich as a thin single layer no muscle cells developed.
In order for induction to occur the cells need to be in a community of sufficient size, a phenomenon termed ‘community  effect’; the cells' development being dependent on the presence of other similar cells.
There are many other examples in development of inductive interactions, one tissue signalling to an adjacent tissue so that its developmental pathway is altered.
Induction thus provides a powerful means of co-ordinating the behaviour of adjacent groups of cells both early and late in development.
For example, the eye is a beautifully organized and complex structure but the parts of which it is composed have, as we have seen, very different developmental histories.
The main part of the eye, the retina, is an outgrowth from the brain, whereas the lens develops as an invagination from an overlying sheet of cells.
The lens forms at precisely the spot where the outgrowth of the eye, in the form of an eyecup, approaches the surface.
This coordination of two developmental events, crucial to the formation of the eye, is achieved in some animals by the approaching eyecup inducing the lens to develop just where it touches the surface, and so the lens develops at the right place.
By grafting in another eyecup another lens can be induced to form from the overlying layer.
Again, the nature of the signal is unknown.
Many cases of induction involve a signal from the cells underlying a cell sheet.
One of the most dramatic examples is the development of the enamel that covers teeth.
Teeth, like eyes, develop from two groups of cells.
There is a sheet of cells covering the tooth germ which is made up of a loose mass of cells.
The enamel comes from the cell sheet and is induced by the cells of the underlying tooth germ.
That is not dramatic.
The drama comes from separating the tooth germ of a mouse embryo from the overlying sheet and then recombining it with the cell sheet enclosing the limb, but which would normally form skin.
This new construction can be cultured and develops quite a nice tooth, but now the sheet of cells that would have become the skin of the foot is induced to make enamel.
Whatever the nature of the inducing signal, it is a signal that can be recognized by quite different species.
An old and elegant result, at first puzzling, involves combining the surface sheet of cells of a frog embryo with the underlying tissues from near the mouth region of the  newt.
Frog embryos develop into tadpoles with suckers near their mouths with which they attach to rocks or plants.
Newts never develop such structures.
Yet, when frog surface layer is placed on the newt near the mouth region, suckers develop in just the right place even though, in evolution, newts and frogs separated millions of years ago.
Perhaps the newt is just providing the frog surface layer with positional signals that may still be the same in both animals: what has changed in evolution is how the signals are interpreted.
INSTRUCTION OR SELECTION
Do signals really instruct cells as to what to do?
Consider a juke-box: if you select one of 20 tunes, have you really given the system an instruction or have you merely selected one of the 20 tunes from the repertoire of the machine?
Instructions imply providing new information to the recipient.
Are, then, cell signals instructive in that they tell the cell something it does not already know?
Many signals are merely STOP or GO.
STOP signals prevent the cell progressing on its developmental pathway and GO signals can only direct it along new pathways, if these are open to the cell.
At any stage, the options open to a cell are very small in number, often only one or two.
For example, the surface sheet can develop a variety of surface structures depending on the underlying inducer but it cannot develop into any of the embryo's internal structures, like muscle or cartilage.
Positional signals might be thought of as instructive since they tell the cell its position in the system.
But the cell must already have an internal system which can respond to such signals and again the signal is being selective.
All signals are thus essentially selective rather than instructive since they bring a minimal amount of new information to the cell, and only select from the possible responses open to the cell.
This emphasizes the importance of the cell's internal programme.
Once it is realized that signals that change cells' behaviour do not really carry intricate information, then it can be seen that any complexity of behaviour lies in the cells' capacity to respond rather than in complexity in the signals.
Since many signals could be of the  STOP and GO type, complexity would emerge because the cells' responses would be determined by their past history.
The current cell state determines the response rather than the particular signal.
This is analogous to the complexity of computers where the signals are essentially noughts and ones but the response depends on previous events.
In emphasizing simplicity of signals I may have gone too far.
There are very few cases where all the signals between cells are known.
It could well be that there are many more signals operating between cells than is currently suspected.
Nevertheless, my own belief is that this is not the case, but only further research will tell.
For the moment I cling to the idea that there are a relatively small number of cell-to-cell signals.
A SIMPLE PATTERN: THE EARLY MOUSE EMBRYO
The development of the mouse embryo is the best experimental model for human development.
It is possible to culture the early embryo and then return it to the mother's uterus where it will develop normally.
Cell divisions of the mammalian egg are unlike those of lower animals where the planes of division appear with military precision.
The early divisions of the mouse embryo seem much more sloppy and between the 8- and 16-cell stages the surface of the clump of cells becomes  smooth and at the 32-cell stage there is a single layer of cells enclosing some cells on the inside.
The fate of these two groups of cells, those on the outside and those on the inside, is quite different.
Those on the outside form the trophoblast which does not give rise to any structures in the embryo proper but is involved in the implantation of the embryo in the uterus and the formation of the placenta.
The embryo proper  comes from some of the cells on the inside — the inner cell mass — and goes on to gastrulate.
Thus, quite a lot of early mammalian development is devoted to setting aside most of the cells for extra-embryonic structures rather than the embryo itself.
It is in just those few cells in the inner cell mass that we have our origins.
The patterning problem here is what specifies which cells will form the trophoblast and which cells will form the inner cell mass.
It is certainly not due to anything laid down in the egg or due to anything special about the first two divisions.
There are numerous experiments in which the cells of the four-to eight-cell stage embryo are rearranged and recombined, always giving rise to normal development.
The most likely explanation is that the patterning results from the difference in the position of the cells and hence their different environment.
Those cells that end up on the inside become inner cell mass and those that end up on the outside, the trophoblast.
It is thus partly a matter of chance which cells end up in either of these two positions.
At an early stage, cells in the inner cell mass are not determined; they are not yet specified to form brains or toes.
If a single marked cell from the inner cell mass of one mouse embryo is injected into the inner cell mass of another it will become integrated into the development of the embryo and respond to developmental signals.
If it carries a marker its descendants can be recognized, and they can be seen to give rise to all sorts of tissues, from muscle and bone, to liver and brain.
This is consistent with the early embryo showing remarkable capacity to regulate when perturbed.
Even when the embryo begins to gastrulate, if up to 80 per cent of the cells are killed off with a drug the embryo can regulate and quite normal mice can develop.
A GOOD LINEAGE
Nature seems quite profligate in the number of ways it has arranged for embryos to construct organisms.
We may find unifying principles in patterns of gene activity, gradients, signals, modes of movement, but there is still much variety for which we have no explanation whatsoever.
Consider, for example, the early cleavage of the embryo.
This is a relatively simple process and divides the egg up into a number of smaller cells from which the embryo will develop.
It is a puzzle why there should be two main classes of cleavage patterns — radial and spiral.
Radial cleavage is clear and straightforward and occurs in sea-urchins, amphibians, and some invertebrates.
The cleavage planes are at right angles to one another.
Many invertebrates, on the other hand, such as snails and worms and crustacea, have a spiral pattern of cleavage.
In spirally cleaving eggs the cleavage planes are oblique so that the cells, when viewed from above, take on a spiral arrangement.
In addition, the pattern of cleavage is both highly ordered and complex and there are fewer cells at the time when gastrulation begins.
Because there are so few cells and a well-defined pattern, it is possible to follow the lineage and fate of every cell at least up to the time of gastrulation.
The patterns of spiral cleavage are hard to understand in functional terms, but one example does, however, have a tantalizing correlation with adult forms.
In molluscs, the direction of coiling of the shell corresponds with the spiral arrangement of the cleavage.
Snails with right-handed spiral cleavage have shells which coil with the same handedness, and left-handed shells have a left-handed spiral cleavage.
Spiral cleavage focuses our attention on the role of cell lineage in specifying pattern.
Lineage itself could specify cell fate.
That is, when a cell divides, the daughter cells may be dissimilar and already set along different developmental pathways, and so no cell-to-cell interactions need be involved.
If the embryos have taken so much trouble to have so well-defined patterns of cleavage it is a reasonable expectation that the cleavage pattern may be involved in specifying cell fate.
In general terms that is true.
Spirally cleaving embryos show much less regulative ability than that seen in, for example, sea-urchins and  amphibians.
There seems to be much less interaction between the cells.
Fate seems rather to depend more on ancestry than position, family rather than friends.
We are almost back again with the problem of preformation, but in a modern form.
The best understood spirally cleaving animal is the nematode,Caenorhabditis elegans .
THE WORM'S STORY
The intensive study of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans derives from the molecular biologist Sydney Brenner.
In 1974, he decided that none of the developmental systems being studied really gave him what he needed for a study of development.
He picked out the small nematode that had just the right characteristics, and single-handed, he established a thriving field from scratch.
The adult worm is about 1 millimetre long and consists of only about 1000 body cells and thousands of germ cells.
In fact, the male has exactly 959 body cells and the female 1031.
Like higher animals it has a nerve cord, muscles, and a gut, with a brain at the mouth (hardly a head) end.
It only has 3000 genes and by this criterion is about 20 times more complicated than a bacterium and 40 times less complicated than a human.
It is excellent for ‘doing genetics’.
The complete lineage of every one of the cells has now been followed.
The pattern of cell divisions was found to be invariant, every   normal worm going through exactly the same pattern of cleavages to form the body.
But there is no clear logic to the complex pattern of cell divisions which divide up the egg and generate the worm.
There is, thus far, no global plan apparent which we would regard as logical and satisfying.
At most we can make some sense of small parts of the pattern.
Consider the different cell types, such as muscle, skin, gut, and nerve.
Do each of these cell types derive from just one stem cell?
That is, do all the muscle cells descend from just one or two ancestral muscle cells?
The answer is no.
These cell types can derive from several cells well separated in the lineage.
In fact, occasionally, a nerve cell and a muscle cell can be sisters derived from a common mother cell.
One way to think of the development of the worm is to draw an analogy with a digital computer and think of the cells at every cell division making a discrete choice as to what to do next.
One must also accept that the programmer of the cells had a different logic from ours, or at least a curious sense of humour.
Some of the mutations that have been found support this digital computer image by altering the program in different ways.
For example, a typical lineage may result in cell type A giving two cell types B and C, and only C continues to divide to give types D and E. Mutants can result in the substitution of type Z for B; or make the lineage symmetrical — B now giving D and E; or even generating a stem cell line with B being replaced by A which repeats the pattern of cell divisions and cell differentiation.
The emphasis on cell lineage in the worm is a little misleading since the implication is that the behaviour of the cells is entirely determined only by the lineage and not by cell signals.
In some cases this is true, but in other cases it is not.
A technique used to test for the autonomy of cell development is to see what happens to cells if their neighbours are killed-off by a fine laser beam.
If development of the cell really is autonomous then killing-off neighbours will have no effect, however if it is dependent on signals from adjacent cells its development will be perturbed.
When the laser is used to kill a cell the adjacent cells often continue to develop normally showing that signals are not necessary.
But in some cases there is dependence, and laser killing shows that, for example, one kind of cell induces three other cells just next to it to develop along a particular pathway.
Interactions also specify a special fate for the central cell.
In spite of all the intensive study of the worm's development there is still little, if any, understanding of why two sister cells can develop, autonomously, along different pathways.
In the absence of environmental signals there has to be the unequal distribution of some factor at cell division so that the cells behave differently from one another.
One possibility is that there are special cytoplasmic factors that are asymmetrically distributed at cell division — at very early stages there is very good evidence that factors in the cytoplasm are unequally distributed during cleavage.
NOT QUITE A HOMUNCULUS
If the cytoplasm of the egg has a well-defined pattern of constituents which determines the later organization of the embryo then cleavage may just be a way of partitioning this cytoplasmic pattern in the egg so that specific constituents go to specific cells.
These constituents would then specify how the cells develop.
In this way, the basic pattern in the egg could be transferred to the cells.
There would be little, if any, need for cell conversations, gradients, and other organizing mechanisms.
The egg would almost be a homunculus.
The cells become the cytoplasm they inherit.
The development of the tunicate (sea-squirt) egg, which has a radial pattern of cleavage, illustrates this cytoplasmic prepatterning.
Certain species have, very fortunately, coloured cytoplasm which is found in  specific locations in the egg.
Each coloured region ends up, during cleavage, in specific cells and those which acquire similarly coloured cytoplasm differentiate in the same way.
Muscle cells come from cells that contain the yellow cytoplasm that is present as a crescent-shaped patch in the egg, a grey patch in the egg cytoplasm gives rise to the nervous system, and so on.
The dependence of muscle development on specific cytoplasmic factors is dramatic.
At the eight-celled stage the yellow cytoplasm is confined to a pair of adjacent cells.
When the  embryo is divided up into pairs of cells then only the pair with yellow cytoplasm gives muscle.
But if, by manipulation, some of the yellow cytoplasm is squeezed into adjacent cells they too will develop muscle, something they would never do normally.
Lineage-based development, with its dependence on cytoplasmic localization, can account for much of the sea-squirt development but the idea should not be taken too far.
There are some cell interactions, and in some species, cells lacking the yellow cytoplasm can form muscle.
Even so, it is a very impressive example of the role of cytoplasmic factors and cell lineage.
SELF ORGANIZATION
In marked contrast to lineage mechanisms are those mechanisms which might generate pattern spontaneously.
The English mathematician, Alan Turing, was an extraordinary polymath.
Not only did he lay the foundation for the theory of computer programs, but in 1952 he published a highly original paper on pattern formation.
He showed that it was possible, starting with a  uniform concentration of chemicals which interacted with each other, for the system to develop differences in the concentration of the chemicals, which he called morphogens, such that there would be chemical waves with peaks and troughs of concentration of the morphogens.
The system was self-organizing and the pattern would occur spontaneously.
Turing suggested that the concentration of the chemicals might control the pattern of a developing system.
If five peaks were set up they could provide the basis for the tentacles of hydra, or for the fingers in the early development of the human hand.
Turing's model was mathematical.
Since that time it has been explored in chemical systems with further mathematics and also experimentally.
In essence, the systems involve diffusing chemicals that interact with one another— hence their name — reaction-diffusion models.
For example, the system may use a rapidly diffusing inhibitor and a slowly diffusing activator; the inhibitor inhibits activator production but its own production is dependent on the activator itself; and the activator stimulates its own synthesis.
For particular conditions wave-like patterns will be generated.
There are chemical systems which mimic it in some ways.
In a complex mixture, whose chemistry is well understood, the Belousov-Zhabotinsky reaction can occur.
When the reaction is carried out in a dish, complex moving patterns of coloured bands spontaneously arise, including concentric rings and spirals.
On occasion, a pattern of spots appears.
Reaction-diffusion mechanisms are very good at generating repeated patterns of many peaks of morphogen concentration.
Some of these patterns, as the Oxford mathematician, Jim Murray, has shown, resemble the coat patterns of animals like leopards and zebras, and the spots on butterfly wings.
Reaction-diffusion could well be the way they arise in development.
Such mechanisms are very sensitive to the size and shape of the system in which the reactions take place because the boundaries are very important.
In a system which gives spots, making a region long and thin results in stripes — striped tails are a common feature of many animals.
The great advantage in generating patterns in development by such reaction-diffusion mechanisms is that they are self-organizing and so can generate patterns without the complex programming that the interpretation of positional information requires.
They can also provide the spontaneous formation of gradients.
Unfortunately, attractive as such mechanisms are, direct evidence for their involvement is very weak.
FEATHER PATTERNS
There are few patterns as varied and beautiful as those made by the feathers of birds.
The patterns largely reflect the distribution of  pigment-containing cells, but some of the colours, like the blues of the peacock's tail, come from the way the structure of the feathers refracts light.
Patterns of pigmentation are due to the distribution of cells that are derived from the neural crest (Chapter 2).
Those cells which can form pigment migrate beneath the skin and enter all the feather germs.
These germs are small outgrowths on the skin arranged locally in a hexagonal pattern.
Whether or not the cells that enter the feather germs make pigment is controlled by the feather germs, each of which has its set of positional values — each feather has its own address.
Depending on their positional value the feather germs promote pigment formation by the migrant cells, or suppress it, and in this way the global pattern is specified.
The positional values that are used for pigment development in the wing are the same as those used for cartilage, muscle, and tendons (Chapter 4).
In this way, the various elements in the wing's positional field, for example, are correctly placed in relation to one another .
More generally, the positional field in the skin enables a wide variety of pigment patterns to be generated — it is almost like painting by numbers.
Within each feather there is a further patterning which determines the distribution of the pigment.
Pigment granules are extruded from the pigment cells as the feather grows out, and changes in the timing of extrusion leads to barred feathers.
More complex processes, which are not understood, produce local spots in the feather, as in, for example, some canaries.
EPIGENESIS
Aristotle was right for the wrong reasons.
He coined the term ‘epigenesis’ to describe the emergence of new structures and forms during development, but his justification for this view was based on philosophy not experiment.
It should now be very clear that development is a dynamic process in which cells repeatedly interact with each other, change shape and position, and become different.
Each stage of development effectively sets the stage for the next.
Cell movements, for example, may bring tissues in apposition resulting in new  interactions leading to further movements.
Other ‘flags’ can be thought of as developing within one part of the French flag.
New positional fields are established after the main axis is set up — those that give rise to the limbs will be examined in the next chapter.
In a way, development can be thought of as a cascade, one event leading to another.
Sometimes the sequence is confined to the changes in single cells, at other times groups of cells have multiple influences on their neighbours.
This, in turn, influences yet other cells.
By concentrating on spatial aspects of the developing system the temporal aspect has been neglected.
The changes with time are just as important as those that occur during spatial patterning and are indeed part of the process.
Epigenesis is indeed a process set in time.
Cells, for example, are only competent to induce, or be induced, for limited periods.
Unfortunately, we understand less about temporal than spatial processes in development.
FINGERS AND TOES
THE DEVELOPMENT of arms and legs is very important in its own right, and it provides one of the best model systems for analysing how an organ develops once the body plan has been laid down.
Not only is the pattern of cartilage elements in the early limb, such as the humerus, radius and ulna, and digits, quite simple, but the embryonic chick limb bud is quite easily accessible to experimental manipulation and is an excellent model for the human.
The basic pattern consists of one main element, the humerus, followed by two smaller elements, the radius and ulna, then some small structures in the wrist, and finally the digits.
Overall, it has a pleasing simplicity and there is a similar pattern in the leg.
By contrast, for example, the development of the heart is much more convoluted, involving as it does the complex folding and fusing of tubes.
Of course, in addition to the bony structures in the limb — which are first laid down as cartilage and only later replaced by bone — there are muscles and tendons whose pattern is more complex.
The wings and legs develop late.
The main body axis is well advanced, and is already segmented into somites; the head too is moderately advanced and the eyes are prominent.
The forelimb begins to develop first; a small bulge appearing on the flank of the embryo — the first signs  of the limb bud.
It is made up of an outer sheet of cells which forms a particularly thick structure — the apical ridge — at the tip, with an inner mass of loosely packed and rather dull looking cells.
The cells multiply and the bud grows out in a paddle-like form.
About half a millimetre behind the tip, the cells in the core become denser and begin to make the cartilage of the first element in the limb, the humerus.
With further outgrowth the radius and ulna develop within the inner mass of cells, then the wrist, and finally the hand with its digits.
After 10 days of development within the egg, the forelimb of the chick — the wing — has a  pattern very similar to that of the human arm, except that there are only three fingers.
It is very convenient that the three digits are so unlike one another since they can be easily recognized.
Based on evolutionary considerations, the small anterior digit is designated digit 2, the large central one as digit 3, and the posterior, middle-sized digit, as digit 4.
The assumption is that, in evolution, digits 1 and 5 were lost from the primitive five-fingered limb.
Our model for the patterning of the elements of the limb is based on the idea of positional information, that is, the cells in the limb have their position specified and this determines how they will behave.
The positional field in the limb determines, coherently, the pattern of all the structures — cartilage, muscle, tendons, feathers, and nerves.
Although the limb is three-dimensional I will treat it as if it were two-dimensional and only consider position with respect to two axes, the antero-posterior axis which runs across the limb from digit 2 to digit 4, and the long, or proximo-distal axis, which runs from the shoulder to the tip of the digits.
How do the cells acquire positional information?
Outgrowth of the chick limb bud is mainly due to cell multiplication at the tip of the limb just beneath the thickened ridge-like structure in the surface layer.
We called this region of proliferation the progress zone because it is there, we believe, that the cells acquire their positional values.
The special nature of the progress zone is due to a signal from the overlying ridge.
The cells in the progress zone all multiply and can respond to positional signals.
Only when the cells leave the zone do some begin to differentiate into cartilage; and, as just stated, the cartilage elements are laid down in a proximo-distal sequence — first humerus, then radius and ulna, and only then wrist, and finally hand.
In our model, the cells in the progress zone have their position specified along the two axes by two different mechanisms.
For the proximo-distal axis, our suggestion is that the cells learn their position by measuring how long they remain in the progress zone, a mechanism based on measuring time.
For the antero-posterior axis there is evidence for a positional signal from the posterior margin of the bud.
I will first consider the signal along the antero-posterior axis and then the ‘timing’ mechanism for the other axis.
POSITIONAL SIGNALLING
At the posterior margin of the chick limb bud there is a small group of cells known as the polarizing region.
They look no different from any other cells in the limb bud but they have the ability to specify the position of the cells along the antero-posterior axis.
The polarizing region thus has properties similar to that of the amphibian organizer.
A key experiment shows this.
A hole is made in the shell and a small cube of cells is carefully cut out from the posterior margin containing the polarizing region and grafted into the anterior margin of the limb bud of another embryo.
After this the hole in the shell is sealed and the embryo is allowed to develop for a few days.
The host limb now has two polarizing regions and develops a second set of digits which are a mirror image of the normal ones.
Instead of the normal pattern of digits, 2, 3, 4, the pattern is now 4, 3, 2, 2, 3, 4.
Grafting an additional    polarizing region into the anterior margin has done two things — the limb bud has widened and the polarizing region has re-specified the position of the cells in the anterior part of the limb so that they form additional digits.
These extra digits do not come from the graft, but from the cells adjacent to it in the anterior part of the bud.
Our model proposes that the polarizing region normally provides a positional signal along the antero-posterior axis.
This signal, we believe, is a  diffusing chemical, a morphogen, which is released by the polarizing region, so the concentration is highest at the posterior margin and the concentration decreases away from the polarizing region, being lowest at the anterior margin.
This morphogen concentration gradient can thus be used to determine the position of the cells.
If digit 4 develops at a high concentration, digit 3 at an intermediate concentration, and digit 2 at the lowest concentration, then one can visualize how both the normal and mirror-image patterns arise.
When we add another polarizing region to the anterior margin there are now two sources of the chemical and a U-shaped gradient in the chemical is established, resulting in the embryo's limb having a pattern of digits 4, 3, 2, 2, 3, 4.
Mirror-image embryonic chick limb after graft of a polarizing region
We devised a test for this model — and it is just a model — by trying to weaken the signal from the grafted polarizing region.
If, we reasoned, there really is a morphogen gradient, it should be possible to weaken the signal by decreasing the concentration, and so, instead of getting an additional set of digits 4, 3, 2 at the anterior margin only a 3, 2 or a 2 should develop.
This is exactly what we found.
We weakened the signal in several ways, one of which was by damaging the cells of the polarizing region with high doses of X-rays before grafting it to the anterior margin.
As the dose of X-rays was increased, so the pattern of additional digits changed from 4, 3, 2 to 3, 2 to 2.
Another approach was to graft fewer and fewer polarizing region cells and again the result was the same.
An obvious question is the nature of the morphogen.
The idea that graded morphogen concentrations are important in controlling development is a very old one and the attempts to identify the morphogen have failed, almost without exception.
It is a technically very difficult problem compounded by the fact that one has no idea of what to look for, and the quantities may be minute.
First, we tried a direct approach and ground up polarizing region cells and put the mixture into agar blocks which we then grafted to the anterior margin.
The hope was that the morphogen in the mixture would slowly leak out and specify new digits.
If that happened we could then try to purify and isolate the morphogen from the mixture — but we had no luck.
Therefore, we adopted a raffle-ticket approach and tried a variety of pure chemicals, just guessing which to choose, on the grounds that if one holds a raffle ticket one's chance of winning may be small but at least it is finite, and greater than zero.
If one does not have a raffle ticket one's chances are zero.
Therefore, everyone in the laboratory was invited to test their favoured compound.
Using this approach we believe we may have discovered the signal.
It would be nice to pretend that our decision to try retinoic acid, a derivative of vitamin A, was based on sound chemical principles.
This was not the case.
We chose retinoic acid because I met a friend, at a meeting, and he told me that it affected cell communication.
In addition, retinoic acid is insoluble in water and so would remain  where we put it in the limb for some time; this was important because we already knew that to exert its effect the grafted polarizing region needed more than 12 hours.
To our surprise and delight it mimicked the effect of the signalling region.
If a special tiny bead was soaked in retinoic acid and then grafted to the anterior margin, a mirror-image limb developed with a pattern of digits 4, 3, 2, 2, 3, 4.
If the concentration of the retinoic acid was reduced, then, just as happened when we weakened the signal, from the polarizing region, the pattern was 3, 2, 2, 3, 4, then 2, 2, 3, 4, ending up with 2, 3, 4.
Unfortunately, this does not prove that retinoic acid is the signal: it could be that it merely mimics the true signal.
But other workers have now shown that retinoic acid is actually present in the limb, and its concentration is graded in just the right direction.
In addition, special receptors for retinoic acid have now been identified in the cells in the progress zone.
All of which is in favour of retinoic acid being the signal, but the evidence is not unequivocal.
Whatever the ultimate nature of the signal turns out to be, there is another question to be asked.
To what extent is the signal in the chick the same as in other vertebrates?
How conservative or parsimonious has nature been with its signals and its building materials?
If a piece of tissue is taken from the posterior margin of a mouse limb bud and grafted into the anterior region of a chick limb bud, it too can specify additional digits, but the digits are, of course, chick digits.
A similar result has been obtained by other workers who grafted the polarizing region from an aborted human embryo into the chick.
It is clear that this signal is the same in all higher vertebrates; what has changed in evolution is the response.
It is that response that makes the digits of birds, mice, and men different.
POSITION AND TIME
For the proximo-distal axis, that is the long axis of the limb, from the shoulder to the fingers, there is a rather different mechanism for specifying positional information.
It is a mechanism based on time.
The cells in the progress zone seem to be able to measure how long  they remain in the progress zone and this enables them to, ‘know’ their position along the proximo-distal axis.
All the cells in the progress zone at the tip are multiplying and, therefore, cells are continually leaving the progress zone as the bud grows out and there is a trail of cells left behind.
The first cells to leave will form proximal structures, like the humerus, whereas those that remain in the progress zone longest will form the tips of the digits.
If the cells have a ‘clock’ that stops when they leave the zone the time on the clock will give them their position along the axis.
The longer the clock runs the more distal the position of the cells.
This mechanism accounts at once for the observation that limbs are truncated when the thickened ridge at the tip of the bud is removed.
Since the progress zone's existence is dependent on a signal from the ridge, removal of the ridge results in the disappearance of the progress zone and so effectively the clock in the cells is stopped permanently.
No further distal positional values can be generated.
Thus, if the ridge is removed from a very early bud only the humerus will develop; but if it is removed at a later stage the radius and ulna and wrist will develop but the digits will be absent.
Whenever a limb abnormality involves truncation, one can be pretty sure that this is due to damage to the ridge and so loss of the progress zone.
We do not have good evidence to support the timing mechanism.
However, the model is consistent with experiments in which we blocked proliferation in the progress zone or killed off some of the cells.
When this happens, cells stay much longer in the progress zone than they normally would, and very few cells leave the progress zone at early stages.
With time, normal proliferation is restored in the progress zone with the result that proximal structures are absent and  distal structures are quite normal.
If cells in the progress zone of the mouse limb bud or the chick limb bud are damaged often merely a hand develops attached to the shoulder and this may provide a basis for understanding the effects of thalidomide.
Thalidomide, as many will recall, is a drug that was put on the market in 1958 to calm the anxious and to overcome morning sickness in pregnant women.
It was marketed under the name Distaval and the advertisements in 1961 indicated that it could be given with complete safety to pregnant women.
An Australian paediatrician, William MacBride, was the first to warn the medical profession of the danger of thalidomide.
He had come across severe abnormalities — particularly of the limbs — in children of mothers who had taken thalidomide during pregnancy.
The drug was eventually withdrawn but there are about 300 young adults alive today who were affected.
Three-quarters of these have limb defects — their arms and legs are shorter, and sometimes missing altogether.
In some cases, there is a small hand attached to the shoulder.
No one really knows how thalidomide causes such abnormalities.
The doses given to pregnant women which caused the effect were extremely small.
When researchers tried to mimic the results on other animals, such as chick embryos, it did not have the same effect.
However, it does cause similar abnormalities in monkeys and there is evidence that it may cause blood vessels in the limbs to leak, which leads to severe damage of the surrounding cells.
As we have seen, damaging cells in the progress zone of the early bud causes proximal structures to be lost, and so our model just might provide a clue as to how thalidomide works.
The hand attached to the shoulder in some thalidomide children is just like the isolated ‘hand’ that develops from chick embryos whose cells in the progress zone have been damaged.
ARMS AND LEGS
The arm and the leg of many animals are both very similar and very different.
They have a very similar pattern of elements — the humerus is like the femur the fingers are similar to the toes — but the detailed  form is clearly very different.
So, it is not too surprising that the signals and mechanism of development are virtually identical in the arm and the leg.
For example, the polarizing region from the leg will produce extra digits, and a wing-polarizing region in the leg will specify additional toes.
The difference between the arm and leg is thus due to the different interpretation by the cells of the same positional signals.
An elegant illustration of the similarity in signals, but difference in response, is provided by grafting tissue from the proximal part of an early leg bud that would normally develop as the femur, into the progress zone of an early wing bud.
The grafted tissue now develops into toes.
The grafted cells which had a proximal character are now in the progress zone again and so acquire more distal positional values.
Because they retain their leg-like character and since their positional value is changed from proximal to distal, toes form.
The different interpretation of positional signals by arms and legs can be traced back to their different developmental history, each bud arising at a different level along the main body axis.
Their position along this axis alters the cell's internal programme such that they now interpret the positional signals within the bud so as to make the arm and leg different.
It is assumed that different pattern-controlling genes are switched on in forelimb and hindlimb, but this remains speculation.
However, in insect development there is excellent evidence for such a mechanism (Chapter 7).
A PREPATTERN AND THE SIXTH FINGER
The limbs of vertebrates can be very different — compare that of a bat with its long fingers supporting the web for flying, with the long pole-like structure of a horse's leg, where all the digits except one seem to have disappeared.
However, many vertebrate forelimbs have a similar basic structure — a single element, the humerus, followed by two elements, the radius and the ulna, and then three or more elements in the wrist and digits.
Given that consistent pattern, it is hard to resist the idea that there is some basic mechanism that lays down first one  element, then two, and then three, and so on.
This is a temptation one should in general resist, as l regard it as a cardinal rule in developmental biology not to try to infer developmental mechanisms from final forms.
Perhaps in this case the injunction can be ignored since the pattern is so widespread and so instinctively attractive.
Moreover, there are no counter-examples; there are no limbs which start with two elements followed by a single one.
More importantly, there is experimental evidence for a mechanism that generates this basic pattern and which does not require anterior-posterior positional information.
The key experiment is to take early limb buds, remove the covering jacket, separate the cells, mix them up, and then pack them back into the jacket which is then grafted to the flank of an embryo.
Such buds containing re-aggregated cells do not develop normally but they can form jointed cartilage elements and sometimes very good-looking digit-like structures.
Since there is no signalling region to specify position along the antero-posterior axis — the cells being all mixed up, they are clearly capable of self-organization.
They do, of course, have a progress zone, because the jacket has a thickened ridge at the tip.
Even so, the capacity for self-organizing rod-like cartilage elements is impressive.
A possible mechanism whereby the disaggregated and  reconstituted bud could form limb-like structures might involve a reaction-diffusion mechanism of the type invented by Turing, as discussed in the previous chapter.
Such a mechanism could play a role in normal limb development, laying down a basic prepattern of cartilaginous elements: first one element, then two, then three, and so on.
Reaction diffusion could provide a series of chemical waves generating  first a wave with a single peak, followed by one with two peaks, and then one with three peaks.
Then, if cartilage is made only where there are peaks, a basic pattern will be established which could then be modified by positional information to give the characteristic patterns of the humerus, radius and ulna, wrist, and hand.
Such a model would be able to explain the not uncommon occurrence of people with six rather than five fingers.
There would normally be five peaks where the fingers were forming but if the limb bud, accidentally, was wider than normal, a sixth peak could form, giving the sixth finger.
It is a characteristic of the wave-generating mechanism that the number of peaks is dependent on the size of the system and a moderate widening could allow another peak to form.
The possibility of a self-organizing patterning mechanism is attractive but evidence for it is, at present, minimal.
MUSCLES AND TENDONS
The cartilaginous elements which will eventually become the bones of the limb are just one of its structural elements.
Muscles and tendons are just as important and form a much more complex pattern.
There are over 30 muscles in the chick limb which attach to the cartilage at  one end and to tendons at the other.
The tendons, in turn, are like cords that transmit the force of the muscle to other parts of the limb skeleton.
They too attach to very specific parts of the limb.
The pattern of both the muscles and the tendons of the chick limb respond to the same positional signals as the cartilage.
For, when a polarizing region  is grafted on to the anterior margin of a bud it is not only the cartilaginous elements that form a mirror-image duplicate but the muscles and tendons are also duplicated.
The same positional information is used to specify all the structures in the limb.
It is typical of vertebrates that the muscles which move the fingers are quite remote from the fingers themselves.
If you look at a dissection of the human arm you can see that the string-like tendons which attach to the fingers are joined further back in the arm, to the muscles.
It is almost as if the muscles controlled the fingers as marionettes are controlled by their strings.
Although there is an essential functional relation between skeletal element, tendon, and muscle, it does not follow that their initial development is similarly linked.
Each of the elements of the chick limb shows a striking early sense of autonomy.
Each seems to be specified separately and to initially develop quite independently of its future neighbours and associates.
Consider the long tendon that attaches at one end to the muscle flexor digitorum profundus and at its other end to digit 3.
As its name implies the muscle, when it contracts, will flex the digit.
To what extent is the development of the tendon dependent on the muscle?
We tested this by grafting the tip of a limb bud to the flank of the embryo.
There the tip developed as a hand but all the more proximal structures were absent, and so there were no muscles proximal to the hand.
Nevertheless, the tendon developed in the right place even though it had no muscle to which it could attach.
This is a typical result and it seems that, like the tendons, the early development of the muscles is quite autonomous.
The early development of both are controlled by their position within the limb.
But, in addition, the muscles and tendons have a mechanism whereby they join up with whatever element is next to them.
In this they are quite promiscuous and unselective and tendons will join up with whatever muscle they find at their end.
The qualification of ‘early’ in relation to autonomy is very important, for the later development of muscles and tendons is not autonomous.
Although the long tendon attaching to digit 3 will develop initially, even though it does not attach to a muscle, it will not  persist unless it does attach.
If it is not placed under tension and pulled it will disappear.
Similarly, the muscles will not grow in length unless they are attached to tendons and bones so that as the bones lengthen, they are stretched.
The later growth of the limb's elements is coordinated by mechanical interactions with the growth of the bones providing the driving force.
This ensures that muscles are the correct length for the bones to which they attach (Chapter 10).
Patterning in all systems occurs in small groups of cells, the maximum dimension of any system in which patterning is taking place does not exceed a millimetre.
The limb is no exception, which means that the basic pattern of the limb is laid down on a very small scale.
Growth of this basic pattern is required to generate the mature limb.
The growth characteristics of the bones are laid down at the time when the pattern is specified and the elements are very small and this early specification will control growth for many years (Chapter 10).
CELL DEATH
Cell death is a normal feature of limb development and helps sculpt the form of the limb.
For example, in mice and humans the digits are initially joined together and only cell death between the digits separates them.
It is not that the cells die because they are sick or somehow abnormal — dying is part of their programmed development.
It is, in principle, no different from cartilage differentiation.
Cell death also occurs in the chick at the anterior and posterior margins of a late bud, helping to mould its overall form.
In 1968, the American embryologist, John Saunders, was interested in finding out whether this cell death was programmed early on, or  whether it was dependent on interactions with the surrounding cells.
So, he grafted tissue from the posterior margin that would die to other parts of the chick limb to see if he could rescue the cells from death.
The results were equivocal, but to his surprise he found that when he grafted the tissue to the anterior margin of the limb there was a dramatic change in the development of the limb — a whole new set of digits developed: he had discovered the polarizing region.
The signalling properties of the polarizing region are now known to be quite unrelated to cell death which is a separate process.
VARIATION ON A THEME
The limbs of different vertebrates such as human, dog, bat, and horse, are variations on a basic theme of an increasing number of elements as one proceeds from shoulder to hand, from the single humerus to the five fingers of the hand.
This basic pattern has been modified in evolution  to give a limb that serves quite different functions.
In the bat, the five fingers have been programmed to be long in order to support the web for flying.
In the horse, the digits have been progressively reduced so that just the central core carries the load and the two adjacent ones are present as splints — remnants of the digits that once  were there.
In cattle, two digits have fused for load carrying.
In whales, the digits are longer in the hand and the hindlimb has disappeared.
It is only because the different elements in the limb have their own positional identity that their pattern and form can be altered independently during evolution.
How the genes control these changes is a central problem.
The changes are not due to alterations in the signals during limb development but due to the alterations in cell response.
There has been a change in the genes, which alters the genetic programme.
For example, in certain limbless lizards and snakes a limb bud develops but the apical ridge dies thus stopping limb development.
THE CELL'S PROGRAMME
The models proposed for the development of the limb place quite a big burden on the cells' response to apparently simple signals.
Cells in the limb bud must record whether they are forelimb or hindlimb cells and so alter their programme.
They must also record their position in the limb, and this may mean that they have both to measure accurately the concentration of a morphogen, and measure time.
Again, they have to interpret their position according to their genetic programme and all these processes are controlled by genes, which still have to be identified.
That such genes exist is shown by the many mutants in the genes of mice that can result in abnormal limb development.
These abnormalities range from the complete absence of limbs to loss or gain of digits.
Very recent work has provided, for the first time, an indication of how the position of cells in the developing limb might be recorded.
There is a set of genes involved in patterning the embryo, the homeobox genes (Chapter 7), which are expressed in the developing limb buds in just the Way that would suggest that they may encode positional information.
For example, successive homeobox genes can be seen to be active, the further away from the polarizing region the cell is.
This observation may at least provide a clue to the molecular basis of positional information.
By understanding what the cells do during limb development, we can begin to ask how the genes control these activities.
Thus it is necessary to examine the cell more closely and to try and understand its internal programme and how it responds to external signals.
It will become evident that the cell is, in a way, more complex than the embryo.
EX DNA OMNIA
EX OVO OMNIA was on the frontispiece of William Harvey's book on embryology in 1651.
Ex DNA omnia is more appropriate since development is dependent on DNA.
The genes are made of DNA, which is both simple and complex, passive yet active, a truly magical molecule.
It is the DNA, and the DNA alone, that carries the genetic information.
But DNA is a rather passive molecule even though it rules our development.
In contrast, it is the very active proteins that are the true wizards of the cell.
The power of DNA lies in its containing both the instructions for making all the proteins in the cell, and the programme which controls their synthesis.
DNA is a very long string-like molecule and it is packaged, with special proteins, in the form of chromosomes within the nucleus of the cell.
Because it is such a long molecule the DNA is folded and twisted within the chromosome.
Even so, chromosomes are themselves long and thin and are not normally visible in the light microscope.
However, when the cell divides the chromosomes condense — this makes them easier to distribute to the daughter cells — and are now easy to see.
Humans have 46 chromosomes, 23 from the father and 23 from the mother, each of which can be matched with its partner from the other parent.
Each chromosome contains just one DNA molecule    so there are exactly 46 molecules of DNA in the fertilized human egg and all normal body cells.
Human chromosomes
The DNA molecule is made up of a sequence of four basic units — nucleotides — strung together.
There are two strands of nucleotides in every DNA molecule that coil around each other to give a double helix, the nucleotides in one strand pairing with those in the sister strand.
The order of the nucleotides along the molecule provides the information for making proteins — and a stretch of DNA that specifies a single type of protein is a gene.
PROTEIN VERSATILITY AND SEQUENCE
The nature of a cell is governed by the proteins it contains.
Proteins are capable of performing the most amazingly diverse functions within the cell.
All the thousands of essential chemical reactions in the cell — the conversion of energy, the building of new molecules, the breakdown of molecules — depend on enzymes which enable these reactions to occur.
All enzymes are proteins.
Proteins also provide the structural basis for the movement of muscle, the transmission of messages by nerves, and give strength to skin and tendons.
The red blood cell can carry oxygen because it contains the protein haemoglobin, muscles can contract because of the proteins, actin and myosin.
Skin cells owe their toughness to keratin, tendons are made of the protein collagen.
There are many different cell types in the human body: liver cells, red blood cells, nerve cells, skin cells, and so on.
Some are obviously very different but others look rather similar.
If you wish to identify a cell, the key question to ask is ‘What sort of luxury proteins do you have?’
If the reply was ‘haemoglobin' you would be dealing with a red blood cell; albumin would indicate a liver cell; insulin a cell from the pancreas.
The reason you would ask about ‘luxury’ proteins is that these proteins are special to the cell.
'Housekeeping' proteins are common to most cells and are needed to carry out all those basic functions that most cells require, such as the production of energy.
Housekeeping proteins are just as important to the cells as the luxury  ones, but they are not the markers of cellular individuality and for development are less interesting..
Proteins are essentially long strings of units called amino acids.
There are 20 kinds of amino acid and the order of the amino acids, which is always the same for a given protein, determines the properties of the protein.
The order of the amino acids determines how the protein ‘string’ will fold up.
Some proteins, like collagen in tendons, are long and thin and have rope-like properties; others which act as enzymes fold into complex shapes which enable them to bind to other molecules.
DNA CODES FOR PROTEINS
DNA codes for the sequence of amino acids in proteins.
The sequence of four nucleotides along the DNA molecule constitutes a gene that codes for the sequence of the 20 different amino acids in proteins.
This code is in the form of triplets, a different combination of three nucleotides corresponding to each amino acid.
So, knowing the sequence of nucleotides in a gene, which may be thousands of nucleotides long, the order of amino acids in the protein can be worked out.
DNA is confined to the nucleus, but protein synthesis takes place in the cytoplasm.
The code for a particular protein is first copied by a process known as transcription into a complementary molecule, messenger-RNA, which is also made up of four nucleotides.
This messenger-RNA then carries the code into the cytoplasm where the protein is synthesized.
One can think of the DNA in the nucleus as an enormous reference  library containing the instructions for making all the proteins.
There are about 50 000 different proteins in our bodies.
The DNA contains not only the instructions for making all the proteins but is also involved in the controlling of which protein should be made when and where.
Contained in the DNA are ‘library rules’ dictating what has to be done for the instructions for a particular protein to be taken out and ‘read’.
These rules are the core of the genetic programme for development.
MUTATIONS
A change in the sequence of the nucleotides in the DNA of a gene is a mutation.
This can be the result of a loss of part of the DNA or the replacement of one or more of the four nucleotides by others.
Another cause is that complete regions of DNA are transposed from one part of the molecule to another, or that foreign DNA from a virus has been inserted.
In each case, the normal sequence of nucleotides is altered, and the alteration can result in abnormal development.
Abnormal development may occur if a protein is not made at the right time or place, or the protein is defective or if too little or too much is made.
A clear example of a mutation altering development is the inherited genetic defect, sickle cell anaemia.
In people with sickle cell anaemia, the molecule that carries oxygen in the blood, haemoglobin, is abnormal, and the red blood cells take on a sickle shape.
The origin of the defect lies in the gene coding for haemoglobin which is 240 nucleotides long.
A change in a single nucleotide, the 64th along the gene, results in a single incorrect amino acid being inserted into the protein chain.
This in turn causes the protein to fold up in an incorrect way, which results in the haemoglobin molecules sticking to each other.
They now spontaneously assemble into rods which press against the membrane of the red blood cell deforming it from a rounded into a sickle shape.
Because the cells are sickle cell shaped and rather rigid they have difficulty passing through fine blood capillaries, and this results in the tissues not having enough oxygen, causing anaemia.
So the change in just one nucleotide  in the DNA can lead to change in shape of a cell with resulting anaemia.
The route from gene to observed effect can be very tortuous and has been worked out in only a very few cases so far.
There are about 4000 inherited human genetic diseases.
In only a few cases, such as muscular dystrophy and cystic fibrosis, has the gene and its protein been identified.
From the point of view of understanding development, mutations are a fundamental tool.
For, because they cause alterations in development, they offer the possibility of identifying genes which play a normal role in development.
Once a mutation that causes an abnormality is observed, it becomes possible to try and identify and isolate the gene.
If the gene is isolated then it can be cloned — that is, large numbers of copies made — and then its nucleotide sequence determined.
From the nucleotide sequence the amino acid sequence of the protein it codes for can be determined and this provides an excellent starting point for finding out the role of the protein in development.
This approach has been very successful in the study of insect development (Chapter 7).
However, discovering the function of a gene is not at all easy.
For example, there are mutations in mice which cause abnormalities in limb development, such as reduction in digit number, but there is no simple or direct way to isolate the genes which are responsible.
It is rather like looking for a single straw in a haystack.
However, in 1985, a fortuitous observation made in the Harvard laboratory of the distinguished geneticist and Nobel Laureate, Phil Leder, seemed to offer a way of identifying one of the genes.
Leder and his colleagues were working on tumour viruses that cause cancer, when they noticed that one of the mice infected with the virus had a limb deformity.
They correctly assumed that the viral DNA had been inserted into the DNA of a normal gene involved in limb development and so had caused a mutation.
But they now had a great advantage because they knew that their viral DNA was in the gene and so they could use this knowledge to fish out the gene that clearly plays some role in limb development.
This they did, and they then determined the nucleotide sequence of the gene, and thus the protein it codes for.
Now, in most cases, when a  new protein is found from a gene sequence, some idea of its function can be inferred from the similarity of its amino acid sequence, to those of other proteins whose function is known.
But not in this case.
It was like no other protein that anyone had described before, and so there was no clue to its function.
Thus at present they have a gene that controls limb development, but they have little idea what its role is.
Their approach now is to try and find out where and when the protein is made during limb development, in the hope that this will provide some insight as to how the gene works.
CONTROL OF GENE ACTIVITY
Control of protein synthesis is the central issue in cell differentiation and development.
More accurately it is the control of the ‘luxury’ molecules — the molecules that make cells different from one another, rather than the control of the ‘housekeeping’proteins — which is the key.
If one thinks of the DNA codes for proteins as records in a jukebox, the problem is to understand why one disc, say the haemoglobin theme, is played only in red blood cells while another, the albumin theme, is played only in liver cells.
What presses the right button in different cells?
Control of protein synthesis can occur at several different points in the sequence of steps that leads from the DNA code to a fully formed protein.
The first step, transcription, is considered by far the most important.
Control of transcription is done in two main ways.
Proteins can bind to sites on the DNA at the beginning of the gene — known as the promoter — and so initiate transcription; on the other hand, there are proteins that can block transcription by binding near the promoter  and so prevent its transcription.
In a sense a great deal of development is about transcription factors, for these factors regulate gene activity and so the state of the cell.
The molecules that control transcription are themselves proteins which are coded for by other genes.
So, what determines whether these genes are transcribed?
There is, in fact, a complex network of gene interactions, the product of one gene controlling the activity of others which involves an intimate relationship between nucleus and cytoplasm, because cytoplasmic signals play a crucial role in controlling transcription and thus determining whether genes are on or off.
The control of transcription — turning on and off of genes — and so controlling the synthesis of specific proteins, involves signal molecules that enter the cell nucleus from the cytoplasm.
Consider the following experiment.
The red blood cell of chickens (unlike our own red blood cell) has a nucleus.
It is, however, almost as if it did not have one.
The nucleus is quite inactive — no genes are on, and no messenger-RNA for new proteins is being made, and there is no protein synthesis.
The human cancer cell could not be more different.
Many genes are transcribed and many proteins synthesized.
The question is what will happen to the red blood cell nucleus if it is placed in cancer cell cytoplasm?
The particular cancer cell used in the experiment is the HeLa cell line which can be grown in large quantities in flasks.
(Helen Lane, from whose tumour the cells were isolated many years ago, gives the cell line its falsely exotic-sounding name.)
The way the red blood cell nucleus is put into the HeLa cell cytoplasm is by fusing the two cells.
As the red blood cell has little cytoplasm, the effect is that both nuclei become surrounded by HeLa cytoplasm.
The HeLa cell nucleus continues to behave as before.
But  there is a dramatic change in the chick red blood cell nucleus.
It gets larger, and dormant chick genes become reactivated within a few days.
For example, new molecules characteristic of the chick appear on the cell surface.
This implies that signals from HeLa cell cytoplasm have entered the chick nucleus and brought about this gene activation.
Another example illustrating the importance of cytoplasmic factors in continually controlling gene activity comes from fusing mature muscle cells with cells of a completely different type.
Mature striated muscle cells make muscle-specific proteins and when such a cell is fused with a variety of other cell types which include liver and cartilage cells, then muscle-specific genes are activated in these cells leading to the production of muscle-specific proteins.
Identification of the new muscle proteins was made possible by fusing human cells with mouse muscle cells; the human muscle proteins are similar but distinct from those made by mice.
There can be no doubt, from these experiments, of the importance of factors in the cytoplasm controlling gene action.
But how far does it go?
Is the DNA in the nucleus really that passive, behaving like a jukebox from which any cytoplasm will select the correct themes?
Could it be that the cytoplasm completely controls gene action?
A famous experiment that involves transplanting nuclei into the egg provides an answer, and more.
TRANSPLANTATION OF A NUCLEUS
It is possible to remove the nucleus from the egg of a toad.
The toad egg is large and yolky and the nucleus floats in the cytoplasm near the top of the egg just beneath the surface.
If the top of the egg is exposed to a sufficient dose of ultraviolet irradiation the nucleus is inactivated and is functionally useless while the cytoplasm is unaffected.
The egg, effectively, has no nucleus.
It is now possible to introduce another nucleus into this egg.
The English embryologist, John Gurdon, in an extensive series of experiments performed during the 1960s, showed that if he transplanted the nucleus from one of the cells of the blastula of early toad embryo it could function as if it were the toad egg's  nucleus.
In a large number of cases the egg would develop quite normally into a swimming tadpole and then an adult toad.
Impressive though this result is, the transplanted nucleus had come from an early embryonic stage.
Could the same result be obtained by transplanting a nucleus from well-differentiated cells?
Gurdon transplanted a nucleus from the cells lining the gut of a swimming tadpole into the ‘enucleated’ egg.
He observed normal development of the egg even though the number of times this occurred was much reduced.
He even transplanted nuclei from adult skin cells in culture and again found that normal development could take place.
This shows conclusively that the egg cytoplasm could completely alter the gene activity in the transplanted nucleus, because the genes active in gut and skin cell nuclei are quite different from the genes active in early development.
Since the nucleus of a cell in the gut could give rise to a normal toad it is clear that no genetic information had been lost during the development  of the gut, and the same holds for the skin nucleus.
The important conclusion is that all the cells in the body contain the same genetic information; what makes the cells different is how that genetic information is used.
Since the nucleus of each cell contains the same genetic information, it is the reciprocal communication between nucleus and cytoplasm during development that determines which proteins are made.
There is a further implication of the experiment.
Nuclear transplantation provides a way of creating clones of identical toads.
Since the nuclei from one animal contain identical genetic information, all the animals that develop from grafting nuclei taken from one toad into enucleated eggs will be identical.
Gurdon has, on occasion, made such a clone of 10 toads.
The members of this family are genetically identical and this was confirmed by making skin grafts between them and finding that they were not rejected.
One should not, however, think that the nucleus of any cell will support development if transplanted into the egg.
The nucleus must be taken from cells that are multiplying.
Nuclei taken from brain cells, which never divide, will not support development.
There is also another  limitation which is seldom mentioned: the toads that develop from nuclei taken from mature cells, like gut epithelium or skin, are infertile.
The reason is not clear, but must be the result of some subtle change in the genetic information in the nucleus.
One of the fear-filled fantasies that many people have about modern biology — genetic engineering — is the possibility of cloning identical people.
This idea comes from false reports that cloning of a human has already been done.
Some millionaire or other, it is sometimes claimed, has had himself cloned in some secret clinic in Switzerland (or South America) by taking the nuclei from some of his own cells.
This is simply nonsense.
No mammal has been, or at present could be cloned in the way described for toads.
Quite the contrary, all the evidence from experiments with mice, which have been intensively studied, shows that it is not even possible for the nucleus of a very early embryonic mouse cell to substitute for the egg nucleus.
By the four-to eight-cell stage of development the DNA in  the nucleus has already undergone some apparently irreversible changes.
This does not necessarily mean that the genetic information has been lost, but only that there may have been some chemical modification which makes crucial genes inaccessible.
But it does mean that, at present, cloning of mammals is not possible by nuclear transplantation.
While the nuclear transplantation and other experiments make it clear that all nuclei contain the same genetic information, there are exceptions.
In certain worms, for example, there is loss of DNA from some cells, only the future germ cells retaining the full complement of DNA.
Also, some cells, like the mammalian red blood cell, have no DNA at all, the nucleus being expelled during differentiation.
GENE SWITCHES
The switching on and off of genes in different cells is fundamental to the programme of development.
It underlies and initiates the changes seen in development.
It is also among our deeply held convictions that gene switching is the basis of both cell memory and change.
Liver cells remain like their parents because the same genes are switched on.
Cells in the leg are different from cells in the arm because the pattern of activity of the genes is different.
Of course, switching on and off of genes does not in itself result in developmental change; switching genes on and off acts by changing which proteins are made and this in turn alters cell behaviour by pathways that, to repeat, may be quite tortuous.
Gene action is controlled at the level of transcription, and whether a gene is on or off is whether or not it is transcribed.
Control of transcription is largely related to the state of the promoter at the beginning of the gene sequence.
That the control of gene activity that characterizes a particular cell type is due to specific factors in the cell acting on the promoter, comes from experiments in which the promoter elements are switched around.
Genetic engineering makes it possible to join the promoter of one gene to that of another.
When this DNA construct is incorporated into the DNA of the developing  embryo the protein will be made in those cells where the promoter is activated, even if the protein is quite inappropriate to the cell.
Growth hormone is a protein made in the pituitary gland at the base of the brain.
It is essential for normal growth and is secreted by the pituitary and carried in the blood to all parts of the body (Chapter 10).
The gene for growth hormone has been isolated and the controlling promoter region identified.
Genetic engineering makes it possible to cut and splice DNA.
So, it was possible to replace the promoter for the growth hormone gene with the promoter for a protein which binds metal ions in the blood: this promoter is activated when traces of metal are present.
The new construct — the growth hormone gene joined to a promoter that is turned on by traces of metal — was injected with a fine pipette into the nucleus of a fertilized mouse egg.
Many copies were  injected and some of them inserted, almost randomly, into the DNA of the nucleus of a fertilized mouse egg.
The egg was then allowed to develop and all the cells of the embryo now contained multiple copies of the growth hormone gene and its new promoter.
Shortly after birth, the mouse was fed water containing traces of metal, so activating the injected construct; the result was a mouse almost twice the size of a normal mouse, and was affectionately labelled ‘Supermouse’.
The growth hormone gene had been turned on in all the cells throughout the body and the increased production of the growth hormone had resulted in increased growth.
Supermouse is known as a transgenic mouse.
It has been given new genetic information by injecting DNA into the nucleus and this will be inherited by all the cells in the body and passed on to future generations via the germ cells.
Transgenic mice provide a particularly  powerful way of studying how genes affect development and how they are turned on and off.
There is another experiment which demonstrates the presence of factors in cells that turn on specific genes.
It makes use, again, of the growth hormone gene, and another gene which codes for an enzyme elastase, which is made in the pancreas and enters the stomach where it breaks down elastic tissue.
The promoter of the elastase gene was joined to the growth hormone gene and this new construct injected into the nucleus of the fertilized mouse egg.
It was now found that growth hormone was made in the pancreas.
Specific promoters are activated in specific cells.
It is as if the promoter regions for luxury proteins contain a list of ‘addresses’ at which the gene should be active.
The state of a cell can, in principle, be described by its genetic activity — which genes are switched on and off.
Development can in this sense be viewed in terms of the changing networks of gene activity in  different cells.
Activation of one gene can lead to the synthesis of a protein which activates some genes and inhibits others, which in turn may control yet other genes.
It is not yet clear just how complex these networks of gene activity are.
One possibility is that there are master genes whose products control the activity of many others.
There is, perhaps, a feeling that there are so many factors, so many interactions, that the whole system is going around in a circle, almost out of control.
This is not the case: rather, this feeling reflects much of our ignorance as to what, in detail, is going on inside the cell.
Ultimately, we want to link gene action with pattern and form.
Knowing how genes are turned on and off is an important step towards understanding the internal programme of the cell and how this is influenced by signals from other cells.
During development a number of different cell types are generated, each with their characteristic ‘luxury’ proteins.
How is this diversity achieved?
CELL DIVERSITY AND DIFFERENTIATION
THE SINGLE cell, the human egg, gives rise to about 350 different cell types, blood, muscle, skin, and so on.
This diversification requires that the genes coding for the ‘luxury’ proteins in these cell types are switched on in the appropriate cell.
A useful image of cell diversification is of an undulating landscape in which a ball rolls down pathways that branch, an image that the British embryologist Conrad Waddington, writing in 1940, called the epigenetic landscape.
At many branch points there may be just two new tracks, while at others there may be more.
The tracks can be thought of as patterns of gene activity and the ball as a developing cell.
Which particular pathway a cell follows is usually controlled by extracellular signals acting at the branch points.
Cells can rarely reverse tracks, but some treatments can push the cell from one track to an adjacent one.
Overall, the image gives a feel of the nature of diversification during development, since as a cell proceeds down a pathway and takes one of the branches, other pathways cease to be open to it.
With time, the cells proceed further and further down the landscape and become more and more distant from each other, reflecting different patterns of gene activity.
The epigenetic landscape is a representation of changing gene activity.
Every cell has the same genetic constitution and some genes are switched on and off as the cell develops and rolls down the landscape.
As the cell proceeds down a pathway genes are switched on and off reflecting an internal programme, for external signals only act at the branch points, directing the cell along one or other of the paths open to it.
Knowledge of the pattern of gene activity is still very limited.
In general, the picture is still painted with a very broad brush and later stages are better characterized than early ones.
The final pathway has no branch points and is essentially maturation.
For example, the maturation of the red blood cell involves major structural changes and the loss of all its genetic information since the nucleus is expelled.
Before this stage a large amount of messenger-RNA for the protein haemoglobin is made and stored in the cytoplasm, so that when the nucleus is lost synthesis of haemoglobin continues.
But even that stops and there is no protein synthesis at all.
The red blood cell is finally a small bag containing haemoglobin molecules for transporting oxygen.
Muscle cells, too, go through a series of characteristic  changes as they mature.
They take on an elongated shape and fuse with other muscle cells to give a multinucleate muscle fibre.
New proteins are now synthesized which provide the muscle's contractile machinery and it becomes organized in the cell into a highly ordered array of filaments which gives muscle its striated appearance.
But what commits the muscle to this final pathway and what ensures that all the necessary genes are turned on at the same time?
In the case of muscle it seems that there is a master gene controlling the expression of all the main genes, known as myogenin and it is always switched on in mature muscle cells.
Its special property is that it can activate most of the genes that are required in the mature muscle.
The myogenin gene has been isolated and can be introduced into non-muscle cells where it becomes integrated into their DNA.
The effect of introducing just this one gene is to switch off some genes and to set in train a sequence of gene activation so that the cell develops into a muscle cell with all the appropriate proteins — master gene is an appropriate description.
But whether this is peculiar to muscle, or whether other master genes will be found, remains to be discovered.
One can imagine how an external signal could activate a gene like myogenin and so guide the cell down the muscle pathway.
Such branch points are crucial in the development of diversity and are particularly clear in the development of blood cells, of which the red blood cell is only one representative.
THE BLOOD LINEAGE
Red blood cells in adult mammals only have a limited life span — about 120 days in humans — and are continually being produced.
There are, in addition to the red blood cells, which are the major population, seven other kinds of blood cells: they thus provide a vital and valuable system for studying cell diversification.
Among the white cells are scavenger cells collectively known as granulocytes; lymphocytes, which are responsible for the immune response; macrophages, which are also scavengers; and a type of cell which makes the platelets involved in the clotting of blood when an injury to a vessel occurs.
The   generation of blood cells takes place primarily in the bone marrow and spleen.
All the cells in the blood come, remarkably, from just one special progenitor cell — the multipotential stem cell.
The essential nature of a stem cell is that it is self-renewing and, as its name implies, the source of other cells.
When the stem cell divides one of the two daughter cells may go on to give rise to other types of cell, whereas the other  daughter cell remains a stem cell, capable of dividing again and always giving one daughter to diversification.
Thus a characteristic feature of stem cells is this asymmetry; one daughter keeping the stem cell character, the other proceeding along a pathway of diversification.
In principle, because stem cells are self-renewing, they are, unlike the cells they generate, immortal.
The evidence that there is just one kind of cell which generates all the blood cell types — a multipotential stem cell — comes from destroying the stem cells of mice and then replacing them with just stem cells.
X-irradiation destroys the stem cells and the resulting depletion of blood cells — no more are made — is the basis of radiation sickness, and leads to death.
Rescue of the animal is possible if the stem cells are replaced.
Injecting as few as 20 multipotential stem cells into a lethally irradiated mouse will suffice.
After many years of patient work, it has been possible not only to isolate the multipotential stem cells but provide conditions such that they will differentiate into the different kinds of blood cell in culture.
The differentiation of the different kinds of blood cells can be thought of in terms of the branching pathway model.
Each branch point can be thought of as occurring at a cell division and so the branching pattern is also a cell lineage which starts with the multipotential stem cell.
The key feature in the programme of differentiation of the stem cell is one of asymmetry.
When the stem cell divides the two daughter cells behave differently.
Is this asymmetric behaviour an intrinsic property of the stem cell, or are there environmental signals which control the different pathways of the daughter cells?
Since the various types of blood cell will develop in culture from the multipotential stem cell, it suggests that the programme of diversification may be intrinsic to the cells and not due to external factors.
In culture, the cells are not exposed to the factors that cells in the spleen or marrow might secrete or other factors circulating in the blood.
On the other hand, there is extensive evidence for specific factors which can control the pathways of differentiation.
At one stage in the lineage, for example, there is a cell which can produce either granulocytes or macrophages, and the decision to follow a macrophage or granulocyte pathway can be controlled by the concentration of a protein factor which, if the concentration is high enough, will direct differentiation exclusively along the macrophage pathway.
The detailed lineage of blood cells is not fully worked out but it is quite clear that there is, with successive cell divisions, an irreversible commitment to one or other general pathway.
With divisions the  multipotentiality of the ancestral stem cell becomes progressively reduced: the choices open to the cells become fewer and fewer.
As the cells proceed from the stem cell to the various mature blood cell types they divide many times.
While some of these divisions represent a branch point, many of the divisions are only proliferative, and serve to amplify the number of cells at that particular stage in the lineage.
Very large numbers of blood cells are required — human red blood cells only last a few months — and there are few stem cells, so an enormous amplification is required.
factors such as the protein erythropoietin can stimulate red blood cell amplification and there is an increased production of erythropoietin when there is a shortage of oxygen, caused, for example, by going to a higher altitude.
DYNAMIC LININGS
Immortal stem cells and cell diversification are also fundamental to both the internal and external linings of our body.
Both our skin and the lining of our gut are always being replaced.
Dead skin cells are continuously falling off and contribute to the dust in our houses.
The lining of our gut also sloughs off continually.
These cells must be  replaced and involve a process similar to that of blood cells.
Beneath the surface layer of the skin are several further layers of cells.
At the base of the skin there is a layer of dividing cells which include stem cells, and these provide the cells which move upwards to the surface.
When cells leave the basal layer they cease to divide and begin to mature into the tough dead cells that cover the surface.
As they move upwards they lose their nuclei and synthesize the special proteins like  keratin that give the skin its protective toughness.
The overall thickness of the skin is controlled by the rate of division of the basal cells and removal of cells from the outer layer somehow increases the rate of cell multiplication to restore the thickness; perhaps the dying outer layers produce an inhibitor of cell proliferation so that if the number of surface cells is reduced inhibitor concentration decreases and more cells are produced.
The life span of a human skin cell from the time it is born until the time it is shed is just a few weeks.
Replacement is dependent on the continued multiplication of immortal stem cells.
It is likely that the stem cells maintain their characteristic state by virtue of their position in the basal layer where they may be under the influence of a deeper layer of cells.
As with blood, X-irradiation kills off the stem cells, so that when cells are lost from the surface there are no new cells to replace them.
The underlying tissues thus become exposed giving the skin the appearance of having the upper layers destroyed as in a burn.
Surface cells are also continually lost from the gut.
This lining is highly folded to increase the area for the absorption of nutrients.
The cells are lost from the tips of the folds and the stem cells are located at the very base of the folds.
As cells move upwards from the base, they continue to divide, but, unlike the stem cells, they have lost their immortality and they stop dividing when they approach the surface where they are sloughed off.
Again, just as it does in the skin, X-irradiation kills off the stem cells and this soon has dire effects on the surface of the gut, giving rise to one of the major causes of radiation sickness.
In the gut, as in the skin, the properties of the stem cells seem to be maintained by their basal position.
Once the cells leave this position they cease to be stem cells and are committed to a pathway leading to maturation and death.
THE DIVERSE NEURAL CREST
One group of cells shows a particular diversity in its developmental pathway.
When the neural tube closes (Chapter 2), a group of cells  detaches itself at the site of fusion and migrates to many parts of the body and differentiates into a wide variety of cell types.
This has already been mentioned in the discussion of cell migration (Chapter 2).
It has been possible to map in detail the migration and fate of the neural crest cells in the chick because of a fortuitous discovery made in 1968 by the French embryologist Nicole Le Douarin.
She noticed that the nuclei of the cells of the quail embryo looked slightly different from those of the chick embryo.
Because transplanted quail cells will behave normally in chick embryos, she realized she had an invaluable natural marker.
By grafting an early neural tube from the quail embryo into a similar position in the chick embryo — the corresponding portion of the chick embryo having been removed — Le Douarin could follow the fate of the quail neural crest.
Her work showed that the cells migrate to many different sites in the embryo developing into the skeletal elements of the head, all the pigment cells in the body, most of the nerves of the involuntary nervous systems, sensory nerves, and a variety of glands.
Neural crest diversification presents a special problem.
Not only must the cells differentiate into a wide variety of cell types such as cartilage and neurons, but they have to migrate long distances to very special sites in the embryo.
There are several ways this could be achieved.
The cells could be multipotential, migrate to all the sites and only once they had arrived would they, due to local signals, be directed along the correct developmental pathway.
Or, they could have their developmental pathway specified before they begin migrating and then would migrate to the correct sites.
Cells programmed to develop as cartilage would, for example, migrate only to the head region.
There is yet a third possibility.
The migrating cells may be made up of a mixture of all the different cell types in immature form, that go to all the sites and a particular type survives only if it arrives at an appropriate site — a sort of cell selection.
Embryos have their own logic and all too often eschew tidiness; there is an element of all three mechanisms involved.
The experimental approach is to use quail neural crest, and  instead of grafting the quail cells to the corresponding position in the chick, they are grafted to an inappropriate site.
For example, head neural crest may be grafted to a more posterior position along the embryo and posterior neural crest grafted to the head region.
The result shows that head neural crest is from the very beginning different from neural crest in other regions, and any other neural crest placed in the head leads to abnormal head development.
Even though head neural crest is essential for the head it can satisfactorily replace trunk crest, suggesting its cells are multipotential and that their differentiation is determined by where they end up.
Evidence for the third possibility, cell selection, comes from regrafting cells that have already migrated and begun to differentiate, to the site of neural crest formation in a younger embryo.
These older cells undergo a second migration and give rise to a variety of cell types quite alien to the site at which they had arrived in their first migration, suggesting that there is a mixed population of cells at each site at the end of migration and the conditions at each site favour the growth and differentiation of specific members of the mixed population; the others fail to flourish and presumably die.
While all the neural crest cells are not completely multipotent their fate is far from fixed as they begin to migrate.
During this migration they receive signals from the surrounding tissues which directs them along the appropriate developmental pathway.
In this respect they are similar to the developing blood cells whose diversity is also controlled by a sequence of signals from the surrounding tissues.
THE GLIAL PROGRAMME
Most mature cells have characters, such as a distinctive shape, which make them easy to identify.
There is no difficulty in recognizing a red blood cell, a muscle cell, or a nerve cell.
But in following embryonic cell lineages of blood or neural crest the early cells are bewilderingly similar; there are no obvious features which can be used to distinguish, say, early red blood cells from white cells.
Since the commitment to a particular pathway occurs long before clear changes in shape emerge this can be a major obstacle to studying differentiation.
Major  advances in overcoming this difficulty have been made by using antibodies to distinguish between cells that seem very similar.
Antibodies are proteins that are specific in binding to different molecules; thus antibodies can be made which recognize only one kind of molecule on the cell surface.
If that surface molecule is unique to one kind of cell, then by using a fluorescent antibody, cells can be recognized under the microscope by the presence of fluorescence on the cell.
Antibodies provide highly discriminating probes for distinguishing cells which contain any of the many different molecules against which the antibodies can now be made.
The antibody technique was essential for teasing out the roles played by external signals and internal factors in the differentiation of glia — the supporting cells of the nervous system — so that is now one of the systems we understand best.
In the optic nerve of the rate — the nerve that joins the eye to the brain — there are only three kinds of glial cells.
Two of these are astrocytes, which are supporting cells occupying the spaces around the nerve cells; the third kind are oligodendrocytes which wrap closely around the nerve, providing an insulating  layer which speeds conduction of the nerve impulse.
One kind of astrocyte and the oligodendrocytes are derived from a common dividing progenitor cell which can differentiate into either cell type.
Oligodendrocytes appear at about the time of birth and the astrocyte a week later.
How does the progenitor cell ‘know’ when to make oligodendrocytes and when to make astrocytes?
The progenitor cells respond to factors in their environment.
In the presence of a growth factor the cells produced by the progenitor cell go through about eight cell divisions before differentiating into oligodendrocytes.
The switch to making astrocytes only occurs when another factor, which is made by the optic nerve, is present.
An  impressive demonstration of the role of this factor is its effect on a single progenitor cell which can be followed under a microscope.
In the absence of the factor the cell becomes an oligodendrocyte; in the presence of the factor, an astrocyte.
This system shows the role of external and internal factors in controlling the pathways of differentiation of cells.
The factor made by the other astrocyte cells is necessary for the progenitor cell to enter a programme of eight cell divisions which has an almost dance-like character.
Only when that programme of cell divisions has been carried out do oligodendrocytes differentiate.
The progenitor cell now receives a signal from the adjacent optic nerve which switches its pathway of differentiation from an oligodendrocyte to that of an astrocyte.
CHIMAERAS
Chimaeras have always been a source of some horror.
Mythology is full of monsters, half one beast, half another; the head like a bull, the tail like a snake.
Yet all female mammals are chimaeras; half the cells have one X chromosome active, and in the other half the other X chromosome is active.
Females have two X chromosomes and males just one (Chapter 9) and this imbalance in chromosome number is developmentally unacceptable.
Embryonic development is very sensitive to having just the right number of genes and so in females one of the X chromosomes is inactivated early in development, leaving just one functional X chromosome in each cell.
Inactivation of the X chromosome is random so that the early embryo is made up of a mixture of cells in which one or other of the X chromosomes is inactivated.
The embryo is thus a chimaera, a mosaic of two different kinds of cells.
A visible example of X chromosome inactivation is the tortoiseshell cat.
Genes controlling coat pattern are carried on the X chromosome and if one X carries a gene that gives colour and the other X carries an inactive gene, the different patches of tissue containing the different inactivated X chromosomes show up as patches of different colours.
The inactivation of the X chromosome is a good model for cell ‘memory’ since it remains inactivated through cell growth and cell division.
It is thought that the mechanism whereby all the genes in the chromosome are inactivated is a chemical modification of the DNA.
A quite different way of creating a chimaera is to fuse two early mouse embryos.
This can be done just by pushing them together.
Their cells then intermingle and a normal mouse can develop.
However, not quite normal, since the mouse will have four parents if the original two embryos came from quite different mothers and fathers.
If, in addition, the one embryo carried a gene for giving the mouse a black coat, and the other lacked such a gene, thus having a white coat, the result is a striped mouse.
REGULATORY GENES
Having drawn a distinction between ‘luxury’ proteins and ‘housekeeping’ones (Chapter 5), and, by implication, the genes that code for them, a further distinction is helpful: the distinction between regulatory and structural genes.
Structural genes code for luxury proteins that play an important role in the life of the cells — haemoglobin in red blood cells, contractile proteins in muscle.
The products of regulatory genes are only involved in regulating other genes and their products do not serve any other function.
One such gene is myogenin which activates a set of genes in muscle development.
Regulatory genes are very important in pattern formation.
As pointed out in Chapter 3 the difference between ourselves and chimpanzees does not lie within the cell types but in their spatial organization.
This view has a strong support from  molecular studies which show that the proteins from chimpanzees and man that characterize cell types are very similar.
The differences between chimpanzees and us cannot be accounted for by differences in these proteins.
Rather, the differences must be sought in the regulatory genes and proteins that control spatial organization.
The best chance of our understanding this link comes from studies of the fruit-fly.