

NEAR THE opening of Moby Dick , Herman Melville ponders the phenomenon of water-gazing.
Circumambulate the city of a dreamy Sabbath afternoon.
What do you see?— Posted like silent sentinels all around the town, stand thousands upon thousands of mortal men fixed in ocean reveries.
Some leaning against the spiles; some seated upon the pier-heads; some looking over the bulwarks of ships from China; some high aloft in the rigging, as if striving to get a still better seaward peep.
But these are all landsmen; of week days past pent up in lath and plaster — tied to counters, nailed to benches, clinched to desks.
How then is this?
Are the green fields gone?
What do they here?
But look! here come more crowds, pacing straight for the water, and seemingly bound for a dive.
Strange!
Nothing will content them but the extremest limit of the land; loitering under the shady lee of yonder warehouses will not suffice.
No.
They must get as nigh the water as they possibly can without falling in.
And there they stand — miles of them — leagues.
Inlanders all, they come from lanes and alleys, streets and avenues — north, east, south and west.
Yet here they all unite.
Tell me, does the magnetic virtue of the needles of the compasses of all those ships attract them thither?
Melville depicts this obsession with the sea as a mystery.
It is thought that we, prisoners of the land, are compelled to return to the source whence, eons ago, we first emerged.
Pilgrims of the primordial, we go to reflect on our birth.
But perhaps, too, we go to observe our death, prefigured in the element in which we cannot survive, and which may  eventually cover the earth for all time.
It could be that we are fatally drawn to the mysterious: the water is that which we cannot fathom, the unfathomable.
Homer referred to the ‘wine-dark sea’ not because the Mediterranean was the colour of wine, but because it intoxicated with its obscurity.
Even those who have never seen the ocean, who live forever landlocked or are blind, would, according to Wordsworth, still have sight of that immortal sea.
Melville's weekend water-gazers were stationed along the east coast of New England, ‘from Corlears Hook to Coenties Slip, and from thence by Whitehall, northward.’
The North Shore of the island of Oahu is a land of full-time contemplatives.
There, water-gazing is a way of life.
If you turn your head seawards as you drive along the Kam Highway, you will find a ribbon of water-gazers between you and the sea.
They might be surfers looking for surf, or spectators looking for surfers, but mostly they are just wave-watchers, bearing witness to the shifting moods of the ocean, timing the pulse of the patient.
Hawaiians on the North Shore are the exegetes of the Pacific, expert in deciphering the ocean.
They have given up reading texts and treat the water as their scripture, their Bible, their Koran, from which they are constantly teasing out ingenious interpretations of hidden, secret messages.
If we live on continents, we tend to see the world as land inconveniently dissected by expanses of water.
Islanders see it as water intermittently disrupted by unsightly deposits of earth.
The sea is their kingdom, water their element.
To a cartographer, the North Shore is only a corrugated fractal from Kahuku Point in the north to Kaena Point in the south.
But to the surfer, it has no limits.
It is the nexus at which the planet converges on itself, the focal point of our universe.
The sun stirs up the winds; the winds suck up the swells; the swells pump out waves that trip up against the jutting kerbs of the land.
If you know how to read the ocean, it is like looking at the stars: you can see what is happening not only far away but also long ago.
A new blossom of light in the night sky reveals a supernova on the edge of the Milky  Way thousands of years past.
A resident of the North Shore will look at a wave and say, ‘Bad weather they've been having in Alaska’, or ‘I see Siberia is in trouble again’.
To the Hawaiian eye, waves are light rays bending round the planet from distant lands.
They are like Cuvier's heel-bone, a minute particle of the whole from which the entire anatomy of the terrestrial animal can be reconstructed.
Within the collective memory of the North Shore resides an entire history of its natural phenomena.
It is an oral history, passed on from generation to generation.
The original Hawaiians, emigrant Polynesians from the south, had a sophisticated language but no writing.
Parts of Hawaii still frown on the paraphernalia of the text: on printed words, on pens and paper, on portable computers.
Such things are tolerated but discouraged.
‘Andy,’ people would say, ‘put that pen away.
You don't need your notebook.’
There were no libraries or bookshops on the North Shore.
The spoken word was the dominant, almost the only record of events.
When the surf was flat, it was like listening to BBC Radio cricket commentators when rain stops play: the lack of action is balanced by a surplus of reminiscence.
The North Shore is a nostalgic culture.
Its inhabitants are gifted with phenomenal memories.
Just as cricket buffs can remember who scored how many runs on this or that ground in a particular season decades ago, so too the Hawaiian can recall who surfed which wave when, where and how.
‘Do you remember,’ a typical conversation might begin, ‘that time back in December of '59 when Waimea was unrideable and Greg Noll caught that wave that must have been thirty-foot plus?’
‘That wasn't the biggest, though, that was in January of '65, on outside reef Pipeline…’
The Greek miracle-worker or thaumatourgos , in order to have his marvels recognized, needed a martus , a witness, to observe and to spread word of what he had seen.
So too the surf-riding chief of ancient Hawaii kept a surf-chanter among his retinue, who would compose a personal hymn, or mele , to his prowess and nobility.
One minstrel was supposed to  have not just glorified his master but saved his life as well:
Naihe from Ka'u on the Big Island was so expert a surfer that his fellow chiefs grew jealous and plotted to lure him into a surfing contest in which he would die.
They agreed on a rule stipulating that no surfer be allowed to return to shore until he had heard his personal chant sung from the beach.
Naihe, knowing nothing of the rule until he paddled out, let his chanter sleep and was marooned far off-shore at the end of the contest.
His enemies sent out a canoe of men with orders to dispose of Naihe.
But a chief from Puna who had greatly admired Naihe's surfing ability sent a servant to wake the sleeping chanter.
Learning of his master's plight, the chanter hurried to the beach and sang the following mele :
The great waves, the great waves rise in Kona,
The ebbing tide swells to set the loin cloth flying.
The day is a rough one, befitting Naihe's surfboard,
He leaps in, he swims, he strides out to the waves,
The waves that rush hither from Kahiki,
White capped waves, billowy waves,
Waves that break into a heap, waves that break and
spread.
It is the sea on which to surf at noon,
The sea that washes the pebbles and corals ashore.
Naihe caught a wave into shore and so escaped his assassins.
I saw myself as a sort of martus among miracle-workers, a surf-chanting troubadour.
But modern surfers were capable of singing their own praises.
Anglers like to talk of ‘the one that got away’, but at least they occasionally bag a fish to flesh out their claims.
The wave is a fish that always gets away.
You cannot point to a wave and say, ‘that is the wave I rode’, as you can say, ‘that is the mountain I climbed’.
The very transience of the wave, a purely provisional form doomed to decline into formlessness, condemns surfers to be story-tellers, constantly recalling their ephemeral experiences in the water, shaping and reshaping the past, immortalizing fleeting moments of intensity.
The wave, like the mele , like all music, like the text, is a mental event, since it is never wholly present in  any one instant and can only be grasped as a formal pattern existing through time.
The North Shore was full of historians.
But these wave-chroniclers, these Xenophons of the surf, often went about masquerading as prophets.
Like Laplace's omniscient scientist they claimed, on the basis of their knowledge of the past, to be able to foretell the future.
‘Psst.
The Eddie's on tomorrow.
It's definite.’
THIS PREDICTION used to send me into raptures of anticipation.
‘The Eddie, oh God, are you sure?’
‘The Eddie’— shorthand for ‘The Quiksilver in Memory of Eddie Aikau’— was a collective act of surfing nostalgia, commemorating a North Shore waterman who had died heroically in 1978.
The man had become a myth and acquired the definite article.
The Eddie Aikau denoted a big-wave contest of a kind that could only be held in Hawaii.
Its precondition was that the surf at Waimea Bay should be over twenty feet for the entire duration of the day in which the contest would be surfed.
But ‘the Eddie’ signified more than a mere sporting spectacular: it was a celebration of a way of life.
The Eddie Aikau was supposed to be an annual event, but it had not been held in three years for want of perfect conditions.
It was a universal obsession on the North Shore.
The less it happened the more important it became.
It seemed more important than the Triple Crown and the world championship put together.
It was a matter of pride, of principle, among the faithful that it should be held.
The Eddie was as turbulent as its homophone: it gave rise to eddies of controversy that swirled up and down the Kam Highway.
Some muttered that George Downing, who had final say  on whether or not the contest should take place, was too fussy.
‘You could have held it two years ago, no problem.
He just wasn't ready.’
There was a hint of sinister commercial pressures being brought to bear.
‘The waves were there.
It just wasn't sunny enough, that's all.
And Quiksilver insisted on good light for the shots.’
The most paranoid account held it was all a cunning ploy on Quiksilver's part, a mirage of advertising and hype.
‘They're getting all this free publicity every year without even holding it.’
Quiksilver had created the richest prize in surfing for this contest: $50,000 for the winner.
This caused a sensation among the surfing fraternity, but dismay in the hearts of Quiksilver's rivals.
Billabong quickly matched the figure: now the Billabong Pro, the last of the Triple Crown events, also boasted a $50,000 first prize.
Quiksilver responded by hoisting theirs to $55,000.
There were at least a dozen big-wave specialists on the North Shore who, if the Eddie Aikau were actually to be held, could reasonably expect to make a small fortune.
The Quiksilver contest was unique.
It was simple: in contrast to the Triple Crown, there were no cut-throat elimination rounds.
Three groups of eleven went out twice in succession, once in the morning, once again in the afternoon.
The winner would be the surfer who was judged to have performed best overall on the day: to have ridden the biggest waves in the most critical positions.
Only your four top waves would count.
It was timeless: other contests set a date and trust to luck that nature will co-operate — the Triple Crown was already distinct in having a much longer window of opportunity than fixtures elsewhere on the Tour.
But the Eddie didn't specify a date at all, beyond a vague ‘waiting period’ that extended from the beginning of December through to the end of February.
It had a pre-defined space — Waimea Bay — but it left the time open.
The élite group of thirty-three big-wave riders who would compete for the title had been chosen.
But now they had to wait until, as the advertising put it, ‘The Bay Calls the Day’.
The Eddie Aikau wouldn't take on lesser challengers: it dared the ocean to field its strongest possible team.
It was as if it was only when the surf was at its most savage that the ghost of Eddie Aikau could be expected to revisit the Bay.
It was the ultimate submission to the impersonal forces of fate.
The Eddie was not called forth by an act of human will.
It was not scheduled or given an elaborate countdown and fanfare.
Sports editors hated it.
It didn't fit on any particular page of their diary.
It was like trying to prepare for an earthquake or a hurricane.
It was like waiting for the Second Coming.
You know a year in advance when the Cup Final, Wimbledon fortnight, or Superbowl Sunday will take place.
With the Eddie, you wouldn't know until the morning of the day it was happening.
The event demanded the most stringent virtues before it even began: patience, perseverance, reverence.
You had to wait.
And you had to be ready.
This was the greatest test for surfers, but it was just as much of an ordeal for journalists.
It was the story of a lifetime, the story I had been born for.
But I knew I would be leaving Hawaii in January.
I only had a few weeks.
I was ready, but I couldn't wait.
The Pacific, though, had already waited three years and didn't seem in any particular hurry this year either.
‘I dreamed about this every night during the waiting period’, said Clyde Aikau, Eddie's brother, after winning in 1986.
He was still dreaming about it, and so was every other surfer on the North Shore, and so was I. But would this dream become a reality?
Would the curtain go up on the world's greatest surfing spectacle before I had to leave — or would it all go ahead without me?
The story of Eddie Aikau began a long time ago:
In the second half of the first millennium, a canoe set out from an island in the Tahitian chain and steered due north for two and a half thousand miles by the light of the stars and the ocean currents till it reached Hawaii.
The crew of that canoe were believed to be among the first human beings to set foot on the Islands.
A folk tale told of a Tahitian chief, Moikeha, who sailed to Hawaii and, largely thanks to his prowess on a surfboard, married two princesses and became  king of the island of Kauai.
When his sons returned to Tahiti and were asked the fate of their father they said:
He is dwelling in ease in Kauai, Where the surf of the Makaiwa curves and bends, Where the kukui blossoms of Puna change, Where the waters of Wailua stretch out, He will live and die on Kauai.
On 16 March 1978, another canoe, the Hokule'a , sixty feet long and double-hulled, set out from Honolulu, steering south towards Tahiti, seeking to mirror that original expedition, using the same techniques of astral navigation and water-knowledge.
There was no radio and no motor.
The deep hulls of the Hokule'a were loaded with dried and canned food and three hundred one-gallon containers of water.
If all went according to plan, the voyage was expected to take a month.
All the sixteen-man crew were as trained and tested as astronauts.
Among the sixteen was Eddie Aikau.
He was a Polynesian Hawaiian, thirty-two years old and already a legend on the North Shore.
He worked as a lifeguard at Waimea Bay; but he was more than a lifeguard: he was the Bay's presiding spirit, its faithful genie, its ruler.
The newspapers called him ‘Mr Waimea’.
He was supreme among big-wave riders, paddling out on his traditional wooden board when no one else dared.
There is a photograph that preserves him forever racing down the face of a twenty-five-foot wave.
The sun picks out the muscles in his back.
He is wearing long white shorts with a black band, he is perfectly poised, arms outstretched, slightly crouched, his arrow-like board barely carving the water with one rail, spraying out a tail of whitewater behind him like a comet moving through space.
Waimea was an arena of combat to some, but to Eddie it was a temple and playground.
He surfed the most savage seas, smiling from ear to ear and hooting with joy, and he saved many lives.
He was a benign man.
‘I never once saw him get upset or angry’, said Ken Bradshaw, one of his circle of disciples.
Eddie thought Bradshaw's name was Brad Shaw  and called him ‘Brother Brad’.
Once, when native Hawaiians were out for blood after a visiting Australian had abused a local, he brought the two sides together and persuaded them to settle peacefully.
‘You've got to learn to live together’, he would say.
‘The ocean is for everybody.’
When he surfed Waimea he wasn't competitive.
He loved to see others catching waves too.
‘Come on, brother!
You and I!
I'll be on your inside.’
Eddie called the crew of the Hokule'a ‘his second family’.
He was not the oldest on board, he was not the captain, nor the navigator; he was the canoe's spiritual father and guardian angel.
Eddie was their good luck charm.
The wind and currents were set fair when the Hokule'a paddled away on that sunny afternoon in March.
The canoe moved swiftly south from Oahu, west of Molokai, towards the Big Island at the southernmost tip of the Hawaiian chain.
But after several hours' hard canoeing, when the Hokule'a was due west of the island of Lanai, in the channel known as Kealaikahiki, or ‘The Path to Tahiti’, a vicious swell blew up.
Soon, the craft was making its way through the darkness over twenty-foot waves and taking on water.
The skipper steered the vessel at ninety degrees to the waves, careful to tackle them head on.
But the multiple currents passing around and between the islands were treacherous.
A twenty-five-foot wave flung itself at the canoe from an unexpected angle and before the crew could turn to absorb the blow, the Hokule'a rose up the face of the wave at forty-five degrees, and was capsized as it flew off the peak.
The crew swam out from under the canoe and attached themselves to the upturned hull.
It was impossible to right the craft.
The hours went by and no one panicked, but they got cold and tired and dispirited.
The sun had not yet risen when Eddie Aikau said he was going for help.
‘Are you crazy?’ said David Lyman, captain of the Hokule'a .
‘It must be twenty miles to land.’
One of the cardinal rules of the sea was to stay by your boat.
‘It's okay.
I'll take my board.
It'll be the longest ride ever.’
Eddie had brought his twelve-foot rescue tanker.
It was on  this board that he had saved so many lives at Waimea.
He was used to paddling it for miles at a stretch.
Eddie dived under the canoe and unlashed his board.
‘Don't worry,’ he said, ‘I can do it.
I'll get to land.’
Then he pushed himself calmly off from the Hokule'a and paddled away with quick firm strokes and vanished into the half-light.
The crew were picked up later that day.
‘Did Eddie make it?’ they asked.
There had been no word from Lanai.
The helicopter trawled back and forth across the channel.
They found the big white board with the word RESCUE painted across it.
The search continued for a fortnight.
But Eddie Aikau was never recovered.
There was no body to commit to the deep.
But over a thousand mourners gathered at Waimea Beach Park for the funeral service.
Surfboards were planted upright in the sand like tombstones and decked with leis.
The minister said that the Pacific Ocean, for the Hawaiian people, was like the desert for Moses and the Israelites: ‘The open sea is the place where we go to meet God.’
An urn of Waimea sand, representing the ashes of the dead man, was voided on the sea.
The rescue helicopter strewed thousands of blossoms on the waters of the Bay.
The orange lifeguard tower where Eddie used to keep watch was empty; a sign on the side announced: No LIFEGUARD ON DUTY.
There was a sticker you could stick on the back of your car.
It said simply: EDDIE WOULD GO.
Everyone knew what it meant.
HALEIWA IS the only town on the North Shore, fifteen minutes up the Kam Highway from Sunset, fifty out of Honolulu.
In the city they call it ‘Country’.
It is the kind of American small town that Steven Spielberg might have invented in one of his more whimsical moods.
The inhabitants  have structured their lives around the ocean.
They not only surf and swim in it, but paint it, photograph it, worship, contemplate and consult it.
The ocean is not just their livelihood but their life.
Without it they wouldn't exist.
Haleiwa means ‘the house of the frigate bird (the iwa )’.
A mission had been established there as early as the 1830s and the Liliuokalani Protestant Church, named after Hawaii's last queen, was still standing.
The hands of its clock pointed not to numbers but to the twelve letters of its patron's name.
At the turn of the century the town expanded to accommodate the sugar cane workers, and a railway line led to the Haleiwa Hotel.
Now the hotel, the railway, and the labourers had all gone.
Hodads from Honolulu still think of the place as the Wild West and venture up the H-2 to stare at surfers as if they were herds of buffalo grazing on the sea.
The Haleiwa Theatre was a pink, art deco pleasure dome built by the sugar barons which by the sixties had become the hub of social activity, screening nightly surf movies.
Everyone spoke of it with affection.
Some even had photographs of it on their walls.
I wanted to go there, but it turned out that it didn't exist any more.
It was demolished in a hurry one night in 1983 to make way for a McDonalds.
As a conciliatory gesture, the restaurant was built like a large shack, so as not to be too obtrusive.
The simple plantation-style wooden buildings, with their crooked façades and creaking boardwalks, now included a bank, a post office, a café, a health food store, and several surf shops.
These seething emporia of boards and beach-gear were outnumbered only by the healing parlours of various persuasions —‘Back and Shoulders’, ‘Healing Hands’, ‘Acupuncture’, ‘MD’— where you could put in for repairs.
Astrologers, psychics and crystal-ball gazers ministered to the North Shore passion for prophecy, and elaborate charts detailing the movement of the moon and planets could be drawn up to ascertain the prospect of waves on any given day of the year.
Dave Jerrome and Shelaine, my born-again Christian friends, disapproved of the mystic fringe.
‘If it's God's will  there will be waves.’
They took me along to a service at the North Shore Christian Fellowship on the Sunday after the Night of the Great North Wind.
The church was a whitewashed barn owned by the Haleiwa Community Association.
As I walked in I was handed a leaflet bearing the image of an apocalyptic Pipeline wave and above it a line from Psalms 93:4: ‘The Lord on high is mightier than the mighty waves of the sea.’
The Bible frequently invokes waves as the measure of nature's power and the limit easily transcended by God.
God could part the Red Sea, Jesus could calm the storm or walk on the water.
But the shapers of the Old and New Testaments only had the Mediterranean as their model of what the ocean could do.
And in Hawaiian terms, the Mediterranean wouldn't even register on the swell scale.
I doubt that any of the Israelites wandering in the desert and occasionally venturing down to the water would have written those lines about God being mightier quite so confidently if they had seen big Waimea.
For the Hawaiians, the god of the ocean did not move upon the face of the waters: he was not pre-eminent over the ocean, he was indistinguishable from it.
Kane, in creating the world, did not, like Yahweh,make light: he made himself into light.
Hence the god of the ocean was the ocean, the god of the volcano was the volcano and so on.
Polynesian holy water, used for purification and sanctification, for driving away demons and diseases, was simply sea water, as saturated with divinity as with salt.
Traditional Hawaiian society only began to fall apart when the godhead became detached from the environment: when Captain Cook arrived and ushered in a foreign idol, ubiquitous, omnipotent, immortal, but disembodied, absent, invisible.
There was a four-piece band of two guitars, drums and bass.
We sang along to a rousing tune while particularly enthusiastic members of the congregation waved their arms about like stalks of corn blowing in the wind.
The minister, who had red hair and fire in his eye, started on an upbeat note.
‘Hey, praise the Lord, man!
He loves you guys!
We lift the North Shore up to you, Lord.’
There were many surfers among the flock, limping, scarred, sunburnt, dressed in their Sunday best of Rip Curl tee-shirts, Billabong shorts and Oakley shades.
They were hoping and praying, on this blown-out Sunday, that the Lord would lift the North Shore up to them.
A peach-faced woman who was on her way from Amsterdam to Fiji ‘to share’, sang sweetly of how good life was.
A pastor exhorted each of us to be a rejoicing person, to be an encourager, to be solution-oriented and not problem-oriented.
The minister thanked God for his beneficence, citing Deuteronomy 1: ‘The Lord will improve your lifestyle.’
But he concluded his sermon with a prayer.
‘We ask a blessing of you, O Lord, as we go out on the beaches, and we pray for a really neat time and some big swells.
Amen.’
IT TOOK a while to adjust to the demanding sartorial standards of the North Shore.
Whenever I wore my brown leather shoes, people would stop me and say, with genuine amazement, ‘Hey, what are those things you've got on your feet?’
When I needed some black shoes for the annual ASP banquet in Honolulu, Bodo van der Leeden dug out a pair he'd bought fifteen years before.
‘You can break these in for me’, he said.
I had a pair of tennis shoes, but Callahan vetoed these along with my ‘suit’.
‘You've got to have thongs for the beach.
The cool thing to do is buy two pairs, then wear odd colours.’
I bought just one pair and, sure enough, they gave me nothing but trouble.
The straps were fabric instead of rubber, so they kept flopping.
‘Did you buy those in Hawaii?’
Callahan said when he saw them.
‘Kinda on the large size, aren't they?’
They extended a half inch beyond my toes but the way he  spoke you'd think I was John A. ‘Snowshoe’ Thomson.
I half expected five-year-olds to be making funny remarks about them behind my back.
‘There goes the jerk with the shoes.’
Michael Willis never wore shoes at all.
‘Andy, if you wear shoes, you're not grounded .
You're out of touch with the earth.
With all that rubber between you and it, it's like riding around in a car and never getting out.
You might as well be on Mars.’
I met Michael the day I moved into Betty's.
I found him sitting on the bench to the side of the house gazing out over Backyards.
He had freckles, a wide-eyed look, and a permanent grin.
‘Take off those shoes, you'll thank me for it later.
Barefoot, you can absorb vitamins and minerals and the magnetic field.’
Back in England, I had always looked on people who went round with no shoes on as crackpots and show-offs, on a par with youths who wore shirtsleeves in midwinter.
But in Hawaii, where nature was kinder to your feet, it seemed somehow out of step to be wearing shoes.
I took them off and rode into Haleiwa with Michael.
As we sat in the garden behind his surf shop and talked I could feel the long grass beneath my feet with a sensual awareness I'd never experienced before.
Walking, or just standing still, had become a pleasure.
It was Michael who introduced me to his twin brother Milton.
Physically they were almost identical, but psychologically they were worlds apart.
If Michael was the artist of Willis Brothers Boards, Milton was the scientist.
Michael was loose, vague, susceptible; Milton was serious, discriminating, professional.
Michael blew with the wind; Milton had objectives, an agenda, a timetable.
One twin listened to psychics and astrologers; the other relied only on weather charts.
We tried to fix up a time to talk about the Willis Phazer board.
‘You and me, we're real flexible’, said Michael.
Then he jabbed a finger at Milton.
‘Let me speak to Mr Cement here.’
Milton was wearing deck-shoes.
‘He's not grounded’, said Michael.
‘A Phazer is not a miracle design that can take a junk board and make it a killer’, Milton said.
‘That's true,’ Michael said, ‘but it can take a killer board and make it magical.’
‘What we Willis Brothers try to do,’ Milton said, ‘is take the magic out of shaping and apply number to art.
It's no longer voodoo and mumbo-jumbo to us.
We've got a science now.’
‘You see that symbol?’
Michael pointed out the Phazer logo on one of the boards: it was the sign of the atom.
‘The basis of all Creation.’
Within two hours of returning home, my feet and ankles were stippled with mosquito bites.
Great itchy red lumps were popping up everywhere.
I caught Michael sitting unashamedly on the bench again.
‘Look at these feet.
I won't be able to walk for a week, with or without shoes.’
Michael looked at me with compassion.
‘Andy, that's the best thing that could have happened to you.’
‘How do you work that out?’
I said bitterly.
‘Listen’, he said, as though trying to teach a child some simple truth.
‘Once a mosquito's bitten you in one spot, it'll never return.
It's like lightning — never strikes in the same place twice.
So the more you're bitten, the better off you are.
A couple more sessions like that and you'll never have to worry about mosquitoes again.’
WE WERE watching the sun go down beyond Kaena Point when Michael asked me how my book on the North Shore was coming along.
I told him it was easy: all I had to do was quote the people who lived there.
‘You're quoting us?’
He looked doubtful.
‘We're just parasites.’
He pointed out at Backyards.
‘Look out there.
That's the real star.
If you want to write a book about the North  Shore, you've got to quote the ocean, you've got to quote the mountains, you've got to quote the air.’
Whatever I wrote, I knew that Michael would not read it.
He had given up reading.
‘There's an inside to things,’ he explained, ‘and print only gave me the outside.
I had the crust, but I wanted the meat.
So I closed all those books and it was then that I opened up my eyes and looked around me and said, ‘Now I'm reading’.’
I wanted to quote the ocean.
Living at Betty's house, I had been listening to it speak for long enough.
But what language would translate what I heard?
What words would describe the inside of the waves?
Callahan had advised me to devote myself to one simple and perhaps impossible mission: to discover the etymology of the word cowabunga.
Cowabunga was an exclamation of joy or approval among the surfing fraternity.
You uttered those syllables at the sight of a big wave or in acknowledgement of a good ride or, like a war-cry, to arouse aggression.
It had become dated and out of fashion, but was still occasionally heard.
It wasn't until much later that Sidney E. Berger, curator of manuscripts at the American Antiquarian Society in Worcester, Massachusetts, explained to me that the word had made its début in the Tarzan movies.
When Johnny Weissmuller swung through the trees, the African natives would mutter in amazement, ‘Cowabunga!’
It was an imaginary Swahili Holy Cow ! invented by Hollywood scriptwriters.
I liked the word, but it was a late accretion.
I wanted something authentic.
Rousseau, in his Essay on the Origin of Languages , interpreted the first sounds uttered by our ancestors as ‘the cry of nature’.
Humanoid bipeds shaped their vocal chords to reproduce the noises they heard about them.
In Hawaii, likewise, it was said that, casting off its Indo-European moorings, the language had evolved in unison with the rise and fall, the ebb and surge of the ocean.
The mele and dances echoed the modulations and music of the all-encompassing Pacific.
Students of chanting practised their art on the beach, with one ear attuned to the waves.
If you listened closely to certain words, it was like  putting your ear to a conch shell: you could hear the sound of the sea breaking on the shore.
It was as though the waves had chosen Hawaiians to act as their mouthpiece.
I had once read a story by Arthur C. Clarke about a Tibetan sect which believed that God had nine billion names.
In Hawaii the ocean had almost as many.
Just as the Eskimos had countless words for snow and ice, so too the Hawaiian language abounded in wave nomenclature.
Each type of wave attracted a different noun, and the nouns incorporated adjectives, verbs, whole narratives.
Instead of terrible, death-dealing, curling wave, you said quite simply kakala ; a high wave, formed by the meeting of two crests, was huia; lauloa was a long wave that broke from one end of the beach to the other; a calm, unbreaking wave was known as opu'u .
I consulted Lorrin Andrews's A Dictionary of the Hawaiian Language on the Hawaiian for surfing,he'enalu , which split into two words,he'e and nalu .
He'e (he'e),n .
1.
A flowing, as of a liquid.
2.
The menses. 3.
A flight, as of a routed army.
4.
The squid, so-called from his slippery qualities.
He'e (he'e),v .
1.
To melt; to run or flow, as a liquid.
2.
To slip or glide along.
3.
To ride a surfboard. 4.
To flee; to flee through fear.
Nalu (na'lu),adj .
Roaring; surfing; rolling in, as the surf of the sea.
Nalu (na'-lu),n .
1.
The surf as it rolls in upon the beach; sea; wave; a billow. 2.
The slimy liquid on the body of a new born infant.
Nalu (na'lu),v .
1.
To be in doubt or suspense; to suspend one's judgement.
2.
To speak secretly, or to speak to one's self; to think within one's self.
3.
To talk or confer together concerning a thing.
4.
To think; to search after any truth or fact.
The wave is the universal metaphor, a summary of the world.
So said the Belgian poet Henri Michaux: it was pure  form, like a poem, nothing in itself and yet containing everything.
Similarly, the Hawaiian vocabulary of the surf was infinitely rich in kaona or hidden meanings.
Surfing was not just ‘wave-sliding’(as he'enalu was typically translated): it was a flowing and a fleeing; it was communing with yourself and talking with others; it was regeneration and the pursuit of truth.
IT WAS the middle of the week when the Marui Pipeline Masters should have been on and wasn't that I ran into Pottz in D'Amicos.
The north wind was still blowing, Randy Rarick was still biting his nails, and surfers patrolled the Kam Highway, boards poking out of jeeps, strapped to cars, balanced on bicycles, searching in vain for rideable waves.
I was eating a lasagna and reading the latest number of Surfing when Pottz cruised in with his entourage.
Most surfers travelled on their own.
Martin Potter boasted not just a manager, coach and partner in the shape of Peter Colbert, but an adviser, an agent, and occasional heavies and bureaucrats who hovered around him as if they were guarding the crown jewels.
We arranged an interview for noon the next day at his house on Rocky Point.
Callahan and I arrived at twelve, Pottz at one.
For an hour we were closeted with Colbert.
He was accompanied by a tall, dark-haired girl with pale skin and blue eyes whom he introduced as his fiancée.
Stephanie turned out to be an Australian model who had thrown in her job to follow Colbert to Hawaii.
The last time I had seen Peter, in Biarritz, he had been accompanied by a tall, fair-haired girl whom he had introduced as his fiancée.
Stephanie made coffee while Peter talked.
There was a mystery concerning Peter Colbert.
Up until a  couple of years ago his name had been Peter Manstead.
What no one knew was why he had changed it.
One theory held that he was fed up with being called ‘Manstead’ and wanted to confuse people into using his first name instead.
Now everyone called him ‘Colbert’.
Colbert had curly red hair and an aptitude for getting into scrapes.
During contests he was as jumpy as a schoolgirl and gave off a static charge of nervous energy.
Barton Lynch's manager had once picked a fight with him.
Lynch was held technically responsible and fined $500.
The story runs that someone then offered Lynch a further $500 with the words: ‘Get your manager to finish him off — it'll be worth it.’
Colbert had an ego robust enough to stand a lot of punishment.
When I was writing an article on Pottz he sent me three large studio portraits: one of Potter and two of himself.
He was loud and self-confident, but he had a right to be: he had a knack for picking winners.
There was a Christmas tree in the living room and a surfing video on the television.
Outside you could see invertebrate waves expiring on Rocky Point.
I turned on my tape machine.
COLBERT: Do you know who has coached most world titles?
AM: You?
COLBERT: Do you know how many world titles I've coached?
Four.
Kim Mearig.
Tom Carroll twice, and now Martin Potter.
Do you know who was the first to coach the men's and women's champions in one year?
CALLAHAN: You?
COLBERT: Right.
I'm telling you as a fact that I'm the only person in this industry who's done it.
CALLAHAN: That's a fact.
COLBERT: Fact, fact.
Fact: a year ago, we worked out a repertoire to win the world title: forehand snap, floater, and figure-of-eight.
AM: A kind of choreography really…
COLBERT: Yeah, it was choreographed.
We planned to go full belt, we planned for 1989 to be either win or retire.
CALLAHAN: That's a serious decision.
COLBERT: It had gone on for too long: this is his ninth year on the Tour.
It wasn't a fluke.
One seventeenth all year.
Two ninths all year.
Five fifths.
Two seconds, one of which should have been a first.
And six firsts.
Plus a first in a specialty event.
I try to tell everybody, this was planned, like a war-strategy.
AM: How did the two of you come to team up?
COLBERT: We met under a bet.
I wanted him badly and he hated my guts, and I said all right, I'll leave you alone if you can beat any of the guys on the Australian spring tour.
If not, come over to me and I'll make you a world champion in five years.
And that was the bet.
AM: When was this?
COLBERT: Five years ago.
CALLAHAN: Oh wow, good timing.
AM: So what makes a world champion?
COLBERT: Surfing is self-expression — it's how you feel.
Hardman and Lynch are very plateau-ish personalities, and their surfing's plateau-ish.
Compare them with Carroll, Curren and Potter — they're the raw world champions.
[Australians Tom Carroll and Damien Hardman and Californian Tom Curren had all preceded Lynch as world champions.
But Hardman was dismissed as a small-wave specialist and Lynch was condemned as a pleasant and industrious journeyman, while Carroll and Curren had acquired the status of living legends among the surfing fraternity.]
CALLAHAN: Those three are communicating on another level.
COLBERT: Oh man, they're so far out they've seen Pluto, those guys.
CALLAHAN: A couple of years ago, Potter was the hottest guy on the North Shore.
COLBERT: Carroll was storming last year.
And then he blew it all at the last minute with that interference.
[An interference is deemed to have been committed when one surfer ‘drops in’ on another, that is, takes off on a wave on which the other has already established priority.
In a four-man contest, priority is decided on a first-come-first-served basis; in a two-man, by alternation.
In surfing's ten commandments, dropping in was high on the list of thou-shalt-nots, and it was as popular as adultery.
I did it all the time, more by accident that design.]
AM: I remember reading that the Carroll camp let out a shriek of despair and I thought, that's got to be Colbert.
COLBERT: I was sitting next to Bob Mcknight, and five seconds before it happened I said to Bob, the only person who can fuck this up is Tom Carroll.
And then the interference came.
That interference came about because of greediness.
There's a grudge against Tom because he drops in on everyone.
And he comes back out with a grin.
AM: He's been paid back, you mean?
COLBERT: He's been paid back for dropping in on every human being possible.
CALLAHAN: Is that karma?
COLBERT: I think so.
CALLAHAN: That sixties hippy concept of karma.
COLBERT: Yeah, I believe so.
AM: Poetic justice.
CALLAHAN: A lot of people said that.
Straight out.
COLBERT: It s just karma.
CALLAHAN: Tom's copping his karma right now.
COLBERT: He won't recover.
It's like: the gods are against me, what can I do?
AM: The fire's gone out of him?
COLBERT: No, because Martin Potter burnt everyone off.
What happened this year is what every surfer feared about Pottz.
The moment he was going to get his head together, that was it.
It was going to be all over for everybody.
CALLAHAN: But there was always a question of when and if.
COLBERT: Yeah, especially if.
But now, when the video comes out, he's just going to break down doors.
[The video was Strange Desires , a study of the life and times of Pottz, shot by Jeff Hornbaker for Gotcha, his sponsors.]
CALLAHAN: He has an unusually high charisma level.
COLBERT: He's certainly a lot more marketable than Damien Hardman.
CALLAHAN: Or Barton Lynch, for that matter.
AM: Barton's a good guy.
CALLAHAN: Nothing against him.
But he doesn't excite anyone.
You wouldn't mind if he married your daughter, but you wouldn't want to put him on the front page.
COLBERT: Yeah, you wouldn't take Pottz home to dad.
A PROPHET almost without honour in his own country, Martin Potter is a national celebrity in Australia.
Based in Whale Beach in Sydney, he has featured in (Australian)Penthouse and Playboy and been named among the country's fifty most eligible bachelors.
A television sports presenter once said he makes Rambo look like a wimp, while legend has it that even Mel Gibson envies the Pottz physique.
He has the classic surfer's build: shoulders like an American footballer, legs like a ballerina.
With his deep-set eyes, Desperate Dan chin and uncombed quasi-Rasta locks, he is the photographer's dream: not beautiful but brooding, his deep shadows and craggy contours flattering the lens.
He was the first man in nearly twenty years to have a full-face mug-shot on the cover of Surfer .
Recent champions have projected a clean, wholesome image.
Pottz marks a reversion to unreconstructed virility  symbol.
Ever since the days when Hawaiian nobles played out tribal and sexual politics in the ocean, surfers have been the beneficiaries of a semiotic hyperinflation conferring the virtues of naturalness, freedom, potency, on the simple juxtaposition of a man and a board and a wave.
Perhaps I was in thrall to an illusion, but to me Pottz looked natural, free, and potent.
He reckoned he had picked the wrong waves at the Hard Rock at Sunset, and was worn down by the sheer hard labour of surfing so long in such arduous conditions.
But he was impatient for Pipeline.
Pipeline is a hollow left-hander which, with its right-handed twin brother, Backdoor Pipeline, turns into a double-barrelled shotgun of a wave that blasts its victims over a shallow, razor-sharp reef.
Pipeline put more surfers in Kahuku Hospital than any other break.
As Pottz said, ‘Anyone who paddles out at big Pipe and says he's not scared is either lying or crazy.’
I'd heard North Shore aficionados reminiscing about the ten-point tube Pottz had caught here back in '82.
That was the wave that earned him respect in Hawaii.
It was his first Pipeline Masters.
In the opening rounds the waves had been small, four to five feet.
Now they were steep walls of water dropping like guillotines onto the reef.
Potter felt his throat run dry.
He was only sixteen.
He wasn't ready to die.
In his quarter-final heat, he was surfing against four times world champion Mark Richards, another Australian, Rabbit Bartholomew, and Hawaiian Michael Ho.
Each had caught his share of rides.
Then a wave formed, the like of which had not been seen at Pipeline that winter.
It was a full fifteen feet and the offshore wind was holding it up like a crystal tower.
Potter made straight for the peak and plummeted down the perpendicular drop: the lip curled over him and he was inside the tube.
At first it seemed big enough to drive a train through.
Then he saw that his exit had begun to narrow.
The mouth was closing and the roof was caving in.
He crouched down and clung to the rail with his right hand and reached out with  his left as if to punch a hole through the wall.
As the wave started to collapse, the air it had sucked in, now compressed, was ejected in a single violent snort.
Potter was blasted through the eye of the needle in a cloud of spray and the wave snapped shut behind him.
‘It was one of those waves,’ he recalled, ‘that either make or break you.
Pull it off and you're a hero, back out and you'll always be remembered as the guy who let the perfect wave go by.’
Mark Richards won the heat, with Ho and Potter tied for second.
Ho and Pottz were sent out for a sudden-death surf-off.
Pottz wiped out three waves in a row and crept back in with his tail between his legs.
Pottz felt he had ‘paid his dues’ on the North Shore.
There is still a widespread superstition among surfers that, in accordance with ancient Hawaiian tradition, you have to make some sacrifice to placate the bloodthirsty gods of the ocean.
And the sacrificial victim is yourself.
Potter's bid for martyrdom came at twenty-five-foot Waimea in the winter of '86‐7 when the early rounds of the Billabong Pro were held at the Bay.
It was so big that some of the ASP surfers refused to go out.
Pottz was pressured into taking off because he'd waited too long.
‘As soon as I stood up I knew it was going to be bad.
I ended up going over the falls and being held under for a long time, and thinking there was no way I was going to come up before the next wave came across.
A one-wave wipeout I can handle, but two waves, that's when it starts to get marginal.’
As a wipeout specialist myself, I could see him being torn apart by the turbulence, I could feel his bursting lungs and taste the fear of blacking out.
When I get ‘taken out to lunch’ I'm in a state of shock for a week.
On the North Shore, surfers consider it a matter of pride to go straight back out and reassert their dominance and exorcise their demons.
‘That was the worst wipeout ever’, Callahan said.
‘Surfing ran two pages on it.
A special on the wipeout of the year.’
‘I got pretty badly worked.
But the way I look at it, if you can't have a spectacular manoeuvre, have a spectacular wipeout — it's good for the public.’
Pottz was confident of taking the world title, but less sure about the Triple Crown.
‘That would be a dream come true.
But the Pipeline and the Billabong are probably the hardest events there are.
Hawaii's different.
If you want to be anyone or get anywhere, you've got to go for it here.’
Callahan took his shots while Colbert and Stephanie sketched out designs for next year's Pottz Australia wetsuits.
Then we left.
Callahan was impressed by Stephanie.
‘What has Colbert got to get girls like Stephanie?’
Without waiting for an answer he said, ‘I'll tell you what he's got.
Brashness.
Either that or a dong the size of a surfboard.’
I'M NOT asking for preferential treatment.
Only for what I deserve.’
Most surfers were worrying about whether there would be a swell or not.
Ted Deerhurst was still worrying over whether, assuming there were a swell, he was going to be given a shot.
I went to visit him in his room at Crazy Joe's Plantation Village on the north end of Waimea Bay.
He was living on the wrong side of the highway.
His room was no bigger than Fat Eric's, but the people in the house were friendlier, slimmer, and didn't boast of spinal surgery.
Ted was beginning to feel everyone was against him.
‘I was in the British amateur team for three years — which Pottz never was.
I never came worse than third.
And yet I haven't had one penny of sponsorship out of Britain.’
Nor had he ever been offered a wild card at the Hot Tuna in Newquay, the only World Tour contest to be held in the UK.
He had been based in England up to the age of twenty-two before going abroad to earn his living as a surfer.
It grated with him when people insinuated he wasn't really British.
‘I've never been anything but British and proud of it.
Look at  the book I'm reading.’
It was Winston Churchill's Memoirs of the Second World War .
‘It's only the condensed version — not the six-volume job.’
You got the impression he would have liked to have brought all six volumes with him if he could.
Ted was the only surfer I knew who read history between heats.
In fact he was the only surfer I knew who read — at least, anything other than surfing magazines.
On the floor of his room Ted was masterminding the fate of Europe.
He was re-enacting the Battle of the Bulge.
‘The way I see it,’ he said, strategically deploying troops and artillery around a wall-to-wall map, ‘with a little more armour the Germans could be really kicking ass.’
He was also planning Operation Sea Lion — the German invasion of south-east England.
‘With better air support they could have got across.
Of course, we'd have pushed them right out again.
It didn't matter what our defences were like.
It was a question of attitude.’
Ted thought we'd have made short work of a mere hundred thousand Hun.
‘Churchill knew a thing or two about the British.
He said that when everything was easy we were hopeless.
But when we had our backs against the wall…’
Ted was a child of the sixties, but he sounded as if he'd been born in the Blitz.
He'd been brought up on a steady diet of blood, sweat and tears and Douglas Bader.
The first music he ever heard was The Dam Busters .
‘Churchill and I have a lot in common— we both have American mothers.’
His mother was crucial in forming Ted's outlook on life.
‘My father taught me the value of manners and being a gentleman.
But my mother taught me never to give up.’
When he was only seven, his horse threw him and hammered him with his hooves.
His mother put him straight back in the saddle.
‘I guess I've been getting back on that horse ever since.’
On the other side of the road lived another Brit I'd met in France.
The house overlooked Off-the-Wall, the break next door to Backdoor.
In fact, the wall Off-the-Wall was ‘off’ was its wall.
Carwyn Williams was sitting out on the balcony watching the waves.
The swell was picking up and the wind  turning around.
‘I love it here.
Look at those down-the-line barrels.
Very roomy.
It's the shallow reef that produces the hollowness, see.’
He was from Mumbles on the Gower Peninsula and had retained his melodious Welsh accent.
He was twenty-four — Martin Potter's age.
He had a reputation for brilliance and inconsistency.
He was a nice guy and a poor competitor.
Now it was the end of a disappointing Tour, he was somewhere around the 50 mark in the rankings, running out of money, and talking about going home.
He hadn't done well at Sunset, and was planning to pass on the Billabong.
The high point of his year had been winning an ‘expression session’(an out-of-competition contest) in Japan.
For his winner's speech he sang the opening lines of My Way .
The low point was sitting out the European contests with a broken arm.
In his pre-sponsorship days he used to be known as ‘the surfer who lived in a car’; in France he had a tent on the beach.
Carwyn looked on Off-the-Wall as virtually his home break.
‘There's only one wave every ten minutes that's perfect.
But if you catch that perfect one…
Last Thursday I caught a classic A-frame triangle and bopped straight into the biggest barrel.
The size of a house.’
I hadn't caught too many tubes myself so I asked him what it was like in there.
‘It's like a tunnel.
Sometimes it bends a bit and you can't see out.
You're completely locked in.
Then you turn the corner and you're out again.
It's heart-stopping.
I don't breathe.
You have to rely on your instincts to pull you through.
Go too high and you've had it.
Go too low and you've had it as well.
You've got to stay in the sweet spot.
You use the compressed air to pull you along.
It's like a turbo.
The sun shines through.
It emphasizes everything around you.
They say time slows down in the barrel.
It does.
It can be the noisiest thing — like a building crashing down right next to you.’
One of his worst experiences had been at Sunset just a few days before.
‘I had fifteen feet of water land on top of me.
You've got to relax in that situation.
I know that.
I was relaxing for a long time.
I was relaxed.
Then I was nearly panicking.
Then I was panicking.
I was struggling and I wasn't going anywhere.
I wasn't coming up.
Then I was up for a second — and the next wave hit me.’
Eventually he limped into the channel, recovered his breath, and went back for more.
‘You've got to paddle out again after a bad experience.
Unless you can't.’
Carwyn pointed out Pipeline, less than a hundred yards away.
‘Fifteen-foot Pipe — it took me a long rime to psych myself up to it.
But the waves were fantastic.
I'll never forget any of them.
So steep, so fast.
When you take off you're weightless.
Sometimes you lose touch with your board.
Sometimes your board loses touch with the wave.
It's like going into a ninety-mile-an-hour spin on a cliff road in a Ferrari — and still not dying.’
Carwyn desperately wanted to come through a few heats of the Pipeline Masters.
‘There's no other wave like it: when you surf Pipe, you've got to be ready.
Your body's got to be in harmony with your brain.’
‘So are you ready?’
‘It still scares the shit out of me.
Last year, my board hit me underwater.
It wouldn't stop hitting me.
My fins hit me in the chest.
I had blood coming out of my tits.
My whole body was in pain.’
He paused to relive the sensation.
‘It felt good, though.’
Carwyn was a homesick nomad.
After Pipeline, he was thinking of catching a plane back to Wales.
He had missed three Christmases in a row.
The year before he'd had scrambled eggs for Christmas dinner and no presents.
He even cried.
Carwyn seemed like a castaway on a desert island.
He gave me an orange card that advertised his status as PROFESSIONAL SURFER. but he was still a child at heart and surfing was still a game.
He wasn't going in for the Eddie.
‘That stuff's not for me.
You just want to tuck the board under your arm, run down the beach, paddle out and have fun.
And if it's big and scarey, you still have fun.
But that — that's not fun — that's death.
If you fall off, you drown.’
Carwyn recalled an occasion when he was fast asleep in his ground-floor bedroom, dreaming about a great wave coming straight towards him.
He woke up, and lo and behold, a great wave was coming straight towards him.
‘It came right in through the window.
Dumped a ton of sand on the floor.’
There had been a wooden bench in the garden outside.
‘A big fat wooden bench — really heavy.
Never saw it again.’
On my way back to Sunset I stopped at the press trailer.
The line-up for the Pipeline Masters had been posted.
Ted was down as eighth alternate in the heats.
TED AND Callahan and I had agreed to meet at Jocko's at 8.30 in the morning.
When I got there they were already out on the beach sizing up the surf.
‘Killer board, dude’, said Callahan.
I was carrying my brand new Willis Phazer under my arm.
It was an eight-foot rocket spraygunned in swirling blue and yellow and stamped with the sign of the atom.
Ted admired it too.
‘I guess you won't be needing the old Excalibur any more’, he said sadly.
I anointed its curves with wax.
‘Race you to the line-up’, I said.
On that immaculate morning, I felt as if I could do no wrong.
This would be the day that I finally cracked the North Shore.
Sure enough, the channel was as smooth as silk.
I cut effortlessly through the water with Ted and Callahan tagging along at my heels.
The waves were whipped up like ice-cream and frothing like champagne and there was no one else out.
Maybe it was too early for the crowd.
We would have first bite at the cake: ours would be the first footprints in the snow.
We came up behind the break and manoeuvred into position and sat on our boards.
I knew no fear.
It was as if what had happened at Jocko's and Haleiwa and Freddie's was all a bad dream.
‘Do you think we should let this guy go first?’ said Ted.
‘If he's ready’, said Callahan.
‘Are you ready, Andy?’
‘I'm ready’, I said.
A set showed.
I span my Phazer round, the wave lifted me up towards God, and I rose to my feet.
I wafted down the face and traced out an elegant arc with my bottom turn, squirting a fountain of spume from my rail as I flew back up and pirouetted on the lip.
Now I had the hang of it, I racked up a handful of top to bottoms with plenty of vertical.
When I pulled out Callahan and Ted were waiting for me.
They must have caught the next wave.
‘Jesus, Andy,’ said Callahan, ‘I didn't know you could surf like that.’
‘Neither did I’, I said.
‘Keep surfing like that,’ Ted said, ‘and you'll be ready for a shot at the title soon.’
I raced back to the line-up and picked off a few more waves.
I was a gambler on a winning streak: it didn't matter what number I placed my bet on, it always came up a winner.
A bigger set broke on the outside and we dived under it, then paddled out to get beyond the break.
Still another set broke on the outside so we kept on going out.
Now we were almost a mile from shore.
On the horizon, to the south, beyond Kaena Point, I could see what looked like a shadow or a cloud.
We paddled out another hundred yards just as a precaution.
Our strokes, at first casual, became faster, then frenzied.
The horizon had jumped up to where the sky used to be.
Coming straight at us was the biggest wave since Krakatoa.
Callahan had turned the colour of flour with all the wheatgerm kicked out of it.
Ted looked as if he was about to be personally bombarded by a squadron of Messerschmitts.
We were too far out now to risk heading in: we were bound to be caught smack in the impact zone.
We barely had time to exchange a glance — a glance which said despair, courage, delirium — before pointing our noses at infinity and pulling for dear life.
We were nearly a mile and a quarter out, the set was another quarter away from us, and already it was fleecy at the top, throwing up spray a hundred yards in the air.
I put my head down and kept stroking.
It seemed to take forever to get up that face, like climbing the rungs of Jacob's ladder.
When at last I broke through the lip and parachuted into the void beyond I turned my head and looked behind.
The wave had had its ropes cut and was erupting in an avalanche of fury that would bury everything in its path.
Of Ted and Callahan there was no sign.
I wondered if I would ever see them again and silently said goodbye.
The second wave was fifty yards away and bigger than the first.
But it was only when I punched through the thick, creamy crest and the rainbow mist cleared from my eyes that I finally gave up all hope.
Right in front of me was the Absolute, the ens perfectissimum , a metaphysical colossus that had strayed into reality.
It towered so far above me I couldn't even see the top of it.
There was nothing left in the world but this vertiginous wave.
I had a chillingly clear picture of its abominable face: it had so many wrinkles and boils it looked as if it had lived for centuries.
And now it was looking for a graveyard.
As I came up out of the trough, the wave was pouting out a lip like the deck of an aircraft carrier.
It started to suck me up the face.
As I looked down a tube as empty as Outer Space, I pushed away from my board and dove for the bottom.
But there was no bottom: it was like going through the Star Gate, with whole galaxies reeling by me.
The concussion of the exploding wave drove me down like a steam hammer.
There was darkness below me; above me, yet more darkness.
I could no longer tell which way was up and which was down.
I was drowning and it didn't hurt.
I felt a momentary regret for all the waves I would never ride, when I had only just learned how.
Then I died.
Death was warm and embracing like porridge.
I saw an infinite and never-ending wave: whether it was heaven or hell I knew not.
It was nearly eight when I woke up.
I pulled on my shorts, sank half a pint of yoghurt, and grabbed my crippled Excalibur.
By 9.15 Callahan and Ted still hadn't showed at Jocko's, and I'd forgotten my webbed gloves.
I couldn't go surfing without my gloves.
I turned the car round and headed home.
Maybe I'd drop by Michael's place and see how my Phazer was coming along.
ON THE morning of Sunday, 18 December, exactly one week after the Great North struck, Pipeline came back from the dead.
The beach was swarming with photographers.
Surfers were waxing down their boards.
The Marui Pipeline Masters was on.
This was my first Pipe.
I had come to Mecca and now I was seeing God.
And I was sitting at his right hand.
For this was the extraordinary thing about Pipeline.
It wasn't just a sheer and hollow left-hander: it reared up and rolled over right in front of your eyes.
Even when you were on the beach it seemed to land in your lap.
Sunset had been grand but remote, like listening to a radio signal from some distant country with only a weak transmitter: when a surfer caught a wave or came to grief, you had to filter out a lot of static and strain to follow what was happening.
At Pipeline, you could see the whites of his eyes, you were out there with him, in the tube, on the reef, feeling the adrenalin rush, getting your teeth kicked in.
Backdoor was breaking too, a mirror-image of its sinister partner, a back-to-front doppelgänger .
While the left-hander twisted and turned up towards Ehukai Beach Park, the right-hander spiralled away in the direction of Off-the-Wall.
‘Look at this guy’, said Callahan, peering through the viewfinder of his yard-long lens, targeted on the snarling peak like a sniper's rifle.
‘He's getting barrelled out of his mind.’
It was at Thurso in Scotland that I'd first seen surfers riding tubes.
They would take a lazy bottom turn, stall as they climbed up the wave, then disappear behind the curtain for a second or two, reappearing like actors at the end of a play to take a bow.
That was in a bay overlooked by a ruined castle straight out of Macbeth .
The tubes at Pipe were bigger, meaner, longer, bluer, warmer.
When someone went into one, you had time to go and buy an ice-cream before they came out again.
If they came out.
To pass unscathed into the inner sanctum of the wave is the categorical imperative of surfing.
Every surfer who is swallowed up by one of the blue-ribbed behemoths of Pipeline re-enacts the legend of Jonah and the Whale.
Many myths of the hero retrace a common narrative: a sea journey; battle with a monster; descent into the belly of the beast; and, finally, triumphant re-emergence into the light of day.
A Polynesian folktale tells of Rata, who travelled across the ocean and ingeniously outwitted a hungry whale by jamming open its jaws with a broken oar; venturing in through the mouth he came face to face with his parents who had been gulped down before him.
So too the yawning depths of the wave, even while threatening annihilation, hold out the promise of rebirth.
A poem by Hölderlin, ‘Patmos’, puts it succinctly: ‘Where danger is, there/Arises salvation also.’
Until recently, Pipeline was thought to be unrideable.
The wave was kapu , as the Hawaiians said, a forbidden zone you visited at the cost of your life.
It was a holy virgin: untouchable.
The first men known to have flouted the taboo were Bob Sheppard and Bill Coleman from California, in 1957.
For their sins, they were both nailed and all but crucified on the reef.
Fred Van Dyke, a pioneer of the North Shore breaks, recalls a time in the late fifties when he and Pat Curren (Tom Curren's father) were sitting on the beach at Banzai and Pat said, ‘Maybe in two thousand years this place will be surfed.’
But the sixties were a time for breaking rules, transgressing limits.
Rumours began to circulate that Banzai had been conquered.
The first photographic record dates from December 1961, when film-maker Bruce Brown shot Phil  Edwards — considered by many at the time to be the best surfer in the world — on a six-to eight-foot west swell.
‘We always wondered,’ Edwards said, ‘could you get in and make the drop?
That was the question.
It was so fast.
We knew if you could catch it, it'd be a great wave.’
Edwards caught it, rode it, and emerged intact.
It was on that day that ‘Pipeline’ was added to the name Banzai.
Edwards's trailblazing feat opened the way to others: by the time he'd strapped his board on the roof-rack of his car, he claimed, three other men were already out.
He was known as the ‘Columbus of Pipeline’.
What stopped people surfing Pipeline was only in part the wave itself — not so much perpendicular as concave, bent over like the hook of a question mark or a twitching scorpion's tail.
It was largely the prospect of what lay just beneath the surface: the coral reef.
This was what made Pipeline a killer.
Pipeline could suck the coral dry and dump a solid fifteen-foot wave on it.
You could crack your skull on that intractable stone, or it could scoop out spoonfuls of flesh.
On calm days people dived to inspect the bottom contours.
They returned, like astronauts from the moon, with stories of immense craters and chasms.
What everyone feared was getting slammed into one of the Pipeline cavities like a golfball into a hole and not being able to get out again.
Mark Cunningham, who was lifeguard for the Masters and regularly bodysurfed big Pipe, was offhand about the danger.
‘It's all mystique’, he said.
‘It's like a parking lot out there, rolled smooth by rocks and wave action.’
I began to regret I didn't have a board with me.
I mentioned I was doing a bit of surfing myself.
Mark looked at me with wild surmise and then spoke in capitals: ‘THE NORTH SHORE IS TWELVE VIOLENT MILES OF SURF.
And Pipeline is the most violent of the lot.
I lose count of the fatalities.
Last winter I fished a kid from Santa Monica out of the water.
Before that it was a local.
This place kills and maims more than any other.
I'm just surprised the toll isn't higher.’
Just as well I didn't have my board after all.
I didn't want to wind up permanently parked on the Pipeline reef.
TED'S POSITION as eighth alternate meant that eight men who had qualified for the heats would have to drop out before he was summoned.
He wouldn't know he was on till he was on.
He clued me in to some strategy.
‘Out of every five or six guys going for the wave, three are bluffing.’
Just then the Tannoy cleared its throat and made an announcement.
‘Ted Deerhurst — pick up your competition singlet from the beach marshal.’
Ted jerked up like a man who'd been zapped with a thousand volts.
He scrambled to his feet, hesitated for a moment, then clasped his 7 ft 3 in Excalibur to his bosom.
‘You and me’, he said to it lovingly.
‘Any last words?’
I said.
‘Right now, I don't want to talk, I just want to surf.’
Ted marched away into the competitors' zone, the glint of battle in his eye.
Kristin and Sabine were sitting on the beach.
Kristin said, ‘The Excalibur man is in this?
I don't believe it.’
Barton Lynch, sitting out the qualifying rounds and waiting for the main event, recalled the 1988 Billabong, which for the first time had been held at Pipeline.
Something of an intellectual among surfers, Lynch has a weekly column in a Sydney newspaper and an air of philosophical detachment.
For years, the ASP bureaucracy had annexed the closing stages of the annual circuit for Australia.
But there had long been a feeling that Hawaii, birthplace of surfing and home of the biggest waves, should have that honour by right.
In 1988, after a decade of wrangling, the surfing year would finally culminate with the Hawaiian Triple Crown.
But that winter was a dismal season on the North Shore.
People were cursing the Greenhouse Effect and swearing that  it had put paid to surf in Hawaii for all time.
The pre-season dispute over which contest — the Eddie Aikau or the Triple Crown — would have priority if the surf topped twenty feet at Waimea seemed about as relevant as an argument over how many angels you could fit on a pinhead.
Randy Rarick had once said that ‘to be declared world champion after a two-foot day at Manly just wasn't significant.’
But it looked as if the title might yet be decided on the flip of a Manly-sized wave after all.
The reputation of Hawaii was at stake.
At last, on 2 January 1989, only forty-eight hours before the waiting period was scheduled to expire, the rollers returned, rising up like submarines out of a smooth blue sea and snapping shut like mousetraps.
The Billabong had been saved at the eleventh hour.
Everything hung on this final event of the year.
The world title was still a three-horse race between defending champion Damien Hardman, Tom Carroll, and Barton Lynch.
Barton was the only one of the three to make it as far as the quarters, but he still had to come through another two heats to overhaul Hardman's tally of points.
His semi-final against fellow Australian Glen Winton — known as ‘Mr X’ for his unpredictability — would be the crunch.
This was the moment Lynch had been building for all his life.
He was riding a stick shaped by George Downing on the pattern of an old balsa board George had crafted thirty years earlier.
He had hired George's son, Keone Downing, as his coach in Hawaii.
He had even bought a house up the road from Sunset.
He dropped into the spinning vacuums of Pipeline with apparent nonchalance.
‘Looks like he's on Valium’, cracked one photographer.
The issue was settled when Winton dived into a black hole and didn't come out again.
Barton had clinched the world title — his subsequent victory in the Billabong was almost a formality.
He was eerily coherent afterwards.
‘I think it'd be fair to say this is the best day of my life.’
There was a risk everything else might seem an anti-climax, a series of footnotes.
‘If I had  written a script for myself I wouldn't have changed a thing’, he said.
Winning the title and the Billabong at the last minute on the most cut-throat wave in the world — that was the perfect ending.
But what could you do for an encore?
In his own way, Ted had been building for this moment too.
He didn't have a house here, he didn't have a coach, he'd shaped his own board.
It wasn't the final.
But he'd been practising his backhand all year, mentally preparing himself for the North Shore.
Lynch was a goofy so he surfed Pipeline with his eye on the wave.
Ted was a natural, so unless he managed to find a right-hander to take him through the Backdoor, he was always looking over his shoulder.
Callahan was still in bed: he didn't bother with trialists.
I rustled up a friendly Australian to take a shot of Ted in action.
As luck would have it, the light wasn't good enough and the shots didn't come out.
Ted was wearing a fluorescent green competition vest.
You couldn't miss him.
It was a six-man heat, so there was plenty of scope for the wily strategist.
A couple of surfers caught waves Ted didn't even move for.
He probably thought they were bluffing.
Then a wave came through that was earmarked for him.
He stroked firmly, looked over his right shoulder, stroked some more, looked over his left, then he was reversing up the stomach-churning Pipeline elevator.
He made a clean take-off, skidded down the face, and tracked the wave into the hazardous zone known as the ‘Bermuda triangle’, somersaulting as his board stalled on the sandbank.
Some of Ted's opponents were finding the Backdoor.
But Ted stuck with the left-handers.
His next two waves were close-outs.
On the first he could only straighten out to stay ahead of the whitewater; on the second he bailed out as the roof caved in.
A mile out to sea Outside Pipeline was breaking.
The swell was still coming up.
Ted hadn't set Pipeline alight, but he had acquitted himself honourably.
In ASP contests you are allowed a maximum of ten waves in any one heat, but are scored on four (in finals it is five out of fifteen).
When the siren signalled the end of the twenty-minute period, Ted had only three waves under  his belt.
But on my reckoning most of the others had fewer, and none better than his first.
‘One good wave and two close-outs should get me to advance.’
I agreed with Ted.
He only needed to make third to go through to the next round.
We sat on the sand and waited for the placings to come over the Tannoy.
When the names and numbers were read out it was a long while before we heard the name of Deerhurst.
He was given sixth.
‘I won't ever quit!’ he said.
Ted wasn't the only casualty at Pipeline.
But Carwyn Williams at least had the consolation of winning the Wipeout of the Day Award.
On his second wave he took a steep drop and his nose dug in.
He came briefly back from the dead a few minutes later, pulling into a Backdoor tube and getting fried on the reef.
I didn't see Ted for a while after that.
When I finally caught up with him at Crazy Joe's Plantation Village, he was in a resigned mood.
He was playing the mouth organ, a plaintive lament which seemed to say ‘I've got those didn't-get-through-my-qualifying-rounds-again blues.’
I denounced the judges who only gave him two (out of ten) for his best wave, but he said, ‘It was fair.
I should have caught some more waves so they couldn't underscore me.
They're used to perceiving old Ted as a loser.’
He was searching for something positive in the experience.
‘Going out there on a new board and catching my first wave when I hadn't surfed Pipeline for a year only reaffirms my confidence.’
Technically, there was nothing wrong with his surfing.
But he was choking when he should be charging.
He had lost so many times, he had forgotten what it was like to win.
He had to start thinking of himself as a winner again.
He had put away his Churchill and was reading a new book.
I looked at the title.
It was How to Increase Your Self-Esteem .
TED COULD only enlist the spirit of Churchill to his cause.
Richie Collins had an unfair advantage: he had the Holy Ghost on his side.
I'd run into Richie twice in France.
Twice he had come second to Martin Potter, once at Lacanau and again at Biarritz.
He achieved notoriety in the first final by turning up ten minutes late for the start.
His excuse was that he had been praying.
He was still praying when he got in the water.
While Pottz tacked to and fro energetically seeking out the elusive peak, Richie dropped anchor and contemplated the horizon.
While Pottz came to the mountain, Richie waited for the mountain to come to him.
He adopted the same tactic in Biarritz, with the same result.
I asked him if after his second second to Pottz he didn't feel history was repeating itself.
‘No,’ he said with a grin, ‘today I turned up on time.’
He hadn't been joking or speaking metaphorically when he talked about praying.
He was actually addressing God when he should have been in the water.
He reminded me of this as we sat on the beach watching Ted and Carwyn having their hopes dashed on the Pipeline reef.
‘God said to me, ‘Richie, you're going to be late for your contest, it's on now’’.
And I said to the Lord, in my pride, ‘No, it's okay Lord, it's not for another twenty minutes’.’
He said he had learned his lesson at Lacanau: God was the better time-keeper.
But God was more than a heavenly speaking clock to Richie.
He was a friend, a confidant, an adviser, a business manager, a collaborator.
God was to Richie what Peter Colbert was to Pottz.
But He had at least one advantage over Colbert.
He could look after His protégé in the water as well as on dry land.
He could serve up waves in the right place at the right time — or not.
‘I pray to the Lord to bless me with a good  wave.’
That's why Richie was in no hurry in Lacanau.
He was waiting on God's will.
‘Jesus told me to go to France.
He said, ‘Richie, you can be a good witness on the Tour.
You can save people’.’
At Biarritz, he again failed to heed advice from above.
‘I knew I needed a good right to win.
And a right came.
Potter paddled for it and could have made it.
I paddled for it and caught it.
I was going for my usual roundhouse and the Lord said, ‘Don't finish that roundhouse.’
But I finished it anyhow.
And I came right off the wave.’
His best result in 1989 was winning the Ocean Pacific Pro at Huntington Beach, California, the most high-profile event on the mainland.
‘But I'm not going to get a big head about it or anything.
Everyone knows it's the most important contest on the Tour.
Everyone knows about you if you win it.’
That victory was all thanks to God.
‘I wouldn't have won the OP without Him.
I said, ‘Thank you so much for letting me win’.
You look on Him as a father telling you what to do.’
Richie Collins faced the same theoretical conundrum that affected Michael Chang when he congratulated God on helping him to win a tennis match.
Did he think the devil was on the other side of the net?
Why hadn't Tom Curren won the OP Pro?
He was a good Christian, too, wasn't he?
‘Yes, but I'm a better witness than Curren on the stand.
He probably wasn't following God the way I was.’
Richie thought everything was a test of worthiness.
He was always on trial in some celestial courtroom.
Richie Collins was twenty, with short curly hair, a wispy chin beard, and long beanpole legs.
In France teenage girls would squeal at his floaters.
Sometimes he went semi-shaven-headed and looked like a monk.
His father was a California shaper and Richie was one of the few top ASP surfers who shaped his own boards.
His logo was ‘Wave Tools’.
He favoured swallow-tails.
‘I tried bobs and square-tails.
I don't like 'em.’
Like Ted, he had created a whole new quiver of boards specifically for Hawaii, and he too was planning to use a 7 ft 3 in at Pipe.
Unlike Ted, he had risen rapidly up the ranks, was voted Rookie of the Year in 1987, made it into the  Top 16 at the end of '88, and was tipped to become a challenger for the world title.
His recent history — which sounded as remote when he spoke of it as a previous incarnation — had enacted a traditional surfing scenario he wasn't particularly proud of.
‘I went totally over the limit.
Me, myself, and I.’ After losing in the Gotcha Pro early that summer on the South Side of Oahu, he went off on a self-destructive bender.
‘I went completely nuts.
I was literally breaking things over my head.
I'd been wanting to break a board over my head for a long while.
So finally I did.
I knocked myself out.’
But everything changed for him on 12 June 1989 when he eventually came to.
‘The Lord said, ‘You're coming home’.
He took me back to the past and showed me the future.
I said, I don't want that to happen.
I just asked Him to have grace and mercy on me.
So I dedicated myself to God.
No going after girls, no going off on drugs.
I strive to live like the Lord Jesus on earth.’
He wasn't perfect, though.
‘I still freak out and go off and do things’, he added enigmatically.
I didn't have to ask Richie any probing questions.
He was probing himself for me.
He was writing his autobiography in his head.
He had been coming to Hawaii since he was thirteen and competing since he was seventeen.
But he'd never done well there.
This year he went out in his first heat at the Hard Rock.
‘I got skunked at Sunset’, he said.
‘The Lord said to me the day before, ‘You're not going to make it out of your heat tomorrow’.
The Lord puts you through these trials.’
He confided that Hawaii was the most difficult place in the world for him.
He had a fear of heights and was claustrophobic, so he hated being held under.
‘A lot of people like to get worked because it knocks the fear out of them.
With me, it only makes things worse.’
Richie's worst experience at Sunset was also in a way his best.
It was ten to fifteen feet, it was getting dark, he had lost his board, and he couldn't get in and he couldn't get out.
He thought he was going to die.
‘I started crying.
And I called out, ‘Lord, have mercy on me’.
And I looked up and the sea had gone calm.
And I swam straight in.
The Lord has complete control over the sea.’
Richie had no time for Hawaiian polytheism.
‘There's no ocean god, there's no tree god, there's just One God — He takes care of everything.’
He wasn't really watching Pipeline any more.
Behind his Oakley sunglasses his eyes were focused on the inner drama of his own existence.
‘I give most of the prize money I earn to the Church.
I say to God, ‘Here's my pay cheque, Lord, you want the whole thing?’
And sometimes the Lord will say to me, ‘Richie, you need that money more than I do.
You need it to pay the rent.
You keep it’.'
God was with him every day, worrying over the smallest details of his life.
‘I went to look for a new car and the Lord said to me, ‘Richie, you buy this car.
I know you're going to like it.
This is the right car for you’.'
God moved in mysterious ways — to Richie he manifested himself as an extremely successful car salesman.
Richie was afraid I was going to do a hatchet job on him.
‘Why is everyone always picking on us Christians?
We're always getting drilled on TV.
That must mean we're right.
All the atheists know there is a God.’
He asked me not to misquote him.
I promised I wouldn't.
‘I get misinterpreted.
The last magazine article came out on me, I had a lot of Christians writing to tell me I had it all wrong.
I still don't live up to my standards.
Because they're perfect.
They're God's standards.
All I can do is try to live up to them — try to be like God.’
The King James translation of the Book of Genesis renders the first line as In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth , confident that prior to God there was nothing, that Yahweh created the universe ex nihilo .
But the phrase beginning bereshith in the ambiguous Hebrew might equally well be read as In a beginning , or In the beginning of creating the heaven and the earth…
On this second interpretation, Yahweh summons order out of a pre-existing primeval soup:when the earth was without form, and void; and darkness was upon the face of the deep .
Some translators of the Bible have gone so far as to postpone the main verb until the divine fiat:And God said, Let there be light .
But it may be that God's primordial action occurs in the previous verse:And the spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters .
This line carries two  compelling implications.
On the one hand, God is a wind (pneuma theos in the Septuagint) stirring the ocean into life, and the rest of Creation flows from the movement of the waters.
On the other, simultaneously, He moves across the surface of the sea: upon the face, riding the waves even as He creates them, surfing the world into existence.
A bottom turn: the spray turned into birds.
An off-the-lip carved out the Himalayas.
One great cutback: and there was Africa.
Out of the spinning vortex of a tube came Adam and Eve.
Paradise was a riverbreak in Mesopotamia.
There was a theory that the Ten Lost Tribes of Israel begat the Polynesians and, hence, the Hawaiians.
The gospel of surfing was not far removed from the Old Testament account of Creation:In the beginning was the wave : God was both shaper and surfer.
Small wonder then that surfing was Richie Collins's way of trying to be like God.
And he wasn't the only one.
It seemed to me that all surfers aspired to the condition of divinity.
They all wanted to be mightier than the mightiest waves.
I knew that during those brief immortal moments when I was standing up on the board, walking on water, I too felt like a supreme being, until the ocean cast me down again and turned me once more into a creeping thing that creepeth upon the face of the earth.
Richie had picked up an almost invisible speck and said, ‘I'm just this tiny grain of sand.’
That's how I felt too, being tossed about at the behest of the currents and waves.
Eventually Callahan turned up.
He was complaining of an aching neck and rubbing it gingerly.
‘Damn girl’, he said.
‘Got my head in a leg-lock and wouldn't let go.
Whiplash, that's what I've got.
Whiplash.’
Callahan liked the sound of the word whiplash .
It could have kept him going for hours.
I told him I'd been talking to Richie.
He thought Richie was a great surfer but a poor human being.
‘He's inhaled too much resin — sends you crazy after a while.’
He paused.
‘I guess that's what makes surfing so interesting.
You have all these weirdos.’
DON KING gave a party during the Pipeline Masters to celebrate the completion of his house on Ke Iki Beach.
The house was like Don himself: tall, imposing, tranquil.
It used only natural materials: wood and stone and glass.
I had seen Don sloping about the beach, still not satisfied with the surf, not enough to swim out and take shots, anyway.
He was just as fussy on the North Shore as he had been in France.
Callahan said Don was more interested in the waves than the surfers.
Some of his best shots were of unridden waves.
One of the most famous enabled you to look right down a spitting Pipeline barrel through the snake's eye at the far end towards the mountains in the distance.
I left Kristin and Sabine in the garden talking to the bodyboarding champion of the world and went down to the beach.
The moon lit up the roof of the breaking waves.
It was a cool night and someone had made a bonfire on the sand.
Betinna and Liese were sitting by it, their faces half shadowed in darkness, half aglow from the flames.
Liese was Bodo van der Leeden's wife, Betinna was her daughter.
I sat down with them.
You could hear the gentle strumming of two guitars from the house.
Liese was a still point in a giddy universe.
She had fled Europe two decades before and qualified in Chinese medicine in Hawaii, spending seven years of her life in a monastery, absorbing the lessons of the Tao, science, philosophy, astrology, and martial arts.
She told me that ‘Ke Iki’ meant ‘Struggle little’.
I considered this.
‘Does that mean it's a good beginner's break?’
Liese laughed.
‘No, it means that once you're caught in those waves you might as well give up.’
I hadn't heard of anyone surfing Ke Iki.
They didn't, Liese said.
People just drowned there.
Once, four girls were collecting shells when a big swell came in and swept them away.
Another time, a photographer had ventured onto the reef that rose up from the sea at the far corner.
He stood mesmerized by a giant wave, shooting picture after picture until it came right over and dragged him out.
Liese made the ocean sound like a hungry beast that demanded to be fed with human flesh.
I was still nursing my Freddieland injuries, and the way she was looking at me with her unflinching gaze gave me a queasy feeling I'd only narrowly avoided providing lunch.
Surfing Hawaii was like being in the Blitz, and it may have been the thought of death that made me think of love.
Or perhaps it was the combination of moon, surf, and acoustic guitars.
Like everyone else, I'd come to Hawaii for the waves, but some clandestine part of me had been plotting all along to make love on the beach beneath a palm tree.
I had read too much Captain Cook.
I knew how willing and sensuous Hawaiian wahini were.
They flung themselves at sailors in a bid for immortality.
I liked to imagine that the tradition of free love had never died.
According to Hiram Bingham in 1820, the Hawaiian Islands were ‘waiting for the law of Christ’.
In the following decades the missionaries stripped the Islanders of everything: their gods, their culture, their land, even their nakedness.
It might have been better had they looted, pillaged, raped, and left.
But they stayed to erase every vestige of paganism.
The Hawaiian tongue was given a written form for the express purpose of translating the Bible.
The East Coast Puritans refused to alter their garb or touch the native food.
They rejected bananas and held on to buttoned coats.
The One and Universal God should be mirrored, in their view, by a monolithic human culture, in which all worshipped, dressed, and ate alike.
Hawaiian society collapsed in the face of such ironclad convictions.
Callahan's theory was that ‘there was a need for something hard and rigid, no matter what.
And that's what the missionaries were.’
Hawaiians would henceforth cover  their shame, refrain from exhibitions of public indecency on the beach, and put aside their boards.
I had already come across a congratulatory account of this transformation in Jules Verne.
On its whistle-stop tour of the Pacific his Floating Island — an Oahu with propellers — found Polynesian gentlemen in waistcoats and wing-collars instead of savages in feathers.
His travellers appeared on the whole disappointed not to be cooked by cannibals.
Surfing was an integral part of traditional Island society: not just a sport, but a rite of passage, an initiation, an act of worship, a demonstration of power, and a form of courtship.
One missionary, Sheldon Dibble, observed that surfing led to the loss of life and limb, the neglect of the land, gambling and starvation.
‘But the greatest evil of all,’ he complained, ‘resulted from the constant intermingling, without any restraint, of persons of both sexes and all ages, at all times of the day and at all hours of the night.’
In the twentieth century surfing has been appropriated by the advertising industry and invested with enough sexual connotations to sell anything from soap powder to condoms.
But it was from the beginning an erotic exercise.
One legend taught that if a man and a woman caught the same wave they would be joined in physical union.
Sharing the wave was a prelude and an incitement to copulation.
Wavesliding,he'enalu , was to water what the hula , the dance of love, was to land.
The modern obsession with the tube — that evanescent twist of the wave as it curls itself up into the form of a vagina to lure in unwary youths like bees into the mouths of flowers — perpetuates the equation of surfing and sex.
The kapu system of priestly prohibitions and sanctions had finally disintegrated in 1819, but new taboos rushed in to take the place of the old.
In 1825, acting under missionary influence, a group of chiefs issued an edict exhorting people to give up their games and turn instead to Christian teachings.
‘The decline and discontinuance of the use of the surfboard as civilization advances,’ wrote Hiram Bingham, ‘may be accounted for by the increase in modesty, industry and religion, without supposing as some have affected to believe, that missionaries have caused oppressive enactments against it.’
There was no need to ban surfing outright.
As the old ways were forgotten, it simply disappeared or went underground.
Certain nineteenth-century paintings — Manet's On the Beach at Boulogne and Degas's At the Seaside — obliquely reflect the colonization of Hawaii.
In the Victorian era you wore exactly the same clothes on the beach as you wore in the city, with the simple addition of a parasol.
Gauguin, in his evocations of life in Tahiti, was the first to show that there could be a completely different culture — more sensual, less strait-laced — more fitting to the beach.
But in the South Pacific as in the North, that original idyll was fading away even as Gauguin paid tribute to it.
His naked riders on the beach and bare-breasted women laden with flowers and fruit were nostalgic celebrations of a vanishing world.
Now, to a degree, the tables have been turned.
Not only do we strip off at the beach, but we have brought the values of the beach inland.
Beach culture, a third force wedged between town and country, imposing its own norms and practices, has spread across the globe from Hawaii like sand blowing in the wind.
Grey city streets enlivened by boldly patterned boardshorts and shirts present a feeble parody of a lost paradise: fashion and tourism have together unmoored a raft of signifiers from their origins.
Images of that immortal sea, of children sporting on the shore and the mighty waters rolling evermore, are not so much allusions to what brought us hither, as Wordsworth would have it, but reminders to book this year's holiday to the Costa del Sol or the Bahamas.
But, since the heyday of the missionaries, the collective consciousness has nevertheless undergone a sea-change.
And surfing is the most potent symbol — even stimulus — of that shift.
Now that the sport was re-established in its place of origin, was it right to suppose a return to the pagan ways of unbridled pleasure and carnal gratification?
I had detected some promising signs.
Women orbited about surfers on the beach; they clung to them in cars; they occupied their houses in loose liaisons.
There was a myth that surfers  were irresistible to women.
It wasn't a myth: they were.
I wasn't sure I qualified as a surfer yet, but I hoped I might benefit from this general disposition.
I never found any hula girls.
There were no grass skirts, no bare breasts.
There were even self-appointed morality patrols, recruited from the ranks of the born-again Christians, who would blow the whistle on indecency on the beach.
But I was sitting on the sands of Ke Iki at midnight with a fairy-tale princess, a Botticelli Venus whose long blonde tresses reflected golden glints from the fire.
I wanted to ride a wave with her.
And the only trouble was, she'd brought her mother along as well.
Liese said, ‘I'd better be going now.
I expect Bodo is wondering where I am.
You can stay, though, Betinna.’
‘No, I'll come with you’, she said.
‘I don't want to be left here all alone.’
DOLLY SPELLED her name ‘Dolle’.
I met her sitting out on the bench where Michael Willis always sat, water-gazing.
‘This is the best place in the world’, she said.
‘That ocean is the source of universal energy.
It's our playground.
The sea is our friend.’
It hadn't been all that friendly to me, but I let that pass.
Dolle was a woman of all ages and none.
Her voice had the pubescent innocence of a junior high school majorette.
Her streaky blonde hair and skimpy bikini were those of a nineteen-year-old beach belle.
When she fluttered the long lashes of her baby blue eyes she had the timeless charm of Olive Oyl or Betty Boop.
But her deep tanned face had been lived in for a fistful of decades.
She was a veteran nymphette who had been kicked out of Shangri-la for seducing the monks.
She occupied a tiny apartment hidden away beneath Betty's house, and she had a habit of materializing unexpectedly as if she'd sprung up through a trapdoor.
‘Hi, Dolle’, I'd say, hopping about with one leg in my trousers.
She was the mother of Mike Latronic, a hot North Shore surfer who effortlessly outshone visiting pros.
The surname, from her first husband, had been Polish, but she had adapted it to fit the modern age.
Dolle described herself as a dancer (she had worked in Las Vegas) and a traveller.
She was a nomad who was finally taking root in Hawaii.
It turned out she was a writer too.
I was reckless enough to ask her what she'd written.
She hauled me down to her lair to find out.
She showed me a pamphlet entitled Gourmet Dining for Hot Place Living — with Tid Bits for the Essence of Life .
As far as I could tell from a quick skim through, every meal was designed to act as an aphrodisiac.
She'd also written two or three books of poetry, although I didn't see them.
But she was preparing a longer and more ambitious work, an imaginary autobiography called The Boyfriends .
The Boyfriends haunted my stay on the North Shore.
The title was perfect.
As it stood, it consisted of a multi-volume jumble of vers libre , written over many years, some in the form of letters, especially to her mother —‘if I sent her a letter she sent me some money — so I kept on writing’— listing the men she'd known.
Dolle had spent her entire life obsessed with but ill-used by men.
Men were to her what waves had become to me.
The book was the story of her wipeouts.
Now she wanted me to help her edit it into shape.
I looked at some of it.
I'd expected to find a vacuous mess.
But instead it was intermittently lyrical, funny, sad, and incisive; it was also sentimental, confused, and cliché-ridden.
My advice to her was simple: cut the sentiment, leave in the sex.
There would still be enough to make a good-sized book out of it.
I jotted down a few extracts from The Boyfriends .
There were plenty of men in big cars riding around the
neighbourhood, ‘Come here little girl’
Fell in love with an Italian,
a punk Mafia dude
his tomato red convertible
and all his bull
Had the New York Yankee ball team
as my clientele
Occasionally she tried to rationalize what she was doing.
It never came off.
I told her all the justifications and apologies had to go.
All she had to do was be more herself and less what she thought she ought to be.
John Lennon filmed us for his movie,Up your legs for Peace .
I got an autographed dollar bill and Viral Hepatitis
I started bullying her.
She had to be strict with herself: ruthless.
But I was the one who was being ruthless.
Confronted with Dolle I felt myself becoming a punk mafia dude.
I came within an ace of slapping her around.
She was all soft and loose and self-indulgent.
I told her she had to be hard, tight, self-critical.
He says ‘I love you more than anything in the world’ I believe him
Fortunately, it didn't have any effect.
In the time I was there she did pencil out a few passages, and got me to red ink a lot more.
She bribed me with pasta and blackmailed me into writing a synopsis on my last night in Hawaii.
But mainly she kept on bodyboarding on the quieter waves between Sunset and Backyards, going to parties, hanging out at the Sugar Bar, and talking to her friends on the telephone.
Her techniques were not subtle but they were effective.
‘Andy, do you think you could drive me to the Sugar Bar?’
‘Come on, Dolle, I'm trying to work!’
‘Oh, of course, I don't want to interrupt.
Forget I asked.’
She would dematerialize.
Five minutes later I would be  shouting downstairs, ‘All right, damn it, get your shoes on.’
‘They're on.’
I knew she'd never finish that book.
I knew I would never finish a book so long as I was on the North Shore, either.
It was a place to live in, not write in.
Writing was a sign of the Fall, it was a kind of punishment; Dolle was still living in the Garden of Eden or at least the Sugar Bar.
Writing was a substitute for surfing.
If you could surf who would ever bother writing?
ON MONDAY , the second day of the Marui Pipeline Masters, the waves were glassy and tubular and the local hotshots were setting the pace.
The ASP rule-book asked the judges to look for the most radical manoeuvres in the most critical section of the wave (that is, nearest the curl).
All other criteria — wave selection, length of ride, style — were secondary.
Pipeline was easy to judge since it was basically a one-manoeuvre event: what everyone was after was the tube.
A good tube-ride might score anything from 8 to 10.
After you'd knocked off the highest and lowest assessments of the five judges, three scores still counted.
Three times that day the judges awarded the maximum 30 points for a single ride.
One 30 was rare; three on one day was unheard of.
Part of this record-breaking hat trick was pulled off by Johnny Boy Gomes.
Johnny Boy Gomes was the July pin-up on my surfing calendar back in Cambridge, and now he was picking up more barrels than a beer-truck.
This was the first time I had seen him surf in the flesh, but for an entire month I had contemplated him pulling fearlessly into a vicious Pipeline tube when I should have been writing lectures.
When I mentioned his name in Hawaii an informant who asked to remain anonymous said: ‘Johnny Boy Gomes is the meanest, heaviest dude on the whole of the North Shore.’
He had a reputation for being tough in the water and was alleged to be a champion of ‘localism’— the attitude of resident surfers who guard their break jealously and resent the intrusion of outsiders.
Hawaii was notorious for localism.
Johnny Boy, according to some reports, was seething resentment in bodily form.
Stories of his mean streak were legion.
If you dropped in on him you were history.
Jodie Cooper from Australia told me that she had been out at Haleiwa when Johnny Boy got it into his head that she had robbed him of his wave.
He swam up to her and said, ‘If you want to surf like a man you're going to be treated like a man.’
Jodie retired hurt.
In the public mind — in their own minds — surfers are the modern equivalent of outlaws.
The surf is their Sherwood Forest, their maquis , their snarling Harley Davidson.
Martin Potter's press photos made him out to be a cross between James Dean and Marlon Brando.
Surfing was like a photographic negative of normality, inverting good and bad, and turning madmen and monsters into heroes and saints.
There are sporadic attempts to rehabilitate surfers and integrate them into society, but it never sticks: they belong on the margins, in another dimension where things are unreal , where outrageous and insane are terms of approbation, and all non-surfing humans are ridiculed as hodads .
They are sandwich-boards for Oedipal tendencies, eagerly disposing of the father — they reject authority, law, the land — and reverting with fervour to the embrace of the all-mothering sea.
You could admire them from a safe distance, but you wouldn't want to run into one of them on a dark night at the crossroads.
Even apparently respectable citizens, family men and pillars of the establishment (one old-time big-wave rider had been elected to the House of Representatives and was running for Hawaii State Governor) become teenage rebels again when they wax down their boards.
I mentioned the stories I'd heard about Johnny Boy to Michael Willis.
He didn't answer straight away.
His artist friend James William Berthrong III said, ‘Johnny only surfs  like he's mean.
He's fairly mellow most of the time.
The meanest guy on the North Shore is Perry Dane.’
Perry Dane was my August pin-up.
Michael decided the name Johnny Boy Gomes had become a convenient shorthand, a symbol.
‘Guys come in with board injuries and they say, Johnny Boy did it to me.
He's the bogeyman of the North Shore.
An alibi.’
For Michael there was no such thing as insiders and outsiders; he hated the idea of nations and nationalities.
‘Fish don't have passports.
The air permeates everywhere.
We're all one.
This guy's a local and that guy isn't: all these labels come from limited-thinking man in 1989.
Whereas proleptic man, futuristic man…’
He went off into a reverie, dreaming of proleptic man.
‘You know, surfers are probably the first human beings to travel around peacefully, not to conquer.
It's a non-colonial thing.
That looks like the future to me.’
According to Michael, surfing was the fount of all virtue.:
It was freedom.
‘It liberates you mentally — opens people up.
There's no boundaries and no stop light.
You don't have mandatory seat belts or helmets.
There's no policemen out there.’
It was courtly love, ennobling and uplifting: it purified the soul.
‘They call Johnny Boy bad — well, if he didn't surf, he'd really be bad.
Who's going to get into a fight after surfing for eight hours?’
Surfers were tranquil.
‘Swimming and surfing give you long loose muscles.
Weight lifting and construction give you tight bulky muscles.
Take your pick.
When you're tight — you get uptight.’
It equipped you to cope with everyday life.
‘I'd rather depend on a surfer in an emergency than anyone else.
If you can face a fifteen-foot wave at Banzai Pipeline, you can handle anything.’
Above all, it heightened your consciousness.
‘When you're surfing big Waimea, you can't be thinking about anything — except for the moment.
Which means that you're just there, in harmony with the universe.’
‘Only for a moment?’
I asked.
‘That's all there is — moments connected to moments.
If  you've got that moment, that's all you need.
If you know that feeling of being here, now, you're set.’
I still hadn't had that moment of awakening,satori , enlightenment.
But I was working on it.
Michael promised to help.
‘Human beings have been on an ego trip for centuries.
We've gone round looting and raping, we've got to learn to just be .’
I was contemplating the truth of these words as I drove up Pukea Road, a turning off the Kam Highway past Pipeline heading towards Waimea on the hill side.
I'd met Kristin and Sabine that morning and they'd told me to come over and described where they were now living.
They said it was about three houses up on Pukea.
I pulled into the driveway of the third house on the right-hand side.
I got out of the car and a large brooding man with close-set eyes and far-flung shoulders came up to me.
‘Move your fucking car out of my drive’, he growled.
‘I'm looking for Kristin and Sabine’, I said politely.
‘Do they live here?’
‘No.’
It was only a monosyllable, but it had all of ninety kilos behind it.
‘They mentioned the name of a shaper they were staying with — Hector, I think it was.’
‘You want the next house up the street.’
I walked back to my car.
Just as I was about to get in, the man spoke again.
‘And move your fucking car out of my drive.’
Later that day I phoned Callahan.
‘I considered saying something like, ‘Is there anything the matter with you, mate?’
But somehow it didn't seem worth it.’
‘Where did you say this was?’
‘Pukea.
Third house on the right.’
‘Jesus, just as well you kept your mouth shut.
That's Johnny Boy Gomes's house.
No one messes with him.
He would have dismembered you!’
The stretched-out, salivating way Callahan said ‘dismembered’ made my blood curdle.
‘But I've been reading an interview in Groundswell where  Johnny Boy says that he's misunderstood and really he's got a heart of gold.’
‘Want to know how they did it?
They sedated him with Southern Comfort.
He had to drink half a bottle before they dared even ask him a question.’
Johnny Boy turned out to be an old friend of Betty's.
She introduced me.
He had forgotten our first fleeting encounter.
I fixed up an interview with him.
But I never went.
Somehow it didn't seem worth it.
TUESDAY WAS the third and last day of the Pipeline Masters.
Carwyn was flying home, Ted was working on his self-esteem, Richie was nursing a broken nose.
Johnny Boy was waiting for someone to pull into his driveway.
I saw the biggest, steepest cylinders of water I'd ever seen from the relative sanctuary of the beach, and Pottz finally landed the world title.
He barely had to get wet.
Hawaii is ten hours behind British time.
I filed reports around midnight to catch the sports desk the following morning.
They appeared twenty-four hours after the event, but then no one back in England seemed in much of a hurry for results.
The surf was crashing outside my window and I was caressing a sentence at around 1 a.m. when the phone rang.
It was Tom Clarke, Sports Editor of The Times .
‘Do you know,’ he inquired with deceptive gentleness, ‘that this morning's newspapers are already reporting the Potter victory?’
‘Er, no.’
‘How is it that The Times is the only British newspaper with a man in Hawaii, and yet has been scooped?’
For a moment, the sinister thought occurred to me that there might be another more efficient British reporter lurking  on the beach.
Then I realized what had happened.
The PR team in the Triple Crown press trailer faxed out releases at the start of the day which had hit England in time for the next morning's edition.
Suddenly my short journalistic career looked as if it would stay short.
I clutched at a straw.
‘Tom,’ I said, ‘all they've got is the bare fact of his winning the title, but did he win the Pipeline Masters?
They've got no idea.
I can put the whole thing in context.
I've got 500 words all set to roll.’
‘We've got to stay on top of this story’, said Tom.
‘Give me 700 words — make that 750.
As soon as you can.’
Another 250 words may not sound much in the great scheme of things, but after a heavy day at Pipeline and an end-of-contest thrash at the Turtle Bay Hilton, it felt like being asked to dash off another chapter of War and Peace .
The report appeared the following day under the heading
POTTER IS NAMED RULER OF THE SURF The new world champion is crowned at Pipeline 
This was part of it:
Martin Potter of Great Britain yesterday clinched surfing's world title at the Marui Pipeline Masters in Hawaii without progressing beyond the quarter-finals.
The elimination of Australian Dave Macaulay and Hawaiian Derek Ho, who would have had to win to keep their hopes alive, means that with one contest still to run in the Hawaiian Triple Crown he can no longer be overhauled.
This year's Pipeline Master is Gary Elkerton of Australia who attacked the most demanding conditions with impunity.
The Hawaiians once practised human sacrifice.
That tradition lives on at the Banzai Pipeline, not so much the  Wembley Stadium of surfing as its Coliseum.
Helmeted, armed with long, spear-like boards, the surfers looked like gladiators going out to engage in mortal combat.
But sometimes it was more like seeing Christians fed to the lions.
The pipe lures surfers in but seldom lets them out again.
The jaws open, then clamp shut, occasionally spitting out the remnants of a broken board.
Potential contestants sat on the beach with limbs encased in plaster, crutches by their side.
On the fiendishly tricky 10 — 15 foot sets of the final rounds, resident Pipeline specialists began with a huge advantage.
But in the four-man final it was the Hawaiian goofy Ronnie Burns who, despite riding the longest tube, finished last.
Veteran Australian Cheyne Horan took third place, while Tahiti's Vetea ‘Poto’ David, a popular favourite with the crowd, who stylishly hot-dogged the biggest waves on the shortest board, was only narrowly pushed into second.
In the end it was the regular-footer Elkerton's ability to hit for six every type of wave — leg-breaks, off-breaks, googlies, head-severing bouncers — that the Pacific could bowl at him that gave him supremacy.
Having already come runner-up at the Hard Rock Café World Cup, Elkerton is now favourite to win the Triple Crown.
The last event in the series, the AAAAA-rated Billabong Pro, is scheduled to open today.
Offering the richest purse on the Tour — with a $50,000 first prize — this is a mobile contest that can take its pick among the numerous world-class waves of the North Shore.
An account of the more melancholy destinies of Ted and Carwyn, and the hopes and fears inspired by the Eddie, completed my quota.
So far, although Pottz was now officially numero uno , he still hadn't actually won in Hawaii.
There was speculation at the Masters that he was no longer trying.
In Pottz's quarter-final, Tom Carroll had yet another interference call against him.
He stupidly took off on the outside of a wave when  someone else had already established priority on the inside.
It looked as if his karma was working overtime.
The punishment for this crime was to be docked his best wave, so his tally would be reduced to three against the other surfers' four.
Normally, as at the 1988 Billabong when Lynch went on to win, that would be enough to ensure his automatic exit.
But Carroll went on to harvest three high-scoring waves, putting the pressure back on his opponents.
The final set was decisive.
With four waves to choose from, each of the four surfers had a chance.
Liam McNamara (a North Shore surfer riding a Willis Phazer) took off on the first, followed by Tony Moniz (another local) on the second and Carroll on the third.
McNamara already had the first spot in the bag and Moniz was out, so the battle was on for second place.
Two men only would advance to the semis.
Carroll rode his wave irreproachably all the way in to shore.
As the last wave periscoped up, with only a minute or so left in the heat, Pottz knew he had to take it: he needed a fourth wave to beat Carroll.
This one was maybe fifteen foot, the most difficult of the set, pitching and rolling like a drunk.
Pottz drove for the peak and was winched irresistibly upwards.
Now he was teetering on the edge of the parapet.
He was peering down from the leaning tower of Pisa like Galileo testing his theory of gravity.
He took one last look into the abyss and slid back.
The wave spiralled forwards into a flawless but bone-crushing tube.
Carroll took second; Pottz was out.
When I caught up with Pottz later that evening, I asked him what had gone wrong.
‘Just didn't catch enough waves, mate.’
‘What about the last wave in the heat?’
‘Oh yeah, that one.’
‘Did you hesitate and pull back?’
He grinned conspiratorially.
‘Can you blame me?’ he said.
‘He's smart’, said Callahan.
‘You don't want to wind up on crutches when you've just won the world title.’
IT'S DOG eat dog out there.’
‘In the water, you mean?’
‘No, on the beach.
Those photographers would cut each other 's throats for a shot.’
I thought Callahan was exaggerating.
It was true that photographers swarmed around surfers like ducks around a crust of bread.
But they seemed on good terms, always fraternizing and joking together: a team of workmates on the assembly line.
‘Don't let that fool you’, said Callahan.
‘They're just trying to psych each other out.
They don't want anyone sneaking off and getting the shot of the decade.’
He told me about two photographers who used to work together.
One of them always got the better shots.
The other couldn't figure this out until one day he found his friend jiggling the settings on his camera, systematically sabotaging his work.
We were at the Café Haleiwa for breakfast.
It was packed at 8.30.
‘Yeah, they love it here when it rains’, Callahan muttered.
He laughed at me for missing out on perfect Pipe the day before.
I couldn't yet hear the jungle drums that told you where to go on any particular day.
Chang could.
Aaron Chang was Surfing's top photographer.
He was ‘Senior Photographer’ while Callahan was only ‘Photographer’.
‘For years he wouldn't even talk to me.
Thought I was just a wannabe nobody.’
Chang was muscular, unemotional, self-contained, with a smile that flickered like a defective light bulb.
Callahan called him ‘the enigma’.
He had found Chang browbeating a bodyboarder.
‘Don't you ever feel the need for real speed, for that acceleration you get when you dig your rail into the face of the wave?
You're never going to get that lying down.’
Surfers despised  bodyboarders for not standing up on their boards: they weren't walking on water, they were wallowing in it.
But bodyboarders knew they could do things with waves boardwalkers could only dream of.
Callahan said to Chang: ‘Yesterday you were talking about your shaper like he was your priest, as if you were having communion together.
Now you're preaching the sacrament of the foaming fibreglass, and digging your rail into the face like it was some kind of religion.
Why don't you leave the guy alone?’
‘Why don't you shut up, Callahan?’ was Chang's response.
‘It was like he was trying to save souls.’
Callahan wasn't religious about surfing.
That was one of the things I liked about him.
He respected it, he loved it, but there were limits.
He didn't worship it, or surfers either.
But there was one thing Callahan was religious about: surfing photography.
Whenever we arranged to meet anywhere he would invariably let me down and his excuse was invariable too: ‘I was taking shots for Surfing .’
I got the impression that if he was found guilty of robbery, rape and murder, his plea in mitigation would be: ‘I was taking shots for Surfing .’
And he would expect it to get him off the hook.
Chang lived just a couple of doors along from me at Backyards, sharing a house with Barton Lynch, so we often ran into each other on the early morning surf check.
He said the profession of surfing photography was like a pyramid.
There was only room for one at the top and he was it.
He rejected the claims of Hornbaker.
I had met Jeff Hornbaker in France.
When Callahan heard that Hornbaker was on his way, he was as jumpy as Gary Cooper waiting for Frank Miller and his gang to ride into town in High Noon .
He warned me to be on my guard.
‘He looks like a pirate — acts like one, too.’
Whenever I ran into him he would ask, ‘Seen Hornbaker yet?’
Hornbaker was shadowing Pottz, shooting a video for Gotcha.
He was another senior photographer for Surfing and reminded me of a more weatherbeaten Errol Flynn.
In France he was courted by publicity-conscious surfers; people asked  him for his autograph.
In Hawaii Chang said, ‘Hornbaker?
He wants to be me .’
I'd heard from a sceptic that there were only six basic shots in surfing photography and everything else was just window dressing.
This opinion enraged Chang.
‘There are infinite possibilities.
We've hardly begun to explore them.
Nobody ever gets the same wave — even when it is the same wave.
Photographing waves is like photographing women.
There's no end.
You just keep looking for another beautiful woman.’
The water shot stood as the quintessence and pinnacle of the photographer's art.
Don King was famous for swimming one-armed into the most critical positions, taking his shots, then melting away into another dimension until the danger had passed.
At Pipeline he was like Daniel in the Lions' den.
Chang had produced some seemingly impossible shots too: not just decapitating waves as they curled over and scimitared down, but the underbelly of the wave as well, shot through the turbulence; the lip from behind and below; the inside of the barrel taken from the inside looking out.
It was the photographic equivalent of sawing a lady in half, except the photographer was also the lady.
Callahan's speciality was what I thought of as the ‘establishing shot’: the picture that put everything into context.
Even before I met him I'd admired a North Shore picture of his which showed the Kam Highway as it meandered out of the hills and down into Haleiwa, flanked by pineapple plantations and clumps of trees, and in the distance the Pacific, rippling with big waves.
But he liked water photography too.
Once Chang pulled rank on Callahan at Sunset and ordered him out of the water.
‘I'm taking the shots here’, he said.
‘You'll have to wait your turn.’
Callahan shot a roll for me at Lacanau.
They were some of the best he'd ever taken, he said, but it was difficult to tell since he'd dropped them in the water when he was changing film.
One of the worst things that could happen was getting water in your camera housing.
It happened to Sarge.
‘It was my first time here and I wasn't used to the power.
I could see the lens just swimming around in there.
I kept on taking shots  anyway so as not to lose face.’
Sarge — his real name was Paul Sargeant — was an Australian who had modelled himself on John Belushi and disapproved of good language (he once took me to task for using the word ‘carouse’).
He used to be a surfer and dreamed of being one again.
He was always talking about the board he was having shaped back in Sydney.
Once in Hawaii he was hit by a wave and lost all his equipment.
‘I borrowed some other guy's gear and went straight back out and lost his too.
He was pissed.’
Now Sarge stuck to the beach and was fanatical about covering every angle on land.
Photographers were vital to the development and promotion of surfing, publicizing its beauty and drama.
Their pictures were the memory bank of the sport, canonizing the ephemeral in magazines that surfers collected like relics.
But now they threatened to desecrate the temple.
‘Sometimes there are so many in the water,’ said Chang, ‘they destroy the wave.
All they do is set up an obstacle course for the surfer.’
It was a test of manhood to get as close as possible to the board without a fin raking across your back.
Some who had failed to get out of the way in time bore the scars like war wounds or medals which they paraded for public admiration.
During contests, photographers were policed and only two were allowed in the water at any one time.
But at Pipeline on a non-competition day there might be over twenty in a scrum around the peak as if they were shooting Marilyn Monroe.
‘Like rats in a cage’, said Callahan.
Chang had got his start when Dan Merkel went into cinema.
Merkel had worked on Big Wednesday , probably the best film about surfing ever made.
Merkel was small and irascible with brillo-pad hair.
He was as cranky as a bad-tempered goat, always putting his head down and charging into things that annoyed him.
Almost everything annoyed him, but especially other photographers.
‘Fucking photogs.
More of 'em on the beach than surfers in the water.’
He was like the man in a traffic jam who curses all the other cars for taking his road, but he didn't see it that way.
‘There are only two serious magazines in the States,’ he said (SurfING and SurfER ), ‘a  handful in the rest of the world.
Surfing can only sustain about a dozen photographers.
So what are the rest of them doing?
I'll tell you.
They're tourists.’
‘Tourist’ was about the worst term of abuse you could use.
‘This place has lost a lot of lustre.’
Merkel had come up with a sinister final solution to the population explosion.
He cackled as he told me of his plan.
‘I'm going to give all my shots away free this year.
The magazines will be printing nothing but Merkels.
All the others'll be nowhere.
They won't be able to sell a thing.
I'll starve 'em out.’
Extermination was a form of altruism, he argued.
‘I'll be doing 'em a favour — magazines pay a pittance anyway.
Next year, it'll be me and a couple of others and that'll be it.
It'll be like paradise all over again.’
IN THE winter of '88 Betty had been fleeced by an Australian photographer.
His name was Bruce Carver.
He stayed for weeks, ran up astronomical phone bills, and then vanished.
One evening there was a call from Bruce Carver.
He was sorry he'd forgotten to pay Betty any money last year, but could he come and stay for a while and pay her then?
Betty said that would be fine.
He had an unshaven anvil chin, glittering eyes and a blonde-haired schoolteacher whose name was Maya.
It was her first trip to Hawaii.
They took over Yvon's room while he was away in Peru.
Carver explained that he was expecting a friend in Australia to wire him $1,500 any day.
Bruce Carver reminded me of Bill Murphy.
Bill was an American photographer I had met in Nicaragua.
He didn't know you had to change $60 into cordobas at the official rate before you could get into the country.
All he had was $30: he'd blown everything else on a crazy night in Miami.
I loaned  him the other $30.
He would have a lot more wired down the next day.
I didn't have to worry.
He was a Vietnam veteran from Rhode Island who had also been a drug enforcement agent in Pennsylvania and a cosmetologist in Palm Beach, and he was in Nicaragua to take combat photos.
When he decided to head north to enlist in the Sandinista army, I left I had to tag along just to protect my investment.
On the last day of the Marui Pipeline Masters, Bruce Carver and Maya went up in a helicopter to take some aerial shots.
Carver wanted me to send a picture to London.
Maya was bubbling with excitement afterwards.
It was her first trip in a helicopter.
When I went to bed at around two o'clock that night, everyone else was still out partying.
I woke up when someone shook me by the shoulder.
Maya was sitting on the bed next to me.
She was babbling something about helicopters.
‘America has invaded Panama.’
‘Really?’
I looked at my watch.
It was 4.30.
‘I've just seen all these Chinooks taking off.
It was amazing.
I've got to write a story on this.
Can you send it to The Times ?’
It sounded like a nightmare.
An Australian schoolteacher in Hawaii wanting to write a story on the States invading Panama for The Times in London.
It got worse.
‘Can I borrow your computer?’
I explained at length that I didn't think this was such a good idea.
She didn't know how to use it and I didn't want my memory wiped.
In 2001: A Space Odyssey there is a poignant scene where the computer, Hal, has his brain disconnected in retaliation for un-user-friendly conduct.
As each of the memory discs is unkeyed in turn, his intellect drains away.
‘It's going,’ says Hal, ‘I can feel it going.’
I identified deeply with Hal's predicament: there were many moments when I could feel my brain going — especially in Hawaii.
This was one of them.
‘Maybe you could just get it started for me.’
I dragged myself out of bed and set the machine up on the kitchen table.
With one tentative finger, Maya started tapping out the opening of her story.
‘There were ten Chinooks…’
Then she paused, searching for inspiration.
I left her to it and retreated to my room.
Half an hour later, unable to sleep, I got up again.
She was on the second line.
‘Still more Chinooks whirred their propellers and…’
I told her I thought The Times would probably have a man on the spot and it was late, and I prised my Toshiba away from her grasping hands.
As I closed my door she was still sitting there, wide awake, but dreaming of Chinooks.
I slept fitfully.
When I wandered out for a surf-check in the morning, Michael was sitting on the bench.
‘Did you miss it?’
‘Miss what?’
‘Only the biggest drama of the winter.
There were police cars, fire engines, helicopters — oh yeah, and a naked woman.
What more can you ask for?’
Carver and Maya had been fighting.
She had caught him flirting with another woman.
The invasion of Panama, curiously summed up for her in the shape of Chinook helicopters, had served as a convenient diversion.
After her abortive attempt to break into journalism, she had gone down to the beach, flung off her dress, and plunged into the water at Backyards.
It was six to eight and heavy.
Betty saw her swimming away into the darkness and called the emergency services.
Maya cut through the breakers into the line-up and then steered towards Sunset.
Hooded waves sprang out at her like muggers from underwater alleyways.
The helicopter found her in the vicinity of Kammies.
She was still stroking and heading for Waimea.
She was a strong swimmer.
As she looked up into the spotlight and the rope ladder unfurled she thought the Chinooks had come for her.
There were American military bases scattered all over the Islands: they were there to protect the Pacific.
Camouflaged trucks patrolled the Kam Highway and US Army grunts invaded the beaches in their time off.
When the States took over Panama, the troops stationed in Hawaii were put on full alert in case of a retaliatory attack.
Perhaps they feared  another Pearl Harbor.
Panama was five thousand miles away, but you couldn't be too sure: it was still America's backyard.
‘You're worse than Noriega’, I heard Maya yell at Carver.
She thought of him as a drug-running tyrant.
‘I've paid all this money to come to Hawaii and all you can do is screw around.’
Noriega had gone into hiding.
The might of the armed forces searched in vain for some trace of this elusive enemy of freedom, originally shoehorned into power to guard American interests.
‘He hasn't been paying his dues’, was Michael's comment.
Bruce Carver and Maya ran to ground, too.
He'd run up another massive telephone bill and hadn't paid Betty a dime.
‘The skunk.
What a sucker I am’, she said.
I never got my money back from Bill Murphy, either.
I even had to loan him some more to get out of Nicaragua.
After being rejected by the Sandinistas, he resolved to become a flying doctor and ferry medical supplies to war-stricken campesinos .
As far as I know, he never returned.
I saw Bruce Carver on the beach once or twice after that.
He tried to sell me a Pottz picture.
Maya said, ‘You ever been up in a helicopter?’
‘ANDY THAT'S the best thing that could have happened to you.’
That was Michael Willis's line whenever I told him about some fresh disaster in the surf.
I often watched Michael at work in his shaping room.
All he wore was a pair of shorts and a mask.
He gave me a mask too.
‘Is this dust bad for you?’
I said.
‘There's dust at the centre of the universe’, he said.
‘We're all made out of dust, aren't we?’
He didn't want me to worry about my health.
‘Check those lights’, he said.
I looked at the tubular lighting in the roof.
‘They emit vitamins.
The more you work in here the healthier you get.’
He listed all the variables of a board: length, width, thickness, bottom curve, nose, tail, fin configuration, rocker, rails, V, stringer.
‘I've shaped all the shapes’, he said.
‘So there is an almost infinite number of possible combinations?’
He looked pensive.
‘Yes.
But they don't all work.
An eagle flies better than a pelican even though they've both got wings.’
Michael's parable reminded me of Jules Verne's Albatross , a flying machine with seventy-six propellers, which was supposed to be modelled on the flight of a bird.
But the Albatross was superseded in turn by a still more extravagant vehicle — at once spaceship, submarine, and racing car — called The Terror .
The requirement of mimesis compelled inventors to find a model for their designs in nature.
In this I was no different from Michael, but where he thought of eagles, I thought of dolphins.
Arion, son of Poseidon and master of the lyre, was sailing to Corinth when he was put overboard by the captain, who coveted his wealth.
His last song attracted a school of dolphins, one of which ferried Arion on his back all the way to Corinth.
Now that the rounded nose of the old malibu had been sharpened to a point in the thruster, the benign image of the dolphin had dissolved into the leering grin of a shark, inverted, its fin trailing in the water.
Boards could maim as well as protect: they had to be muzzled with noseguards.
‘Here, look at this rail.’
Michael pointed out how he had a long curve along the top of the board's edge, and only a small curve at the bottom.
‘You can make it fifty-fifty.
But I prefer eighty-twenty.
Why?
The more you have on top, the more it lifts you; the more you have on the bottom, the more you're pulled down.
I prefer to go up rather than down, don't you?’
I did.
I wanted a Willis board.
I wanted a Phazer.
‘The board  I'm going to make for you will be a masterpiece’, Michael said.
‘It's going to fit you like a glove.
You see, I know what you're like.
So I know what your board should be like.
I'll sign it, but it'll have your name written all over it.’
He carried on sanding the blank into shape.
‘But you want to know my dream?
To produce boards the way you produce record albums.
From a master copy.
I want everyone to have a board like yours.’
It was only the fact that boards were expensive, Michael thought, that kept some people out of the water.
He stood back to admire his handiwork.
His next words astonished me.
‘There's an ugliness to boards,’ he said, ‘an extreme ugliness.
And I'll tell you why.
The material.
This idea of being in harmony with nature on the wave — isn't that the biggest crock of shit you ever heard?’
‘So you don't think surfers are in harmony with nature?’
‘With a polyurethane board?
Impossible.
You're destroying nature.
Polyurethane is plastic.
The whole thing is toxic.
You breathe a burning surfboard and you die.
To me it's a crock of shit to go out and harmonize with nature on my resin polyurethane surfboard.’
Michael loved the surfboards he shaped.
But he hated what he loved.
He confided his second dream to me.
‘What I want is a biodegradable board — like the husk of a grain of wheat.
That way, when you bust your board, you don't just toss it in the garbage.
You bury it in the earth and fertilize a tree — that's what I call harmony with nature.
It's the only way to go: the mass-produced organic biodegradable surfboard.’
‘Do you think it's technically possible?’
‘Do you think God would give me the vision and no way to make it come true?
Everything is possible.
Show me something that's not possible.
Where were you when they put a man on the moon?’
I told Callahan about Michael's ideas.
‘You don't think surfers are worried about feeding the plants, do you?
All they want to know is: am I going to get a good bottom turn?’
He thought Michael was a dreamer.
But Michael was undeterred by scepticism.
‘The nineties will be the decade of the board builder.
I have plans, I have a myriad projects.’
I hoped his plans included building a board for me.
In the meantime, I kept using what was left of Ted's Excalibur.
Then I met Alan, who worked for Olo Surfboards.
I gave him a lift into Honolulu one night when his car had broken down.
He was a shaper, too.
It was almost an hour's drive, which gave him time to elaborate his philosophy.
He told me I should never use a leash.
They were the work of the devil.
I told him a leash was all I had.
What I needed was a board to go with it.
‘You don't have a board?’
The idea struck him as somehow absurd, as if I had told him I didn't have a head or a heart.
‘Come on over to my place.
I've got loads of old boards just lying around.
Pick one up to suit yourself.’
He gave me his number.
I called several times and spoke to his wife.
Finally we arranged to meet in Foodlands at six.
I waited until 6.30 and then left.
‘Alan?’ said Bodo.
‘You don't mean Bullshit Alan, do you?’
‘Well, he didn't call himself Bullshit Alan.’
‘No, but everyone else does.’
I never heard from Alan again.
Bodo said he'd take me out and loan me one of his boards.
I met him at Laniakea (familiarly known as Lani's ), a long, multi-peaked break past Jocko's heading towards Haleiwa.
He had Damon with him.
Damon was a nineteen-year-old student from California who was staying with Bodo and Liese for a month.
He was a great surfer.
I would have two great surfers with me.
This time I knew I couldn't fail.
There was a brief debate over which way we should paddle out.
Half a mile from the beach there were three breaks: from right to left as you looked out, big, medium, and small.
You could paddle out from the right alongside a rock jetty, or you could go from the left.
Before Bodo arrived I'd already decided in favour of the gentler angled approach through the rip from the left, with an eye on building up gradually from the small to the not-so-small.
Damon said, ‘I'm taking the short-cut’, and dived in with his board by the rocks.
Bodo said, ‘You might as well come with us.’
He drew me a map of the route with a stick in the sand.
‘There's a path through the break here, where it's not so strong.’
The first few hundred yards were deceptively smooth.
But accelerating towards us was a row of sharp, jutting, foamy peaks, like a set of upturned shark's teeth wreathed in toothpaste.
‘Where's the path?’
I yelled to Bodo above the grinding of jaws.
‘It's right in front of us.
Follow me’, he said.
It had seemed clear enough in the sand.
Now all I could see was spray.
I tried ducking under broken sections, but they just ducked right down after me.
When Bodo saw I was in trouble, he said ‘We'd better turn round and go out the other way.
‘No, come on, we can make it!’
I cried.
My overriding desire at this point was not to do any more paddling.
We were only twenty or thirty yards from the line-up, albeit divided from it by a thin blue line of helmeted, truncheon-tipped breakers.
The paddle in, around, and out again, was at least a mile.
I knew I wasn't up to it.
Bodo mistook my cowardly calculation for gutsy heroism.
‘Yay,’ he cried as a wave broke over his head, ‘that's the fighting spirit!
Andy, you're a credit to British surfing.
Pottz lookout!’
I scrambled frantically up the face of another eight-footer.
Miraculously, we were out the back.
Damon was already up and running; Bodo was champing at the bit.
‘I'll check out the smaller break for starters.
Catch up with you later.’
I crawled off.
By the time I reached the furthest peak I was feeling distinctly sick.
I'd been yo-yoing up and down a rollercoaster for the best part of an hour and I was still hung over from the phial of ‘Renshenfengwangjiang’— a potent blend of panax ginseng and royal bee jelly — that Michael Willis had persuaded me to drink for breakfast.
Then it started raining.
I drove into the mouth of a carnivorous  wave with the reckless abandon of a man who has just been given a week to live.
It wasn't the best possible trial for Bodo's eight-foot minitanker.
It was like test-piloting a plane and crashing on the runway.
I still hadn't made a clean take-off.
When Michael asked me later ‘Are you ready for Sunset yet?’,
I said I didn't think so, but I would be soon.
Every day I went to see him I hoped I would be fitted out with my bespoke Willis Phazer.
I knew it took a while to finish a board: there was not just the shaping, but the painting and the glassing.
When it came to within a few days of my scheduled departure date, I said to Michael, ‘I suppose it's too late now.’
‘Andy, what's my last name?’
‘Willis.’
‘And how do you spell it?’
‘W — I — L — L — I — S. Isn't that right?’
‘Yeah, but in two syllables.’
‘Will…’
‘You got it.
WILL IS.’
BODO'S EPIC misinterpretation of my failure at Lani's established itself as the authorized version of events.
Betinna said, ‘I hear you've been a hero.’
Liese said, ‘This has been a day of great accomplishments.’
I could have wept with frustration.
Liese made me dinner in the Chinese style: miso soup, stir-fried vegetables, sweetsap for dessert.
Afterwards she fixed me a potion she promised would tone up my whole system.
She had a cupboardful of Chinese remedies.
I asked her if she had any medication that would make me a better surfer.
‘No.
There is nothing that will make you a better surfer.’
‘I need more control.
I've got no control.’
‘You mustn't seek control.
You must be like a piece of wood  in the ocean: wood always floats to the surface, even though it is rolled over and held under.’
Her hallucinatory voice, creamy as cappuccino, soothing as Valium, anaesthetized my instinctive resistance.
‘The wave cannot be mastered — you can only move with it, not against it.
It is the same with your Self: don't struggle to impose your will: let your mind be your body and your body be your mind.’
She prescribed a massage.
Strands of wispy Chinese music looped themselves around my brain like a spider's web.
Liese rolled a sheaf of a Chinese root which she grew in her garden and put a match to it.
The smoke wafted up my nose like incense.
She blew on the cigar and held it next to my skin.
I thought I was on fire but the cigar left no mark.
Liese scoured my body for tension.
‘These hands are like X-rays.
They are like magnets, drawn to those parts of your body that need healing.’
Whenever she found a knotted muscle she would say, ‘Here we have a coconut’, and then pound the spot into insensibility.
Then she would say, ‘That is better.’
When I cried out, I didn't know whether it was with pain or pleasure.
I saw nothing but her deep brown legs as she knelt beside me, felt nothing but her strong hands kneading me like dough.
I told her I suffered from headaches.
She squeezed my ankle and said, ‘There, this will help your head.’
Liese told me the two centres of the chi — the life force — were located an inch or two above and below the navel.
She gave a few tentative prods.
‘How is my chi?’
I asked.
‘Pretty sleepy’, she said.
‘But it will wake when you need it.’
When she had finished she shook her arms, as if trying to dry her hands.
‘I absorb your tension’, she explained.
‘It is like a glass of dirty water.
To clean the water I must take the dirt out.
It does not help just to stir it around.’
Liese thought the ocean could teach me many things.
‘Listen to Lao-tzu in the Tao Te Ching ’, she said:
Under heaven nothing is more soft and yielding than water.
Yet for attacking the solid and the strong, nothing is better.
It has no equal.
The weak can overcome the strong.
The supple can overcome the stiff.
Under heaven everyone knows this, Yet no one puts it into practice.
‘You must watch and imitate.
That is how my master taught me.
He used to say: ‘I cannot teach you.
But you can learn’.’
It was on that night that we consulted the I Ching .
Liese explained how I could look for answers; but first, silently, I had to formulate my question.
‘It has to be something important to you.’
I thought: ‘Will I get to surf Sunset before I leave?’
I tossed the three discs.
The combination of different faces produced a score which required me to inscribe a divided line or a single unbroken line on a sheet of paper.
After six throws I had a hexagram which looked like this:
I checked my hexagram against the index, which led me to the pages headed Ta Kuo: Preponderance of the Great .
I read them with a kind of terror.
The hexagram represents a beam that is thick and heavy in the middle but too weak at the ends.
This is a condition that cannot last; it must be changed, must pass, or misfortune will result…
It is an exceptional time and situation; therefore extraordinary measures are demanded.
It is necessary to find a way of transition as quickly as possible and to take action.
This promises success…the time when the great preponderates is a momentous time.
I read on and learned that a nine in the second place means:
A dry poplar sprouts at the root.
An older man takes a young wife.
Everything furthers.
Wood is near water; hence this image of an old poplar sprouting at the root.
This means an extraordinary reanimation of the processes of growth.
In the same way, an extraordinary situation arises when an older man marries a young girl who suits him.
Despite the unusualness of the situation, all goes well.
From the point of view of politics, the meaning is that in exceptional times, one does well to join with the lowly, for this affords the possibility of renewal.
This, I felt, was the story of my life.
If I interpreted it correctly —‘Nothing is definite, you must interpret the words’, Liese said — I had only to keep lying on my bed of North Shore nails for it to turn ultimately into a pillow of foam.
Betinna lay curled up like a long-haired cat on the sofa.
I asked the I Ching one more question.
I found my hexagram under the rubric K'un — Oppression (Exhaustion ).
I had a six in the third place.:
He butts his head against a wall and in consequence feels oppressed by the wall…
Thereupon he turns back irresolutely and returns to his house only to find, as a fresh disappointment, that his wife is not there.
I needed no further warning.
I fled into the night.
I WANTED to meet some ‘real’ Hawaiians, but they were hard to find.
I knew there was an island reserved for racial Hawaiians.
But I never went there.
I knew there was a strong Hawaiian community on the west side of Oahu, in Makaha.
But on the day I went to Makaha I got distracted by a shapely wave and a firm offshore and met no one apart from a lifeguard in the tower and a girl on the beach.
Captain Cook's third and last voyage was a dismal echo of the first two.
Cook was suffering the effects of a debilitating illness that had killed many of his earlier crew; his ship had been poorly repaired and took in water constantly; the North-West Passage was impassable.
He was sobered to find that many Tahitians were already dying from the venereal diseases bequeathed to them on a previous visit.
Cook may have sensed that, like a cloud of anti-matter, he was fated to destroy whatever he discovered.
He foresaw the decimation of the Hawaiian people; perhaps he had some premonition of his own end too.
The Puritan missionaries thought the heathens didn't deserve to exist and the heathens were so compliant that they duly dwindled towards extinction.
The population of more than 300,000 at the time of Cook's arrival had plummeted to less than 40,000 by the end of the nineteenth century.
Many sought refuge in intermarriage, with Chinese, Japanese, Filipinos, Thais, as well as Americans and Europeans.
While we in other countries had become Hawaiianized, the Hawaiians themselves had melted away.
They were everywhere and they were nowhere.
On the North Shore, racial disharmony found a hook in the simple division between locals and haoles (pronounced ‘howlies’).
Haoles were white people.
Locals were almost  everyone else.
The word haole meant ‘without breath’, lifeless; it could also mean ‘ignorant’.
The feeling that Hawaii had been unlawfully possessed by the United States was still a potent force.
Hawaii was of the United States but it was not in it.
It often looked askance at the mainland.
When the States invaded Panama, the typical reaction was ‘why don't we keep our noses out of other people's business’.
Panama seemed to many like a re-enactment of Hawaiian history: the States had needed a reason to take over and it had found one.
The Americans turned the Islands into a plantation and Honolulu was now the business centre of the Pacific.
But it was always the newcomers who did well: the older families, the Hawaiians, were always the losers.
‘Without welfare,’ said Callahan, ‘there'd be an Hawaiian liberation army camped in the hills, armed to the teeth with machine guns.
Economically and politically, they've been completely disenfranchised.
Genetically, they've been wiped out.’
He said there was a protest movement, similar to that among American Indians, which had had some small success in winning back some of the lands that had been taken over.
The sense of dispossession sustained an underworld of thugs, drug pushers, and thieves (I wanted to write about crime in Hawaii, but the godfather of the North Shore let me know that he'd rather I didn't).
The ASP had once had to pay protection money to prevent disruption to the Triple Crown.
‘But surfing is the main way out for Hawaiians.
It's about the only thing that hasn't been sold off to the Japanese — yet.’
The Hawaiian surf club, the Hui o he'enalu , had become a focus and a forum for dissatisfaction and dissent.
In certain quarters the members of the club were known as ‘the Black Shorts’ on account of their surfing costumes.
The name accidentally recalled the pseudo-fascist organization run by P. G. Wodehouse's comic villain, Roderick Spode.
I felt that Bertie Wooster might not have approved.
But the Hui was essential to the orderly running of the ASP contests.
Formidable members of the Black Shorts, more formally known as the ‘Water Patrol’, policed the contest areas, warning off errant outsiders.
There was no chance of my winning the women's event here.
‘Surfing is what you do when you've got nothing left’, said Hailama, one of the contest beach marshals.
His name meant ‘old warrior’(I remembered it by thinking of the High Lama in Lost Horizons).
I had a theory that Hawaiians had the same kind of relationship with the sea as the Australian aborigines had with the land.
The sea was their patrimony, their past, their reservoir of stories about themselves.
‘We'd like to have a relationship with the land,’ Hailama said, ‘but we ain't got no land.
All I've got is my surfboard.
I was practically born and raised on a surfboard.
The beach is my back yard.’
He hankered after a lost Golden Age.
The North Shore wasn't the way it used to be.
‘It's got so heavy here.
There's so much shit come up.
I used to know everybody.
Now there's guys like you around.’
I was the whitest human being on the island.
I stood out like Moby Dick.
I was chief haole, a direct descendant of Captain Cook.
In the Bishop Museum in Honolulu, I found the sixteen-foot board that George Freeth used to ride.
Freeth was the surfer of Hawaiian and Irish ancestry who tried to teach Jack London to ride the breakers of Waikiki in the first decade of the century.
The board was supposed to have been given to him by his uncle, an Hawaiian prince.
It was Freeth who introduced surfing to California.
Henry Huntington, who would give his name to Huntington Beach, had built a railway from Los Angeles to Redondo.
But no one wanted to go there.
An article in a national magazine by Jack London on ‘The Royal Sport’ inspired him to devise a publicity stunt to pull in the crowds.
He invited Freeth to demonstrate the art of surfing at Redondo Beach.
In the spring of 1907 Freeth, billed as THE MAN WHO WALKS ON WATER, became the first surfer to ride a wave on the mainland coast, while Californians rode Huntington's trains to go to watch him.
Freeth stayed on to become the first lifeguard too, and when he died during an influenza epidemic at the age of thirty-five it was said that he had exhausted himself rescuing swimmers.
Terry Ahue worked as a lifeguard at Pipeline and was  President of the Hui o he'enalu .
I saw him a lot at the Ehukai Beach Park where he was based, but only managed to talk to him at any length at a party in the hills.
As we swung in a hammock by the fire he explained that far from being a subversive organization, the Hui was actually a preserver of traditions.
Surfing had a symbolic value for Hawaiians.
It was like a barometer whose health or malaise reflected the state of society as a whole.
‘What's happening to surfing is happening to everything,’ Terry said, ‘that's progress for you.’
For the Hui , Hawaii was surfing — everything else was superficial and transient.
But superficiality had crept into surfing, too.
On the one hand, Hawaiians were proud that the climax of the Tour was back where it should be.
‘Australia, who wants to go to Australia?’ one lifeguard sneered.
On the other hand, there was bitterness at the exploitation of surfing in Hawaii.
‘What has Billabong got to do with us?’
Someone was making money out of Hawaii, but it wasn't the Hawaiians.
Hawaiians who weren't even competing felt it most of all.
‘Let's all go to Burleigh Heads [in Queensland]and take over the place for their best month.
And see what they say.’
Duke Kahanamoku was one of the founders of the first Hawaiian surf club, known as the Hui Nalu .
It was said that the Kahanamokus were the descendants of Kamehameha the Great, but Duke inherited his name from his father, a Honolulu police captain who was named after the then Duke of Edinburgh following his visit to the Islands in 1869.
Born in 1890, Duke lived his early years in the waters of Waikiki.
It was the dream-time of surfing, the creation, when everything was still possible.
There were no skyscrapers, no bikinis, no suntan oil; you lived off fish, fruit and poi .
In those days no one surfed the North Shore.
The waves of the South Shore were long in forming and slow to break and the water was a constant seventy-six degrees.
Waikiki was where the bygone chiefs of Oahu had surfed.
Princess Kaiulani had defiantly ridden her big olo board in the bay in the last decade of the nineteenth century, but the old skills had been lost.
Now Duke and his brothers began trimming sideways across the  face of the waves, as their ancestors had done, rather than riding them straight into the beach.
Photographs of the period show a grinning Duke with his ten-foot board looming up behind him like a tall wooden tombstone, his name engraved on the deck like an epitaph.
FOR THE better part of two decades, Duke Kahanamoku was the best swimmer in the world.
In a timed swim across Honolulu Harbour in 1911 he covered 100 yards in 55.4 seconds, shattering the existing record by 4.6 seconds.
The judges were so incredulous they twice remeasured the length of the course.
Mainland officials rejected the claim in disbelief.
In 1912 Duke represented the United States at the Olympic Games in Stockholm and won the gold medal in the 100 metres freestyle, losing it again only in 1924 to Johnny Weissmuller: ‘It took Tarzan to beat me’, he used to say.
When he returned to Hawaii he was more than a hero, he was a saviour, a messiah.
He would tour the world quietly preaching the gospel of surfing.
Those who met him never forgot it.
There was a debate among anthropologists over the question of origins.
In pre-European times, surfing was practised from Easter Island to New Guinea, in Micronesia and Melanesia, although it was only in Hawaii and Tahiti, whence the Hawaiians had come, that riders stood up on their boards.
Dieter Schori in Das Floss in Ozeanien argues that occurrences of surfing elsewhere can all be traced to Polynesian influence.
Ben R. Finney, on the other hand, in Surfboarding in Oceania , favours the hypothesis of independent invention, drawing attention to the different names for he'enalu in different places (wahakaheke ngaru among the Maoris and fakapapa in Uvea).
But what is beyond question is that, in the post-contact era, it was Hawaii that colonized other countries with surfing.
In 1912, C. D. Paterson of Manly in Australia returned from Hawaii with a heavy redwood board which a few local bodysurfers tried in vain to ride.
In 1915 the New South Wales Swimming Association invited Duke Kahanamoku to the Domain Baths in Sydney where he beat his own world record for the 100 yards with a time of 53.8 seconds.
When he arrived at Manly beach with a board he had carved out of sugar pine, many were those who said that riding a wave on a board was pure myth, a legend of the South Seas brought back by drunken sailors.
On 15 January 1915, a bright Sunday morning in summer, while in Europe men were digging trenches to die in, Duke paddled out at Manly.
The lifeguard boat offered to tow his board out through the pounding break.
Duke laughed good-naturedly and turned them down.
He powered through the water, leaving the boat and the other swimmers who had escorted him far behind.
Soon he was in the line-up in the northern corner of the bay.
He swivelled the board round, moved effortlessly into a wave and stood up, cutting diagonally across the break and finishing with a headstand.
Duke's miracle caused a sensation.
Young Australians clamoured to become his disciples.
By the time he left Sydney surfing had taken root in another continent.
Claude West, who had watched Duke that day, won the newly inaugurated national surfing championships from 1919 to 1924, and once saved the life of the Governor-General, Sir Ronald Munro Ferguson.
Many years later, it would be said of Australia that it was not a sea-going nation but a surf-going one.
Duke Kahanamoku begat surfing: he was the origin, the first cause, the primordial father of all.
He created the cult of the beach boy.
Surfers traced themselves back to the Duke as if he were Adam.
He seemed to embody in his person the entire history of the sport: he symbolized the Hawaiian spirit.
He saved twelve lives when a pleasure boat capsized in heavy surf at Corona del Mar in California in June 1925.
He played bit parts in Hollywood, acting alongside John Wayne in the 1948 Wake of the Red Witch .
He mellowed into a white-haired  wise man.
He knew everybody.
A friend was changing a light bulb when Duke said, ‘I knew Tommy.’
Tommy ?
The friend was baffled:Who the hell is Tommy ?
Then it dawned on him: Duke meant Thomas Edison.
Duke had met Thomas Edison .
President Kennedy, who as a young competitive swimmer had learned the Kahanamoku Kick, asked to meet him.
He became Sheriff of Honolulu, Official Greeter, and Hawaii's unofficial ambassador.
After he died of a heart attack in 1968 on the dock next to his boat at the Waikiki Yacht Club, his ashes were scattered over Kalahuewehe break.
In the early years of the twentieth century, hardly anyone surfed Kalahuewehe First Break, off Diamond Head, now known as Outside Castles.
These were the biggest waves on the South Side, like surfing the North Shore in Waikiki.
In 1917 Duke had ridden a Kalahuewehe wave half a mile till it died in front of the Royal Hawaiian Hotel, where now the ASP annual banquet is held.
It was hailed as the longest ride, but Duke was convinced a still longer ride was possible.
It was in the summer of 1932 that Duke paddled out alone into the biggest swell he had seen in his life, with a stiff offshore from the Koolau mountains pinning back the peaks, which he estimated at thirty feet, as big as the storm waves off Kaena Point.
The night before, a rumour had swept Waikiki that the ‘Bluebirds’ were coming: the giant tsunamis that thundered in only on very rare occasions.
Sometimes years would go by and there would be no sight of the Bluebirds.
Now the Bluebirds had come.
Duke wrestled with the torrential whitewater, spinning his Papa nui — a sixteen-foot, hundred-and-fourteen-pound semi-hollow Tom Blake board — upside down in an Eskimo roll to let the broken waves pass over him.
The sound as they smashed on the upturned bottom was like ‘a string of freight cars roaring over a trestle’.
At last in the line-up, rising and falling with the ridges and troughs, he wondered whether even he could withstand the force of the mighty impact zone.
This is how, in his partly autobiographical World of Surfing , he described the wave for which he is still remembered:
Strangely, it was as though the wave had chosen me more than I had chosen it.
It seemed a very personal and special wave — the kind that I had seen in my mind's eye in a night of tangled dreaming.
There was just this one wave and myself — no more.
Instinctively, I got to my feet when the pitch, slant and speed seemed right.
Left foot forwards, knees slightly bent, I rode the board down that precipitous slope like a man tobogganing down a glacier.
I shifted my weight, angled left, and shot into the big Castle Surf which was building and adding to the wave I was on.
Spray was spuming up wildly from my rails in a way I had never seen before.
Diamond Head was leaping at me from the right.
Then I was slamming into Elk's Club Surf, still sliding left, still fighting for balance, for everything and anything that would keep me upright.
Then I skidded and slanted through into Public Baths Surf.
Three surfs combined into one, big, rumbling and exploding.
A curl broke to my right and almost engulfed me, so I swung even further left and shuffled back on the board to keep from pearling.
Left it was; left and more left, with the board veeing a jet of water on both sides and making a snarl of speed and stress and thrust.
Borrowing several hundred yards from the Cunha Surf I steered the board into the now towering Queen's Surf.
One mistake would spill me into the maelstrom on my right.
I teetered, caught control again, and made it down that last forward rush, sliding and bouncing through the lunatic water.
That ride, from Castles, across Elks, Cunhas and Public Baths, as far as Queens, was the longest in the history of surfing, the ride of rides.
Duke reckoned it at a mile and three-quarters; the most conservative estimates put it at over a mile.
Duke never repeated that achievement, and now such a ride is no longer possible.
The bottom contours of the bay have changed and the lighter, shorter surfboards lack the momentum to connect the rider across the flat intervening sections to the next break.
But if surfers could no longer make those connections through space, they made them through time.
Surfing was all the Hawaiians had left: it was their last living link with the past.
The ancients had surfed while other nations floundered in the water or built unwieldy vessels to keep them precariously afloat.
They had established an intimacy and an affinity with the ocean which we can still only envy.
When the haoles took everything, surfing became a gesture of revolt, a symbolic reassertion of power over superior forces.
More than that, it was the Hawaiians' way of retaining a sense of dignity and worth, it was their way of staying alive.
And now the haoles were stealing their waves.
Martin Potter — from Captain Cook's own country — was taking over.
It was no accident that when Pottz won the world title one of the tabloid headlines in England ran: ‘Britannia Rules the Waves’.
But Hawaii had a natural defence against this brand of surfing imperialism: the big waves of winter and the Eddie Aikau.
David Kahanamoku, Duke's nephew, had already broken his ankle in the November swell at Waimea and been fished out of the Bay by Michael Willis.
As Hailama said, ‘You don't need a contest to have a contest here.’
ON THE North Shore I often heard people say ‘there are no two waves alike’.
They were like fingerprints, like snowflakes.
Surfers could describe individual waves as well as their friends or enemies.
They thought there was one wave that was meant just for them, in the same way that marriages were supposed to be made in heaven.
The Hawaiian wave is born thousands of miles away, awoken by the rotation of the sun and the moon, the circulation of the wind and the spinning earth.
It dies when it runs out of water to breathe and pump round its body.
When  water-depth decreases to 1.3 times wave-height, the wave is compressed, its steepness rises, and the orbital journey of a wave particle is squeezed into a tilted ellipse.
The onrushing crest dips below the critical 120-degree angle and falls forward in uncompleted cycles, thumping out its agony on the outstretched limbs of the land.
The wave, a creature of the sea, seems to suffocate and gasp when it is beached on the shore.
It is hardly surprising that it should occasionally wreak vengeance on its executioner.
A wave 10 feet high and 500 feet long can pack a punch of 400,000 pounds per linear foot of its crest.
Waves organize themselves into trains so that, as one of their number expires, a memory of its strength is bequeathed to its successors, consolidating their length (the distance between crests) and speed and height.
Sometimes converging swells will synchronize to produce a peak that is higher than any of the separate peaks that preceded it.
It is then that rogue waves appear, devouring other waves in their path to grow still larger.
Statistically, they are inevitable.
Waves cannot exceed a seventh of their length in height without breaking; but they can stretch to as much as a thousand feet.
The average ocean wave is five feet in height.
One wave in 23 is over twice the height of the average wave.
One in 1,175 is over three times the average.
But the totality of waves in the world is incalculable: who knows how many there are?
Giants stalk the waterways, day in, day out.
Odysseus met with them in the wine-dark sea of the Mediterranean and called them Cyclops, Scylla and Charybdis.
But those mythic monsters were as dwarves to the waves that inhabit other oceans.
Lieutenant Margraff was the watch officer aboard the USS Ramapo patrolling the North Pacific on the morning of 7 February 1933.
It was then, after a storm that had blown for seven days at speeds exceeding seventy knots, that the Ramapo encountered the biggest wave ever reported by a ship at sea.
Lieutenant Margraff estimated it to be 112 feet from base to crest.
The vessel survived.
Bigger waves undoubtedly occur, but those who witness them do not return to tell the tale.
Flying saucers and  kidnapping aliens have been postulated to explain the disappearance of whole vessels, supposedly spirited off to distant stars.
And giant waves are indeed like alien presences, as big as the Death Star, erasing ships and sailors as effectively as Martian ray guns.
They are a rigorous mystery, governed by unfathomable equations.
Waves ignore frontiers and time-zones as they echo round the world.
They can penetrate far inland in the form of tidal bores, funnelling incoming tides up a narrowing channel with increasing power and destructiveness.
People on the North Shore identify particular waves as ‘Ken's wave’ or ‘George's wave’.
There was once a wave that was Victor Hugo's wave.
For over twenty years, Hugo had masterfully deployed the metaphor of the wave: he had bent the wave to his own ends, he had coupled it to revolution, to love, to Napoleon, to centuries, pinning it to the page in alexandrines and rhymes.
On 4 September 1843, while Hugo was travelling with his mistress, his newly married daughter Léopoldine and her husband Charles took to the river at Villequier in a small sailing boat.
On the same day, the mascaret , a river-bore which had been known to reach as far as Paris, was sweeping up the Seine.
According to one account, by the time it hit Villequier, it was a wall of water several metres high moving at fifteen miles per hour.
What is certain is that the boat capsized and all on board were drowned.
Following his daughter's death, Hugo ceased writing for several years.
When he took up his pen again, it was as if he had assumed the annihilating impact of that wave: his books, he said, ‘must be read as if they were the books of a dead man’.
He divided his career into two phases,Autrefois (Before) and Aujourd'hui (Today); the dividing line was Villequier.
When he exiled himself to Jersey, it was to surround himself with ‘the sinister sheep of the sea’, ‘the hydra-headed dragon’, which had become for him an image of the abyss, of fate, and of God.
The last line of one of his last novels reads:There was nothing left but sea .
According to Hugo, everything speaks; everything has a soul.
Like Michael Willis, all he had to do was quote the wind  and the sea, flames, trees, reeds, rocks.
The ocean spoke to Hugo with its own distinctive voice:
Do you think that the ocean, which swells and struggles, Would be happy to open its mouth day and night, To breathe into the void a vapour of noise, And that it would roar, beneath the hurricane above, If its roaring was not speech?
Michael Willis, the ancient Hawaiians, Victor Hugo, had all been affected by wave-fever; all of them had abjured the text.
It seemed to me that there was a law relating in inverse ratio the experience of waves and the production of writing.
The bigger and more frequent the waves, the less scriptural the culture.
The biggest waves in the world generated a wholly oral society.
Waves washed away the words on the page as they swamped islands, ships, sailing craft and poets' daughters.
This theory would illuminate one lasting mystery.
Throughout his three great journeys of discovery and exploration, Captain James Cook had been the most assiduous of diarists, keeping an almost daily record of thoughts and observations.
The closing pages of his journal speak repeatedly of the ‘high surfs’ and ‘great waves’crashing against the Hawaiian littoral and preventing the Discovery and the Resolution from docking.
On 17 January 1799, nearly a month before Cook's death in Kealakekua Bay, the journal breaks off.
There are no rough notes for the succeeding weeks, and there is no explanation of his silence.
Cook was worshipped as Lono, god of peace and of surfing, and priests prostrated themselves before him.
Lono, who came forth from the waves, did not write.
THE HIGH priests of the North Shore, the ayatollahs of this surfing Mecca, are the big-wave riders.
When the swell rises to twenty feet plus and the high surf warning siren sounds and everyone else is evacuating the water, these are the men who paddle out.
If Sunset Beach, Banzai Pipeline, and Waimea Bay are the holy trinity of the thirty-odd North Shore breaks, Waimea is the Father, the holy of holies: slow to rise, but majestic and terrible when it does.
It can elevate and glorify, or it can crucify you.
Those who ride the Bay are surfing's acknowledged aristocracy.
Sponsored by sports companies and worshipped by women, these modern ali'i are torn between the claims of tradition and media-exploitation, divided in their approaches and personalities.
Ken Bradshaw and Mark Foo, two of the main pretenders to the crown, are a study in contrasts.
At the age of fifteen Ken ran away to California from his Texas home when his parents locked up his surfboard.
He kept on heading west, lured by the magnet of Hawaii.
After a succession of jobs as bellhop, waiter, car-park attendant, like a bit-part actor who finally made the big time in this aquatic Hollywood, he has built a career out of surfing big waves.
At thirty-six, he has the raw machismo of Burt Reynolds, the biblical authority of Charlton Heston, the classical physique of Johnny Weissmuller.
He jumps off waterfalls to pass the time of day.
Mark Foo is more in the mould of Bruce Lee, a Zen master among big-wave riders.
Born in Singapore thirty-one years ago, with a dash of French blood in his Asian veins, brought up on Hawaii, he did two years at the University of Hawaii, but concentrated on attending some of the tougher colleges of the North Shore before finally graduating from Pipeline  and Sunset to take his PhD at Waimea in the early eighties.
The student quickly claimed pre-eminence over his professors.
His sudden rise ruffled the feathers of the old guard, ‘the men with beards’ as he contemptuously called them.
They disliked his aggression, his finesse, his lack of respect for tradition, his obsession with media coverage.
No photos, no Foo.
There was no love lost between Ken Bradshaw and Mark Foo.
But there was a joker in the pack, too, a fool at this court of kings, a jester, a clown, pure showman and extrovert, the big-wave riders' answer to Evel Knievel.
His name was Alec Cooke, but he preferred to be known as Ace Cool.
A real estate agent and descendant of one of the old missionary families, he set out with only a minimal grasp of technique to achieve the simple objective of riding the biggest wave in history.
On 18 January 1985 there were plenty of old scores to settle.
By noon, the swell at the Bay had built to eighteen to twenty feet.
This is when it qualifies, in the phrase of its disciples, as ‘real Waimea’.
Ken Bradshaw was holding court among a handful of Waimea veterans.
By three o'clock, the twenty-five to thirty-foot sets were not just immense, but increasingly gnarly and hard to handle.
One of the beauties of Waimea is that, for all its size, it is regular and predictable, almost like a machine-wave, breaking at virtually the same spot every time.
But now Waimea had become as shifty and treacherous as Sunset, a churning vortex that would suck in the over-audacious.
Big Waimea has been described as a ‘lunatic washing machine’.
On that day, Bradshaw said, ‘it was more like a toilet.
Guys were getting flushed away.’
Bradshaw himself got picked off by a thirty-footer and lost his board.
He charged the half-mile to the narrow exit lane at the eastern end of the Bay, wedged between the point and the beach, but got trapped in the surging rip current that dragged him towards Coffin Corner, the shipwrecking rocks at the west end of the Bay.
He angled out to sea, carved round, then tried again, his huge arms working like steamshovels.
Again he was swept away.
Now he was on his third circuit of the Bay: he'd been ducking  under bulldozers for almost an hour.
Bradshaw's technique, his whole life, was built on the twin pillars of strength and stamina; he was used to taking on an unbeatable opposition and winning.
Now even he began to look defeated.
Betty, who was on the beach at the time, said: ‘We thought he was a goner.
No one had ever been more than twice round the Bay in those conditions and survived.’
Bradshaw knew he was running out of energy.
This time he hugged the point, coming in as close as he dared to the rocks, and felt the gut-wrenching tug of the rip as he approached the shore.
But then, as if Waimea had prematurely taken its gloves off, the waves all round him eased and he took advantage of the lull to belt the last thirty yards to the beach.
A lifeguard ran up to him, as he strode up the sand amid applauding spectators, and said, ‘Hell, you're not even out of breath, are you?’
In the oral history of the North Shore, 18 January 1985 is remembered, in part, as the day Ken Bradshaw swam three times round the Bay.
But it would become legend for other reasons, too.
No one was in a hurry to pick up where Bradshaw had left off.
Then James Jones, who had pioneered tube-riding at Waimea in the seventies, paddled out.
Foo and Cooke decided to join him.
They played cat and mouse with the Bay, now scrambling for the outside, now sneaking back in.
They flew over a thirty-foot tube which Foo described as ‘a huge cavern with half the ocean as its roof and sides’.
Jones taunted Cooke: ‘Hey Alec, if you'd caught that one you would have had the record.’
Bradshaw was getting ready to go out again when he caught sight of what he later called ‘indisputably the largest wave anybody has ever had to deal with’.
Out at the line-up, the three men were climbing over a routine thirty-five-footer when they heard screaming and the toot of car horns from the beach.
They looked up and the mammoth wave of all time, a titan among giants, a lumbering dinosaur of a wave, had rubbed out the sky.
It was still a quarter of a mile beyond the line-up and it was already feathering.
Estimates of the size of that wave vary.
Foo says it was twice as big as anything else that day, which would make it sixty to seventy feet from base to crest; some called it eighty feet.
Everyone agrees it was the most monstrous wave that had ever appeared on the North Shore.
To Foo it seemed so unreal, like a cartoon, a caricature of a big wave, that his initial reaction was to laugh.
The freak wave broke top to bottom across the entire length of the Bay.
The surfers bailed out and dived for the bottom.
Twenty-five feet down, Foo rolled over and saw an upside-down steam train puff by above him.
When he came to the surface, by some obscure miracle his leash had held, and his board was bobbing about a few yards away.
‘It was destiny,’ he says, ‘all part of the Plan.’
While the others started looking for land, he slid back onto his gun.
James Jones was picked up by helicopter.
Alec Cooke elected to keep swimming.
Within minutes, he was getting pulped by the shorebreak.
Three times pilot Bogart Kealoha lowered the cage to him.
Three times Cooke was pitched out by the pounding surf.
‘I was about to become hamburger on the rocks’, he admits.
At last he emerged from the maelstrom dangling from the bottom of the cage, safe from everything but ridicule and humiliation.
Foo was alone.
At this stage his main objective was to catch a wave all the way into the beach.
Colossal close-outs kept him sprinting for the horizon.
Unable to get far enough inside to catch one of the more amenable waves, Foo at last resolved to attempt an outside set.
With the helicopter hovering overhead, he drove for the peak of the leading wave, but then backed off.
The next wave was perhaps thirty-five feet, sucking inwards to produce a concave face like the inside of a bottle.
Foo was beyond the point of no return.
He launched himself over the edge, going into free-fall, his feet still planted on his board.
He connected up with the wave again another twenty-five feet down, but lost his footing and fell.
It felt more like landing on concrete than water.
He skipped on the surface, bouncing the rest of the way down the face.
Ted Deerhurst is one of the few Englishmen to have attempted big Waimea.
‘It's like jumping off the roof of a three-storey house,’ he said, ‘and then having the house chase you down the street.’
The house chased Foo, caught him and collapsed on top of him, obliterating his nine-foot three-stringer Lundy.
Foo's luck held.
He was given the most cathartic laundering of his life, but his reputation — and his earnings from sponsors — shot up when he published the story in magazines around the globe.
Bradshaw thought the hullabaloo was unjustified: ‘After all,’ he grumbled, ‘he didn't actually ride the damn thing.’
That was the Day of the Biggest Wave Never Ridden.
So who should receive the accolade of riding the biggest wave?
The consensus was that the palm should go to Darrick Doerner, a sinewy, red-haired Waimea lifeguard.
It was 31 January 1988, Super Bowl Sunday, the last day of the holding period for the Eddie Aikau.
In the morning, the swell was three feet.
George Downing called off the contest for another year.
But at noon, fifteen-foot waves started rolling in.
By three o'clock Waimea was twenty-five foot with thirty-foot sets.
When the biggest set of the day came through, well over thirty feet but still well-formed, Doerner, Foo, and Bradshaw all set off in pursuit.
But there is only a tiny window through which it is possible to slide into waves of this size.
Doerner alone was in position.
He went over the ledge, hit the water again about half way down, skidded unscathed out of the tube, and kept on going.
After that the Bay shut down.
Bradshaw, Foo, Doerner, Cooke: each of them had some claim to supremacy.
But there was speculation that the sixteen-foot olos of their Hawaiian predecessors had been capable of scaling the monstrous waves, fifty feet and more, that boil and boom off Kaena Point and remain untested in modern times.
They were like astronauts landing on the moon and finding footprints in the dust, or like the mountain climbers in Jules Verne who, having at last reached the summit of what they take to be a virgin Himalayan peak, find a sign saying:M. Durand, Dentist, 14 rue Caumartin, Paris .
I ONCE asked Ross Clarke-Jones — a laconic Australian who was on the Tour but also liked to surf big Waimea — which would be his ultimate experience: a big wave or a tube?
‘Big tube’, he replied.
And what did you need to surf big tubes?
‘Bigger everything’, he said.
‘Bigger boards, bigger lungs, bigger…’
Callahan cut in.
‘Bigger dick’, he said.
I'd always suspected big-wave riders had to have more cojones than the average human being, and there was at least one of that species who seemed to bear out my hypothesis.
The first time I saw Mark Foo he had two girls with him.
The last time I saw Mark Foo he had two girls with him — not the same two.
He rode women the way he rode waves.
He had a smooth, lean, compact body.
Just below his left shoulder was a raised welt, about four inches long.
I speculated endlessly about that welt.
Was it a reef injury?
Or was it a surgical implant that enabled him to endure more terror than ordinary men, a supplementary hypothalamus?
He was a handsome man, with neat geometrical features, but it was this mysterious blemish which, I couldn't help thinking, was the secret of his success with women.
It was an irresistible lure, like the quack of a decoy duck.
When I saw him dancing at the Saturday night disco at the Turtle Bay Hilton I thought I had discovered how it was he managed to survive those horrendous wipeouts.
At some early stage in his evolution he must have been filleted.
He didn't have a pre-ordained and immutable structure to his body, but curled and writhed like a cobra.
There were no bones to be broken.
He was all suppleness and movement, pure elasticity, like a strip of Blue-Tak.
But we shared at least one thing in common: Foo was a  writer.
The account he had written of his experiences at Waimea on 18 January 1985 had won a prize.
I had once won a prize for French poetry composition at school, so I didn't feel too outclassed in this respect.
Since he doubled as surfer and media man, our paths crossed often enough.
He felt he had only come alive when he started surfing.
I felt that way myself — the difference was that he had been living longer.
Some people said that Mark was an actor, a hype-artist, an image-projector.
This was true to the extent that he was acting out a drama of his own inventing, he was the protagonist in a play that was nothing but climaxes and intervals.
In a strange way, big-wave riding reminded me of cricket.
You'd be doing nothing for hours, kicking your heels on the boundary, then, without any warning, the ball would be skied towards you, and suddenly the outcome of the entire match would rest on your shoulders.
It was a mixture of tedium and terror: lulls and sets.
Paddling out at real Waimea was the equivalent of squaring up to an over from Harold Larwood and finding you had forgotten your box and pads.
The board was your cricket bat: the only thing that stood between you and castration.
Foo started out on the Tour but narrowed his sights on Waimea and the outside reefs.
There were thousands surfing two-footers, but only a handful on twenty.
He had climbed the pyramid right to the top.
‘But it's like the Richter scale’, he pointed out, warning against the idea of simple increments of difficulty.
‘A twenty-foot wave and a twenty-five-foot are completely different worlds.
Add another couple of feet and it's twice as hard.’
Those figures were misleading anyway: ‘A twenty-foot wave might have fifty feet of face on it.’
Height is measured vertically from base to crest, but the face — what you actually ride — is the shoreward diagonal of the triangle.
‘Some of those waves are thicker than they are high.
That's what gives them the power.
And you're tapped right into it.
You're feeling it all through your toes.’
I suppose I'd expected a stunt-man who pulled off hair-raising feats for kicks.
Ken Bradshaw probably wrestled with  sharks just for the hell of it.
But Foo hated heights, fast cars, motorbikes, even rollercoasters.
He liked the quiet life.
The odd thing was that he considered life to be at its quietest in the midst of the most thunderous, ear-splitting waves.
He had one huge advantage over everyone else.
I put it down to that welt in his shoulder.
The more awesome the wave, the calmer he became, until, when the swell entered what he called ‘the unridden realm’ of thirty foot and above, he was virtually catatonic.
He was a yogi, a fire-eater, a knife-swallower, with total control over his body.
I felt he could stop his pulse if he wanted to and induce his own death.
It wasn't training, it was sheer genetic fluke.
He was like a prodigy, a ten-year-old who runs rings around the Grand Master, the infant Amadeus composing symphonies in his head and transcribing Bach masses from memory.
He was just over thirty — still a child in Waimea terms.
Waimea demands maturity, experience, the wisdom of years of watching and waiting.
It was almost an old man's wave.
Foo was perceived as the new kid on the block, the angry young gunslinger who had ridden into town to test his draw against the ageing marshal.
He strapped on his three-fin (to increase manoeuvrability and performance) when everyone else was still riding single-fins with no leash.
He surfed big conditions with disdainful ease, a slightly meretricious casualness.
But now what had happened to the old guard was happening to him, too.
He was in danger of becoming part of the establishment and there was a new young punk hungry for his chance: twenty-one-year-old Brock Little had come fourth in the 1986 Eddie Aikau when Foo was second.
I could sense how badly Foo wanted the Eddie.
Last year he had won the ‘expression session’ that replaced the main event, surfed out on occasional twenty-foot sets.
But that was just a full-dress rehearsal.
Now I could hear the throb of impatience in his voice as he waited for the curtain to go up.
Even as we spoke he was thinking of nothing else.
Like Ted, he was desperate for his shot at the title.
‘Am I ready for the Eddie?’ he snorted.
‘I've been getting  ready all my life.
Every day I wake up I pray it's twenty feet.’
The idea of dying didn't worry him, so long as he went out with a bang.
‘When the Challenger blew up, everyone said it was a tragedy.
But I thought: this was the moment they lived for.
They died happy.
That's the way I want to go.
You can die at Waimea just as easy as Outer Space.’
Foo saw the waves as a watery pyre, where he would in due course achieve martyrdom.
He reminded me of the author in Godard's A bout de souffle who said that his ambition was ‘to become immortal — and then die’.
We met briefly once in the water on my ill-fated outing at Laniakea: he was planing down a wave, I was scuttling up it, looking for a way out.
He gave me an impassive glance before, like passing trains in a relativity experiment, belonging to separate frames in the universe, we went on our opposite ways.
‘Are you crazy,’ he said to Bodo later, ‘taking that guy out in those waves?
He's going to die.’
It was a perfectly serious prophecy, for which I would have paid good money had I gone to one of the Haleiwa psychics.
We had another encounter like that, this time on land.
I had met a couple of girls on the beach at Pipeline.
Their names were Rebecca and Joseanne.
They were watching the Masters because, as they frankly admitted, they wanted to meet some surfer boys.
But they also wanted a lift into town and we agreed to go to the Hard Rock Café in Honolulu together that night.
I went to pick them up at D'Amicos at eight.
But, just as at Lani's, I backed out at the last minute.
There was no shortage of willing chauffeurs.
The next morning I went to Mark Foo's house overlooking Waimea.
Rebecca and Joseanne were there.
Foo was still in bed.
They were fixing him breakfast.
‘DON'T MENTION me in the same paragraph as Ace!’
That was what Mark Foo had said to me.
Ace Cool lived at Jocko's.
But it was in the Coffee Gallery in Haleiwa that Bodo first introduced us.
Bodo and I had been watching a bodysurfing video starring Mark Cunningham, but when Ace found out I was writing some articles about the North Shore he insisted on an immediate full-scale press conference.
He gave me the inside scoop on the Biggest Wave story: the thirty-five-foot mountain he'd ridden on 5 January 1985.
Dropped by helicopter at Fifth Reef Pipeline, he saw the mother of all waves rear up out of the water.
This was ‘Ace's wave’, the one he'd been waiting for all his life.
He looked around for some measure of comparison.
‘It was as tall as that tree there.’
We were sitting under the canopy of a tree that overhung a two-storey building and dissolved into the inky heavens.
Postcards of Ace and the Wave, showing him flying down an infinite green wall closely pursued by an avalanche, were still available in North Shore shops.
A video appeared:In Search of the Biggest Wave .
And yet Ace was unhappy.
‘I'd done everything I set out to do.
But nobody took me seriously.’
The hardcore élite dismissed the evidence of the camera on the grounds that the aerial perspective didn't distinguish between the face and the base of the wave, effectively doubling its size.
He hadn't earned the respect of his peers.
He would have to go again.
‘I'm aiming for forty feet this time.
That'll settle the argument.
Or maybe forty-five.’
So far Nature had failed to co-operate.
All Waimea veterans speak of the outer reefs as the next frontier: the majestic ‘cloud breaks’ that erupt a mile and more  from shore where the Aleutian juice is pure and unadulterated and waves even bigger than those at Waimea can, theoretically, be surfed.
It was at one of these that Ace was planning another assault on the summit.
He had lined up assorted members of the crack US Navy team known as the Seals, a 100-horsepower Zodiac boat, a helicopter, and an oxygen back-pack with six minutes of air.
‘The Navy are calling it ‘The Biggest Wave Mission’.'
He made a prediction.
‘It's going to get bigger.
I can smell it.
In the coming month, I'm going to surf the biggest wave ever seen.
The boat may get wiped out.
I may have to save them.
But, basically, if we all survive, we're stoked.’
It sounded as though, win or lose, Ace expected to get to heaven.
‘Pulling into a thirty-five-foot tube would be as close to a cosmic experience as you can get, short of surfing the Milky Way.
My main motivation is spiritual.
It's God's playground out there.’
I wasn't sure whether he wanted to meet God or if he thought he was God.
‘I want to assume the throne of the big-wave maniacs.
My rightful place is at the top.
No one else is on the outer reef trip I'm on.’
The holder of a degree in psychology and philosophy, he was anxious to explore the recesses of his own mentality.
‘My motives are not completely pure, though.
I also want to make some serious bucks out of this.
I'm going to license my name.
I want to be as famous as Snoopy.
I'll be all over your tee-shirt and coffee mug.
I want to be the most famous person on the planet, a household word.’
After Joe Cool, Ace Cool.
I saw Ace becoming the toast of the kings and queens of Europe, having an audience with the Pope, shaking hands with Gorbachev; but he, for once, was more modest: ‘I'd like to hook up with Jacques Cousteau — we could stay in tune with the global weather patterns.’
COUSTEAU: Are you familiar with the Balinese behemoth?
COOL: That's a left-hander, isn't it?
COUSTEAU: Fully grown, it has been known to reach up to forty feet in size.
COOL: Holy shit!
Do you think it's rideable?
Ace wanted to go out and rape the ocean.
‘The wave is my lover and she gives me the ultimate orgasm.’
Although, like Asterix, he attributed his phenomenal prowess partly to a magic potion, ‘Superjuice’, concocted by his druidical sponsors,Body Ammo , he didn't really need it: ‘They say I have three balls — I need an outlet for that extra energy.’
But what drove him on was less his outsize libido than his desire to prove a point and win public acclaim: ‘Everyone thinks I'm going to die.
So it's me against the world — not to mention the wave.’
He was as psyched up as a footballer about to step out on to the field on Super Bowl Sunday — but he would be sustaining this level of feverish anticipation all winter.
‘Every day I'm ready.
I dream of it.
It's always on my mind.’
He was handcuffed to the North Shore.
‘If I go to Maui for the day, I'm scared I might miss my chance.’
He was candid about his missionary ancestry.
‘My family came to do good and they did very well.’
He saw himself as in some way subverting that tradition: they told Hawaiians to put their clothes on and stop surfing; he was taking his off and going pagan all over again.
His father wanted him to go to Harvard Business School.
‘It was the biggest mistake he ever made buying me my first board.’
He had his specially built twelve-foot big-wave gun, weighing about twenty pounds, ready and waiting.
‘Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I have the biggest surfboard ever built.’
Ace was a touch over 200 pounds and thirty-three years old.
‘Jesus's age’, he told me.
He may have confused himself with the Messiah, but he didn't expect to die.
He thought he was immortal.
When he'd gone, there seemed to be a large vacuum in the café.
Bodo said, ‘I worry about Ace.
I hope he's mentally and physically tuned and doesn't just think he is.
You're really pushing the limit in anything over twenty-five feet.
Last time he only just made it.
This time he's a little older.
He'll be like an old boxer trying to make a comeback.
But the ocean — it doesn't get any older.’
I ran into a lot of sceptics on the North Shore.
One lifeguard  said, ‘Ace may not have ridden the biggest wave, but he's sure got the biggest mouth.’
‘A boat and a helicopter?’ scoffed another old hand.
‘That guy's going to need a submarine to scrape him off the bottom.’
KEN BRADSHAW waxed and waned with the swell.
When it was down, he was down; when it was up, he was up.
He competed in the early rounds of the ASP contests, but ten to fifteen feet was a millpond for Bradshaw and he sank like a stone.
But atop the blue tower blocks of big Waimea, he attracted as much attention as the Pope on the balcony of St Peter's.
He was six feet tall and 185 pounds and had muscles the way a fish has scales.
He had a beard.
Often he would shave it off, but the next day he would have a beard just the same.
He had a beard all over his chest and back, too.
My barber Albert wouldn't have known where to stop cutting.
I asked Ken about his reputation as a surfing caveman who would bite chunks out of your board if you got in his way.
He laughed, revealing powerful white incisors.
Like a circus Hercules demonstrating how to tear up a telephone directory, he showed me how I too could dismantle a board with my mouth.
It was all a question of catching it at the right angle.
‘If you put them together you can take them apart again.’
Ken was a shaper: he didn't only destroy boards, he created them too.
His shaping room had the brightly lit intensity of an operating theatre, the mystery of a chemical laboratory.
He strapped his patients to a table and wielded an array of tools with practised precision and dexterity.
But the shaper is more than a surgeon or scientist or sculptor: he does more than repair or re-form: he energizes inert matter, turning a  slab of foam into a fibreglass dolphin.
Green-eyed, bemasked, conjuring up the ten-foot plus boards that could conquer the peaks of Waimea, Ken Bradshaw reminded me of Dr Rotwang in Metropolis instilling his robot with beauty and life.
A Bradshaw board carries locked within its smooth husk the seed of its begetter.
Ken was father, mother, and midwife to his boards.
He hated to throw them away when they got old.
They were like children to him.
On Christmas Day he grieved over the loss of his ‘second board of the season and nursed one useless half of it all afternoon.
He'd seen a kid walking excitedly away from Coffin Corner with a fragment of the Bradshaw cradled in his arms.
‘What are you going to do with it?’ he asked.
‘I thought I'd patch it up and maybe float around on it in summer.’
Ken thought it was going to a good home.
‘Keep it, it was mine, now it's yours.’
When Callahan and I visited him at his large house on Sunset Beach, it was like walking around a graveyard: every board was a headstone with memories buried beneath it.
‘A good board has a personality, a soul’, he said.
‘See that one there?’
He pointed to a board with a broken nose.
‘I mourned it for two whole days when it died.’
Callahan picked on one he recognized from photos.
‘This is history right here.
State of the art for those days.’
‘That was my best board’, Ken said.
‘I shaped it like a teardrop.
But the wide point is too far forward.
Those old boards — they were just rockets.
I look at them now and think: God, that's prehistoric.
But I loved 'em then.’
He loved them still.
Ken caressed a board fresh from the womb.
‘This has more hip to it.
Better for pivoting.
The trouble is, we sacrificed raw speed for manoeuvrability.
Ever since then I've been trying to get the speed back.’
A big heavy man like Bradshaw needs a big heavy board.
When it started raining, three of us stayed dry under his ten-foot Waimea gun.
Ken looked like a waterborne Tarzan, swinging through the air from wave to wave.
But he had a mild, good-humoured, articulate side, verging on the academic, abjuring the sensational.
I'd heard he was vegetarian.
‘Lacto-ovo-vegetarian’, he corrected.
He was as good an advertisement for vegetables as I'd ever come across.
The sixteen-year-old Bradshaw spent the winter of '69 in California.
It was the most epic winter the West Coast had ever seen.
‘I can remember thinking: that's what it's all about: big waves.’
He surfed the reef breaks — La Jolla, Windansea, Swamis — until one day someone came up to him and said, ‘With the kind of lines you draw you should go and surf Hawaii.’
‘Everything I did was like stepping stones to Hawaii.’
The North Shore was the standard against which all other waves were judged.
‘Everyone came to Hawaii to test themselves.
That was the mentality I grew up with.’
He'd never forget his first experience of Waimea: ‘It was 25 March 1974 — a late spring swell, clean and perfect.
I went out on a board George Downing had built for me.
It was fifteen to eighteen.
At the end of the day James Jones came up to me and said: ‘What's your name?’
Man, I was stoked.’
Jones was the first man to tube-ride Waimea.
Bradshaw became apprenticed to Eddie Aikau.
Eddie was his hero, his guiding light.
But Ken didn't always follow his advice.
‘In the winter of '76, Waimea was maxing out and houses were floating down the Kam Highway.
We were in a car looking down over the Bay and I said I've got to go out.
Eddie says to me: ‘Brother Brad, when the waves are hitting the bath-house, you don't go out’.'
The bath-house is a couple of hundred yards up the beach.
‘So I went out.’
There were thirty-five to forty-foot sets.
It was the first time Waimea had been surfed that big.
‘I met Roger Erikson on the beach, and he said, ‘You're going out?’ and I said, ‘Yep, I'm going out’, and he said: ‘All right, I'm going out too.’
So we both went out.’
That was the day Bradshaw caught the biggest wave of his life.
‘It was a left and then the right cut in so I had to straighten out.
And then the whitewater caught me so I proned out and hung on — I was eaten up then I was spat out and then I was eaten up again and spat out again and the beach was right  there, so I threw the board away and just rolled and rolled and tumbled, and I ended up in the river on the far side of the berm.’
No other wave since has deposited him in the river.
He estimated his wave at between thirty and thirty-five.
‘If it walls and closes out but you could maybe ride it, that's thirty.
If it walls and closes and you can't possibly ride it, that's thirty-five.’
He said he'd stood up on waves that were bigger and elected not to go: ‘When you know you have that much whitewater to contend with and a rock-lined bay in front of you, it's a deterrent.’
That explained why so many of the big-wave riders were focusing their attention on the outer reefs.
‘If you want to ride a wave that's over twenty-five feet and feel comfortable, you have to go further out.
No matter how good you are, you can't ride an unrideable wave.’
Ken didn't believe Ace Cool had surfed a thirty-five-foot wave.
He remembered 5 January 1985.
‘Waimea was an adequate fifteen to eighteen.
Maybe a couple of bigger sets.
I was down here at Sunset and I could see him out there doing it.
It wasn't Outside Pipeline, it was actually Outside Rocky Point.
When I saw him I was laughing, because it wasn't even twenty feet.’
Bradshaw was the only man I met to laugh at twenty-foot waves.
Talking of Ace set him off on Mark Foo.
‘Mark is the same way.
Mark wanted to go out to Outside Log Cabins with me.
He says: ‘I'll get the boat, I'll get the helicopter.’
I said: ‘Keep your boat, keep your helicopter.
What if the boat sank?
Then we have to depend on ourselves and what about the people in the boat — who's going to save them?'’
Real Hawaiians didn't like accessories and add-ons: they eschewed board grips, gloves, rash guard, stretch shirts, anything that would come between them and the wave.
Rubber wetsuits they regarded with distaste as contraceptive sheaths that would interfere with the primal experience.
I, on the other hand, was an accessories fetishist: add-ons were all I had.
I never went out without my insect repellent and waterproof sunblock.
I'd been given a pair of lime green webbed gloves as a wedding present by Roger, my surfing guru in Newquay.
I couldn't get by without them.
When I  left them behind in Cambridge, I got my wife to send them express to the Turtle Bay Hilton.
At Lani's, Bodo told me to throw them away.
Regretfully, I consigned them to my personal museum of surfing memorabilia along with my Coogee Beach swallow-tail radical intermediate.
Bradshaw and Foo were popularly supposed to be at war.
‘If I wanted to go to war with somebody,’ Bradshaw said, ‘they wouldn't exist any more.
I would win.
I think of Mark as my younger brother.
Just sometimes his ego gets out of line.’
Ken was a proud traditionalist, a purist, almost a puritan in his stern insistence on standards.
But he wasn't a hypocrite.
He regularly swam a mile or two out, surfed, and then swam back in again.
He didn't mind losing his board and slogging in through the breaking waves.
But where I thought of this part of the game as the worst, Ken positively savoured it.
‘You have to pay money in an amusement park to get that kind of tumbling.’
When I wiped out, it felt like going through a car-wash without a car.
There was one formative element in Ken's youth no one else had mentioned: cinema.
As a kid, he had watched the film Ride the Wild Surf obsessively.
I hadn't seen it, but I recalled the lines in the title-song which went:
The heavies at the Pipeline are OK,
But they can't match the savage surf at Waimea Bay.
Ken said, ‘Yeah, I remember that too, but what really got me going was the bit at the end:
It takes a lot of skill and courage unknown
To catch the last wave and ride it in alone.
Do you remember that?’
It wasn't what I had expected.
Ken Bradshaw and I were singing songs to one another like a pair of humpback whales.
Ken's whole life revolved around surfing.
‘I've had lots of girlfriends leave me because of it.
They would say, ‘Do you want to do this with me at Christmas or do you want to go  surfing?’
And I would say: ‘You're making me choose, don't make me choose.’
My girlfriend now understands me — she knows my happiness depends on surfing.
When I'm happy I'm a wonderful person to be with, but if anyone tries to keep me from doing what I want to do then I'm…’
‘Unbearable?’
‘Unbearable.’
‘And if someone makes you choose?’
‘Then I'll choose — to surf.’
Ken believed in a supreme being, but said he would never pray for help if he got into trouble.
‘I chose to put myself there.’
He saw God as a glorified combination of boat and helicopter, not unlike Jules Verne's The Terror .
Bradshaw wanted nothing to do with either human, mechanical, or divine intervention: he still wanted to catch that last wave and ride it in alone.