

Approaches to Learning
As you will discover, I am very much a believer that we largely teach ourselves when learning new skills and that the main purpose of a book or instructor is to help clarify exactly what your aims are.
This book, rather than simply telling you how to execute a manoeuvre, suggests valuable methods you can use to practise more efficiently.
The book closely follows the the new graded teaching system of the Royal Yachting Association (RYA) and it is no coincidence that the chapters use the names of the RYA's Levels 1 to 5.
Many windsurfing texts that aim to make you a better sailor explain the skills and techniques you need to master in a ‘how to do it’ format, with numerous photographic sequences of the manoeuvres involved.
What they don't spend much time on is the way in which you are supposed to approach learning the new skills.
The opening chapter uses a slightly different method and looks at the greatest variable in improving — namely ourselves, since the way we approach and react to learning greatly affects the end result.
THE INNER GAME
In recent years far more attention has been paid to psychological factors in skill development, the catalyst being a book The Inner Game of Tennis by Timothy Gallwey (Cape, 1975).
It became the best selling tennis book ever and has affected the competitive approach and attitudes of a number of sportsmen.
Three years later a highly successful ‘Inner Skiing’ book was also published.
The inner game approach rests on the belief that the correct technique can and does develop naturally and painlessly given the opportunity and the right environment.
Our bodies can learn to respond to new situations if trusted to learn how for themselves.
Take, for example, learning to ride a bike, which in fact is quite a complex skill.
No one ever teaches you how to ride — you are given the opportunity with stabilisers and encouragement, with the right environment being a smooth, safe pavement.
Through trial and error and careful practice the body learns how to balance, pedal and steer all at the same time.
Gallwey describes the learning process in detail by referring to a ‘Self 1’ and a ‘Self 2’.
The instinctive way of doing something, the bike riding part of us, is the characteristic of Self 2.
As you age, though, analytical thought plays its part and this is personified as Self 1: the voice that reminds you when you play tennis that you must relax, must follow through, must win the point, must play well because your father is watching, and invariably provokes nervous tension and interrupts the instinctive natural flow.
Because of the disruptive influence of Self 1 on our performance, Gallwey, rather than teaching us how to perform a skill, concentrates on ways of distracting Self 1 thereby letting the body perform in its own intuitive way.
In tennis he will ask his students to call out their estimate of the height of the ball above the net as it crosses from side to side, or he will ask them to shout ‘Bounce’ each time the ball bounces and ‘Hit’each time it is hit, giving Self 2 a chance to show what a fluent player he really is.
The Role of Instruction
An ‘Inner Windsurfing’ approach has yet to be fully developed, but we can benefit by using some of the ideas and assumptions.
Take, for instance, the idea of a Self 2 which could instinctively teach itself to windsurf like riding a bike.
Clearly at a basic level if you just gave someone a board and lake to practise on, apart from being dangerous it would take many months of frustration for them to work out what to do.
The best way to learn is to attend a school where, with good instruction and a safe environment, you can pick up the basics in a day or two.
Provided the basic technique is sound, which is one of the aims of the RYA recognised schools, rapid improvement can be made by letting the body teach itself.
Indeed, almost all top windsurfers are self-taught.
The role of books such as this and instructors beyond a basic level is to set out clearly the aims for learning.
It is ridiculous to suggest that a magazine article, book or even the most expert of instructors can teach you exactly how to perform the complex set of movements involved in, say, gybing.
They can show you what you are aiming at by breaking down the manoeuvre and showing the role of each movement, but putting it all together with correct co-ordination and timing is up to you to teach yourself.
Instructions should help to clarify what you have to do and what factors are involved, but the timing of each movement is self-taught.
Later in the book, I shall describe different manoeuvres, explaining what I think are the important factors.
The aim of this chapter is to show that you are often your own worst enemy in learning and to look at how you can best go about teaching yourself.
Obstacles to Learning
Fear, anxiety, tension, whatever you care to call it, is a common hindrance in all sports requiring balance and results in a loss of commitment and an awkward rigidity in stance, movement becomes restricted and everything becomes more difficult to do.
People often have an underlying doubt about falling in and dislike not being in complete control over what they are doing.
Confronting and accepting the reason for the tension is often the best way of dealing with it, since if you look logically at the cause it is often not as bad as the imagination would suggest.
After all, water is the most forgiving of mediums to fall into.
Environment
The environment you choose to learn in plays a crucial role in how well you progress.
At a windsurfing school the environment is carefully chosen to be safe and suitable for quick progress, with the wind being the only variable.
Unfortunately, the weather conditions often prevent you from learning gradually, unlike a ski slope where you can choose the degree of difficulty of each individual run.
Your decision as to where you sail is very important.
One of the reasons I managed to improve so quickly was that I practised in flat water with a steady wind.
Having perfected each manoeuvre in the flat water, I could then sail down the estuary to the open sea and practise what I had learned on the waves.
Too many people do not think about where would be best to sail and invariably head straight for the coast in an effort to make progress.
Sea conditions are often very choppy, particularly at high tide with an onshore wind which makes sailing well very difficult.
On the sea you inevitably feel more unsafe than on flat water, this, combined with the knowledge that many onlookers are watching your sailing, produces an environment ill suited to learning.
Furthermore, on the coast there tend to be some expert sailors around and your confidence in your own ability does not benefit from comparison with them.
Confidence in the Equipment
Another aspect that interferes with learning is not having confidence in the equipment.
The old adage that a bad workman always blames his tools is borne out on many a windsurfing beach.
It is far easier to blame equipment for failure than oneself.
When a person is reluctant to trust his board and sail as designed, then awkward movements are bound to follow.
The top brands, such as Mistral, benefit from such thinking since some people are prepared to pay high prices to ‘buy’ confidence in their equipment.
Practice
Of all the obstacles to learning, perhaps the greatest is the way in which we approach practice.
In spite of a keen desire to reach greater heights, progress is hindered by poor practice methods which make improvement slow and frustrating.
In Sail, Race and Win (Macmillan, 1982), Eric Twiname uses the analogy of his piano playing compared to that of his young concert pianist friend to illustrate this important point.
The young concert pianist had spent fewer hours reaching concert standard than he had spent achieving a mediocre amateur level.
The greatest difference, however, was not in the length of practice but in the approach to it: he struggled at it whilst she didn't.
He went all out at a new piece, rushing into it with lots of enthusiasm and wrong notes, trying to make it sound like the finished piece as soon as possible.
The concert pianist did exactly the opposite.
Rather than taking the piece as a whole she broke it down into smaller parts and then worked on them with separate hands and at varied rhythms.
Individual difficulties would be singled out for special treatment: ‘When a passage went wrong during practice, she didn't mentally beat herself with a stick and get angry, merely went over it again, maybe more slowly or homed in on the particular difficulty that had tripped her up and worked on that.’
This clearly illustrates that the way you approach practice greatly affects how much you improve, irrespective of talent.
SELF-COACHING
What we must do is appoint ourselves as our own coach since, as we mentioned earlier, ultimately we teach ourselves.
The idea of self-coaching is not to turn your windsurfing into a strict coaching regime and take the fun out of it, rather to be a little more honest with yourself and let the coach part of you analyse and objectively observe what you do.
All this involves a slightly different approach to your windsurfing.
The basic idea is to break down manoeuvres into smaller component parts, concentrating on polishing up each part in the sequence before considering the whole.
The following are a few ideas that can help to make your practice more fruitful.
Throughout the carve gybe (a high speed, fairly advanced manoeuvre) is given as an example.
Knowing your Level
The first thing to recognise is at what level you are currently performing.
Unfortunately, the funboards people tend to classify their level by the type of board they sail rather than how well they sail it.
All too often people have a board with footstraps, so they assume they should be doing funboard manoeuvres, such as the  carve gybe.
On many occasions I have been exasperated by people attempting these manoeuvres who can't even use a harness or sail consistently in strong winds.
Without good stance, harness use and upwind ability, you will never be able to spend enough time in the water before tiring.
The RYA's grading system will help to solve this problem.
You can use the table of course contents of the National Windsurfing Scheme (see Appendix) to judge your own level.
The carve gybe appears as one of the manoeuvres of Level 4, so before attempting to carve gybe you should be able to do all the material in the preceding levels.
Try to be honest with your use of the table and don't attempt to run before you can walk.
The Reaching Trap
For many beginners, reaching, turning and often falling is what an afternoon's windsurfing consists of, which, although it is comforting and fun to be with the dozens of others who are doing exactly the same, doesn't lead to much improvement in their sailing.
Just as you should carefully select your sailing venue, so you should also think about the type of sailing you do.
The trouble with reaching all day long is that there are no aims to your sailing.
Before launching, it is worth setting yourself some objectives.
An obvious one might be to execute three good carve gybes.
Instead of doing the usual reach-fall-reach, choose a point a few hundred metres upwind as a target to sail to, then you can concentrate solely on gybing as you work your way back downwind.
This way you learn how to sail upwind, don't have to worry about drifting too far downwind in the gybes and have plenty of water space in which to practise without sailors speeding past.
You also have a distinct end to the practice when you reach the point from which you set out.
Another aim might be to see how far upwind you can sail in ten minutes, trying to beat it each time you do it in the future.
Experimentation
A further way of introducing some purpose to a day's sailing is to experiment with different ways of doing things, since you can only be sure that you have found the best way by deliberately trying different ways.
There are so many variables involved in sailing a board that the experimentation can never stop.
You could, for instance, try differing lengths of harness lines or changing the amount of weight you place on each foot.
The best results come from working with someone else with whom you can sail and discuss the findings.
Experimentation was the method that I used to learn the carve gybe.
I can vividly remember trying all sorts of feet positions before deciding which one worked best, then concentrated on the upper body.
Wondering what would happen I tried pulling up on the boom as I went into a turn.
After a few attempts I found I was turning like Robby Naish for the first part of the turn, then falling in on the inside of the turn.
So, with this result, I decided to try the opposite by pushing down on the boom through the turn.
The next few gybes were the first I had ever done with speed all the way through the turn, in fact, it happened so quickly that I couldn't change the rig fast enough — so then I had to work on the rig change.
The significant point is that you have to split a manoeuvre up and experiment with each part for practice to be worth while.
Post-mortem
Experimentation is wasted unless you stop to analyse what the result of it was.
At the end of a day's sailing it is worth thinking about what  you have learned that day, and trying to work out why the new technique works better than the one it has replaced.
To do this you will need some knowledge of windsurfing theory.
In my gybe, it seemed that by pulling up on the boom I was committing a lot of weight to the back which, although turning the board initially, caused it to lose speed through the turn.
By pushing down on the boom I was keeping the rig more upright, hence providing more power whilst also keeping the board more level and stopping the back of the board digging in too much.
Copying
Observation
By watching and sailing with someone of a higher standard, you can pick up small points about better positioning and the way they approach a manoeuvre.
Everything happens so quickly on the water, though, that all you are left with is a vague impression, particularly with something like the carve gybe.
Perhaps the greatest value is in studying pictures of an expert doing a manoeuvre, since from these the positioning can be clearly examined.
On the carve gybe you can note where the back foot is positioned, the extent of the knee bend and the rig position.
What the pictures cannot show, however, is the timing and sequence used in the manoeuvre.
In the carve gybe this is a good thing since a competent windsurfer will cut many corners of the original technique to make it smoother.
For example, a good sailor gybing a short board changes his feet at the end of the turn; the novice attempting this would find it very difficult since at this stage you should change the feet before changing the rig.
Advice from experts should therefore be approached with considerable caution, since although well intended, it is often the interpretation of their own technique not of that suitable to someone less experienced.
Exaggerating
If you have an idea of what is needed in a manoeuvre from a book or instructor, then exaggerating that particular aspect is often the best way to put it into practice.
For instance, when coaching people in the carve gybe, rather than simply say ‘Bend zee knees’ which has little effect, it is better to ask them to try and get their knees to touch the water as they bank into the turn.
Of course, this actually never happens but surprisingly people do seem to end up in the correct position.
Exaggerating a physical movement often achieves the position that is being sought.
Mistakes
Every mistake is an opportunity to learn something.
By being angry at our mistakes and mentally chastising ourselves we do not learn anything about why we fall.
There is a danger that in getting angry with yourself, you try to make the learning happen rather than allowing it to happen.
Time is a great healer so, rather than press on with a manoeuvre that is repeatedly failing, leave it for a while and come back to it later.
By constantly making the same mistake there is the danger that you are reinforcing and learning how to make the error rather than correcting it.
It's All in the Mind
Learning a skill is in fact a fairly subconscious process.
By practising the skill we show the subconscious what is involved and allow it to acquire the ability to master the skill.
The more times we successfully complete a manoeuvre, the more opportunity we are giving the mind  to reproduce the same movements.
When practising or training, therefore, the greater the number of repetitions the better.
Whilst practising we should also insist on high standards, since once a technique is ‘remembered’ it is difficult to change.
If you allow bad habits during practice, they will be difficult to lose later.
Day-dreaming
It might seem surprising, but day-dreaming can actually be useful.
By re-running successful events in the mind, such as that perfect smooth carve gybe you made, you are reinforcing your success.
The more you relish the moment and remember exactly what it felt like and what movements were involved, the better.
Mental repetition has been shown by research on basketball players to be as effective as going through the actions.
This approach is widely used in the competitive sphere as David Hemery reports in The Pursuit of Sporting Excellence (Collins, 1986).
Daley Thompson apparently lies on his bed for much of two days before a decathlon thinking his way through each event, mentally rehearsing the self-discipline needed when confronted with two failures at his first high jump or pole vault.
Likewise, John Newcombe would visualise the sequence from the dressing-room on to the court and the first few games to stem nervousness and condition his reactions in advance.
So, next time you prepare for the carve gybe think your way through it and imagine what it feels like to bear away, bending the knees and, at the end, flipping the rig.
Experimenting is a good way to improve.
However, when practising always sail in a safe, flat water environment and never venture underneath any diving boards.
Getting Started
EQUIPMENT
Types of Board
After the frantic design years of the early 1980s board design has now settled down to a fairly stable format and it is only construction techniques that are still changing slightly.
Firstly, let us consider that unfortunate windsurfing term ‘funboard’.
The word originated as a marketing term from Germany and referred to a type of board that was easier to control in strong winds than the earlier boards.
The design features of a funboard are a narrow surfboard shaped tail with retracting daggerboard, a mast track and, here comes the crunch, footstraps.
Since the term was first used funboard has been used to describe any board with a foot strap on it.
Implicit in the name is the ridiculous idea that you can only have fun on a funboard.
The result has been that the majority of boards produced today fall under the blanket description of being funboards, although there are in fact a number of different designs.
The following is a list of the major board types, starting with the separate category of the beginner's board and then recognising the four distinct types of funboard.
More specialist types of board are used in top level racing (see Chapter 6) and speed sailing.
Beginner's or Family Board
This has a generously wide and stable hull with a square tail outline, a large daggerboard and sometimes footstraps which can be fitted as the sailor improves.
A ‘soft’ sail option is commonplace.
Typical examples are made by Bic, Fanatic and Alpha.
All-round Funboard
This category has a huge degree of variation in it with boards varying in length from 3.60–3.75m and having equally large differences in volume.
It is all-round in that it can be used in light and strong winds and is the most popular type you will see today.
The larger sized boards are also suitable for beginners though footstraps and mast track will be no use to a novice.
The ‘320’
This refers to the length of the board measured in metres.
It is designed for use only in Force 3+ and usually has a small daggerboard.
The 320 is a good sized board on which to learn funboard manoeuvres since uphauling is still possible.
The ‘Slalom’ or ‘290’
As the name suggests this boards can be used in slalom competition where speed and manoeuvrability are important.
It requires a good water starting and carve gybing ability and can only be sailed in a consistent Force 3/4+.
This is the most popular size of small board since it is fast and its size is suited to coastal sailing.
Sinker
The sinker is normally less than 2.70m and resembles a surfboard.
Very good funboard  skills are needed along with plenty of wind, Force 5+.
This board is often custom-made from foam blocks covered in glassfibre.
Types of Sail
There has also been considerable development in sail design in recent years with the result that sails are now far more controllable than the earlier types which resembled blown-out bedsheets.
Most people have at least two sails so they can windsurf in fresher winds, but a choice of three such as a 5.7, 4.7, and 3.7 sq m would cover most conditions.
There are four categories of sail widely available today.
Beginner's Sail (Fig 3)
This needs to be easy to uphaul and should offer fine control in light winds.
It is generally between 4.3 and 5.5 sq m.
To make it easy to uphaul it will have a fairly short boom of around 2.0 m for a 5.5 sq m sail, whilst to keep the weight down there are few if any battens.
Recreational Sail (Fig 4)
This will largely be a compromise between the two specialist sails mentioned below.
It is this type of sail that manufacturers commonly supply with new boards and frequently it is a ‘soft’ sail.
This doesn't mean that the material is especially soft, rather that the battens in the mid-section of the sail are not full-length therefore giving it a ‘softer’ feel when sailing.
This makes the sail better suited to both light and strong winds.
Race Sail (Fig 5)
Obviously the main aim of a racing sail is to be fast.
This is achieved in two ways:
1.
By having an aerodynamic, efficient leading edge.
Camber inducers and split batten systems both produce a good smooth shape around the mast whilst also helping the sail maintain its stability in gusts.
2.
By cutting a sail low with a supporting batten, helping to close the gap between board and sail.
If this gap is left open the potential power is lost by wind flowing under the sail.
For obvious reasons race sails tend to be large and range in size from 4.8 to 7.5 sq m.
Wave Sail (Fig 6)
This sail is commonly used on shorter boards in open sea conditions.
Thus a powerful sail is needed, but it should be easy to control and durable.
A wide luff tube is not used as it hinders waterstarts when full of water.
The clew and foot of the sail are cut quite high to provide greater manoeuvrability, whilst the boom tends to be short — 1.65m on a 5.5 sq m sail.
A dual batten option is commonplace, enabling the sail to be set soft if desired.
Wave sails range from 3.5 to 5.7 sq m.
A NEWCOMER'S GUIDE TO BUYING EQUIPMENT
When you walk into a windsurfing shop, it will probably stock all the different types of boards and sails and much more besides.
Even if you specifically ask for beginner's equipment the choice is still daunting, so here is some practical advice that will help you to choose correctly.
Vital Considerations
Buy a Big Board
The best measure of overall size is the volume of a board, so by big I mean over 200 litres of volume.
Sometimes the volume quoted by the manufacturer is wrong by as much as 25 per cent, so press the salesman to confirm that the volume is at least 200 litres.
The length of the board should be greater than 3.60m unless the user is a slight lady or a child, in which case the length and volume can be less than the figures quoted above.
The reason for placing such emphasis on buying a board of this size is because the stability inherent in high volume means that a big board will be easy to stand on.
Large Fully Retracting Daggerboard
Make sure that the board you buy has a large daggerboard (longer than 50cm) which fully retracts into the hull leaving nothing sticking out under the board.
The reason for this is that a large daggerboard helps with stability in lighter winds.
As you improve and start to sail in stronger winds you will want to sweep the daggerboard completely up into the board at high speeds to help with control.
If the daggerboard does not fully retract it will be a great hindrance in making progress.
An Easy-to-handle Rig
You should avoid sails with full length battens as not only are they harder to control in lighter winds but they are also heavier.
Sails without full length battens are frequently called ‘soft’ sails, ideally you will need two sails since when you start to sail in strong winds a small sail will be far easier to use.
One should be around 5.7 sq m with a 2.0–2.3m boom, and the smaller one should be around 4.5 sq m with a boom length between 1.65–1.85m.
If the boom is too long it will be difficult to uphaul.
Very short booms are used by experts in strong winds, but in light winds they have very little steering ability.
Unless you want to make things difficult for yourself don't buy a board which fails to satisfy all three of the above conditions .
Secondary Considerations
Footstraps
These are only used when you can sail the board competently in a Force 4.
On most boards the footstraps can be fitted when you improve so on no account should they be on the board when you learn as they can get in your way as you step around the board.
Mast Track
Nearly all boards today have a mast track system for moving the mastfoot, but it is of no benefit to you as a beginner.
It is only used once you have improved considerably, for example, when you have reached RYA Level 3.
Modern Shape
What you should avoid is a board with a very wide square tail.
The tail should resemble something like a rounded surfboard tail.
Another factor here is the underwater shape which, like footstraps, will become more important as you improve.
A concave underwater shape will give superior performance when you progress to an intermediate level.
The modern tail and underwater shapes will enable you to make progress in stronger wind and sail far quicker than if you use a wide  square-tailed board with a flat bottom.
A modern shape is faster and enables you to steer the board with your feet at high speeds.
Clothing
Unless you live in a warm climate a wet suit will be a necessity, as it is very difficult to learn anything if you are cold and shivering.
A wet suit will also enable you to spend more time on the water than if you only venture out when the sun is shining.
The wet suit should be tight fitting and allow reasonable freedom of movement.
The recently developed one-piece steamers are much warmer and are therefore the best option.
Although to start with you can use ordinary sports shoes, in the long term it is worthwhile investing in some purpose-designed windsurfing footwear.
Good windsurfing boots or shoes have soft rubber soles so your grip will be far better, and the materials used in them mean that they can withstand use in water much better than running shoes.
They also keep your feet warm.
Longer Term Considerations
Transportation
One of the attractions of windsurfing is that the equipment can be transported so easily.
To do this you will need a sturdy roof-rack that attaches to the guttering of the car, and, rather than relying on your knot-tying ability, you can buy special straps that make securing the board, mast and boom far easier.
Insurance
Last but not least it is a good idea to take out insurance, preferably with comprehensive and at least third party cover.
The incidence of board theft is thankfully low but it does happen.
However, there is always the remote possibility that you might run down and injure someone in the water, which could cost you as much as £100,000!
Third party insurance will cover you against this unlikely possibility and in Britain costs little more than £10.
There are specialist brokers who deal in this type of insurance whose addresses you can normally find through your local shop or in windsurfing magazines.
Buying Second Hand
Buying a second-hand board is rather like the second-hand car or computer market in that there are plenty of bargains but unless you are careful you can be ripped off.
The main problem in windsurfing is that it has developed so rapidly in the last ten years that boards only a few years old are very out of date and lack the features mentioned earlier.
You can still learn on these older boards and at as little as £150 they can be a real bargain.
Some people learn on a cheaper second-hand board and once they are sure they want to pursue the sport they buy a modern board on which to progress.
These older boards still sail perfectly well in lighter winds and it is only when you start improving to stronger wind conditions that the difference becomes apparent.
Like the car market you can either buy a second-hand board from a shop or privately.
A shop will prove a little more expensive but may be able to offer some kind of guarantee.
A shop should also be able to demonstrate the availability of spare parts for the board you have selected.
Buying privately you can pick up some excellent equipment, but it is best to obtain some independent advice from someone who knows what they are talking about.
The board should be checked for damage especially around the nose and rails, and it is also worth  bearing in mind its weight since boards become heavier with age.
The rig will also need a thorough check for signs of wear and tear.
WHERE TO LEARN
To learn the basics of the sport it is best to go to one of the numerous windsurfing schools around the country.
There is an excellent course of standardised tuition which has been organised in the UK by the Royal Yachting Association (RYA).
The cost is very reasonable starting at around £30, and the course can be completed in a day, either during the week or over the weekend, in safe flat water conditions.
Some people ask a friend to show them the ropes, or, worse still, they teach themselves.
We all know the limitations of a friend teaching you to drive — the finer points are never brought out unless the friend is himself an instructor.
Sometimes it is not very safe either.
Most windsurfing schools are run by shops and the format consists of dry land practice on a simulator followed by sessions on the water, with wetsuits, buoyancy aids and safety boat provided.
By the end of the course you will be able to sail the board in light winds, in any direction and get home again.
Learning Abroad
A large number of people sample windsurfing whilst on holiday and unfortunately do so under difficult conditions: crowded swimming beaches, choppy conditions, poor equipment and indifferent instruction.
If this applies to you, next time try and find a genuine windsurfing school away from the crowded beaches with qualified English speaking instructors.
The RYA has a list of schools it recognises as fulfilling its requirements and it may be worth contacting them.
Alternatively, you could take a holiday specifically with the aim of windsurfing, as these carefully chosen centres are often in pleasant holiday surroundings.
BASIC TECHNIQUE
Since a book by itself cannot teach you to windsurf from scratch, this beginner's section is a guide to be referred to.
It is not a ‘how to do it’ text but rather one that is best read in conjunction with an RYA Level 1 course.
Assembling and Carrying the Equipment
Most boards use very similar methods for assembly and come with a full set of instructions.
It is usually fairly easy to work out any variations from the norm.
The rig, which is the collective name for the sail, mast and boom, should be put together in the following manner:
1.
The mast is slid into the sleeve of the sail and the mastfoot/universal joint is pushed into the bottom of the mast.
2.
The  downhall line is tied and lightly tensioned to the bottom of the sail.
There is often a pulley and cleat provided for this purpose but on some older boards where it is not present you will have to improvise by making a loop in the bottom of the line.
3.
The next stage is to attach the boom to the mast.
You should set it so that it is level with your shoulders; to check this raise the mast beside you and mark the point.
There are a variety of methods of attachment but to ensure a tight connection (which is essential) the inhaul rope should be tied when the boom is parallel to the mast so that when swung down to its normal position it tightens the rope.
4.
Tension the outhaul.
Again, pulleys and cleats are provided to make this easier.
You should make full use of them since the sail should be tight.
5.
The top batten (nearest the mast tip) which is often full length should be inserted at this stage using the webbing strap and buckle.
With shorter battens that only go partly across the width of the sail it is best to insert them before the outhaul is tensioned.
6.
Having done all this, final adjustments can be made to the downhaul and outhaul to ensure that the sail has a good aerofoil shape.
The common mistake is that people are afraid to pull too hard for fear of breaking something.
The result is a baggy shape which is difficult to use.
Pull tighter than you imagine is necessary, aiming to produce a smooth shape without any creases, and if in doubt ask for advice.
The board needs little preparation since once the skeg is attached only the daggerboard has to be slid into its case.
On no account should footstraps be fitted at the novice stage, as they will only get in your way.
Dropping boards and sails through not carrying them correctly can be very expensive, so it is worth learning the correct method (Figs 8 and 9).
The easiest way to carry the board is with one hand in the daggerboard and the other on the mast track.
The board should balance well in this position.
When preparing to sail the board should be left by the edge of the water and the rig should be put in the water first.
If the board is left unattended in the water it can drift away very quickly as the wind and waves catch it, whereas the rig only drifts very slowly.
Finally, the rig can be attached to the board.
Again, each manufacturer uses a slightly different system, but they nearly all have a mechanism which controls how easily the mastfoot releases from the board.
This should be set so that it only comes out under considerable pressure.
Raising the Rig
At the outset this seems an onerous task, as not only do gallons of water lie on the sail but the wind is also trying to hold the sail down.
Strength is not important; what is needed is the correct technique.
You are not trying to pull the sail out; you should lean with straight arms and back whilst pushing with bent legs.
Once the sail begins to emerge, use your arms to work up the rope.
When the sail is out of the water the uphaul has served its purpose, so transfer your hands to the comfort of the solid mast.
Turning Practice
A common complaint from people who have not been taught properly is often: ‘I could get the sail up alright and sail a little, but I couldn't turn round and come back.’
Learning how to turn is obviously an important skill that should be mastered before you sail away.
Your instructor will insist that you can do this before progressing any further.
Once the rig is raised and your hands are on the mast you can turn the board by inclining the rig to either end of the board.
To stop the board turning, just like a car's steering wheel, you return the rig to a neutral middle position.
Whilst doing this you must keep the end of the boom out of the water since if it ‘catches’, the wind will fill the sail and control will be lost.
To turn the board completely round through 180 degrees keep leaning the sail towards one end of the board and take small shuffling steps around the mast as the board turns under you.
Try to avoid looking down at your feet as you do this.
When you have turned completely, stop the board turning by bringing the rig back to the middle.
When turning completely it is always preferable to turn by leaning the sail over the back of the board (a tack) since this will turn the board into wind and make it easier to return from where you set out.
Although leaning the sail over the front of the board (a gybe) is easier, it often makes getting back more difficult since you have to sail further into wind.
Using these newly acquired turning skills the board can be lined up into the secure position from which you can start sailing.
This position is reached when the board faces  directly across the wind, the sail making the a right angle with the board.
Once you have mastered finding and maintaining this position you are ready to sail.
Setting Off
Remember that before you start to sail the board must be in the secure position.
Grip on the Boom
Use whatever grip feels comfortable.
An overhand grip (palms downwards) uses the triceps, whilst an underhand grip (palms upwards) uses the biceps.
Feet
The foot placement is very important as it encourages the rest of the body to take up a good position.
The front foot faces forwards; this should help the upper body to rotate facing the front.
The back foot is placed across the board on the centreline at a comfortable distance behind the front foot.
Rig Position
The next step is crucial because if the rig is not pulled across in front of the body all sorts of problems will arise.
Remember: pull the rig across to a balanced position using the front hand on the mast.
A good guide is that the front of the board should be visible through the sail window.
Sheeting In
Applying the power to the sail is the next stage and a useful analogy here is that of closing a door.
Imagine the front hand on the mast is holding the hinge and the other (back) hand is placed on the boom level with the shoulder—as the imaginary door is closed, the power comes on.
The more you sheet in, the greater the power.
Lean, Don't Pull
Once the power is applied, the sail (rather unsportingly) tries to pull you over.
Rather than tensing up and pulling with all your arm strength, simply use your weight to do the work for you by leaning on your arms with a straight back.
Most of your weight should be on the back foot.
Leaning rather than pulling is a recurrent theme in windsurfing which, once mastered, leads to rapid progress.
Balancing
Keeping your weight on the centreline is a fairly obvious tip, but you can also stay upright by varying the power in the sail.
So, if you are being pulled over, rather than letting go of the boom completely and having to raise the rig again, you can save a lot of time and energy by letting out the back hand until you have regained your composure.
The opposite applies if you feel yourself falling in backwards — pull in the back hand to give yourself more power.
Steering
This is done by angling the rig forwards or backwards.
Most problems arise when inclining the rig to the front to turn the board away from the wind; if you commit too much weight forwards there is a risk of being pulled over.
Therefore a crouched position should be taken up which keeps the centre of gravity lower.
Also, as the theory section shows, sheeting in will help.
The Emergency Stop
Where there is a danger of colliding with or hitting something, rather than abandoning ship and letting the board glide unaided on to the target, it is far better to fall in, bringing the rig with you, which will stop it instantly.
Getting Back (Figs 15 & 16 )
This is done by using the turning technique described earlier.
When you transfer your hands from boom to mast, remember that it is always the back hand that leaves the boom first.
Self Help
If you cannot get back to shore use a self rescue technique.
Two of the most useful methods are shown in Figs 15 & 16 .
An important safety rule is never to leave your board unless it is to get into a safety boat, since your board will make it easier for rescuers to see you and will keep you afloat.
WINDSURFING THEORY
At first sight this might all look very technical, but it is really fairly simple, and an understanding of the theory of how a board works will help you to progress beyond a beginner's level.
The Sail (Figs 17 & 18 )
Let's start with the sail.
This is a curved surface in a moving airflow which simply bends the wind, causing a pressure difference between the windward and leeward sides of the sail.
Where there is a pressure difference, air will attempt to move from high to low pressure.
For example, in a bicycle tyre the high pressure air inside tries to force its way out creating enough force on the rubber to support a human.
On our sail he pressure difference causes a driving force which acts roughly at right angles to the sail at its centre of effort.
If we transfer this sail to a board which is restrained by its daggerboard from moving sideways, we can look more closely at the driving force (Fig 18 ).
When sailing across the wind (reaching) the driving force D is acting in almost exactly the required direction, giving the board plenty of forward force F, but only a small amount of sideways force S, which the daggerboard can easily resist.
Sailing close to  the wind (beating), the greatest force is sideways with only a small amount of forward force.
Here the daggerboard is straining to stop the board slipping sideways.
Sailing with the wind behind the sail (running) simply pulls the board along and, in this case, although the daggerboard has no sideways forces to resist, it can help by giving the board stability.
Steering
By Moving the Rig (Fig 19)
As we said earlier, the driving force acts through an imaginary centre of effort (CE) on the sail.
Similarly, the sideways resistance of the board, which is largely controlled by the daggerboard, acts through the imaginary centre of lateral resistance (CLR).
When steering by moving the rig forwards or backwards we are moving the CE either side of the daggerboard, which is the fulcrum about which the board turns.
When sailing in a straight line the CE will be almost directly over the CLR (the daggerboard).
Without Moving the Rig (Fig 20)
This is often an unintentional form of steering which happens when the sail is not at the correct angle to the wind — the section of the sail next to the mast does not fill with wind and the driving force acts from a couple of feet farther back.
The CE has moved behind the CLR and the board steers into the wind.
This situation is a common occurrence in stronger winds when the inexperienced sailor lacks the technique to sheet in fully, so he  edges along partly ‘closing the door’, and as a result slowly turns into the wind.
Frantic attempts to sail a straight course by inclining the rig forwards usually fail as the CE is so far back.
Unfortunately the effect is cumulative, since once the board starts turning into the wind it is even harder to sheet in the sail fully.
The solution is to use a smaller sail until your technique improves sufficiently.
Steering Difficulties
It should now be clear why the daggerboard must be fully down, as not only does it provide  stability, but also the pivot point about which the board turns.
Steering difficulties often arise with the use of small short boom sails and especially  children's rigs on full size boards.
In these cases the arc of movement of the rig is not great enough to get the CE sufficiently behind the CLR and so the board becomes unresponsive.
A solution to this can be to cut down the skeg, as this provides the resistance at the back of the board.
The ‘No-Go’ Zone (Fig 22)
Sailing craft cannot sail directly into the wind but only at an angle of 45 degrees to it.
If the board is sailed too close to the wind, the so called‘no-go’ zone is entered within which the board will stop or even blow backwards.
Progress upwind can only be made by completing a series of zig-zags, the turns at first being executed by the 180 degree turn method and later, with more experience, by tacking — steering the board through the turn.
Fig 2 The component parts of a windsurfer
Fig 3 Beginner's sail: easy to uphaul, light and offering good control in light winds.
It is also cheap.
Fig 4 Recreational sail: a good compromise between a race and a wave sail
Fig 5 Race sail: these tend to be large
Fig 6 Wave sail: commonly used on shorter boards in open sea conditions
Fig 7 Attaching the boom.
To ensure a tight connection fix the boom when it is angled up to the mast
Fig 8 Carry the board using one hand on the daggerboard and the other in the mast track
Fig 9 When carrying the sail use one hand on the boom and the other on the mast.
Ensure that the boom is always pointing into wind.
Fig 10 When raising the rig it is important to keep the back straight and use the strongest muscles in your body, the leg muscles, to do all the work.
Do not tug at the rope, just lean back and the rig will slowly emerge
Fig11 The secure position: The board is facing across the wind.
Remember: keep your hands on the mast — the rope is only used to raise the rig.
Notice also how the feet are on the centreline
Fig12 Your feet should be adjusted to this position immediately before you set off.
It is important that the front foot faces forward besides the mast foot
Fig13 Just before setting off: the rig is pulled across the body towards the wind until it feels balanced.
If you fail to pull the rig across in this manner you will be making it very difficult for yourself
Fig14 A little imagination is needed here.
Imagine the hand on the boom is pulling the door closed, using the hand on the mast as the hinge.
By closing the door like this (sheeting in), you put power into the sail and start moving
Fig15 If you cannot get back and the wind is very light, by carefully balancing the rig on the back of the board you can lie down on the front and paddle back
Fig16 Another method of getting back is to take the battens out and roll the sail up towards the mast.
Then, by placing it on the board again, you can lie down and paddle home.
Both these methods are difficult in strong winds
Fig17 Producing the driving force; Leeward side fast moving air; Windward side slow moving air
Fig18 On the reach the forward force F is large, whilst the sideways force S is small.
When beating it is the sideways force that is large with the daggerboard fully down to resist it.
When sailing with the wind on the run the driving force D acts forwards
Fig19 Steering by inclining the rig forwards or backwards
Fig20 Steering without moving the rig
Fig 21 Steering on a run.
By pushing the sail over to the left-hand side of the board the CE is also moved, causing the board to steer to the right.
Notice that on a run the feet are placed across the board and the body faces the front
Fig22 Points of sailing and the ‘no-go’ zone: Downwind sailing; Running; Broad reaching; Reaching; Beating; Upwind sailing
Improving Techniques
EXERCISES AND GAMES
It is often said that children pick up and learn things much quicker than adults.
This is probably the case since children do things the way that feels natural to them without worrying unduly how it is meant to be done.
They use instinct and spontaneity and when they practise something, they do so for the enjoyment it produces and thus it becomes more of a game than a practice.
On windsurfers children are particularly quick learners since they spend much of their time messing about on boards, and in the process find out how to handle their boards and rigs in a number of unorthodox positions.
In showing off their agility in a Force 2, they learn what not to do to remain upright in a Force 5+.
Children at play do things that inhibited adults would never do.
They learn all the wrong ways of doing things and so learn what to avoid.
How to Play
This section, then, like child's play, suggests a number of exercises and games which will help to develop an awareness of how the board behaves.
They are all a type of experimentation, which was outline as being an important part of learning in the opening chapter.
There is, though, a danger of doing an experiment when you have already decided on the result you are looking for.
By looking for a set result you are excluding all the learning potential from the exercise.
Many windsurfers have very fixed ideas about how they should look and feel.
So, in the following exercises try and throw all these preconceived ideas away, just as the impetuous child would go ahead and fool around in his own way.
Every drill or game has a purpose: to learn.
There are often other purposes too — some are obvious, others less so.
Sometimes the purpose will be described but often it won't, since you may try to anticipate the result.
Remember to analyse each exercise and report your findings to your coach-self or the partner with whom you are doing them.
You cannot fail in any of these games; there is no standard to achieve.
If you find one particular exercise has little value for you, just accept it and try another.
By their very nature a complete beginner will find some of the drills rather difficult.
The exercises, though, are not designed for any one standard just for all those who are committed to improving at whatever level.
You need to select flat water conditions with no more than a Force 3 otherwise you will be concentrating too hard on staying upright rather than thinking about the exercises.
I have grouped exercises using similar skills into four sets, which are themselves closely related: they are posture, balance, control and pairs.
Posture
Looking Around You
Whilst sailing around with a comfortable posture, pick out all the details of the water and land around you.
Don't just limit this to  everything in front of you, but look [all]around you, even behind you and on the other side of the sail.
Notice what shades of colour there are on the water and look at your wake as it shoots from under the board.
How many other boards are there on the water?
Look at the surrounding skyline and pick out things that catch the eye — the flashy Porsche in the car-park, the dark cloud looming or the ugly building that sticks out like a sore thumb.
Sailing Stiffly
As you are sailing along, tense up and sail stiffly with your hands clutching the boom with a vice-like grip, with arms locked solid and body rigid.
Hold it for a few seconds, maybe five, then release it.
Remember the posture you adopted when you first learned?
Try that — hands wide apart and crouched a bit like a gorilla, pulling hard with the arms on the boom.
Each time you relax, revert back to your own stance and feel the benefit of the comparison.
Rotating
Try rotating your hips in all the different directions possible, facing both forwards and backwards.
Now do the same with your shoulders and experiment with which of the positions feels most comfortable.
Balance
Deep inside our ears is the mechanism for keeping us balanced.
When our mechanism is level (ie, when the head is level) balance is natural.
When the mechanism is itself not level, any corrections to the body have a built-in bias which has to be overcome before balance is regained.
Try This
Stand in front of a mirror on one leg and watch your eyes in the mirror.
Now tilt your head slightly.
Do you notice a compensating reaction in your foot?
Whilst windsurfing, by keeping the head level you are giving your body the best chance of keeping its balance beneath you.
Now you know this, don't start applying it rigorously as a rule which will inhibit your sailing, merely let the body work it out for itself by noticing the levelness of the horizon.
Windsurfing Blind
Pick an open, clear piece of water and close your eyes for small intervals which you gradually make longer at each attempt.
As you will discover, we only need our eyes to tell us where to go since windsurfing is done completely by feel.
It is a good indication that once a skill is learned, reproducing it is purely instinctive.
Arms and Hands
Try feeling the different pressures in each arm as you sail along.
Aim to try and make the pressure equal in each arm by moving the hands up and down the boom.
Experiment with moving the hands closer together or further apart, again noticing how the pressures change.
As you move both hands forward or backwards which arm takes more weight?
Try and place one hand in a balanced enough position to take the strain of the whole rig, letting go with the other one.
Feet
Similarly to the hands, feel the way the weight is distributed over both feet.
By moving the feet around the board try and get your wake to  be as quiet as possible and watch how it differs as you move your weight around.
You can not only experiment with different feet positions and weighting but also with the angle at which the feet are placed across the board.
There are numerous variations possible, so experiment with different feet angles and see which one suits your style best.
The way you angle your feet determines the posture of the lower body.
Gradually take all the weight off one foot but leave it on the board as a back-up.
When you are ready take it off the board and waggle it about.
If you are feeling really confident, you can try one foot and one hand together.
Control
Freestyle is an excellent way of developing control over the board.
The exercises that follow are based on some of the easier freestyle manoeuvres, but the great thing about freestyle is you can invent your own tricks.
Oversheeting
By deliberately pulling in the sail too tight over the back of the board you can try sailing sideways or even backwards.
This is also a good method of making someone else fall in without even touching them, since if you sail directly upwind of someone and then oversheet  the sail, you create such a disturbed and confused wind that it becomes very difficult to sail in.
Sailing inside the Boom
By crouching down, you can rise up inside the boom and rest your back on it.
Sitting Down
This is a particularly good practice for developing the idea of transferring your body weight through the mast foot.
At first you will only be able to crouch down on the board, but as you get used to pulling down on the booms to pull yourself up again, you will be able to get lower.
Some people even lie on the board.
Backwards
Pretend you are a beginner who has inadvertently forgotten which end of the board is forwards and set sail going backwards.
See how far you can sail like this.
Sailing on the Wrong Side
Do a tack but don't walk around the front of the board.
To get the power back on again you will now have to push against the sail as you sail on the wrong side.
This is a unique feeling as instead of your arms pulling on the boom, you are looking from the other side of the sail and pushing.
Tail Sink (Fig 25)
As the name implies you walk towards the back of the board thereby sinking the tail.
This can only be done when you are sailing directly with the wind on a run.
This is very good practice, since you will find that by using your weight, which is so far back, you can steer the board downwind.
If you feel adventurous, try sailing backwards and then doing a nose sink.
Pairs
Following
Sailing closely with someone is a very good way of practising.
try following them as closely as possible almost touching their tail.
This will need very good control.
Tag
This close following can easily turn into a competitive game of tag.
You can also play this with a number of boards, but it is best to avoid tagging each other by board contact, which becomes rather dangerous as people start ramming each other.
If you set an area outside which you cannot sail then tag one another by doing a tack or a gybe around them, it can turn into a very good game where you can build up your own tactics.
In fact, I have always thought it would make a great spectacle for television if performed in surf with three contestants confined to a small area, all trying to knock each other of their boards.
The audience would love the thrills and spills with the added spice of danger.
Human Video
By sailing along behind someone you can act as a human video and when your partner has finished his run you can mimic what he was doing.
This often leads to each sailor offering the other useful and constructive criticism about his windsurfing.
If you can find a partner of roughly the same level, this is an excellent way of practising.
FASTER TURNING
Perhaps the easiest technique to improve is turning the board since it can be practised in any wind.
A common theme in faster turning is that a low body position with bent legs keeps the centre of gravity low and makes you more stable throughout the manoeuvres.
The Quick Tack (Figs 26 to 28)
Key Points Keep low; weight on the back foot; front foot by the mast; hands on the mast; steer the board through the wind before moving to the other side.
The Rig
To get maximum effect from the CE the rig has to be inclined as far back as possible.
The best way to achieve this is to place the front hand on the mast below the boom as you lean the rig back.
Try and make the end of the boom skim the water.
In stronger winds, as the theory section explains, you can head up by deliberately sheeting out.
Body Position
The most important aspect of this is to place all your weight on your back foot as you turn.
The weighted back foot should also slightly depress the leeward rail.
In the process of heading up, place your front foot by the mastfoot in anticipation of the rush to get round to the new tack.
The Transfer
Timing is critical here.
Steer the board through the eye of the wind until the sail brushes on your back leg, before transferring both back hand and foot up to the mast.
The quicker you can get around the mast the better, some people even jump, but the main point is that both hands should hold the mast and not the uphaul rope.
Once on the new side, the rig should be thrown well forwards to complete the turn on to the new tack.
Exercise
Experiment with varying positions and different amounts of weight on the back foot when you head into the wind.
The Flare Gybe (Figs 29 to 33)
Key Points Angle the rig forwards and across the board; keep low; depress windward rail; kill turn by moving forwards; use an efficient rig change.
The flare gybe is the name given to a faster version of the basic gybe.
It is performed with the centreboard down and the sail is used to turn the board.
It should not be confused with the carve gybe which is used in high winds without the centreboard.
Initiating the Turn
You should not enter the turn with too much  speed; it may be necessary to slow down.
The rig should initially be inclined forwards and then drawn to the side of the board as it approaches the broad reaching position.
The front foot should be on the windward edge and well weighted.
The Turn
The rig is still inclined over the side of the board: in lighter winds it may be necessary to move your hands well down the boom to make this effective.
The turn can be speeded up if you take a step back on the board and depress the windward rail.
Once the board has turned you will have to move forwards quickly to kill the turn before it goes too far.
Flipping the Rig
From the clew first position release your back hand and place it on the mast below the boom.
As soon as it is firmly on the boom release the other hand.
The mast hand then vigorously throws the rig across the body ready for the new back hand to sheet in.
It is especially important to keep low when sheeting in.
Exercise
A useful exercise to practise the rig steering combined with weight on the rails is to see how long you can maintain the freestyle trick of tail sinking.
Notice how sensitive the board is to weight movements the further back you step.
THE DAGGERBOARD AND WEIGHT DISTRIBUTION
The Daggerboard (Fig 34)
A great deal of confusion surrounds the use of the daggerboard.
It has two uses:
1.
It provides the main resistance to the sideways forces of the sail.
2.
It gives the board stability at low speeds.
Thus, in lighter winds, it should be kept down on all points of sailing.
However, when the speed of the board increases to near planing speed in stronger winds, problems start arising which can ultimately lead to a capsize fall .
As the name suggests, the board literally flips over on its side and you usually tumble off when sailing fast on a reach.
A capsize fall is caused by the forces acting on the daggerboard at high speeds (see Fig 34).
In resisting the sideways forces the daggerboard starts to behave like a sail and a force is set up between the high and low pressure sides of the foil (F1).
Not only does this force encourage the board to capsize, but the weight of the sailor carried on the boom is transmitted through the mastfoot (M).
These combined forces cause the board to capsize.
There are two solutions.
Firstly, the weight transmitted through the sailor's feet can be  used to counter the capsize by placing them on the rail (W2).
Secondly, if the daggerboard is raised the force (F2) will not be so effective in turning the board over.
So, in stronger winds on a reach or run the daggerboard is either partially or completely raised, and all the sideways resistance is left to the skeg and rails.
Upwind, however, the daggerboard is still kept in the down position, though in extreme conditions it needs to be moved back a few centimetres.
Remember: if a daggerboard is swept back it also moves the CE back, thus making bearing away easier but heading up, more difficult.
Weight Distribution (Figs 35 & 36 )
This was touched upon when discussing the flare gybe.
By placing your weight on either side of the board it is possible to steer it, as Fig 35 shows.
This only applies when the daggerboard is down .
Basically, by weighting the left rail the board turns to the right and vice versa.
This is why when you tack it is important to weight the leeward edge as you turn.
The further back you apply the weight, the greater the effect.
The tail sink exercise described earlier is an excellent way of practising this.
For maximum performance the board should be sailed level, and the feet positions should encourage this (Fig 36).
There is often a tendency to stand too far back in an attempt to approach footstraps: this makes lots of fast-sounding gurgling noises in the water behind you but does nothing for board speed.
A good way of checking your trim (the angle of the board in the water) is to look behind you and see how small and quiet a wake you can produce by varying your position on the board.
NEW HORIZONS
Most sailors soon tire of sailing in the same place all the time and look for new places to sail which will give them variety and a challenge.
The unknown adds spice to the adventure whether it is a relative newcomer's first trip to windsurf on the sea, or a move to a place that produces more of a challenge with better waves for an aspiring expert.
Either way, this section looks at some of the things you should think about when arriving at a new location.
Choosing Where To Go
Many people rely on personal recommendations as to where to head for.
These can be fairly reliable, but what your friend may have neglected to tell you is to what wind direction the water is best suited.
For example, nearly all locations on the south coast of England are hopeless in a northerly wind.
It can be very frustrating to leave home in perfect conditions only to arrive at the chosen beach with rain and an unfavourable wind.
The weathermen are your best ally in making a good decision and probably the best coastal forecasts are those provided by ‘Marineline’.
These forecasts are designed specifically for water users and provide a regional service throughout the UK.
After a while you begin to be able to interpret the forecast for the sailing conditions in a particular region.
Normally they forecast for open water so when they say it's going to blow Force 3/4, the wind on the beach tends to be nearer Force 2/3.
Excluding the sudden arrival of a frontal system, the wind direction is predictable and you can plan with a map the place most likely to have the ideal cross-shore winds which enable easy launching and recovery.
The greatest danger to a windsurfer is a wind that blows you away from a beach.
You should never sail in an offshore wind, particularly not alone.
An offshore wind will become progressively stronger the further you are blown out, and as you find you can't cope, you'll spend more and more time in the water, being pushed in a direction you don't want to go, at an ever increasing speed.
If you have got yourself in this situation and cannot get back to the beach, drop your sail and try and attract attention, by waving the fluorescent flag you should be carrying.
On no account should you leave your board.
An onshore wind will also be difficult since it builds up the waves into difficult chop which can break on the beach with mast-breaking force.
Arriving
When you arrive at the area you've chosen, a useful first stop is the local windsurfing shop, the address of which should be advertised in the windsurfing press.
Most shops have at least one windsurfing enthusiast, who should be happy to advise you further since you could become a future customer.
Some shops will even be able to tell you over the phone exactly what wind and waves are doing.
Tides (Fig 37)
If the windsurfing shop doesn't have a tide table, the local newsagent should.
The time of high and low water is one of the most important things you should know, since not only does it affect the direction of any dangerous currents but also how flat the water will be.
Windsurfing during the two hours either  side of high water is ill-advised on most beaches in all but the lightest winds.
With the water high up on the beach the sea is very choppy and launching is very difficult because the waves break viciously on the steep upper slopes of the beach which is frequently a shingle ridge.
On many beaches high tide brings the added danger of groynes.
Even the best sailors can be swept into them, apart from which they can cause all sorts of damage to your equipment.
I know someone who earns his living by repairing boards and he always does most business on the days after a strong onshore wind has combined with a high tide.
Some of Britain's most popular windsurfing beaches are adjacent to the mouths of estuaries and rivers.
The reason for this is that the outflowing rivers provide the sand that makes them good beaches.
However, although rivers and estuaries helped to form these beaches, they also provide a major threat to those who windsurf from them.
In the mouths of such harbours and rivers there are some very strong tidal currents that can catch out even the most skilful of sailors.
When the tide flows out, the current often flows straight out to sea washing any distressed windsurfer with it.
Avoid any harbour entrances for this reason, as well as the probable use of the channel by other far larger craft, i e, boats and ships.
Other Sailors
The local sailors are the people who probably know the conditions best, so it is worthwhile speaking to someone who can point out the idiosyncrasies of the location.
If there is a school or rescue service on the beach, then their advice will also be useful.
Setting Sail
Having arrived, there is every reason to be dubious if no-one else is on the water: perhaps it is dangerous, or there is a better place close by.
Whatever the reason, you would be ill-advised to go out on your own.
Hopefully, however, there will be plenty of others sailing, and you can learn a lot by watching them for a while.
By watching, waiting and chatting you should be able to evaluate the following points, which should be considered before you take to the water.
1.
Sail selection.
What size of sail will be comfortable?
See what sailors of a similar weight and standard to yourself are using.
If in doubt, it is always better to go out slightly under powered and be able to get back, rather than struggle from the outset.
2.
Tide and Wind.
Is your own information on the tide and wind predictions the same as the local sailors' interpretation?
3.
What local tips are there?
How can you avoid any rips or currents there may be?
Are there any hidden obstructions, such as sandbanks, rocks or wrecks that might claim your skeg or body if you run into them?
4.
Restrictions.
On some beaches there are bathing zones, shipping channels and water ski areas, which are often protected by by-laws to keep other water users out.
Park and sail in the designated areas and respect the other beach users, otherwise you could cause terrible problems for the local windsurfing community.
5.
Recovery.
If you broke something, how would you get back in, and where would you drift to?
6.
Can you handle the conditions?
Although you might have driven a long way to get there, don't put yourself into a situation you can't handle.
There will normally be another venue nearby where you can sail far more safely.
If the beach is crowded with swimmers, sail well clear of them since a board travelling even at low speed could do severe damage to someone's head.
Also, although others may be wearing very little, you should always ensure that you are dressed sensibly for the occasion.
It is far better to be too warm than too cold.
If you are considering doing any long distance sailing, remember that distances over water are very deceptive.
A number of boards have been rescued trying to make the long sail to the Isle of Wight off the British coast, which, on a clear day, appears far closer than it actually is.
For any long distance sailing you should inform someone where you are going and when you expect to return.
Sail with someone else and carry some means of attracting attention in the event of an accident, such as flares or a daglo flag.
As you can see, it is all a matter of common sense yet hundreds of windsurfers are rescued off the British coastline each year.
Perhaps if you see anyone not using their sense you could do them, and all other windsurfers, a favour by telling them.
Fig 23 One hand.
Notice the position of the hand on the boom and also how straight the arm is
Fig 24 Crouching: Note the positioning of the feet on the centreline.
How else, besides using her leg muscles, might she be able to help herself to stand up?
Fig 25 Tail sink.
A very good exercise to practise using the weight to steer.
You can control the amount of ‘sink’ by either pulling up, as I am doing here, or pushing down on the boom.
Fig 26 Quick tack.
Head up into the wind with most of the weight placed on the back foot and a low crouched position.
The rig is inclined back, using the front hand placed on the mast.
Notice how, as you turn close to the wind, the rig is pulled across the the back of the board and the foot of the sail brushes the shin.
In anticipation of the rush to get round the mast, the front foot is placed by the mast foot.
Fig 27 As you pass through the eye of the wind you need to transfer both back hand and foot to the mast and get round to the other side as quickly as possible; a small jump is often the best way.
Maintain a low crouched position.
Fig 28 Once round on to the new tack, the board is steered on to its new course by leaning the rig forwards.
Notice that while doing this you are vulnerable to being pulled over, so your body position should be lower than ever.
When comfortable transfer the front hand to the boom.
Fig 29 Flare Gybe.
The board is steered away from the wind by initially inclining the rig forwards and then leaning it over the windward side of the board.
Once the board has started to turn, move back on the board and apply weight to the windward rail, as Peter Harts is doing here
Fig 30 With the weight well back on the board and still on the windward (left) edge, the board will continue to turn swiftly.
The rig is also used to encourage the turn by using the same steering technique as on a run
Fig 31 The board is now well through the turn, and to stop it turning too far, take the weight off the edge and move forwards.
Notice how, with this change in weight distribution, the nose is closer to the water, and the rails next to the mast foot are engaging the water, which slows the turn
Fig 32 With the weight well forward again, the nose is in the water, offering far more resistance to turning than when it was in the air.
It is now time for the all-important rig change, so the back hand is released from the boom…
Fig 33…and is placed on the mast below the boom.
The rig will swing over the front of the board and try to pull you over.
Keep low and vigorously throw the rig across the board (to the right) before attempting to sheet in
Fig 34 The capsize fall
Fig 35 Steering using weight
Fig 36 Feet positioning: As the wind increases, move feet back and towards windward rail to counter the capsize fall
Fig 37 Low tide is always better for learning as the water is much flatter and any waves have little power.
High tide is often positively dangerous, with vicious dumping waves breaking on the steep slope of the upper beach.
Launching is very difficult.
3 STRONGER WIND TECHNIQUE
Windsurfing in stronger winds produces an exhilaration and satisfaction that is difficult to equal.
For a while though, I had a psychological block to sailing in fresher winds because I thought my weight and strength was not up to it.
I also hated being beaten by the wind and was frustrated by my lack of progress.
It was not until I saw a sailor much smaller than myself performing in a Force 6 that it dawned on me that the answer must lie in a good technique.
STANCE (Figs 38 to 40)
The beginner's stance needs to be altered to handle higher winds otherwise you will tire quickly and the boom will be constantly ripped from your grasp.
Key Points
As the wind increases, hand and feet positions should move further back; your arms should be extended, with shoulders and hips parallel to the sail.
Lean with your weight rather than pulling with your arms.
Head
This faces forwards in the direction of travel.
It should look over the front shoulder and not under the armpit; if you do this, you will find that the rest of the upper body will tend to face forwards in the proper way.
Shoulders
They should remain roughly parallel to the sail, hence their angle will depend on your course of sailing.
Arms
These should be extended with the elbows facing down, and the front arm in particular should be straight.
Bent arms become tired far faster than straight arms.
Hands (Fig 39)
The correct hand position is vital.
They should be about shoulder-width apart, placed equidistant from the CE so that there is an equal amount of strain on both arms.
If the hands are too far forwards, as is often the case, the back arm being so close to the CE cannot take all the strain and tends to sheet out causing the board to turn into the wind.
Legs
The legs should be slightly bent, with the knees supple and ready to straighten or bend to absorb rough water.
Feet
These must follow the example of the hands and move back down the board as the wind increases.
Remember that the front foot faces forwards.
Feet placed wide apart may feel more stable, but only encourage a pulling action rather than leaning.
OTHER CONSIDERATIONS
Starting
A common problem when starting in stronger winds is that the board seems constantly to turn into the wind.
This is caused by the steering properties of a sail only partly sheeted in.
The sail should be pulled well across the body and swiftly sheeted in.
The secret is to lean back hard as you put the power on.
You can't hold back here — you have to trust  that the power from the sail will pull you back up again should you lean too far.
A low body position will also help.
Apparent Wind (Fig 41)
If you run in still air the apparent wind you feel blows in your face.
In stronger winds, by moving through the water quickly we create more wind.
So, on a board the apparent wind we experience when we travel at 10 knots in a 10 knot cross-wind will be a 14 knot wind hitting us at 45 degrees.
What this means is that the faster we go, the more the apparent wind direction swings forwards.
So, in strong winds, the sail has to be sheeted in far tighter than in light winds.
When speed sailors sail at high speeds (39 knots is the current record) they have their sails in a close hauled position although they are sailing on a broad reach.
The Catapult Fall (Fig 42)
This spectacular fall happens when a gust of wind hits the sail and you are thrown off your feet over the boom.
It is an indication that your weight is too far forward and to avoid it the feet should be positioned further back and more weight should be placed on the back foot.
Land Practice
A great deal can be practised on land by removing the skeg and placing the board in a suitable position with clear wind.
Experiment with different hand and feet positions and try to get used to the idea of leaning back on a straight front arm.
This is also a good place to practise strong wind starting, but you should have a colleague to support the sail if it falls.
USING THE FOOTSTRAPS
Footstraps are on the board to stop your feet bouncing or being washed off in stronger winds.
They have no use until the board reaches planing speed, and for novices and light wind sailing they are best removed.
Adjustment
it is important that you set the straps for your own foot size.
They must fit tightly across the top of the foot.
Too loose and your foot and ankle could slide all the way through after a fall, possible resulting in a broken leg.
Too tight and your toes will be cramped.
This will cause both feet to rest on the windward rail, making it difficult to keep the board level.
Your back foot should be far enough in the back strap to straddle the centreline of the board.
Remember to adjust the straps at the beginning and the end of the season to accommodate either bare feet or boots.
Strap Positions (Fig 43)
Beating straps are only occasionally fitted to boards and, as the name suggests, their sole use is for sailing into wind.
With the track forwards, the front or back foot can be placed in the strap.
Some people prefer not to use them at all and remove them.
The next pair are the training straps, which are used in the early stages to accustom sailors to footstrap use.
For very heavy sailors, however, these might prove to be the most suitable straps as putting the weight further back might sink the tail of the board.
Behind these come what I have called the gybing straps, since these are used during the carve gybe, and at the back of the board are the two high wind straps, which can only be used in Force 4 or above.
Boards under 3.00m in length normally use only the gybing and high wind straps.
Getting into the Straps
Key Points.
Keep the board moving as fast as possible.
The front foot is the first foot into the training strap.
Keep the board level; move back as the wind increases.
Many people, in order to feel more secure, make the mistake of diving into straps at the first possible opportunity.
Think of your board as a speedboat.
As you open up the throttle, you need to move to the front of the boat to help it rise on to the plane.
Once it is planing, you can move back again.
As you start, therefore, concentrate on keeping the board level and getting it to move as quickly as possible.
Sequence
1.
Get the board moving as fast as possible with the centreboard retracted.
2.
Place your front foot in the training strap, using the back foot to keep the board level.
3.
When wind or board speed increases sufficiently, place the front foot in the gybing strap, again using the back foot for stability.
4.
Place your back foot in the front high wind strap.
5.
If speed is lost, quickly move forwards on the board.
It is important to think of the high wind straps as being completely independent of the straps further forward.
Thus, it does not follow that if one foot is in the training strap, the other must use the front high wind strap.
Faults
A common complaint is that the straps are too far back and that the board keeps turning into the wind.
The reasons for this are:
1.
Not having an efficient strong wind stance.
(This is the most common fault).
2.
Attempting to use the straps when the wind is not strong enough.
3.
The centreboard being down.
4.
Not using the above sequence.
5.
Not keeping the board level with the back foot.
6.
The footstraps being too tight, causing all the weight to fall on the windward side.
Footsteering
Footsteering is best practised in position 3 of the sequence and only when the board is planing fast.
With the daggerboard retracted. the board can be steered solely by weight  movements and behaves like a surfboard, water-ski or skateboard, in that if you weight one side of the board it will turn in that direction.
By rocking back on your heels, the weight will be transferred to the windward side and the board will turn into the wind.
To bear away from the wind, you must move your body weight to the other side by bending the knees and bringing the hips over the board.
The best practice is to try steering a controlled wiggly course using your weight.
To do this you will need to move your back foot.
Remember as you head up and bear away that the sail will need to be sheeted in and out accordingly, otherwise the board will stop.
If the board fails to respond to your weight, this is an indication that, either you are not travelling fast enough, or your weight is not far enough back on the board.
THE HARNESS
The harness really does take the pain out of windsurfing and allows you to stay out on the water far longer.
Rather than weary arms taking the strain, the harness lines do, allowing maximum use of body weight whilst letting the arms make fine adjustments to the sail.
However, you should only consider using one if you can confidently sail in a Force 4.
Harnesses have progressed a lot from the early designs of the 1970s, and there are now three different types in use:
1.
The waistcoat harness .
This conventional harness has a fairly high hook position with straps that go over the shoulder.
It is becoming less popular now because of the lack of support it gives to the lower back, although it does give more buoyancy than other types.
2.
The waist harness .
This is widely used because of the comfort and lack of restriction of the upper body.
3.
The seat harness .
This can take many forms, but the idea is that part of it is strapped around your backside; this prevents the hook from riding up and allows you to take all the weight of the rig by sitting.
It is commonly used in racing and flat water sailing.
The ideal learning conditions for getting acquainted with the harness are flat water with a Force 2 to 3 onshore wind.
Gusty winds are to be avoided at all costs.
Setting up the Lines (Figs 45 to 48)
This is very important since lines that are either the wrong length or not balanced can provoke a string of problems including tired arms, aching backs, bad posture and catapult falls.
The lines are positioned by referring to the CE or balance point of the rig.
On most sails this imaginary point lies about 18 to 22 inches (46–56cm) from the front of the boom and can be found by standing the rig on the beach in a steady wind.
A good way to check the lines are in the correct position is to temporarily release one or both hands from the boom whilst hooked in.
If the lines are balanced you should be able to hold this position for a few seconds without the sail changing its position.
The ‘depth’ of the lines is equally as important as the positioning and it should be such that the arms can almost be extended when hooked in.
Hooking In and Out
When on a close reach, hook in by pulling the rig sharply towards you and letting the line swing up to meet your hook.
A hip movement towards the swinging line will also help, but beware of moving the whole body towards the  sail as this will encourage a catapult fall.
You can unhook by taking the weight of the rig back on to your arms, thereby allowing the rope to fall out of the hook.
Faults
Difficulty in hooking in can sometimes be attributed to harness lines that are too short.
The commonest problem, though, is the balance of the lines.
If you feel excess pressure on your front arm, move the line towards the mast and vice versa if the back arm seems overworked.
Do not attempt to use the harness on a run as it is difficult to control the gusts.
THE MAST TRACK
The mast track is now a common feature on most boards and with proper use it can increase the board's speed and manoeuvrability, particularly in strong winds.
Only  competent sailors can take advantage of the mast track, so if you are still mastering other techniques it is best to leave it in the middle and forget about it.
Moving the Track
Most tracks are operated by a pedal which, when depressed, enables adjustment.
With the front foot on the pedal, the track is moved forwards by pushing downwards on the boom and backwards by pulling on the boom.
This will only work with the rig inclined back in the sailing position, otherwise it may be necessary to use one hand on the mast.
Positioning
A lot of confusion surrounds the ‘where and when’ of mast track positioning.
The simplest approach is to look at it as a device that moves your weight up and down the board.
So, with it at the front the board lies on the water flat, and with it back the tail digs in.
For a board over 3.20m there are three positions in which you can use the track mast: towards the front, towards the back or in the middle.
For shorter boards the same principles apply, but the back position does not make the board faster as the board planes on too small a surface and becomes difficult to control
Front
The track is used in the front position for sailing into wind, as nearly all the length of the board is in the water and this provides greatest sideways resistance.
Back
The back position can only be properly used in strong winds on a reach; in lighter winds the board will just sit on its tail causing lots of drag.
Once there is enough wind to plane, though, the back position comes into its own, since with the weight back only a small amount of the board is in contact with the water thus enabling high speeds.
Also, with less length of board in the water, the board becomes more manoeuvrable (just as a short car has a tighter lock than a long estate model).
Middle
The middle position is used for reaching in medium winds as it prevents the tail from digging in too much and encourages the board to plane.
This is the best all-round position.
Fig 38 Here the CE is marked and the hands are spaced equally either side of it.
The arms are straight, placing the strain on the larger groups of shoulder and back muscles.
Notice how the shoulders are parallel to the boom whilst the hips, knees and feet are all facing the direction of ‘pull’, making for the most efficient sailing position.
Fig 39 Strong wind stance — hand positions: Bent arms with back hand taking all the strain near the CE; Straight arms with hands further back, spaced equally about the CE.
Leaning rather than pulling.
Fig 40 A perfect, relaxed stronger wind stance demonstrated by one of Britain's top Division 11 sailors, Barrie Edgington.
Notice that he is looking forwards over his straight front arm, with his back arm slightly bent to adjust the angle of the sail.
Contrary to what you are told as a novice, it does in fact pay to let your backside drop into a sitting position — this allows even the shortest sailors to lean back in a relaxed position using their weight as opposed to relying only on arm strength
Fig 41 Apparent Wind.
Board A is tethered and the true and apparent winds are the same.
Board B is moving at 10 knots cross-wind.
The resulting apparent wind blows at 45 degrees and the sail has to be sheeted in tightly
Fig 42 Even the best sailors sometimes take catapult falls.
Here it probably happened by sailing into the steep wave resulting in a sudden loss of speed.
To avoid being thrown when sailing in waves, look ahead to choose the best course and allow the waves to flex over the waves.
Fig 43 A typical footstrap arrangement on an all-round funboard of more than 3.50m
Fig 44 Getting into the footstraps: Back foot keeps the board level.
Back foot is the last into the footstraps and is only used there in a strong wind (Force 4 & plus )
Fig 45 Attaching the harness.
Hold the rig on the beach in a sailing position with wind in the sail
Fig 46 Still with wind in the sail, move the hands close together.
Provided that the rig is balanced, the point where they meet is the balanced point of the rig
Fig 47 Attach the lines equally either side of the balance point
Fig 48 They should be long enough to enable you to sail with almost straight arms.
Too short a line will make hooking in and out of a waist harness very difficult
4 FUNBOARD TECHNIQUE
The funboard skills in this chapter draw heavily on good strong wind technique, and you should be able to sail comfortably in moderate to strong winds and use the harness and footstraps without mishap before attempting what follows.
It does not follow that in owning a funboard you should only learn funboard techniques.
Funboard Requirements
The following six points form the essentials of funboard sailing and set a good funboard sailor apart from a bad one.
Commitment
Commitment, or a ‘go for it’ attitude as windsurfers have termed it, is perhaps the most essential ingredient of all.
When you have a high level of commitment your attention is focused specifically on what you've chosen to do and the way you've chosen to do it.
You cannot be tentative or apprehensive in your movements; you have to throw caution to the wind and ‘attack’ a manoeuvre with the objective clearly in your mind.
Mobility
Funboard sailing, by its very nature, requires more agility and suppleness than is needed in light winds.
Timing
Everything happens so much quicker in stronger winds, so a good sense of timing is needed.
This is gradually learned so that, for instance , you know exactly when to gybe in choppy water to take advantage of the waves.
Efficient Stance
This is not so much an attribute but a requirement since, as we shall see later, it is essential for any of the more complicated techniques to be attempted.
Upright Rig
Keeping an upright rig also distinguishes a good funboard sailor since it gives more forward drive whilst sailing and more lift in beach and waterstarts.
Body Weight
By using body weight through the mastfoot a good sailor will waterstart and sail his board more efficiently than a bad one.
STANCE
The posture for funboard sailing is no different from that required for any other board, apart from the fact that the feet are commonly in the footstraps.
However, nearly all funboard technique problems can be traced back to deficiencies in the strong wind stance.
The most common cause is that of the front hand being too far forward on the boom, which causes luffing problems in the water start and the beach start and gives insufficient speed in the carve gybe.
The strong wind stance  described earlier is the basis of the funboard stance, but to it we can add a further ingredient — the hips and bottom.
Try this: with a partner of equal weight try pulling each other over with hands clasped and toes touching.
Stop!
The first thing you do is drop your bottom and push with your legs to make use of your weight.
Some people use this instinctively in their windsurfing in stronger winds and especially now that seat and waist harnesses are widely used.
It is a particularly useful method of sailing in gusty conditions where the hips can move in and out to compensate for fluctuations in the wind without moving the sail.
So, although you are discouraged from dropping your bottom as a beginner, it is very useful when the wind increases in handling the extra pull.
(as Fig 40 demonstrated.)
The important points to emphasise from stronger wind stance are that the hands and feet should move back as the wind increases to centre around the balance point.
Also the arms, and in particular the front one, should be straight since not only is this less tiring but it keeps the rig upright and provides more power.
Finally, the head and shoulders and hips should all be rotated to face forwards which is the most efficient position.
THE BEACH START (Figs 49 to 52)
Key points Mastfoot pressure; back foot on centreline; upright rig; straight front arm.
The beach start enables you to step on to your board without having to haul the sail out of the water.
It becomes compulsory when sailing off exposed beaches in rough conditions, since it means you can escape the hazardous shorebreak quickly.
Strictly speaking, this is not solely a funboard technique but I include it here as it has such close links with the waterstart.
Tips
Manoeuvring into Position
This is done by applying pressure to the mastfoot by pulling or pushing with one hand on the mast.
The board will pivot round the skeg.
The sail should not be powered until you are ready to go.
The Back Foot
It is imperative that this is placed on the centreline otherwise the board will swiftly turn into the wind once any weight is put on it.
If you have difficulty keeping the board on a broad reach.
the back foot on the board can draw it towards you.
Getting Going
Let the wind do the work and pull you up on the board.
You will only get enough power to do this by extending the arms as high as possible, thereby getting the rig upright.
If, when you get on, all your weight is left on the back foot, the back of the board will inevitably sink and you will go for a swim — as you step on to the board move the weight forwards quickly.
Fault Finding
‘The board keeps on turning into wind as I get going’There are a number of possible causes of this:
1.
Board is not in correct starting position.
2.
Not having the weight on the centreline.
3.
Sheeting out as you step up.
4.
Not moving the weight forwards quickly enough.
‘I can't seem to get close enough to the board to get my foot on.’
Possible reasons for this include:
1.
Approaching the board from side-on rather than from the rear quarter.
2.
Not lifting the boom high enough above you; control the extra power by spilling wind.
THE WATER START
Of all the skills in windsurfing water starting is the most highly prized as it opens the door to a whole range of smaller high performance boards.
Uphauling in stronger winds, as well as being extremely difficult, is very tiring and often frustrating.
The water start uses the force of the wind to pull you out of the water and, when performed properly, is a faster and more efficient means of starting on all types of board.
Even on the Olympic Division 11 board, the water start is used in strong winds after a fall since it is so much quicker.
There are many similarities with beach starting, indeed many people have taught themselves by performing increasingly deeper versions of the beach start, The water start is divided into two parts; the rig recovery and the start itself.
All lengths of board can be used provided they can support your weight, but when learning the sail should not be larger than 6.0 sq m and should have boom length shorter than 2.00m.
Rig Recovery
Key Points: Position mast at 90 degrees to the wind; swim vigorously into the wind, pull rig diagonally upwards and into the wind.
This is undoubtedly the most tiring skill to learn since it involves so much swimming.
The aim is to arrange the rig in such a way that the wind can blow under it and release it from the water.
Tips
1.
Aligning the mast to 90 degrees Fig 53 .
Obviously the rig does not always conveniently lie in this position for you, so you must swim the rig into position with a strong leg action.
Sometimes, though, the rig falls in an awkward position, in which case the rig has to be flipped by lifting the end of the boom.
For first attempts the board is best positioned as above, but with practice the board can be manoeuvred once the rig is out of the water.
2.
Raising the rig (Figs 55 & 56)The main points here are to swim vigorously into wind, which will help release the water off the back of the sail, and lift the sail upwards and diagonally into the wind.
When raising the rig one hand is on the mast, while the other treads water helping the feet.
3.
Controlling the rig Once the rig is free the hands move on to the boom in the normal sailing position and the power is controlled by sheeting in and out.
Fault Finding
‘The back of the sail seems to dig into the water as I raise the rig.’
Possible causes of this  1.
Not swimming hard into the wind.
2.
Lifting vertically up, rather than into the wind.
If this happens, pull down on the mast hard and swim into the wind.
The Start (Figs 58 to 61)
Key Points: Pull the board close to you by using the back foot; maintain an upright rig; kick hard with the front foot; lean forwards applying weight to mast foot.
It is a common fallacy that the wind does all the work in a water start by pulling you on to the board.
In fact, in winds of Force 3 to 5 it only does about half the work in getting your weight over the back foot, the rest is up to you.
Only in very strong winds does it pull you completely out of the water.
Tips
1.
Get close to the board (Fig 58 .
By using the back heel placed on the centreline, pull the back of the board towards you thereby making it infinitely easier for the rig to pull you over the board.
2.
Extend your arms Keep them well down the boom to get the rig as upright as possible.
3.
Kick hard with your front leg Unless you have very large feet you won't get much extra lift, but it will help your stability and balance.
4.
Lean forward as you rise As in the beach start, by leaning down on a straight front arm you are taking the weight off the back of the board and putting it on the mast foot.
Fault Finding
‘I keep heading into wind when I try starting.’
Possible causes:
1.
Not starting on a reach; remember — use the back foot to bring the back of the board towards you.
2.
Not having the weight on the centreline.
3.
Not leaning forwards as you rise.
4.
Not having a good enough strong wind stance.
‘In very strong winds I can't prevent the sail from lifting me out of the water.’
1.
To control the power keep the sail low and close to the water to decrease its effective area and slide one or both feet into the straps whilst lying in the water.
Exercise
As mentioned earlier, making deeper and deeper beach starts is often a successful way of tackling the water start, provided you have a gently shelving beach.
Another good way of practising the start without having to go through the exhausting rig recovery is to sail along and lower yourself into the water.
In light winds this can still be done by lowering yourself to sit on the board and then pulling on a straight front arm to pull yourself up.
It develops the idea of using weight through the mast foot.
THE CARVE GYBE (Figs 62 to 66)
Key Points; Plenty of speed; weight inside rail; low with bent legs; keep rig well in front of you; timing of feet and rig change; commitment.
This is the most satisfying of all the manoeuvres since with enough speed and with the daggerboard retracted the board is turned like a surfboard or ski by weighting the inside edge.
A good stance and plenty of wind is needed to get sufficient speed and then the footsteering principle is used throughout the turn with little help from the sail.
Equipment and Location
Although all lengths of board will carve gybe, the longer all-round funboards need a higher level of skill than the more responsive 3.30m size of board which is ideally suited to first attempts.
The sail size needs to be large enough to get you planing at speed.
Here we shall deal with the basic carve gybe on a board over 3.00m.
Shorter boards have slightly different techniques.
A flat water venue is vital since choppy, coastal conditions make smooth turns very difficult, even for the experts.
Imagine learning to water-ski on the sea with waves — you wouldn't be making life easy for yourself.
Tips
Foot Placement (Fig 62)
You can only turn properly if you are using the gybing straps.
The back foot is placed on the leeward side of the board with a number of factors (such as the weight of the sailor and the length of the board) determining where you place it.
At first, place your foot in position with very little weight on it; then, when your decide to begin the turn, swing your body weight across the board by bending the knees so that more and more weight is borne on the back foot.
In mid-turn all the weight will be on the inside foot whilst the other remains in the strap.
When placing weight on the feet, use the front of the feet and toes rather than the heels.
Body Position
Keep those knees bent, just as when snow skiing.
The body itself should be upright, it is the knees that apply the weight to that inside foot.
Looking forwards through the sail will help to keep the upper body in the correct position.
If your front leg in the strap is straight, it is a sure sign that you are performing the fatal mistake of leaning back too far.
Although you might turn like Robby Naish in the first part of the gybe, the rest of it will be a slow, wobbly affair.
The Rig
To keep the weight forwards push the rig well in front of you with extended arms.
This also provides more power through the turn because the rig will be more upright.
Timing
Help yourself as much as you can by looking ahead and picking the flattest piece of water in which to turn.
Gybing in gusts will give you more speed.
The feet and rig change is done about two-thirds of the way through the turn.
The feet are changed first and then the rig, using the same method as for the flare gybe.
It is not very easy to judge when you are two-thirds of the way through a turn, so turning round a buoy provides a good reference point.
Another useful guideline is to move when the rig feels at its lightest.
Fault finding
‘The board turns well to start with but then I just head downwind.’
1.
Not enough speed.
2.
This is an indication that the weight has moved off the back part of the board and allowed the rails to dig in further forwards.
Keep your body weight applied to the back part of the inside rail throughout the turn.
‘I keep falling in on the inside of the turn.’
1.
Avoid applying the weight to the turn by leaning the whole body, rather let the bent knees do the work whilst the upper body remains upright.
Exercises
Rather than trying to tackle the gybe as a whole, break it down into smaller component parts and try to make each part smooth.
The rig change often deserves the greatest attention.
The best way to perfect this is to do numerous light wind gybes since the technique is the same but everything happens slower.
For all parts of the gybe proceed on a trial and error basis with different arcs of turn, different back foot placements and in particular changes in the timing.
A final word: do the carve gybe in flat water — it is so much easier, honestly!
FUNBOARD DESIGN FEATURES
A lot of aggressive publicity and marketing surrounds funboard design, and for the uninitiated it is difficult to understand what is going on.
Here then, cutting through all the waffle, is a concise run-down of what makes a board work.
Underwater Shapes (Fig 67)
In an attempt to make the board plane in marginal winds (Force 3/4) most boards have single, double or quadruple concaves.
These subtle curves encourage air to flow under the board which gives extra lift and better acceleration.
They were first developed on seaplanes to encourage them to take off at lower speeds and are now a common feature on speedboats.
Towards the back of the board is a characteristic known as ‘V’.
This encourages decisive footsteering since as one rail is depressed the other is raised.
It also deflects unwanted air from passing the skeg which, as we shall see, is important at high speeds.
Skegs (Fig 68)
There is an unbelievable variety of skeg shapes available which all aim to do the same job, namely, keep the board sailing in a straight line.
The huge variety of shapes is partly fashion and partly an attempt to avoid a phenomenon known as spin out .
At very high speeds in Force 5 + a spin out occurs when the skeg suddenly stops working and the board loses control, slipping sideways.
In fact, it feels as if the skeg has dropped off.
What happens is that on a high speed reach there is so much sideways pressure on the skeg that an area of low pressure around the skeg sucks air down and creates an air pocket around the fin., therefore making it useless.
Spin out also occurs after landing badly from a jump.
In an attempt to cure this problem (and sell more skegs) the manufacturers have come out with a number of ingenious shapes.
In chronological order, the first to appear was  the fenced fin, on which horizontal fences around the foil aimed to prevent the offending air bubbles from working down the fin.
Next came the football style skegs, which, with a hooked leading edge, apparently stop the air bubbles since at speed air cannot flow forwards along the front facing section.
Where these two designs unfortunately fail is that they are both very successful at catching seaweed and the like.
The latest shape is the cut-out fin developed by Jimmy Lewis.
The part of the skeg nearest the board suffers most from turbulence and spin out, so this part is correspondingly cut away, relying on the large area at the bottom to provide the grip.
This skeg is not particularly good to windward, so for course racing large racing fins are favoured.
The miniature fins are known as thrusters and are used on smaller boards with wide tails to provide extra grip on the waves.
Many thrusters provided with boards are far too large so it may be worth while investing in a smaller pair.
Rail Profiles (Fig 69)
The rails of your board determine how well it sails upwind and its ability to maintain grip at speed on a reach and during a turn.
To do this they work together with the other design features of a funboard.
The rail shape gradually changes throughout a board's length; unless you look carefully it is difficult to see the subtle changes involved.
Different rail shapes release the water that is flowing under the board in different ways.
For instance, the smooth flowing curve of the soft rail encourages water to follow the  line of the rail up around the board, therefore having the effect of sucking the board into the water.
This is very good for grip and reduces the chances of spin-out whilst not being very fast.
It tends to be used in wave boards where good turning is important.
In total contrast, hard rails release water more cleanly and consequently will tend to plane earlier at the expense of not gripping quite so well in the turns.
A very thick hard rail, which you can hardly get your hand around, is often used in the mid-sections of a race board where speed is important, since when the board is sailed at a slight angle the thick rail digs in providing more lateral resistance and thereby helping the daggerboard.
There is also a compromise of the above shapes — chined or bevelled rails.
Widely used on modern boards, these are a combination of hard and soft, giving good water release and maintaining grip in turns.
These three shapes provide the basis for numerous other permutations in rail profile.
Tail Shapes (Fig 70)
The actual outline shape of the tail is of little importance, it is the width that matters.
The width controls the volume in the back part of the board and hence its sailing characteristics.
The table below contrasts a narrow and a wide tail:
Narrow Tail
Advantages: Fast in high winds; easy to control in extreme conditions.
Disadvantages: Lack of volume, thus difficult to sail in all but strong winds.
Gybes: Only long high speed turns possible.
Wide Tail
Advantages: Fast in light to moderate winds.
Disadvantages: Difficult to control in strong winds.
Gybes: Only long high speed turns possible.
As you can see, unless you only sail in very strong winds a wide tailed board is more suited to European conditions.
A moderately wide tail provides the best compromise for all conditions and this is what we find on most boards under 3.30m.
There are numerous different outline shapes used to achieve different widths, but the three most common are the pintail, the rounded pintail winger and the squash tail.
In its sleekest, narrowest form, the pintail is the favourite on high wind speed boards, due to its small wetted area and clean water release.
It needs a lot of wind and only performs wide turns.
The rounded pintail winger is probably the best shape for all conditions.
The wingers provide a sudden increase in width to encourage early planing, good jumping, and tight or long turns.
The squash tail is a popular shape on the large all-round funboards, giving easy light wind handling and making it quick to plane.
Tight gybes are possible.
The Rocker Line
Perhaps the reason that tail shapes have wrongly received so much attention in the past is that they are the most obviously visible difference between boards.
The rocker line, though, which is the most important part of board design, is difficult to identify.
Not only do boards have a lifted nose, but also a subtle rise in the tail.
It is the nature of this curve between nose and tail — the rocker line — that determines a board's speed and manoeuvrability.
Racing and speed boards are built with minimum amounts of nose and tail lift, giving long flat areas underneath which are good for speed.
However, such boards are difficult to turn and in large waves can nosedive, so for a more manoeuvrable design the rocker line would be made more curved.
Fig 49 The beach start.
The board has been manoeuvred into the broad reaching position by pushing and pulling on the rig and we are now about to start.
Notice the back foot position on the centreline and look how the hands are well down the boom in a sailing position.
Fig 50 The boom is then pushed up above you with straight arms, making the rig more upright and therefore supplying more power.
Also, at this stage you can draw the back of the board towards you using the back foot.
Fig 51 When you place the weight over the back foot the tail will submerge, so as you step on to the board lean forwards placing weight through the front arm on to the mast foot.
Fig 52 When the other foot steps on, move rapidly forwards into a normal sailing position.
Notice how Peter has adopted a crouched position to avoid being pulled over.
Fig 53 Aligning the rig.
Recovery position 90 ° to the wind; lift end of boom to flick rig, then proceed as in (a); swim rig into position.
Fig 54 Flipping the rig into a better position.
By lifting the end of the boom the wind will catch under the sail and flip it over.
Kick hard with legs and spare hand.
Fig 55 Raising the rig.
Lift diagonally upwards and into wind.
Fig 56 Rig recovery.
Once the rig is at 90 °s; to the wind.
swim hard upwind and lift the rig diagonally which will let the wind under the sail.
Fig 57 Here the clew of the sail has caught in the water because the mast has been raised too high.
When this happens swim vigorously into wind and pull down hard on the mast
Fig 58 This illustrates the importance of getting close to the board.
A has used his back foot to pull the board closer to him, thereby making it far easier to pull himself up.
Note how much more upright his rig is compared to B's, and also that by being further underneath the boom, it is easier to apply pressure to the mast foot.
Note that it is the heel which rests on the board, not the whole foot.
Fig 59 The water start.
Once the rig is free, transfer the hands to a position well back on the boom.
Kick hard with your feet and position yourself by the rear quarter of the board.
Fig 60 Extend the rig well above you with straight arms as in the beach start.
This not only supplies more power, but also enables you to get close enough to the board to put your foot on it.
Notice the back heel is placed on the centreline and, again like the beach start, can be used to bring the board closer.
Keep the spare leg kicking hard, this supplies a little lift and also stops the board's rapid progress sideways.
Fig 61 As you rise up lean well forwards; this will transfer much of your weight through the front arm on to the mast foot.
Kick the front leg vigorously as if you were trying to attract a shark!
Notice how the compact legs are enabling the body to keep close to the board.
Fig 62 Foot placement variables in the carve gybe: Aim: to make the back quarter of the inside rail dig in and grip.
Position for heavier sailors, shorter boards (less than 3.20m) and long, wide turns.
Average foot position for 11 stone (70kg) sailors.
Rear position for lightweight sailors, long boards (more than 3.60m) and tight turns.
Fig 63 The carve gybe.
The board is travelling at the necessary high speed and the sailor's weight is starting to bank the board into the turn.
Notice that the knees are already well bent.
Fig 64 The tilted angle of the board indicates that all the weight is now on the leeward side of the board, i e the right foot.
Note that if we were looking across the board from left to right the rig would still be relatively upright, as it is being pushed well forwards thereby supplying maximum power.
Fig 65 Look closely at the classic body position.
All the weight is on the right foot, using well-bent knees that enable the upper body to remain in a stable upright position.
Fig 66 Two-thirds of the way through the turn and the feet are changing.
The rig has been released in exactly the same manner as in the flare gybe (see Figs 29 to 33), but here the importance of an efficient rig change is paramount so remember the vital role of the hand placed on the mast.
5 Advanced Funboard Technique
Once you can carve gybe and water start with ease, you can move on to the more advanced funboard skills.
A good level of fitness is needed for this stage since you will often be sailing in Force 5 + winds.
Sailing in these conditions also needs an alert awareness of safety matters: you should pick your sailing venues with great care and always sail with others.
The techniques and skills that follow can be performed on all funboards but are best suited to boards under 3.20m as they are more controllable in strong winds.
THE CARVE GYBE ON SHORTER BOARDS
There are subtle differences between gybing long and short boards.
Foot and Body Position
Fig 62 showed the variables in foot placement and indicated that for smaller boards the foot is placed slightly further forwards.
This is only a general rule.
To this we can add another variable the rocker line of the board.
For instance, on a fast slalom type board, with only a little tail lift, the foot will have to be placed further back than on a wave board where the rocker line resembles a banana.
Each board has slightly different turning characteristics so when trying a new board it takes a while to learn where to put the back foot.
The body position differs slightly by having greater knee bend, since the speed of the board is so much greater.
In extreme winds (Force 6+) you have to keep very low to avoid being thrown over the front.
Timing (fig 72)
The greatest difference between gybing long and short boards, though, is in the timing since the short board is travelling faster and is more sensitive to weight movements than a longer board.
If you try moving the feet before changing the rig you are asking for trouble, since, in doing so, the board will wobble in the critical part of the turn thus losing smoothness and speed.
The feet should be kept in the straps until sheeting in on the new tack, thereby keeping the board on its banked course throughout the crucial rig change.
The greater speed enables the rig to be released earlier.
Provided the speed is good it can be released halfway through the turn, relying on the board's momentum to carry it through.
Remember, you place the back hand on the mast.
If you use the front hand on the mast you end up having to cross arms at the sheeting in stage.
The timing of when to do the turn is particularly important in anything other than in dead flat water, since the slope of even the smallest wave can be used to bank off, thereby helping to maintain speed.
The aim is to gybe just before an oncoming wave, thus using the ‘downhill’ part of the wave, when you are most vulnerable, ie during the latter part of the turn.
Good timing of the turn makes an enormous difference, especially in choppy water.
You tend to find that you become accustomed to the timing on your local water and that when sailing in a different place it takes a while to learn the timing of a different wave pattern.
Before moving on to tackle the other types of gybe, you should aim to perfect the standard carve gybe with a success rate of nine out of ten.
THE SLAM GYBE
The slam gybe is a very tight version of the carve gybe and is a useful technique to have in your repertoire.
The board spins around on the tail with some assistance from the rig.
It is particularly useful when you want to gybe without losing valuable way downwind, for example, when working upwind on a short board or gybing in tight situations such as in front of an oncoming wave or obstacle.
Tips
Foot Placement
For a tight turn the back foot will need to be placed a long way back on the board.
Body Position
All the weight has to be used to make the tail dig in, so the posture needed is exactly that of a very bad carve gybe, ie straight front leg, leaning back and pulling the rig towards you.
Throughout the turn you must keep very low.
Speed
If you enter the turn at full speed the board will just bounce out of control as you lean back.
You need to sheet out considerably to slow down and then sheet in again to do the turn.
Rig
The rig is partly used to steer the board through the turn by angling it across the board into wind.
The rig change is done at the very end of the turn which will involve a few seconds of clew first sailing 
Killing the Turn
To stop the board from turning too much and possibly heading into wind, the turn can be stopped by swiftly moving forwards on the board
THE DUCK GYBE (Figs 73 to 77)
This has no practical purpose whatsoever but has become rather a measure of ability — if you can duck gybe it is an indication that you must be quite good.
It is a standard carve gybe where, instead of letting the sail rotate around the front of the board, it is deliberately thrown overhead, involving a ‘duck’ underneath the sail.
When performed well, as well as looking good, it produces a sense of well-being as you smoothly come out of the turn at speed.
The duck gybe can be performed on any board provided that the rig is not too large and the foot of the sail is not too low, for example on racing sails.
It is essential that before you attempt to duck gybe you can carve gybe well, as the feet and body positions are exactly the same.
The most important ingredient is speed, sine the faster you are going the lighter the rig will feel in the duck (apparent wind).
Also, at speed the board is more stable.
Tips
Timing
This will depend on the wind strength, but as a general rule the hand movements should start about a third of the way into the turn when the board is travelling at its fastest.
The stronger the wind, the later you release the rig.
Trial and error is the best way to learn the timing, and most people discover that it is better to release sooner rather than later.
Keep Very Low Throughout
If you are too upright there is a tendency to sway back on to your heels to avoid the boom end.
Also, at the end of the turn when the boom is grasped, unless you are low you will be pulled straight over as the power comes on.
Throwing the Rig Back
When in the position shown in Fig 75, the rig must be thrown vigorously back over your head.
A good guide is to try to brush your ear with your shoulder as it throws the rig.
Grasping the Boom on the New Tack
The sooner you can get the front arm in front of the balance point, the better, since you are then in a position to spill wind and control the rig.
Getting the hands forward might involve a little arm over arm shuffling along the boom.
Feet Change
There is enough to worry about already without having to worry about the feet so, as in the short board carve gybe, leave the feet in the straps until after the rig change.
Exercises
It is well worth while practising the hand movements on the beach (as in Figs 73 to 76), since there must be no hesitation on the water.
In light winds a good practice is to incorporate the duck gybe into the long board flare gybe, this will not only improve the hand movements, but also your sense of timing.
The freestyle trick, Sail 360 °s; also uses the same hand movements.
SAILING IN WAVES
Sailing in waves produces an excitement that is difficult to beat and this is partly because it can be slightly dangerous if you are not careful.
You must be able to water start with ease and have enough confidence to gybe in front of a breaking wave.
Being a strong swimmer is obviously important, as is being reasonably fit, since when the wave puts you through its ‘rinse cycle’ you come out disoriented and out of breath.
In true surf conditions only boards of under 3.00m are suitable.
Launching (Fig 78)
On many beaches this can be the hardest part, as there is often an unpleasant shore-break.
However, this can be a useful built-in safety factor, as it prevents those who aren't up to it from sailing in waves where they will be a danger to themselves and others.
The beach start is the only way to launch into breaking waves and it needs to be carefully timed.
It is worth spending a few minutes looking at how the waves are breaking and picking the best place and time to launch.
You should look for the biggest gap between  waves, this will probably occur on a gentle slope of the beach, as on a steep part of the beach the waves will break closer together.
If the wind is blowing directly onshore, you should also work out which is the best tack to set off on.
When you put the board in the water to launch, punch the board through any advancing waves by pushing hard forwards on the rig with one or both hands on the mast.
At this stage an important surf rule needs to be observed:never be in a position directly behind the board or rig as a wave approaches .
Not only is this position dangerous, but it is  also the way numerous masts are broken.
As the wave washes the board shorewards, the rig resists this movement by digging in and sometimes catching the bottom.
The rig cannot stop the force of the wave and the mast breaks.
It is always preferable to have the rig nearer the wave rather than vice versa.
Sailing Out
Once you are up and going, you should select your course out through the waves aiming to jump on only one or two waves that take your fancy.
To sail over a wave without jumping you need to unhook and let your legs absorb the rising wave — rather like a skier uses his legs as shock absorbers over bumps.
Having passed over the wave there is often a tendency to catapult fall, so it is sometimes necessary to sheet out.
The white foamy part of a broken wave is largely made up of air bubbles and the board often digs into it rather than riding over it.
When approaching white water you should not have too much speed, sheeting out might be necessary, and the weight should move on to the back foot to encourage the nose to lift over the foam.
Anything other than a square-on approach can lead to problems.
Jumping (Figs 79 to 83
Jumping is an exciting part of high wind sailing in which there is no limit to the amount you can learn since the possibilities and variation in jumps is endless.
Indeed, three years ago the 360° aerial loop was considered an impossible feat but now it is commonplace amongst the top wave sailors.
The majority of windsurfers, though, do not enjoy the perfect conditions that are needed to perform such spectacular manoeuvres and we have to make do with much smaller and fewer well-shaped waves.
For your first attempts you should not venture into breaking surf but instead practise ‘hopping’ off wind-blown chop.
Boards with wider tails are more suited to jumping since they will leap off the top of a wave rather than digging into it.
The height and type of a jump will depend on the steepness of the wave and your speed.
When sailing in surf it is important to select which wave to jump and also which part of the wave face is best.
Avoid trying to jump white water, aiming instead to jump at the steepest part of the wave which is normally the part about to break, the critical section.
Tips
1.
Think of all the waves around you as potential ramps from which to launch yourself.
With so many potential ramps available, you should look well ahead and select a good steep wave.
In this way, rather than it being an impulsive last second decision, you can prepare and focus your attention on what you are about to do.
2.
As you approach your selected wave concentrate on getting up as much speed as possible and unhook from your harness.
Always try to approach the wave at right angles.
3.
As the wave hits the nose of the board, lean back in a crouched position, placing all you weight on your rear foot.
This encourages the nose to lift.
4.
As the board leaves the wave, use the front foot to lift the windward rail, thereby encouraging the wind to catch under the board and giving more lift.
5.
Stay crouched and keep the sail sheeted in tightly.
6.
When you are in the air use the back foot to pull the tail of the board up under your buttocks.
It is this action that levels the board out in flight and makes a small hop into a controlled jump.
The Upside-down Jump (Fig 82)
Getting upside-down is far easier than it looks — it just needs the right combination or circumstances.
The wave should be very steep to encourage a more vertical flight as you take off.
Your speed should not be too great otherwise you will not be able to control the flight of the board in the air.
Your weight should suddenly move back as you reach the tip of the wave and you should pull the boom back over your head.
You should aim to dominate your equipment and really ‘go-for-it’.
It is probably safer in an upside-down jump to stay with your equipment rather than abandoning in mid-air since there is a risk of it landing on top of you.
For really extreme positions in the air you can try an angled approach the the wave face.
Apparently, in the movements before a 360 ° loop the board is headed into the wind so that it takes off from the wave at an oblique angle.
Good luck if you try it!
Landing
Initially it is difficult to avoid falling after a jump.
There are, however, three different ways of landing.
1.
The flat landing Rather like a belly flop in swimming, this is to be avoided at all costs since the flat impact can break a board in half as well as causing injury to the sailor.
2.
Tail first This is the most common landing in the learning stages and provides a much softer option to the flat landing.
3.
Nose first As you improve you can develop this landing by lifting the back foot under the buttocks in flight.
This is the best of the three since because of the nose rocker the landing is soft and you can recover quickly to the normal sailing position.
If you find that your landings are rather flat, lean back more as you come down.
Riding In (Fig 84)
In the ideal conditions for wave riding the wind is blowing parallel to the shore but, as with jumping, you can get away with winds that blow slightly onshore.
Offshore winds are dangerous and are to be avoided at all costs.
At some stage after you have leapt out through the waves you will need to gybe and hopefully catch a wave back in.
There really is no need to sail more than 300m off the beach; remember that the further out you sail the longer the swim back in should your equipment break.
When it comes to riding waves, surfers are the people with the greatest knowledge.
You will see groups of them clustered way out beyond the breaking surf waiting for the best waves.
These bigger waves arrive in ‘sets’ of two to five in which the wave height is considerably more than the normal waves.
When a set comes through, which may be anything from every five to every forty minutes, the more experienced surfers will take the second or third wave of the group since these are normally the biggest.
Whilst sailing in surf you should always keep an eye out for these sets since if you don't you may suddenly find yourself amongst the larger waves whose ‘rinse cycles’ are considerably more vigorous than that of a washing machine.
Before moving on to the more advanced aspects of wave riding let us consider what should happen in the first attempts.
Tips
1.
As with jumping, you should select your wave well in advance — the only criterion is that it should be fairly small.
You should gybe well in front of it and once the turn is completed look behind for your wave.
To ‘catch’ it you might have to slow down and let it come towards you.
2.
When the wave approaches, the back of the board will be lifted up and, obeying gravity, the board will shoot off down the slope of the wave.
As the tail is suddenly lifted you will need to move your weight back to stop the nose from digging in.
3.
As the board accelerates down the face of the wave your speed increases and the apparent wind changes.
The sail will need to be sheeted in.
4.
To make continued use of the slope of the wave it is best to sail along the wave face in either direction, but the favoured direction is that which takes you upwind.
5.
Don't get too close to the breaking part of the wave.
get off the wave either by sailing down ahead of it or by slowing down and letting it pass under you.
Beyond Basics
As you improve, instead of riding in a straight line along a wave you start manoeuvring by footsteering on the wave just as surfers do.
As you catch a wave and accelerate down its face you vigorously steer away from the wind.
This is called a ‘bottom turn’ and closely resembles the first half of a carve gybe.
However, since the wave is providing all the power for the turn you do not need much power from the rig.
So, rather than holding it in front of you as in the carve gybe, you deliberately lose the power from the rig by oversheeting ad leaning it towards the wave.
As well as losing power this provides support for the pronounced body lean into the turn.
The bottom turn should be sharp enough to bring you back up to the top of the wave whereupon you perform what is known as a ‘cut-back’ in which you use all your weight on the windward rail to violently turn the board back down the slope of the wave.
Bottom turns and cut-backs are performed along the wave leaving a wiggly wake.
These more advanced manoeuvres can only be performed in perfect conditions with smooth well-formed waves and a sideshore wind.
Curing Spin Out
Spin out is a far more common occurrence when sailing in waves, since so much air can get under the board.
However, waves do not cause spin out on their own; it is partly a result of bad technique.
To cure spin out the aim is to try and spread the sideways force of the sail along the rails of the board, rather than it being concentrated  on the straining skeg.
One way of doing this is to put the mast track further forwards, thus engaging more of the rail.
You can also achieve this by placing some of your weight through the boom to the mast foot — this is why many top sailors appear to lean forwards with their feet so far back.
With feet in the straps, the ankles should be relaxed allowing the strap leeward rail to bite which will, in turn, release the pressure from the skeg.
With the skeg placed at the very back, there is also less chance of spin out.
If you do spin out, try recovering by sharply bearing away using footsteering.
Otherwise you will have to slow down until the water flow around the skeg re-establishes itself.
Fig 71 Stuart Sawyer carve gybing a short board at speed.
Notice how much knee bend he uses.
Look also at the position of the rig — in high speed turns on flat water the sail is deliberately sheeted in and inclined into the turn.
This makes it easier to lean your weight into the turn and it is even more exaggerated when you turn on a wave face.
This technique is also used in slalom racing.
Fig 72 Timing when and where to gybe in choppy conditions.
You should turn just in front of a wave to make use of the slope it offers.
The bigger the gap between the waves, the better.
Board uses the smooth downhill part of wave in latter part of turn.
Fig 73 Duck gybe hand movements.
From a normal sailing position with hands equally spaced either side of the balance point (marked by tape), the back hand B slides down towards the end of the boom.
This will lessen the sudden jolt in the rig as it falls away when the front hand F is released
Fig 74 F releases and crosses over to grasp the end of the boom.
Once it has a grip, B releases and passes under the sail…
Fig 75…reach forwards on the new side of the boom.
meanwhile F pulls back sharply over the shoulder.
Fig 76 From a different angle: B is aiming to grasp in front of or as near to the balance point as possible.
The lower you duck and the harder F pulls back, the better chance there is of getting well forwards on the boom.
Fig 77 Robby Naish in the latter stages of a duck gybe.
He is about to throw the rig back over his head and momentarily will have no hands on the boom until his front hand grips.
Look at the bend in his left knee: it is an indication of how crouched and low you should be.
If you are anything near upright, the prospect of a face full of boom or sail causes you to lean back which completely spoils the turn.
Fig 78 It is dangerous to be positioned behind the board and rig, because the wave will throw them towards you as it passes.
Fig 79 Lift off.
Launching from the smallest of waves, more lift can be gained by lifting the windward rail thus enabling the wind to catch under the board.
Fig 80 Now in mid-flight, the sail is still sheeted in and the sailor is pulling the back foot under his backside to level off the jump and encourage…
Fig 81…a nose first landing.
Notice how far back he is leaning to stop the board burying too much.
Fig 82 An upside-down jump from Robby Naish
Fig 83 Another jump from Robby; this time a 20 ft leap into oblivion
Fig 84 Different methods of wave riding.
Advancing wave face.
Cut-back or ‘off the lip’; Riding along the face.
Fig 85 Maui Mayer from Hawaii performing a cut back in a World Cup wave riding event.
As you can see, it needs total commitment.
6 Competitive Windsurfing
GENERAL POINTS
One of the attractions of windsurfing is speed, and there is no better way to find out how fast you are and improve your technique than racing.
It is also an excellent way to meet like-minded people and try out new venues.
There is a wide range of standards at which you can compete, ranging from weekly club races to national series events or even international championships.
The very pinnacle of the sport is the Olympic Games and the world professional circuit.
The Divisions
There are four internationally recognised classes, each with their own measurement rules.
At club level these divisions are often relaxed as all boards sail together and only a maximum sail size rule is imposed.
Because weight is such an important factor in boards planing, there are two weight groups in all but the funboard division.
The dividing line between light and heavyweight is 72kg or 11 st 4lb.
Division 1
The rules stipulate that these boards can have a maximum hull thickness of 16.5cm which includes most boards produced today.
The maximum rig size permitted is 6.3 sq m.
This is a particularly popular class in clubs.
Division 11
With a maximum hull thickness of 22cm these boards have a distinctive round underwater shape that at first sight resembles a canoe.
They are very fast in light to medium winds, but rather difficult to sail because of their rounded shape.
This is the Olympic class and tends to have a higher standard with a limited following.
Mistral Competition SST One Design
This is the only one design class recognised by The IYRU (International Yacht Racing Union).
In a one design class as the name suggests, everyone uses exactly the same equipment.
The Mistral SST is the board used for the Youth and Ladies World Championships, for which identical boards are supplied for competitors at the race site.
WBA Funboard Division
This has evolved to cater for funboards.
There are fewer rules than in the above classes and racing only takes place in winds above 11 knots.
There is also a division between professionals and amateurs, though at times it is rather difficult to draw the line.
Events are normally held at windy times of year (spring and autumn) and at venues where there are good surf conditions.
Types of Competition
The Course Race (Fig 86)
This is a race common to all classes, in which the boards race around a set of buoys using upwind and offwind legs.
Divisions 1 and 11 use  a conventional triangular course for all their competitions.
The Mistral and funboard classes, though, have adopted a ‘W’ style course where there is more emphasis on gybing and reaching.
Normally a series of three or more races is held and the winner is the person with the lowest overall points total.
The Slalom (Fig 87)
This takes place in strong winds and both the Mistral and Funboard divisions use it.
The slalom is a test of high speed reaching and turning, and consists of a series of heats leading to a final.
Wave Competition
This is only used in the funboard division and in Europe tends to be something of a rarity, as the combination of cross-shore winds with surf is so infrequent.
Sailors perform in man-on-man heats in front of a panel of judges showing off their jumping, riding and turning skills in the waves.
Go-Fast Technique
Before explaining how to tackle a course race it is worth looking at what makes one sailor go faster than another.
Both slalom and course races can be won by sailing fast without any tactics.
Fast Stance (Figs 88 and 89)
On boats the rig is held in position with wire shrouds and top yachtsmen spend many hours tweaking and adjusting their controls for maximum performance.
On a board all these fine adjustments are made by our bodies in the way we stand.
Here then are the main aspects of a fast stance:
1.
Keep the rig as upright as possible An upright rig presents more sail area to the wind and keeps the driving force pointing in the right direction — horizontally forwards.
This is achieved by using extended arms placed shoulder width apart on the boom.
Harness lines should have enough depth to enable the arms to be extended when hooked in.
2.
Keep the sail still, balance using hips and knees When the sail is sheeted or moved to retain balance, it spoils the airflow around it and wastes valuable power.
You should try and keep your balance by moving the knees and hips towards or away from the sail, keeping the shoulders still.
3.
Keep the board level The board should be sailed in a position it is designed for — horizontal.
The exception to this is when you are sailing upwind which will be covered later.
4.
Flex the legs to absorb oncoming waves.
The legs act rather like shock absorbers.
5.
Close the knot This involves, especially when reaching, trying to close the gap between sail and board.
The sail should be rigged with the minimum amount of mast showing at deck level.
It is difficult to close the slot in light winds.
6.
Gust response If you respond to gusts efficiently, without sheeting out to maintain control, you can gain many metres from each gust.
To do this you should always be looking upwind to spot the give-away dark furry patches on the water that mark their approach.
If the gusts look particularly ferocious then it is worth widening your grip.
Crouch low before it arrives and when it hits drop your backside and push your bent legs out to take the strain.
This is an essential skill in gusty offshore winds.
Race Preparation
If you are a newcomer to racing the main preparation is to understand what procedures will be used at the race you are entering.
You can learn a certain amount by reading, but the best advice comes from talking to people.
Equipment
The equipment needs to be checked for any signs of wear and tear well in advance, since if anything breaks in a race it is ultimately you  who are to blame for not foreseeing it.
Daggerboards and mast tracks should be made to work freely and you should be confident with the non-slip surface.
Surfboard wax works wonders for slippery decks.
Skegs and daggerboards can be sandpapered to remove any nicks and the uphaul rope can be tied neatly so that it doesn't flap around the ankles in mid-gybe.
The slot flusher which closes off the gap on the underside left by the daggerboard case needs to work effectively otherwise, as well as being slowed down, you will have a fountain of water blasting into your face when you go fast.
You will need to wear a watch to time the starts; this should be worn on the wrist of your right hand, with the face on the inside, so that in the final seconds of a frantic starboard tack start it can easily be read whilst in the sailing position.
The Body
For top competitors this might involve some form of physical training.
In the period immediately before a race it is worth eating something sweet to provide glucose and drink plenty of fluids since in a long race you can become dehydrated and can lose up to 5lb.
It is also wise to do some stretching and warm-up exercises before launching, especially in strong winds.
The Mind
This is only of benefit in big events where the skill and fitness of the top sailors are all very similar and it is the state of mind that matters.
‘Psyching-up’ is what this mental preparation is often called, and for some it starts days before an event.
Many people have developed their own ways of preparing them selves, such as rehearsing what they are going to do in their mind.
There is an excellent book which covers this intriguing subject called Sporting Body Sporting Mind (J Syer and C Connolly, CUP 1984) which explains numerous methods of mental preparation.
COURSE RACING
Course racing is used in all the divisions and is popular in windsurfing clubs.
The main priority at first is to get round the course without falling off; then, as you improve, you can start to think about tactics, some of which are explained below.
The Line Start (Fig 92)
A line start is the most common method of starting a course race.
In simple terms the fleet has to start through an imaginary line usually drawn between a mast and buoy.
A countdown using sound signals together with the raising of flags is given at ten and five or six and three minutes before the start, depending on the procedure being used.
At one minute before the start a sound signal is made.
You can synchronise your digital watch with the countdown to ensure you start exactly as the gun goes.
For obvious reasons, laser beams or submerged fluorescent wires cannot be used to mark the start line.
To make sure you are not over the line at the start, try and get an accurate transit — do not use a moving ship on the horizon!
It should be checked twice; once before and then again after the second sound signal, since the race team are allowed to move the line between the first and second sound signals.
They often do this by letting out or bringing in their mooring line, so keep an eye on them to see which direction they move it in, if at all.
It is also worth checking your transit twice, since sometimes the start line drifts in a current before the anchor grips.
At one championship in Barbados they had this  very problem, as the buoys needed three hundred feet of line to reach the sea-bed!
Board Handling
At the start you need very fine control over the board to enable you to manoeuvre into position whilst all the other competitors try to do exactly the same.
You need to be able to hold the board in one position without it drifting downwind and also to sail backwards which is invaluable in tight situations.
Starting Tactics (Fig 95)
The first tactical decision is over where on the line you start.
This is determined by the angle the line is set to the wind, as one end is nearly always better than the other.
A line set at exactly right angles to the wind is rare, so you have to set about detecting which is the favoured end , three methods for this are shown in Fig 95.
Unfortunately everyone else will be doing  the same thing and if one end is blatantly favoured then it is likely to be crowded.
Starting at the crowded favoured end is all very well if you can get a good clean start, but more often than not, there is so much crowding that only a few boards get away in clean wind.
The safer option is to start about fifteen per cent further down the line, thereby giving yourself a little more room.
If the bias towards one end is only small, the best place to start is in the middle where there is often plenty of space and the chances of making a good start are greater.
Most of the top sailors start here, so be careful who you position yourself next to since if they are fast they will soon take your wind.
Line Bulge and Sag (Fig 96)
There is often a large sag in the line-up of boards, because although the people at either end are confident that they are not over the line, the people in the middle can not judge their approach precisely and tend to hold back in caution.
If you recognise a sag developing, stay confident in your transit and steal and instant lead over your competitors by staying on the line.
In an experienced large fleet everyone is so keen to get a good start that a bulge often forms.
This tends to be skewed towards the favoured end and you should aim to be at the front of the bulge.
Tactics in the Final Minute
So, there you are in the final minute, boards crowded around you and space becoming limited.
What you must do is preserve as much of that space as you can, especially downwind of you.
As you edge up to the line, keep nudging into wind as this will create a small gap downwind.
With between four and eight seconds to go, you can accelerate into this gap, hitting the line at speed whilst those around you are still sheeting in.
The Gate Start (Fig 97)
The gate start is an alternative to conventional line starting and is sometimes used to start large fleets.
The principle is quite simple.
A board, whose identity is made known to all competitors, begins sailing upwind on port tack past a buoy in the water about ten seconds before the start gun.
Behind this board (called a pathfinder) is the start boat which motors along at the same speed as the board.
When the start signal goes the boards are free to start by sailing out close behind the start board on starboard tack.
The pathfinder and start boat keep on going until all the fleet have started, or for three minutes, whichever is the shorter.
At the end of the start the pathfinder tacks and continues to race just like any other board.
In steady conditions this is an entirely fair way to start; a board starting early through the gate has exactly the same chance of reaching the first mark as the last boat through.
A good start is one where you pass close behind the start boat going at speed.
The important tactic with this type of start is to decide whether to start early or late in the gates ‘opening’.
Go late if you want to keep to the right hand side of the course and early if you want to use the left hand side.
Also, if you consider yourself to be faster than the pathfinder board, it is worth starting early, since as you wait for him to reach you, you could be sailing that part faster than him.
If you consider yourself slower than the pathfinder then start late.
This is a good method of starting a small group of boards without a race organiser and is commonly used in training.
The Upwind Leg
This is easily the most important leg of the course, where a great deal of place changing can go on due to the huge differences in speed among sailors.
There are also a large number of tactical decisions to be made as you sail upwind.
Technique
Upwind sailing is a part of the sport that many people ignore, concentrating instead on reaching and gybing all the time.
It comes as a  bit of a shock to see how much faster others can sail upwind.
There is no magic skill, you just improve with practice.
Your main objective should be to sail as close to the wind as possible whilst maintaining speed.
The closer you sail, the slower you go and vice versa.
It then becomes rather a compromise of finding the optimum angle to sail to the wind in different conditions.
For instance, in choppy water it is worth sacrificing your angle to the wind for a little more speed to punch through the waves.
You can feel if the sail is sheeted correctly by the pressure in the arms (assuming that they are spaced equally about the CE).
If the pressure in the front arm decreases then you are sailing too close to the wind.
You can practise this skill by deliberately steering a bad variable course ad feel the pressure changing in the hands.
With practice this skill becomes instinctive and you don't have to think about your sailing — you can just switch yourself to ‘automatic pilot’ and concentrate on other aspects of the race.
If your arms are fit enough, it is best to sail without using the harness as much as possible since you can make far more sensitive adjustments.
In the 1984 Olympics no harnesses were allowed, even in strong winds.
Nowadays, though, top sailors use the harnesses to rest their weary arms on long races.
Railing (Fig 98)
On the beat (upwind leg) the board is not sailed level as on all other points of sailing, but is deliberately heeled to enable the leeward rail to dig in and thus providing more lateral resistance.
Indeed, specialised racing boards have rail shapes that are extra sharp.
At speed the daggerboard helps to angle the board as Fig 34 showed.
Otherwise, the position of the feet along with the amount of weight placed through the booms onto the mastfoot determine the angle of heel.
The optimum angle varies between boards, but it should not be too great or the sideways resistance of the daggerboard is decreased.
Tactics Upwind
On the awkward leg some of the worst reasons for tacking are: ‘It's about time I did one.’
‘This left arm's aching too much, I'll have to do one.’
‘The sun's gone behind the sail, I'll have to tack.’
‘I'll just see how Jim is getting on.’
We have all probably used one of these excuses at some stage.
However, when you tack it should be for tactical reasons.
In club racing you will often tack to avoid ‘dirty’ wind, whilst at high levels the decisions become more complicated, also involving tidal currents and wind shifts.
Avoiding Dirty Wind (Fig 99)
This is one of the most important things to remember when racing.
Dirty wind is disturbed turbulent air behind obstacles (such as trees, buildings and other boards' sails) that greatly reduces a board's speed.
The turbulent wind behind a sail extends about five boards length downwind and if you are sailing in this area your speed can be as much as halved.
However, not only is the wind downwind of a sail affected but also that behind the board, since the sail curves the wind and it takes a few board lengths for it to revert to its normal direction.
If you are sailing in this curved air flow you cannot sail as close to the wind as you could if you had been in clear wind.
The importance of getting a good start now becomes obvious, since if you fall only a few metres behind in the first minute after the start you fall into everyone else's dirty wind and  drop even further back.
If you do get a bad start it is worth tacking through the fleet on port tack in search of clear wind.
This is very demoralising since you have to pass behind many boards on startboard before getting clear.
Sometimes the boards at the front seem to extend huge leads over the rest of the fleet.
This is not purely a result of them being faster sailors, but partly a measure of the clean wind they have had by being at the front.
When the wind blows off the land you have to consider the effects of trees, hills and buildings.
It sometimes proves worth while to tack towards one side of a course to get more wind.
These effects are particularly strong on small lakes.
For many people the bible for race tactics is the classic dinghy racing book Start To Win by Eric Twiname (Granada, 1975) which clearly explains the complexities of racing tactics.
One of his chapters is entitled ‘The Beat as an Obstacle Race’, which is a good way of thinking about it since the obstacles to your progress are the numerous areas of dirty wind provided by other sails and you have to do your utmost to avoid them.
Wind Shifts (Fig 100 to 102)
On inland waters and in offshore winds at sea, wind shifts can play an important part of the upwind leg.
If you tack at the right time, when the wind slightly changes in direction, large amounts of ground can be made over those who are oblivious to the shift.
The skill is in spotting these slight wind changes.
When sailing upwind, a change in the wind direction will make either the board point higher or lower than previously.
If you have to point lower because the wind has changed direction (you have been headed), this is a sign to tack and gain ground over those who haven't spotted it.
Recognising the header needs good concentration and confidence.
There are, however, a few indications that a header has just passed:
1.
Front arm loses pressure, sail feels lighter.
2.
Need to recover from falling backwards.
3.
Loss of speed.
4.
Need to push rig forwards and bear away to keep moving.
If all these occur it is a fairly good indication that you should tack.
A useful method of detecting changes in the wind direction is to make a mental note of the point on the shore towards which you are sailing and use this as a reference point.
If there is a wind shift you will then point in a slightly different direction.
It really is no use following the tacking pattern of someone who is meant to be good in front of you, since the shifts affect different parts of the course at different times.
Also, even world class sailors only get it right about 80 per cent of the time, so by following someone you will never manage to beat them and you will often get lead the wrong way.
The wind shifts mentioned so far are small and fairly frequent so hopefully you can tack on the headers all the time.
But this is by no means the only kind of shift.
Sometimes the wind swings steadily round over a period of time, and at other times it blows steadily in a curve.
A hill or valley can often act in the same way as an enormous sail and bend the wind over a large area.
Such large wind shifts are important when sailing long upwind stretches.
Other than in large championship races, windsurfers tend to use fairly short beats so their influence is decreased.
There is, however, one general rule which uses the wind bend principle:when sailing upwind head for the shoreline side of the beat first.
The advantage of heading towards the shore has to weighed against the possible disadvantage of lighter winds closer to shore because of the slowing effect of the land.
When sailing in offshore winds, however, this rule is more often than not  proved right, particularly in coastal bays.
With experience you can sometimes spot the favoured side of a beat by looking upwind for clues.
The shape of the land and the potential wind barriers often indicate which side will have more wind.
Smoking chimneys display the wind's strength and direction, whilst on the water the behaviour of other sailing craft can do like wise.
The darkness of the water will give a clue as to the winds strength, and an ominous grey cloud usually signals oncoming wind.
Tidal Currents (Fig 103)
These can be particularly important on the sea where the tide is not just limited to movements up and down but also currents which flow in and out of bays and estuaries.
There are plenty of clues as to which way the tide is flowing other than the tide tables.
Moored boats with deep keels (ie, not motor boats) swing with the current, and you can also detect the flow around buoys.
If you know the direction of flow.
if it is favourable you obviously benefit by sailing in it, otherwise you should concentrate on keeping out of the flow.
Avoiding an unfavourable current can often be done by tacking close to the shore since the water is normally slower when moving at shallower depths.
In bays, the tide tends to flow around the bay in one direction as it rises and then reverses as it falls.
An important rule when beating into a current flowing across the upwind leg is always to sail the tack that takes you uptide of the mark  first.
By doing this you are making it far easier for yourself to judge exactly when you should tack for the mark, since if you take the other tack it is difficult to judge how much the current will sweep you down.
There are, therefore, a number of factors involved in choosing a course to windward.
Tactics play a secondary role to board speed; many a race is won by the sailor who is fast off the line and avoids dirty wind enough to use his speed advantage.
Rounding the Top Mark (Fig 104)
With the whole fleet converging on the first mark it can often get rather chaotic, as everyone is eager to blast off on to the reach.
Since starboard tack has right of way the starboard approach is particularly busy, with a line of boards queuing to go round.
The perfect line on to which you would tack to make the mark is called the layline.
To avoid sailing in dirty wind everyone has to tack slightly late and the  queue stacks up above the layline.
If you get on the layline too early then you risk being slowed down by everyone tacking in front of you and, furthermore, if the wind shifts you have no option other than sailing on, thereby losing ground over your competitors.
If you are feeling particularly adventurous you can try approaching on port tack, gambling on being able to find a gap to tack into.
In large fleets where there is so much dirty wind on the layline this is often the best tactic.
A point to note about technique is that when you actually go round the mark in strong winds the daggerboard should be retracted first then the mast track moved back in preparation for the reach.
This way you can accelerate into the reach without the fear of a capsize fall.
The Reach
Pumping
This is an important skill which helps you to go faster on the reach.
It involves sharply pulling the sail towards you which, for an instant, creates more wind and hence more power.
It takes considerable practice to perfect and if  done badly slows you down rather than speeding you up.
The signal to pump is when the back of the board is being lifted by a wave.
The important part of pumping is the timing relative to the wave.
You should always pump at the top of the wave as the board is about to accelerate down the face.
This timing is vital even on the smallest of waves since if you pump at the bottom of a wave you will not go any faster.
There is just one catch to all this, which is, that in some races, notably Divisions 1 and 11, there is a rather badly constructed rule that tries to limit the amount of pumping you are allowed to do.
It says that in surfing or planing conditions you are allowed only three pumps per wave.
There are a number of obvious problems with the application of this rule, since its interpretation varies from person to person.
There are, though, a number of waves on a reach and as long as you limit yourself to three distinct pumps with a clear pause before the next set you should be alright.
Reaching Tactics (Fig 105)
Again, the main tactic is to avoid the dirty wind.
This will mean you have to steer a slightly bowed course to discourage others from passing to windward.
If the reach is fairly broad  the fleet often steers a very curved course to the next mark, so it is sometimes worth deliberately keeping well clear on a low course.
If there is a tide flowing, to avoid being swept downtide you can take a transit on the next mark to steer the rhumb line.
Tactics at the Gybe (Figs 106 & 107)
If you are rounding without any boards near you, you should aim to approach the mark wide and come out close, this tactic is known as in wide-out close.
This way no valuable ground is lost to windward at the end of the turn and it ‘shuts the door’ on any one trying to make a furtive inside rounding.
The in wide-out close principle has particular importance at the bottom mark, since the following leg is to windward and a bad rounding can result in dirty wind at the outset.
Rounding in the company of others is a different matter, as you can use the rules to help you.
If you are the inside board and have an overlap over the board outside you at two board lengths before the mark, you are entitled to the inside position around the mark.
This means that you should always aim to approach the mark on the inside of other boards, even if it means altering your course down the reach.
Provided you get an overlap you can shout ‘water’ and the other boards have to give you space to gybe in.
Strange though it may seem, it sometimes pays to slow right down before rounding.
When a bunch of boards rounds the mark, rather than get forced wide with the group and risk the possibility of a rig being dropped in your path, you can slow up and coolly take an inside rounding.
Winning
The person who wins races is usually experienced.
Experience heightens our powers of observation since it teaches us what to look for.
The winner is busy searching the water, nearby boards, the sky and shore for every scrap of race-winning information.
He concentrates every second on the race because he has more than enough to concentrate on.
However, the information the tail-ender picks up is probably less than half of what the expert picks up.
Armed with inadequate information he usually fails to see why one moment is better for putting in a tack than any other.
He isn't sure what he should be looking for, so he doesn't look and his mind is therefore fairly free to contemplate subjects unconnected with windsurfing.
To be able to concentrate so fully on a race needs good board handling skills, since you shouldn't have to think about how to sail the board fast.
it should have become instinctive.
It is only when sailing the board fast has become natural that the attention can be fully focused on tactics.
So, it doesn't need the rigorous coaching of, for example, athletics to improve, merely plenty of time on one board learning how it behaves.
When it comes to sailing in a series of races the emphasis must be on consistency.
You don't have to finish first in each race, merely in the leading group.
Consistent sailing means not taking too many unnecessary risks, such as not starting at the crowded end of the start line or sailing completely to one side of the beat where just one unfavourable wind shift can ruin you.
Avoid being involved in a protest at all costs since, not only does it risk a disqualification, but it also ruins your concentration as you ponder over the incident.
I was involved in a protest in the morning race of a world championship and the hearing was not until later that evening.
My result in the afternoon race was the worst of the event as I dwelt over my fate up the first beat.
By sailing consistently over a series of races, you win by other people's mistakes.
SLALOM RACING
Slalom racing is usually held in strong winds, so it is fast, exhilarating and good to watch.
Unlike the course race, the start is off the beach and the course has no upwind leg so shorter boards without daggerboards are used.
It complements course racing, since when conditions are too severe to lay a course offshore the slalom competition can be run within 200m of the beach, with marks being laid by wading into the surf.
With boards  travelling at up to 25 knots, the emphasis is on not falling since in a few seconds the fleet will have zoomed past and gained a huge advantage.
A series of beats are held, usually with the first four boards going through to the next round, culminating in a final.
Each heat lasts for about three to five minutes, with the final often being a series of three races.
If time permits the heats are arranged on a double elimination or league basis whereby you have to lose more than once before being eliminated.
The Beach Start
With a beach start everyone is allocated a position on a short line on the beach, the race organiser checks everyone is ready and then signals the start.
This is often the decisive part of the race, since if you launch well and get clear of the group it is only your own mistakes that will stop you from qualifying.
The skill is running down the beach with all your equipment often in a stiff breeze.
Everyone develops their own favourite method, but you must be able to run, keeping the board and sail from blowing all over the place.
Whilst doing this you need to avoid the other competitors.
Before the start, just let them know you are there and don't let anyone crowd you; try and make as much space for yourself as you can.
If you have drawn an end position on the line, run down the beach a little wide to give yourself more room.
As you approach the water put the board in deep enough not to rip the skeg out and push the board a little further out using one hand on the mast.
If you use both hands on the boom to run through the shallows it will only need an awkward gust or wave to rip the sail from your grasp.
With the hand on the mast control is far easier.
The Race
Having launched and got going you should be attacking, going fast and trying to pass others in an effort to get clear wind.
Fast technique has already been covered earlier in this chapter.
an added speed factor is the way in which you go over the waves — just like a ski racer, the longer you spend in the air the slower you go.
So you need to anticipate and absorb each wave with the legs (which act as shock absorbers).
A further way of avoiding too much time in the air is to lift the back foot as you go over a wave, this helps to stop the nose lifting.
Also, as you take a wave try to avoid sheeting out since you lose valuable power.
In slalom turning rules of conventional course racing do not apply.
The priority is with the person who leads going into the turn.
Protests are uncommon here since it is in each sailor's own interest to avoid high speed collisions which not only ruin your chances but can be quite dangerous.
On the gybes the aim is not to fall in and to keep clear of others.
If you can do an in wide-out close turn it is a bonus.
In large surf it is sometimes worth slowing down ad letting a large wave pass before attempting the gybe.
Having established a position you can consolidate it by using defensive tactics to keep other boards behind you.
Heading up high means that it is difficult for anyone to pass since you can always bear away down on to them, forcing them to sail in your dirty wind.
Also, when bearing off your speed increases dramatically.
The beach finish either involves getting you and your equipment through the line or more commonly, just yourself.
OTHER DISCIPLINES
Pursuit Racing
This is not really another discipline, just another way of running a race.
For many people it is rather demoralising to finish a long way behind the leaders all the time and so pursuit racing is an attempt to provide a handicapping system.
A fairly small course is needed with an upwind.
The handicaps are worked out on the results of a trial race and then on all subsequent races everyone starts at minute intervals depending on their previous result.
The least able sailors first and then a minute later the next group start and so on, finishing with the best sailors who often have a handicap of 10 minutes on a 25-minute race.
The aim is for everyone to finish together.
After each race the handicaps are altered accordingly, so there is personal satisfaction in decreasing your handicap much the same way as in golf.
The system has proved popular with club racing enthusiasts.
Speedsailing
In July 1986 windsurfers shocked the sailing world with the news that a board had travelled at the astonishing speed of 38.86 knots which is nearly 44 mph.
Speedsailing is now firmly established as a part of the competitive scene, with events all over the world including  the famous course in England at Weymouth.
The sailors are timed over a course of 500m, which needs to be flat water with an optimum sailing angle of 120–130 degrees to the wind.
Pascal Maka of France achieved his record at an ideal site on the island of Fuerteventura, part of the Canary Island group.
Here, boards can speed down the course within feet of the beach in consistent summer trade winds of up to 45 knots, and it looks set to become the ideal venue for breaking records.
For these high speeds very specialised equipment is used with long narrow boards often less than a foot wide and with specially reinforced camber-induced sails.
There are a few less high-powered speed events held around Britain where you came enter using standard equipment and see how fast you can go.
Production boards are easily capable of 25 knots or more.
Freestyle (Fig 110)
Freestyle is a form of trick sailing where the sailor performs a routine in front of a panel of judges, similar to ice skating or gymnastics.
It is an excellent way of improving your windsurfing skills, as you learn how the board behaves in all sorts of weird conditions.
One of the classic freestyle skills is railriding where the sailor flips the board on its side and sails along, coolly standing on the edge.
Another of the skills incorporated into a  style routine is the pirouette, in which the sailor lets go of the rig and spins round twice before catching it again.
In competition a sailor has to perform a three minute routine, performing as many tricks as he can and linking them together with a smooth flowing act.
Dee Caldwell's Book of Freestyle Boardsailing (Fernhurst Books, 1983) provides a good explanation as to what is involved.
Variations
Tandems
Sailing a two-man board is great fun since not only is it particularly fast in moderate winds but there is also the uniqueness of being able to share your exhilaration with someone else.
It might not be worth buying a two-man board, but if you ask around you will often find one lying unused in a backyard.
They need flat water to perform well and on no account should they be taken into waves, since, not only are they difficult to manoeuvre well, but they are also liable to snap because of their length.
Steering is largely done by one of the sailors sheeting out, for instance, if the back sail is depowered the board will bear away with all the power still on at the front.
If you want a hilarious day's sailing, I strongly recommend the two-man board.
Landsurfing
The windsurfing concept is not limited to use on the water and in recent years windsurfing sails have been seen on land, snow and ice.
The simplest form of landsurfer is a rig attached to a skateboard.
This needs a suitably smooth surface and very careful balance as all the steering is done with weight.
The most popular board on wheels, however, has been the speedsail, which is like an enormous skateboard some five feet long with air-filled tyres.
The speedsail, because of the very low friction, can do very high speeds in light winds, indeed,.
it is positively dangerous in anything above a Force 2.
The ‘vehicle’ is footsteered and some have claimed that it has helped their gybing tremendously.
Do be very careful, though, when having a go since it takes a little getting used to and falls can be very uncomfortable, to say the least.
There is, in fact, an organisation in France that runs world championships for the speedsail, where tactics are unimportant and it is just a matter of courage as speeds of up to 50mph.
Even more hair-raising is the thought of landsurfing on ice, which is apparently the winter occupation of some windsurfers in Scandinavia.
Fig 86 Different types of course race.
Conventional Olympic triangle; Shorter beat, longer reaches, more gybes
Fig 87 Different types of slalom course: Beach start, beach finish, wind, sail
Fig 88 Keeping the rig as upright as possible.
Some of the driving force is lost by D pointing upwards; Bad stance: bent arms and too crouched a position; Driving force acts in direction of travel; Good stance; extended arms.
The upright rig means more sail is presented to the wind
Fig 89 Balancing using the hips and knees (viewed from the front).
Notice how the shoulders and arms remain stationary, thus keeping the rig still.
To move the weight inwards towards the board, the knees are bent and the pelvis is thrust in towards the sail
Fig 90 Lester Noble, designer of Tushingham Sails, concentrating on closing the slot at Weymouth Speed Week.
This is an important aspect of slalom and stronger wind course racing
Fig 91 Julian Anderson winning the Mistral World Championship at the age of 17.
Notice how his long harness lines are enabling him to sail with straight arms thereby keeping the rig upright.
look also how it is dropped hips and bottom that are controlling the force of the sail.
Fig 92 A line start at a world championships.
L190 has a good start in clean air but it looks to be the unfavoured end of the line.
130 and H167 seem to have made good starts, but Z114 better watch out since before long he may be in H167's dirty wind.
Meanwhile G120 is facing the wrong way and H 131 is in very disturbed wind behind the whole fleet.
Fig 93 Taking a transit from behind the start boat.
Remember what lies on the shore behind the start mark
Fig 94 Sailing backwards by pushing on the wrong side of the sail — a valuable skill
Fig 95 Three methods of detecting line bias: Watch a flag; Position board behind start boat, look at flag and see which end is closer to the wind; Position board along the line with sail free.
The biased end is the opposite direction to the drift of the board; Do a practice start with a partner of equal speed from either end of a line.
The favoured end will be that from which the leader sailed.
Also, by watching the angle of other boards sailing across the line upwind you can judge the biased end.
Fig 96 A has remembered his transit and will get a good start well in front of the rest.
B is part of the line sag but has kept clear of the chaos within 15 per cent of either end.
He has created a gap downwind into which he can accelerate to start at speed, whilst those around him will still be sheeting in.
Fig 97 The gate start.
Boards A, B, C, D have all started, although D has got a bad start by not passing close behind the start boat.
The group of white boards are waiting to start.
Fig 98 Railing.
By sailing the board at an angle the leeward rail digs in providing more sideways resistance.
The more you pull down on the boom, the more you rail.
Fig 99 C is sailing in A's dirty wind and must get out of it as soon as possible by either tacking or bearing away.
B is sailing in the curved air behind A's sail and cannot point very high.
If he stays there too long he will slip into the dirty wind like C, so he must tack off quickly.
Both B and C will lose at least four board lengths by sailing in A's influence.
Fig 100 Wind shifts.
Oblivious should not have tacked here since he loses out to Smart.
Fig 101 The wind bends at the shoreline in an offshore breeze and tries to cross it at 90 degrees.
By sailing towards the land first you will find more favourable wind which will enable you to benefit over those who don't.
A is able to point higher than B because of the wind shift near the land.
Fig 102 Looking upwind for clues.
Here the left side seems favoured.
Fig 103 By making the first of two tacks into tide it is easier to judge when to tack for the mark since you are much closer to it than if you take the other course.
Fig 104 A and C are well placed but E has lost out being further back in the queue.
B is in trouble since he is in dirty wind and cannot tack because C is blocking him.
G has completely misjudged the approach by sailing too far above the layline.
F has joined the layline too early and as well as getting dirty wind as he approaches the mark, he will have no option but to sail on as if there is a favourable shift.
The white boards are taking a risk by approaching on port, but they do benefit by sailing in clear wind.
Fig 105 Different courses on a reach.
Take the low course if the high course is crowded or very curved
Fig 106 ‘In wide-out close’.
Fig 107 Rounding with others.
remember: you can only ask for water if you establish and maintain an overlap before you are two board lengths from the mark.
Rather than take the long outside course, A can slow down and cut inside
Fig 108 American, Ken Winner performing a lighter wind slalom gybe.
The wind is about Force 4 here and Ken is using a large sail.
To maintain power through the turn he is keeping the rig upright by thrusting the rig forwards with a straight front arm.
Notice also how he is sheeting in the sail since even at this speed the apparent wind effect still plays a part in the turn.
Fig 109 Robby Naish gybing in a Force 6 or 7 slalom race.
In this wind he dare not extend his front arm since he may get pulled over, so instead, he is crouching low and leaning slightly forwards which achieves the same upright rig effect as Ken had.
Since the true wind is so strong, the apparent wind plays little part.
Fig 110 Freestyle is an excellent way to improve your board handling.
At the top competitive level it requires a lot of agility.
The technical name for this trick is ‘a reverse leeward side railride inside the booms’.
APPENDIX 1
RYA National Windsurfing Scheme Course Content
LAUNCHING, STARTING AND LANDING
SAILING TECHNIQUES AND STANCE
MANOEUVRES
LEVEL 1 Learn to windsurf
Carrying and launching the board and rig separately; raising the rig
Sailing across, upwind and downwind; wind awareness and controlling wind power, steering and stopping
180 degree turn; basic tacking and gybing
LEVEL 2 Improving techniques
Launching the board and rig complete; introduction to the beach start; coming ashore and positioning the board
Improving reaching, running and close-hauled sailing; daggerboard positions, stance; steering using weight and rig
Improving tacking and gybing; the effects of weight distribution
LEVEL 3 Stronger winds — an introduction to funboard sailing
Carrying the board and rig assembled; beach starting, uphauling and starting in stronger winds
Stance on all points of sailing — mast foot pressure and upright rig; use of harness, footstraps and the mast track; footsteering
Faster tacking and the flare gybe
LEVEL 4 Funboard techniques
Launching and coming ashore in waves; the water start
Developing stance and harness technique; increasing speed and closing the slot; effective use of the mast track on all points of sailing
Funboard tacking and the carve gybe
LEVEL 5 Advanced funboard techniques
Advanced water starts; launching in surf, carrying a short board
Wave jumping, riding and transitions
The short board gybe; slam gybe; duck gybe
APPENDIX 2
The Beaufort Scale of Wind Force
General description
Calm
Light air
Light breeze
Gentle breeze
Moderate breeze
Fresh breeze
Strong breeze
Near gale
Gale
Severe gale
Sea Criterion
Sea like a mirror
Ripples with the appearance of scales are formed, but without foam crests.
Small wavelets, still short but more pronounced.
Crests have a glassy appearance and do not break.
Large wavelets.
Crests begin to break.
Foam of glassy appearance.
Perhaps scattered white horses.
Small waves becoming longer, fairly frequent white horses.
Moderate waves, taking more pronounced long form; many white horses are formed.
Chances of some spray.
Large waves, taking form; the white foam crests are more extensive everywhere.
Probably some spray.
Sea heaps up and white foam from breaking waves  begins to be blown in streaks along the direction of the wind.
Moderately high waves of greater length; edges of crests begin to break into spin-drift.
The foam is blown in well-marked streaks along the direction of the wind.
High waves.
Dense streaks of foam along the direction of the wind.
 Crests of waves begin to topple, tumble and roll over.
Spray may affect visibility.
Landman's Criterion
Calm; smoke rises vertically
Direction of wind shown by smoke drift but not by wind vanes.
Wind felt on face; leaves rustle; ordinary vane moved by wind.
Leaves and small twigs in constant motion.
Wind extends light flags.
Raises dust and loose paper; small branches are moved.
Small trees in leaf begin to sway.
Crested wavelets form on inland waters.
Large branches in motion; whistling heard in telegraph wires, umbrellas used with difficulty.
Whole trees in motion; inconvenience felt when walking against the wind.
Breaks twigs off trees; generally impedes progress.
Slight structural damage occurs (chimney-pots and slates removed).
Glossary
Apparent wind
The wind that you experience blowing in your face when moving.
it differs in direction and speed from the true wind experienced when standing still.
Balance point
The imaginary point where the CE acts on the boom through which the sail balances.
Battens
Pieces of flexible glass fibre that slot into ‘pockets’ in the sail which help to create an efficient aerodynamic shape.
Full length battens extend right across the sail.
Beach start
A way of starting in shallow water that involves stepping on to the board with the rig already in the sailing position.
When using this technique, the rig does not have to be raised from the water.
Bearing away
Steering away from the wind.
Beating
Sailing into the wind by doing a series of zig-zags.
Beaufort scale
A scale of measurement of wind based on knots invented in 1805 by Admiral Beaufort.
The scale is measured from Force 0 to Force 12.
Blank
A large piece of polyurethane or polystyrene foam which is shaped by hand into a custom board.
Boardsailing
Another term for windsurfing.
Boom
The curved alloy tube covered with rubber that you hold to control the sail.
Bottom turn
The high speed turn at the bottom of the wave which brings you back up the same wave enabling you to continue your ride in.
Broad reach
The direction of sailing which is roughly half-way between a reach and a run.
Camber inducers
Specially shaped pieces of plastic in the mast sleeve into which full length battens slide.
they make the front part of the sail considerably more efficient and are primarily used in racing.
Carve gybe
A gybe performed with the daggerboard retracted in strong winds, in which the board is turned by footsteering with no assistance from the sail.
CE
The centre of effort.
The imaginary central point in the sail through which the power of the sail acts.
Centreline
An imaginary line drawn lengthways down the middle of the board.
Cleat
A small fitting used to secure the control lines of the rig.
Clew
The back corner of the sail which is attached to the end of the boom.
Close hauled
The course you steer when beating, ie, sailing as close to the wind as possible.
CLR
The centre of lateral resistance.
The main point about which the board will resist sideways drift and about which it turns.
This will be just behind the daggerboard when it is down.
Concaves
A slightly curved shape used on the upper side of boards to produce greater speed.
Course racing
A discipline of competitive windsurfing which involves racing around a course marked by a series of buoys.
Critical section
The part of a wave that is about to break.
Cut back
An aggressive manoeuvre in wave sailing, where the sailor suddenly changes course whilst on the face to bring himself back down to the bottom of the wave.
Daggerboard
This is sometimes called the centreboard.
It is a large ‘fin’ which gives stability and stops the board slipping sideways.
In stronger winds it is retracted inside the board.
Downhaul
The line that tensions the sail down the length of the mast and is connected to the mastfoot. it controls the shape at the front of the sail.
Dual batten system
A way of saying that the sail can use full or half length battens.
Duck gybe
A gybe in which, instead of the sail passing around the front of the board, the sailor ducks down and throws it overhead.
Dumping waves
Waves which break vigorously on a steep beach.
This commonly occurs at high tide.
Fin
(Also known as the skeg.)
The small piece of plastic or glass fibre protruding at the tail of the board which helps to keep it sailing in a straight line.
Flare gybe
A gybe normally performed on longer boards with the daggerboard down.
The board is steered through the turn using the rig.
Foot
The bottom edge of the sail.
Footsteering
The use of your weight (feet) to steer the board in strong winds with the daggerboard up.
Footstraps
The straps at the back of the board into which you put your feet when travelling at speed in stronger winds.
Force
A measurement of windspeed using the Beaufort scale.
Freestyle
Performing tricks on a board; sometimes used as a discipline in competitive windsurfing.
Funboard
A board that is easy to sail in strong winds which has a surf-board type of tail, footstraps, a retracting daggerboard and a mast track.
Gate start
A method of starting a race, mainly used for large fleets, in which boards file out behind another board.
Gybe
Turning the board around by steering away from the wind and letting the sail pass over the front of the board.
Harness
A garment worn to take the strain off the arms, which is attached to either side of the boom, by the use of a hook and lines.
Heading up
Steering towards the wind.
IBSA
International Boardsailing Association.
The governing body of the Olympic Division 11 class.
Inhaul
The line that is used to attach the boom to the mast.
IYRU
International Yacht Racing Union.
The body which oversees all competitive sailing and windsurfing except Funboard racing.
Knots
Nautical miles per hour.
A nautical mile is 2,000 yards rather than the more familiar 1,760, so 10 knots is almost 11½mph.
Leeward
The side of the board that is furthest from the wind.
(The opposite to windward.)
Line start
The conventional way of starting a course race using an imaginary line between two designated points, usually a boat and a buoy.
Lip
The ‘lip of a wave’ ie, the crest.
Mast foot
The means of attaching the mast to the mast track.
Mast track
The sliding device that enables the mast foot to be moved up and down the board.
Nose
The front (pointed) end of the board.
Offshore wind
A wind that blows away from the shore.
Olympic triangle
The triangular shaped course used at the Olympics by both boats and windsurfers.
One design
A class in which racing takes place on identical boards and sails.
Open class
A class where racing takes place on boards conforming to a set of measurement rules, ie, Divisions 1 and 11.
Outhaul
The line that pulls the clew of the sail out towards the end of the boom.
It controls the overall curve or ‘fullness’ of the sail.
Overhand
The grip used on the boom where the fingers point downwards.
Oversheet
This happens when the sailed is pulled at too tight an angle to the wind, ie, when the back hand is pulled in too much.
Plane
To sail at speed, enabling the board to rise up and travel across the water surface rather than pushing the water aside and sailing through it.
Port
The nautical way of saying left.
You are sailing on ‘port tack’ when your left hand is the one nearest the mast.
Pumping
The action of sharply jerking the rig towards you which momentarily creates more wind in the sail and increases speed.
Rail
The edge or side of the board.
Railing
The skill of sailing the board at an angle, allowing the downwind rail to dig in and therefore providing more sideways resistance.
Reaching
Sailing in a direction across the wind, with the wind blowing at or near an angle of 90 degrees to the board's course.
Rhumb line
The line followed when sailing in fixed direction.
Rig
The collective name for the mast, boom and sail when assembled.
Rip
A strong current, commonly experienced on surf beaches.
Rocker
The overall curve in the board from nose to tail.
Run
The term used to describe the course of the board when sailing in the same direction as the wind.
Secure position
The position across the wind, with the hands on the mast, which you adopt prior to sailing off.
set
A set of waves is a group of waves which are larger than average.
Sheeting in/out
Changing the angle that the sail makes with the wind by pulling in or letting out the back hand.
Simulator
A land-based board mounted on a turntable device which is used to teach the basics before going on to the water.
Sinker
A very small board which is used in stronger winds.
It is called a sinker because it sinks beneath you when you are stationary.
Skeg
see Fin.
Slalom
A competitive discipline normally held in stronger winds which uses a fast reaching course with numerous gybes.
Slam gybe
Sometimes referred to as a ‘scissors gybe’.
It is a very tight version of the carve gybe performed on shorter boards, where the board is turned in a short distance.
Slot flusher
A device which aims to make the flow of water over the daggerboard slot as smoothly as possible.
Soft sail
A sail which does not use full length battens.
Spin out
A phenomenon which can occur on a high speed reach when air bubbles work their way down the skeg and cause it to lose its grip in the water.
The board suddenly slews sideways.
Split batten system
A variation on the camber inducer idea which uses full length battens that split around the mast giving an efficient shape.
Starboard
The nautical way of saying right.
You are sailing on ‘starboard tack’ when you right hand is the one nearest to the mast.
Steamer
A one-piece wetsuit with close fitting neck, ankle and wrists.
A true steamer should use a waterproof ‘blind stitch’ on the seams to prevent water penetration.
Tack
Turning round by steering into the wind and stepping around the front of the mast.
Tail
The back end of the boat.
Tandem
A windsurfer designed for two.
Transit
A method used in racing to judge how near the start line you are.
Trim
The manner in which the board lies in the water.
This is determined by where you put your weight.
True wind
The wind that is experienced when you are stationary.
UJ (universal joint)
This is attached to the mast foot and allows the rig to be moved in all directions.
This formed an integral part of the first windsurfing patent.
Uphaul
The thick piece of rope that is used to raise the rig in the water.
Upwind
the direction that is into the wind.
The opposite is downwind.
‘V’
The underwater shape at the very back of the board.
Volume
The volume of a board determines its buoyancy and, to some extent, its speed in different wind conditions.
Water start
An advanced manoeuvre used in stronger winds in which the sailor lets the sail pull him on to the board from a position in the water.
Wax
Non-slip wax is used to help your grip underfoot.
Windshift
A change in the wind's direction that can either be sudden or gradual.
It becomes an important part of tactics on upwind legs as you get to higher standards.
Windsurfer
The first make of board was a ‘Windsurfer’ invented by Hoyle Schweitzer.
Since then the name has become associated with the sport itself in the form of windsurfing.
Windward
The side of the board that is closest to the wind.
Opposite to leeward.