

The Shop
CHRISTMAS 1913
‘You've done a splendid job on that window, lass; I've never seen it look so bonny.
The only thing is, it'll attract a squad of bairns until all hours.’
‘Well, what's the window for but for the bairns at Christmas, because the grown-ups rarely stop and look at it.’
‘Aye, there's that in it.
What time is it?’
Arthur Conway took from his pocket a large silver cased watch, sprang the lid, looked at it, then said, ‘You'd better go up and have a bite while things are a bit slack.
Now d'you think you'll be all right managing things on your own tonight?
I could stay back if you…’
‘Father, the night you stay back from the club will be the night the shops are on fire, both of them.’
She jerked her head towards the far wall.
‘Well, tonight's different.
That Nan asking off early because she says her mother's bad.
She's a sly one that, you know.
I'd like to take a bet on it that the mother wears the trousers.’
‘Father, you know it isn't often this happens.
And her mother isn't well.
She's never been really well since the boy was drowned.’
‘That's all of six years ago, Aggie; sorrow doesn't last that long.’
‘No?’
Agnes raised her eyebrows.
‘All right, all right ; but don't come back with examples.
The main thing is I hate to leave you here on your own.’
‘I'll hardly be here on my own, Father, with Mr Arthur Peeble managing the Tobacconist Emporium .’
She gave a derisive laugh as she again inclined her head towards the far wall, then said, ‘That fellow's preciseness gets up my nose.
The voice he puts on for the customers, you would think he was in daily contact with the Lord Mayor or the Duke.
He uses it even when selling a packet of Woodbines.’
She now changed her voice, mimicking, ‘That will be two pence precisely…not, that'll be tuppence, thank you, or ta very much, as Nan would say.
‘Nan's not dealing with men, and gentlemen at that.’
‘If she were she'd have more sense and be able to tell the difference between a stuffed dummy and a real man.’
‘Can you ?’
He poked his head towards her, a grin on his face.
And she nodded at him, her face unsmiling now, as she answered, ‘Yes, I can, a mile off.’
‘Aye, well’— he smiled indulgently at her —‘you're a clever lass.
Always have been.’
Her face still unsmiling, she said, ‘And I can smell soft soap a mile off, Father.
And I'm not a clever lass, I'm what you would call a b…fool.’
As she went to pass him he caught her arm and, his voice questioning, he said, ‘What…what makes you think that, lass?’
‘Oh’— she tossed her head —‘a number of things.’
‘I thought you liked looking after the shops.’
He made a small wagging movement with the flat of his hand.
‘I do.
I do.
But…but they don't make up life…well, not entirely.’
He took his hand from her arm and, his eyes narrowing, he said, ‘Do you want to be married?’
‘Oh no!’
She tossed her head on the exclamation.
‘Do you want me to be married?’
‘Well’— he pursed his lips —‘I sometimes think you should be for your own good.
And there's two chances, you know, wide open.’
‘Oh, Father!
Henry Stalwort, forty-five if he's a day; two daughters, one nearly as old as our Jessie.
But of course’— she pulled a face at him —‘he's in the wholesale business, isn't he?
We might get our tiger nuts cheaper.’
‘You're a cheeky monkey.
Tiger nuts cheaper, indeed!
And you know it is wrong to suggest that I've any motives in that quarter because, between you and me, I can't stand the man.
If you want to know something, that's why I let you do the ordering this last year or so.
But Pete now, Pete Chambers, he's a canny fellow.’
‘Yes, yes, he's a canny fellow.
And, as Mother points out, he's got a share in a tramp steamer.
But you've seen the tramp and I've seen the tramp, haven't we, Father?
It's a leaky old coal-carrier.
Never been further than London in its life.
But you know that wouldn't matter to me; if I had any ideas about Pete, he could be the stoker on that tramp.
And anyway, Father, I know Pete will not cry when I say no; he'll go to the first pub he comes across and get sozzled, and then he'll start to sing.
We've seen Pete's reactions to disappointment.
Look what happened last year when the three of them nearly went bankrupt.
They came next door and bought the most expensive cigars, not Mexican, nor American, but Havanas.
They didn't know the name of any one of them, they just wanted the best.’
She started to laugh now.
‘And I sold them the best.
Remember?
You only had that sample of five, Sin Iguales.
They were down in the order book at four and eight pence.
You were going to sell them at one and tuppence each.
Well, I charged them six shillings and out the three of them went puffing their heads off.
Then later, Teddy Moules was picked up blind drunk, wasn't he?
I don't know how Pete escaped.’
‘Nor do I.’ He smiled at her, and she smiled gently back at the tall, grey-haired, spare-framed man, whose brown eyes were so like her own, and whose hair at one time had been auburn, too, not a grizzled grey as it was now.
She could look back down on her twenty-two years and see a tall handsome man, and she recalled his words a few minutes ago, ‘Sorrow doesn't last.’
Arthur Conway had been married before he met her mother.
At eighteen he'd married a beautiful young girl of seventeen, who died when he was twenty-five, and he mourned her for ten years.
She hadn't known this until one night, three years ago, when he had imbibed too liberally.
He had sat in the store-room behind the shop here and told her how someone in the club had sung a song that recalled his Nelly to him.
He was thirty-six when he married her mother, and she herself was born three years later.
And here he was, a man turned sixty, still upright, but no longer handsome or as jolly as he used to be.
She could recall that when she and Jessie were small he used to romp with them, crawl round the floor with them on his back.
She was four years older than Jessie but he would treat them both alike.
Her mind brought her abruptly back to the present when she thought, that was until two years ago when Jessie left the Dame School.
She had thought then he would bring her into the shop, as he had herself, and trained her into the business, not only the confectionery and tobacconists, but the little factory across the yard where they made most of their boiled sweets and toffee.
But no, Jessie had to be something else; Jessie had to be sent to the Secretarial School: no getting her hands sticky from the toffee hammer, breaking up the slabs in the long tins; no weighing out a ha'p'orth of hundreds and thousands or a penn'orth of sugar baccy; and as for the weighing out of the real baccy, of hard cut or shag or even serving the best cigars, oh no, oh no, her father was having Jessie do nothing like that.
It was strange that she was in no way jealous of Jessie being her father's choice for betterment, because Jessie herself hadn't wanted to go to the Secretarial School, nor had her mother wanted her to go.
Oh no, her mother's opinion had been, if Jessie didn't want to serve in the shops then she could help with the housework and learn to cook, and so save Maggie Rice's half week's wage of six and threepence, for Maggie was on what her mother called half-days, which started at eight and finished at one.
Agnes often thought about the disparity in wages: while she was getting fifteen shillings a week, Arthur Peeble only got a pound, and he had a young family to bring up on that, and Nan Henderson's wage was a niggardly eight and six for a long-day week.
And Nan would be twenty next month and due for a rise, and she was hoping her father would stretch a point and make it ten shillings, for no matter what he said, Nan was a good assistant.
But of course he was right about the trouser bit because Nan had a gay disposition and a very pretty face; what he wouldn't admit to was that she brought in a lot of custom at the week-end, especially when there was a boat in and some of the sailors would make their way up from the quayside and spend freely on chocolate or toffee for their girls.
Of course, these would be the ones who didn't make straight for the pubs.
She was now going through the door into the store-room behind the shop when her father said, ‘Mind, close up at nine sharp, Aggie.
It's no use hanging on; anybody who's going to spend will have spent afore then.’
She gave no reply but went on through the store-room, whose walls were lined with shelves, some holding bottles of sweets, others boxes of all sizes, then through another door and into a corridor, from which, six feet to the right of her, a door led into the store-room of the tobacconist shop.
This door was always kept closed so that the strong odours of tobacco, cigarettes, cigars, and leather goods should not permeate into the sweet shop.
Ten feet in the other direction a staircase rose directly up by the side of the end wall and she made for this.
A short flight up was a landing and the stairs turned in on themselves to another short flight, which brought her to another corridor similar to the one downstairs but more than twice its length.
The upstairs house ran above the two shops to form spacious living quarters, which were surprisingly well-furnished and comfortable.
Agnes's mother, Alice Conway, had two assets: she was an excellent cook and she was a homemaker, at least where material things were concerned.
Unfortunately the homemaking did not include harmony, for she was given to moods.
Strangely, her mother's moods, Agnes had noticed for some long time now, were more evident in the evening.
During the day her mother seemed happy at times, baking, trying out fresh recipes, or changing yet again the curtains, or crocheting new chair-backs.
Very often, in the middle of the evening, she would be overcome by lassitude and retire to bed, often before the shops downstairs were closed.
Of course, she had a very comfortable bedroom.
It was situated at the far end of the house, above the sweet store room.
Besides a double bed, it contained a resting couch, a large easy chair, and a mahogany bedroom suite, consisting of a wardrobe, dressing table, and a wash-hand stand.
Next to this bedroom was a smaller one, but it was never used.
In it was a single bed and also the cradle in which she and Jessie had lain many years ago.
Across the corridor from the single bedroom was the modern innovation of an indoor closet.
No longer did they have to go down the backstairs during the night, and into the yard and across it to where the three outdoor lavatories stood.
The nearest one had been for the use of the Conway's house, the second one was for the use of Tommy Grant and his family.
Tommy had managed the little sweet factory for many years and had lived above it and brought up his family there.
And he was adamantly against anything changing the pattern of his life, for, as he said, he was having no netty inside, it wasn't decent; and just think about the effect on the sweets and the ingredients that went into their making.
The third lavatory was for the use of the narrow, single-storey house that formed the end of the three-walled courtyard.
This was a furnished house that was let periodically to travellers or First Mates or Captains or anyone who preferred a stay in a house rather than an inn or hotel.
A number of sea-faring men had stayed here with their wives over the years.
The House, as it was simply called, was a profitable little concern and it had been part of Agnes's work since she had left school, six years ago, to see to the laundry, and with Maggie's help, to its cleaning.
On the whole, Agnes enjoyed looking after the little house.
Although it stood cheek by jowl with the factory, it was a place apart, a business apart, and an interest apart.
She had come to look forward to the intervals between tenants, for at such times she would sit at the bedroom window that overlooked the street, which sloped swiftly to the main thoroughfare; and guided by the landmarks of St Dominic's church and, beyond that, St Ann's, she could look over the chimney pots and catch a glimpse of the river gleaming between the busy traffic on it.
This was the only time she allowed herself away from the business of the shop or the house above it.
Here, she would think and ask herself, again and again, what lay in the future for her?
She was twenty-two years old.
All the friends she had made at school were now married.
Would she ever be married?
She doubted it.
Certainly not to a man like Pete or to Henry.
Oh, never to one like Henry Stalwort.
She'd have to be very hard-up before she would take a man like him.
Well, what would be her end?
Would she be like the Misses Cardings, the three spinster ladies who kept the hat shop beyond the tobacconist's?
Or Christine Hardy, who worked in her father's fancy bakery at the bottom of the street.
Christine was in her thirties and she laughed a lot.
To Agnes's mind she laughed too much.
Was it because of Emmanuel Steele, who had his shoemaking shop between the Misses Cardings and the bakery and who was well into his forties, but apparently had no use for women, inasmuch as he did his own housework in the rooms above the shop, and ate most of his meals out.
The gossip in the road was that Christine had chased him until he had chased her and in terms that weren't complimentary.
Theirs was a short street going uphill, four shops on the right-hand side and the blank back walls of a warehouse opposite.
This led into another thoroughfare, the far side of which was bordered by a high brick wall in which two iron gates were let, seemingly at the top of Spring Street, and giving entrance to a drive leading to a substantial red-brick house.
Her father was apt to say, when her mother would mention the big house and its occupants, ‘Who bothers with such folk?
Stick to your own class and the community in which you were brought up.’
And what better community could you get than in Spring Street, he would ask, for hadn't it a shop that supplied food, and two others that fitted you out from top to bottom?
And then there were his own two shops that brought a little solace to the lives of both rich and poor.
When she had once laughingly asked, ‘Who supplies the meat, Father, and the clothes that go between the hats and the shoes?’ he had come back with his usual answer to her, ‘You're too sharp by half; you'll cut yourself one of these days.’
Anyway, everybody in the street made enough money to go outside it and buy the meat and their necessary clothing.
Hadn't he clothed them well and fed them well over the years?
Yes, she supposed he had.
But sitting up in the bedroom looking down towards the river, she was asking herself more often of late whether meat and clothing were all there was to life.
Had one to work for that alone?
Surely there was something more to it.
But what more?
What did she want?
She was baffled when she couldn't give herself, or wouldn't give herself, a satisfactory answer.
The nearest she would get was that she wanted time, time to herself to think, to read, to find out how other people lived; how they managed to live, how they managed to face up to the tragedies; their scraping for a living; and how they managed to cope with love.
Yes, ‘love’, that word was often in her mind.
Her reading of the passions of men and women in the past so often revealed that ecstatic love ended in tragedy.
It seemed to her that if love was to be great it had to be paid for with a terrible price.
Perhaps she read the wrong books.
Perhaps she should read the magazines,Woman's World ,Woman's Weekly and the Woman's Journal , like her mother did.
Then she would be comforted by the thought that, once married, lovers lived happily ever after.
But from when she had been sixteen and had left the Dame School and stepped right into the home life above the shop, it had been borne into her that marriage was a humdrum affair: two people lived together, apparently happy, yet went their own ways, as shown by her parents; they didn't think alike, yet they didn't argue; they never laughed at the same things, nor did local or national events affect them in the same way.
She often wondered what happened in bed at night.
Were they loving and tender with each other?
She had even tried to visualise what happened.
But her mind presented her with two stiff figures lying side by side, not even holding hands, perhaps not even saying a polite goodnight.
‘What are you standing out there for?’
Agnes started and went towards her mother, who was looking at her from the kitchen doorway.
‘I…
I was just thinking.’
‘Thinking?
You are doing that too often of late.
It's a wonder you can attend to the business downstairs.
What were you thinking with your mouth half open?’
Alice Conway almost jumped back into her kitchen as her daughter swung round now and yelled at her, ‘It may surprise you to know that I was thinking about you and Father and this house, and the business downstairs.
And life, and asking myself if it was all worthwhile.’
She watched her mother smooth her hair back from her brow, draw in a long breath, then say, ‘Well, well!
This is a tantrum isn't it.
What's brought this on?’
‘It isn't a tantrum, Mother.
And nothing's brought it on, as you say.
I've been in this frame of mind for a long time, but no one seems to notice.’
‘Well, then —’ Alice walked across the kitchen to the open fireplace and, bending towards the oven at the side of it, she opened the door and took out a casserole dish and placed it on the table before she went on, ‘If that's how you're feeling I think it's about time you got yourself married.’
‘Yes, I thought that's what you would say, Mother.
And I suppose you would recommend Mr Stalwort?’
‘You could look further and fare worse.’
‘Well, I'll do that, but it couldn't be much worse than him.’
‘You don't know what you're talking about, girl.
What do you expect?
You're twenty-two and…’
‘Go on, say it, Mother, go on!
I'm not pretty; and I haven't the advantages of Jessie.’
‘You said it.
You said it yourself.
So you can't pick and choose.
I'm not saying you're plain, but your disadvantage is your attitude towards men.’
She now swung round from the table and, thrusting her head out towards her daughter, she almost hissed, ‘What do you expect?
You've got to take what you can in this world and make the best of it.
Henry Stalwort is a rich man; he's got ten times more than your father.
He doesn't only own the warehouse but has property dotted all over the city.
Those two girls will soon be off his hands.
Men of his age can be manipulated by anyone with a ha'p'orth of brains.
If you had a ha'p'orth of brains you would have been married by now and living in Jesmond, the best end.
What are you waiting for?
Do you know yourself?’
Agnes stared at her mother.
All her own passion had died out of her: she felt deflated; she had the desire to laugh, and she almost did as she said, ‘Yes, I know what I want at this moment and that's something to eat and then to get downstairs again, because, you know, it's Father's night for the club.’
Alice had picked up a spoon ready to ladle out the stew on to a plate, but she paused and looked at her daughter hard as she said, ‘You don't know what it's all about, do you?
God help you when you do.’
She finished her ladling and pushed the plate of mutton stew and dumplings towards Agnes; then, the ladle held above the casserole dish, she was about to dip it in again when Agnes said in an offhand manner, ‘What a pity you aren't a widow, Mother, you could have had dear Henry yourself.’
The ladle hit the stew with such force that the liquid splashed onto the white tablecloth, and, almost stuttering now, Alice cried, ‘What a thing to say!
What a thing to say!’
Then she did an unheard-of thing, she threw the ladle itself onto the white cloth and stalked from the room, leaving Agnes looking towards the door that had banged closed and thinking, Goodness me!
Goodness me!
It must have struck home in some way.
But which way?
She looked down at the steaming plate.
She had no appetite for it, but she must eat; if she were any thinner she would disappear.
How was it she hadn't a bust? nor hips like other girls, or women, of twenty-two?
Look at Jessie, only eighteen, and she was all bust and hips.
as if her thinking had conjured up her sister, the door opened again and Jessie came in, saying in a low voice, ‘Mother's in a pet.
What's happened?’
‘Oh, we were just talking.’
‘Just talking?
Arguing more like it, or rowing.
She's in the sitting-room, the crocheting needles flying.
She's always like that when she's in a bad temper.
It's odd, isn't it?
Oh, dear me!’— she was looking at the casserole dish —‘stewed mutton and dumplings.
Three hot meals a day.
I'm putting on weight.’
‘How's things at the school?’
‘Oh, don't ask me.’
Jessie shook her head.
‘I'll never make a secretary, Aggie; I've got nothing up top.’
‘Don't be silly.’
‘I'm not.
I just can't grasp these things.
Have you ever tried to do shorthand?
And think of a life ahead sitting at a machine tapping out: ‘Dear Sir, At your request I am forwarding twenty barrels of salted herring to your wife's boudoir.
Would you please return the casks after they have been washed.’
Agnes put down her knife and fork and turned her head away from the table as she began to laugh; Jessie was spluttering, too, as she said, ‘You've got no idea about some of the letters the girls make up, real naughty ones.
If Father were to hear them he'd whip me out of that place much quicker than he pushed me in, I can tell you.
Oh —’ Her laughter faded and she sighed before she went on, ‘I'd give anything to leave there.
And I mean to leave, Aggie, and soon.’
‘Well, what will you do?
Come down to the shop?’
‘No.
No, I won't; I'll get married.’
Again Agnes put down her knife and fork: ‘Jessie, now listen,’ she said.
‘Listen to me.
Are you still seeing that Robbie Felton?’
And when Jessie didn't answer, she went on, her words tumbling over each other now, ‘You're mad.
You mustn't.
Father would never have it; he'd go berserk.
You know what the Feltons are; they're the roughest family on the quay.
One's just come out of prison.
Their women are the same.’
‘Robbie's not like that.
And they're not all bad.
They're all right; they're nice when you talk to them.’
‘Have you been seeing them, I mean the family?’
‘No, no; I only met…well, Robbie was with two of his brothers and they spoke to me and they were nice.
They talk broad but they were nice.
And they were respectably put on, not scruffy or anything.’
‘Don't be silly, Jessie.
Of course they're respectably put on.
They make money in all ways.
You haven't been seeing him regular?’
‘Yes.
Yes, I have, whenever I can.
And don't look at me like that, Aggie.
I…well, I like him.
I more than like him, I love him.
And he loves me.
I know he does.
He does.
He does .’
‘Oh my God!’
Agnes covered her eyes for a moment, then said flatly, ‘Has he told you so?’
‘Well, no, not really.
But I know he does.
And he waits for me.’
‘He waits for you ?
When?
When can he wait for you?
Father nearly always meets you at school.’
‘He…he waits about when we have our dinner break.
Oh, Aggie, he's…he's different.
If you would only meet him and…and he could talk to you.
He's not really rough.
What I mean is…well, he's strong, and he can be funny.’
‘Funny ?
Girl, how can you sit there and talk about one of the Feltons being funny!
They're roisterers.
They're always in fights; you can hardly lift a paper up before you see their name: illicit dog fights, fisticuff battles, stealing, and pitch and toss.
Oh, Jessie, of all the people you could have taken a fancy to in this world you've got to go and pick one of the Feltons.
I'm telling you, Father will do murder.
He won't have it.’
Jessie rose from the table now, but she didn't move away from it, she leant her hands on the edge of it and, bending towards Agnes and in a mere whisper now, she said, ‘Father's got to understand that I have a life of my own; I'm not a china doll to be babied.’
Staring into the pretty face for a moment, Agnes nodded, saying, ‘That'll come as a great surprise to him.
And I wouldn't like to be present when you express your views, if ever you do.’
Jessie drew herself up straight.
And when she said, ‘I might need to, and then I'd just walk out,’ Agnes was round the table as if she had been shot there and, holding her sister by the shoulders, she cried at her, ‘Don't do that, Jessie!
Never! do you hear me? because you'll break him.
He'd trace you to wherever you were and there'd be hell to pay.
You don't seem to know Father and what lies behind his jolly façade.
I'm with him more than anybody and I don't really know him, except that you're the only one he really cares for.’
‘What about you?
He depends upon you.
You practically run the business downstairs.
How can you say I'm the only one he cares for?’
Agnes turned away from her sister and there was a sad note in her voice as she said, ‘He cares for me merely because I'm useful to him, that's all.
And I don't know how he feels about Mother, either.’
Then quickly turning back to her, she said, ‘But I do know how he feels about you.
So, I beg of you, Jessie, don't do anything rash.
You know, you're so pretty you could have anyone, but you've got to go and pick one of the Feltons.
All I can say is, I pray this is a spasm, one you'll grow out of.
Anyway —’ She looked down on her partly eaten meal and her nose wrinkled before she went on, ‘I've got to go downstairs again, and you'd better clear away here when you've finished, then go into Mother and see if you can soothe her ruffled feathers.
And that's another one, you know: she would die of shame if she knew that you were even looking at a Felton, never mind expressing affection for one.
Oh my!’
She now flapped her hand as if shooing something away, then went out of the kitchen and onto the landing, and here, as she had before, she stopped, but only long enough to raise her eyes to the whitewashed ceiling as her mind said, Dear God, don't let anything come of this.
Her father had gone to his club.
Her mother had stopped crocheting, so Jessie said, and was in the sitting-room going through a catalogue of curtain material for yet another change at the windows and had decided firmly against anything resembling Nottingham Lace; her mind was now set on drapes with pelmets, so Jessie had whispered to her in the back shop a short while ago.
The shop bell had tinkled frequently for the past hour, most of the customers having been the ha'penny and penny ones, some of whom were now standing outside at the shop window oohing and aahing at the Christmas goodies displayed there, all entwined with coloured streamers and illuminated by the two gas lamps attached to the side wall of the shop and plopping inside their pretty pink glass globes, while casting a rosy light overall, even over the small faces pressed against the window.
The shop bell rang; then the door closed with a clatter on two customers, one all of six, the other in the region of four years old.
‘Oh, hello Bobbie.
Hello, Mary Ann.
What is it tonight?
Tiger nuts?’
‘Naw, we've both got pennies.’
‘You have?
Your mother gave you them?’
There was a note of surprise in her voice.
‘Naw! the lodger…we got a lodger.’
‘Oh.’
Agnes was nodding her head now, and as she did so she was thinking, I only hope your father doesn't find him there when he comes back from one of his trips.
Your mother never seems to learn, poor soul.
She walked behind the main counter to the flap that could be lifted to give access to the shop itself and, leaning on her forearms, looked down on to her weekly customers and asked, ‘Well then, what is it to be?’
‘Divvent know yet.’
‘You want to look round?’
‘Aye.
Coconut ice slabs are tuppence, aren't they?’
‘Yes, and I don't think you would enjoy spending all your money on a coconut ice slice.
But there are the coconut chips.
You could have a pennorth of those.’
He blinked up at her from his grimy face, and said flatly, ‘Ha'p'orth.’
Agnes raised her eyebrows and said, ‘Very well then, a ha'p'orth it is.’
She moved back along the counter and, picking up a box of the sugared candy, she was about to scoop some into the scales when the shop bell rang again.
The sight of the two customers that entered this time stayed her hand holding the small brass scoop that was about to transfer a minute amount of coconut chips to the scale.
From the dress of both the man and the woman she realised immediately that they were not only strangers, but class.
And if she hadn't been able to judge this from their dress, she would have from their voices as, one following the other, they said, ‘Good evening.’
‘Good evening.’
Her hand tipped the scoop and the chips slid into the scale and when the dial registered much more than half an ounce she didn't remove any but, taking a paper bag, she blew into it, then, tipping up the scale, she disposed of the coconut chips before saying, ‘I'll be with you in a moment.’
‘There's no hurry.’
It was the man who spoke.
‘She wants chocolate taffy.’
‘Oh, well now.’
She glanced from her regular customers to the two new ones who seemed to be interested in the proceedings, and she said, ‘Well, now, she won't get much chocolate toffee for a ha'penny.
She's always liked tiger nuts.’
‘You want tiger nuts?’
When the small head nodded acceptance Agnes, now looking at the boy, said, ‘A ha'p'orth or a pennorth?’
‘Ha'p'orth.’
This word was said in such a way, and accompanied by a look, that told the woman behind the counter that she didn't know her business, because they'd never had a pennorth of tiger nuts.
Hurriedly now Agnes weighed out the tiger nuts; then, glancing at the newcomers again, she smiled and said, ‘I'm sorry.’
‘Don't be.
Oh, don't be.’
It was the young woman speaking now.
Her voice had a lilt to it as if she were on the verge of laughter.
Agnes turned her attention to the young customers again, saying, ‘Well, that's a penny gone.
What would you like next?
You can have two gob stoppers for a ha'penny.
You often have those.
And she likes hearts and crosses, or there's everlasting stripes,’ and she spread her hand wide.
The boy, however, took no notice of her but raised his eyes to the bottles on the shelves and said, ‘Acid drops.’
Agnes did not make the mistake now of asking her customer how much he intended to spend on the acid drops; she reached up and took down the jar and, tilting it, tipped some acid drops into the scale; then, putting the glass lid back onto the jar, she returned the whole to the shelf before once again blowing into a small paper bag and depositing the sweets inside.
Now, once more looking at the small boy, she said briskly, ‘Come, make up your mind quick, Bobbie; I know you've bought a shipping order tonight but there's this lady and gentleman waiting to be served.’
‘Cindy taffy.’
He would choose cinder toffee, she thought.
She moved along the counter to where, beneath it, on a narrow table, there stood a number of trays and, taking up the brass hammer, she broke the edge of the toffee and put four pieces into a newspaper cone that she had taken from a number stacked up by the side of the tray.
She also added the crumbs of the toffee; then rubbed her hands on a small damp towel lying on the table by the toffee trays.
When she placed the paper cone by the side of the three bags she was confronted by a pair of unsmiling eyes and a voice that held condemnation: ‘Ye've nivvor weighed it.’
She now leant across the counter and, poking her face down to the child's, she said, ‘No, I didn't Bobbie, because if I had you wouldn't have got half as much as is in that bag.
Now, take that lot and go, get yourselves away.’
She gathered up the bags and pushed them towards the child; and when he reluctantly handed her the two pennies she said, ‘Thank you very much.
I'll see you next week, I hope.’
It was the gentleman who seemed to spring to the door and open it to let the two heavily laden customers out.
And then laughing, he looked at her and said, ‘That was as good as a play.’
‘More like pantomime, sir; and it's enacted every week, mostly on a Friday night when they get their pay-pennies.
What can I do for you?’
It was the young lady who now spoke: ‘You won't remember, of course, I scarcely do, but years ago my grandfather brought me to this shop, and it was at Christmas time too.
He was really going to buy cigars at the shop next door, but I saw the sugar mice in the window and he couldn't get me away until he came in and bought some.
I remember he bought a dozen.
And I remember, too, those I hadn't eaten by the time I got home we hung on the tree.
And there was a sugar and chocolate cat; and that's still there; of course, it won't be the same one.’
She laughed now.
‘There were all kinds of animals; there was a dog too.’
‘Oh yes, the dog.’
Agnes smiled broadly.
‘The mould got broken and we never replaced it.
Nobody seemed to want sugar or chocolate dogs, and the cat isn't so very popular either.
It's the mice everyone seems to go for, I mean the children.’
‘Well, I have three children of my own now and I thought it would be nice to surprise them with the sugar mice on the tree, and also the chocolate cat.’
‘How many would you like?’
Agnes watched the young, plump, matronly lady look at the young man, whom she imagined to be the same age as his wife.
And when he said, ‘I would say a couple of dozen, because that little tribe just don't eat, they gobble.
And who's to prevent the grown-ups enjoying a sugar mouse now and again.
But will that spoil your window?’
‘Oh, no, no; we have plenty in stock.
But not so many cats.
How many cats would you like?’
It was the young woman who answered, ‘Six, say?’
She glanced at the man, and he said, ‘Yes; yes, six.’
‘Will you excuse me a moment?’
Agnes hurried into the back shop, turned up the gas jet, quickly transferred two dozen sugar mice to one fancy box and six chocolate cats to another; and when she returned with them into the shop they both exclaimed, and it was the young woman who said, ‘What pretty boxes!
Oh! they are nice.
Aren't they, Charles?’
‘Yes they are.’
He smiled at Agnes; ‘Do you think we could have some toffee?’
‘With pleasure.
What would you like?
There is walnut, and treacle, and chocolate topped, and of course, cinder.’
At this they all laughed.
Then the young woman said, ‘I know what your choice will be, Charles, the walnut.’
‘Yes; yes, I'd like the walnut,’ he said.
‘And I can tell you what your choice will be, too; it'll be the chocolate.’
Again they were laughing.
‘How much would you like?
We put them up in quarter pounds or in half pound boxes.’
‘Oh, we'll have a half pound of each.’
‘Oh, that won't go very far, not when Reg and Henry get their fingers into them.
Better make it a pound each.’
‘Yes, yes.
I'd forgotten about those two.’
They were looking into each other 's face and laughing as if , Agnes thought, they were alone.
They looked happy.
She wondered who Reg and Henry were, their children?
They seemed to have brought another world into the shop.
She had noted the young woman's attire.
She was wearing a fur hood and a Melton cloth coat with a huge fur collar.
She had fur-backed gloves and high brown-polished boots, not shoes but boots, and from what she could see of them they looked serviceable, as if they really were worn for walking.
The boxes filled with toffee and tied up with red string, Agnes checked up the account, saying aloud, ‘Two dozen mice, sir, at a penny each, two shillings.
Six cats at threepence each, one and six.
One pound of walnut toffee, eight pence, and one pound of chocolate toffee, a shilling.’
She looked up, adding now, ‘The chocolate is always dearer.
You understand?
That will be five shillings and two pence.’
The young man put two half crowns and two pennies on the counter, saying as he did so, ‘We'll take more than the sweets away with us tonight.
It's been a pleasure visiting your shop.
And I wouldn't have missed your last customers for anything.
He certainly got his money's worth, that young man.
He seemed to know what he wanted.
He'll make his way in the world all right.’
‘I hope so,’ said Agnes, without expressing the large doubt in her mind, knowing the kind of family from which young Bobbie Wilmore came.
But his was one of the many families in the streets that ran off the main road at the bottom of the hill and from whom this shop and the tobacconist's derived most of their regular custom.
‘Good night, and a happy Christmas when it comes.’
‘And the same to you.’
She nodded from one to the other; then watched the young man open the door and stand aside to allow his wife to pass before him.
On the point of following her and still holding the door open, he again nodded towards her and smiled; and she smiled back at him.
What a nice couple.
It was as if they were indeed from another world: a happy world, a free and easy world.
The way they talked to each other just went to emphasise this.
And they had three children.
She couldn't have been much older than herself, about twenty-five or so.
And how old would he be?
About the same age, perhaps a little older.
And they were both so good-looking, he in particular.
His wife was inclined to plumpness but it was a pretty plumpness, a happy plumpness.
There was that word again.
She seemed to cling to it.
Is that what she wanted?
That kind of happiness?
But where would she find it?
Well, there was one thing certain, she wouldn't find it in Spring Street.
Her father had once said when discussing classes, if they were all naked you could tell the county man from the commoner because of his commanding tone or his easy insolence.
Well, there had been neither the commanding tone nor the easy insolence from that couple; and yet, in a way she knew her father was right in his summing up of the gentry.
Still, she would never see that pair again; her dealings would be with the Bobbie Wilmores, either young, middle-aged, or old, and their wives or their mothers.
She'd had a number of the wives in tonight, all choosing bits and pieces out of their Christmas Club money.
But their choices remained either in the storeroom or in the window because her father had made it a rule that the window wasn't to be cleared until the day before Christmas Eve.
It was at ten minutes to nine when she decided to close up the shop.
Arthur Peeble would put the shutters up next door at exactly nine o'clock.
Not a moment before, not a moment after.
But there had been no customer in the sweet shop for the last fifteen minutes, and the children had all disappeared from the window.
So she went outside and she was in the act of pulling the shutters closed when a voice to her side said, ‘What you up to?’
She started as she looked at her father.
‘Oh, you did give me a fright.
And what's the matter?
Why are you home so soon?
It isn't even nine yet.’
‘No, I know it isn't and you're closing up before nine, aren't you?
Here, give it to me.’
He pushed the lock through a link of chain, turned the key, then said, ‘Get yourself inside; it's enough to freeze you.
We're going to have snow, if you ask me anything.’
Inside the shop, the door bolted, and the blinds drawn, she asked again, ‘What's brought you back so soon?
You're never home before ten.
Have they thrown you out of the club?’
‘No, they didn't throw me out, miss; I got fed up with the chatter.
Anyway, I thought I could be doing better things here, and I wanted a hot drink and I was feeling a bit peckish.
I didn't have much before I went out.
What's trade been like?’
Oh, about the same except for two strangers who happened to pop in, county types.’
She wrinkled her nose at him.
‘Bought five and tuppence-worth altogether.’
‘Did they now?
Five and tuppence-worth.
A shipping order.’
‘Well, it's bigger than anything that's been taken today, or yesterday, at one go.’
‘Yes, yes, I was only kidding you.
By the way, did you make the order out for me for tomorrow?’
‘Yes.
There it is.’
She pointed along the counter to the till.
He passed her and picked up the sheet of paper.
‘Why do we want everlasting stripes again?’ he said.
‘Well, we are down-to one box and they always go very well in the winter; anything with liquorice in, like that.’
‘Three dozen candy rock assorted!
I hope you sell them.
Liquorice allsorts.
Well, you've only got two boxes down here; I would have got another one.
Sherbet dips, hearts and crosses, wine gums, jelly babies.
Aye.
Aye, jelly babies; they go.
Hundreds and thousands…
Oh, marshmallows.
Now, they stuck last year, didn't they?’
‘They went eventually.’
‘Candy walking sticks.
Ah well, what with the candy rock, I don't think they are good for stocking.
Sherbert dips…not in the winter, not as many, anyway, as you've got down here, three boxes.’
‘Then why didn't you make the list out yourself, if there's so many things wrong in it?’
‘Now, now, now.
That's no way to talk to your father.
What's got into you?’
‘It's more like, what's got into you, Father.
I've always made the list out and you've never queried it before, well not like that.
And as I'm in the shop most of the time and know what goes and what doesn't, I think you should stick by what I say or get somebody else in who'll do it better.’
As she went to flounce past him, he checked her, saying again, ‘Here!
Here!
What's got into you?’
‘Nothing's got into me, Father.
It's what's got into you.
Yes, I repeat, what's got into you.
If I was of a probing nature I would say there's something worrying you.
And what's brought you home so soon?
It's never happened before…well, not for a long, long time.
But I've been taught to mind my own business, so I won't need an answer to that.’
‘That'll be the day when you mind your own business.
Anyway, talking about changing tempers, yours has been in and out with the tide these last few months.
We were talking earlier on about you marrying.
Well, if you don't want to marry, what do you want to do?’
Then suddenly closing his eyes and clenching his fist and bringing it down on the counter, he said, ‘Whatever you want to do, for God's sake!
Aggie, don't tell me you want to walk out of here, because I can't do without you.
I've got so many things on my mind; but when you're here running things, well, I know everything's all right.
And this is our livelihood.
So never say you want to walk out.
Anyway —’ He turned towards her again.
His hand was open and there was a touch of laughter in his voice as he said, ‘What would you do? where would you go, if you don't intend to go into some other man's house?’
She did not immediately come back with an answer, but looked at him steadily for some seconds before she said, ‘That's why you think you've got me here for good, isn't it, Father?
But there's plenty of places I could go.
Remember, Miss Carter wanted me to go pupil-teaching and then take a teacher's course, well that's one thing I could do; it's not too late, I'm only twenty-two.
Or, I could run somebody's business, couldn't I?
I've had plenty of experience for that.
Oh’— her lips curled —‘you saying you couldn't do without me, Father, doesn't cut any ice, Good night.’
She walked hastily from him and into the store-room, and he followed her, and they were just about to confront each other again when the back door leading into the yard opened and there, revealed in the gaslight, was Jessie.
Jessie was surprised to see her father, as her father was surprised to see her, and coming from the yard.
‘Where've you been?’
She came in and bolted the door, then stood with her back to it, looking from one to the other.
Then glancing at Agnes, she said, ‘Aggie asked me to take some towels across to the house for the people coming in tomorrow.’
‘That was a damn silly thing to do at this time of night.’
He was almost bawling at Agnes now.
‘You know what happens in that yard at night when the drunks get going.
And they're not above leaving a couple of drays in there late on till first light, rather than stable them.
Anyway, I thought you took it on yourself to see to everything in the house over there?
And you, miss, get yourself upstairs and never go out on your own at night again.
Do you hear me?’
‘Yes, Father.’
Jessie sidled along by the racks to the door leading to the passage and the stairs.
And she had hardly disappeared from view before Arthur Conway turned on Agnes, a growl in his voice now as he said, ‘What's up with you?
You know what happens out there.
Supposed courting couples.
There's no gates on our yard, or hadn't you noticed?
It's open to the scum of the earth.
Anything could have happened to her…’
‘Oh, shut up!’
Before his hand could reach her face she jumped back, crying, ‘You do that, Father, you do that just once and there'll be one less for breakfast tomorrow morning, and I mean that.
With all my heart I mean that.
Do you hear me?
You ever lift your hand to me and that'll be the end.’
As his arm dropped to his side his head also bowed, and with an audible intake of breath he muttered, ‘In the name of God!
What's come over us?’
She neither gave him an answer nor waited for more reaction, but turned swiftly up the stairs and through the kitchen and along the corridor where, without knocking, she burst into Jessie's room.
Before she could speak, however, Jessie whimpered at her, ‘I'm sorry.
I'm sorry, Aggie.
But…but I couldn't think of anything else to say.
And who would have thought he would come home so early?’
Agnes moved closer to her sister and cried at her, ‘And who would have thought you were outside consorting with one of the Feltons, eh?
Just imagine if he knew that.’
‘Oh, Aggie, that's why I…well, said what I did.
I was frightened, petrified.’
‘You had a brave face on earlier tonight: you were going to lead your own life, weren't you?
Well, lead it and have the courage of your convictions: either come into the open or drop that fellow.
And for his safety and yours an' all, I would suggest you do the latter, and quickly.’
‘Well, I…
I can't do that, Aggie.
I can't.
And anyway, after all, it was nothing to say, I mean, that I was taking the towels over for you.’
‘No, nothing, except that he was going to hit me.’
Jessie stepped backwards, her face stretching, her mouth open, and when she muttered, ‘No!
Never,’ Agnes said,, But yes.
It was only my threat that stopped him because if his hand had touched me I would have walked out of this house that very minute and I wouldn't have had to go far.
The Miss Cardings next door, they would have let me stay there until I got myself sorted out.
And let me tell you, this isn't the first time I've thought of it, either.’
She turned now as though about to carry out her threat and went out, across the corridor and into her own room, and there, fully clothed, she dropped onto the bed and fell sidewards across the pillow.
Happiness.
Happiness.
The picture of the young couple came into her mind again; and on it she thought: there must be a different way of life.
There must.
I have a mind, why can't I use it to some good in a way that will give me satisfaction if nothing else?
Yes, if nothing else.
After a while she sat up and slowly began to undress to her camisole and her waist petticoat; then, turning up the gas that had been on a low jet, she went across the room to the wash-hand stand and poured water from the jug into the basin.
The water was icy cold but she washed her arms up to the oxters, and then her face and her neck down to the top of the bodice; after which she took off the rest of her underwear and got into a calico nightdress.
By the time she got into bed she was shivering.
She hadn't turned the light out, and now, propped up by her pillows, the bedclothes tucked under her chin, she sat staring straight ahead.
This had been her room since she was six years old but there was nothing of hers in it.
There was her mother's choice of furniture, walnut in this case, consisting of a wardrobe, a marble top wash-hand stand and a wooden-headed bed.
The curtains were her mother's choice, as was the bedcover and the carpet.
There was a time when she could remember thinking it was a very nice room and that she was lucky to have a carpet on the floor and not just lino.
She couldn't actually now pinpoint the time when she began to dislike the room, the furniture, the colour of the carpet, the curtains…the ever-changing curtains.
A moment of panic welled up in her as she cried to herself, I must get away.
I must get away or I'll be trapped here for life.
I can't bear it.
If I was gone, he would have to put Jessie into the shop.
Why not?
Then what about her mother?
Yes, what about her mother; why couldn't she go down and take a turn?
Oh, no! that would be beneath her dignity.
She had always said she had never been a shop-girl and she wasn't going to start now.
No; but she'd let her daughter be a shop-girl.
She turned her head as she heard the kitchen door click.
Her father was up and was on his way to bed.
There was no calling, ‘Good night, Aggie.
Good night, Jessie,’ tonight.
Would he tell her mother what had happened?
She doubted it, for her mother would likely be asleep.
She must have gone to bed some time ago, else Jessie wouldn't have been able to sneak out.
She felt sick.
She'd have to take a drink of water.
Reluctantly she got up and her teeth chattered as she took a dressing gown from a hook behind the bedroom door.
Then, putting it on and pulling the collar tight about her throat, she lit the candle that was standing in a holder on her bedside table, and went quietly out and along the corridor to the kitchen, through it and into the scullery, where they had a running tap above a shallow stone sink.
After filling a glass with water, she returned to the kitchen and sat down and slowly sipped the water.
Yet the more she sipped the more sick she felt; and then she began to have a cramp in her stomach.
She rose from the chair, muttering to herself, ‘Oh dear!’ because she knew she would have to make her way to the closet at the far end of the house.
She'd hardly reached the closet when she heard her father's voice.
It wasn't loud and she couldn't distinguish anything he said, but during the time she was in the closet she could hear it droning on, with breaks here and there when her mother must be speaking.
After a while when the sickness had subsided, she opened the door and was about to creep cautiously away, when she heard her father speak some words that halted her: ‘Who's to blame for the club nights, I ask you?’ he was saying.
Then her eyes sprang wide with the words: ‘And let me tell you something, I'm not spending any more nights on that bloody single mattress in there.
And if you want the bed camouflaged in the morning you can get up and make it.
And I'm giving you this ultimatum: tomorrow night I come into this bed and if you try to stop me, you'll end up next door for the remainder of your days.’
Now her mother's voice, thin, piercing: ‘You try any trick like that on me, Arthur Conway, and you'll be sorry.
Those two along the corridor will then know exactly what kind of a father they have, and about the slut you keep on the side under cover of the club nights.
Oh, just you try forcing yourself on me again and your world will explode.
I know one who wouldn't stand for it; she'd walk out.
And then what would you do?
Because it's she who runs that business, not you.
And she's a fool not to marry Stalwort and leave you on your backside.
So, I'm warning you, you come near me and there'll be such an explosion that you won't know where you are.
The shock I got when I found you out again will be nothing to their reaction.
Oh no; I can promise you that.’
There followed a silence in which Agnes imagined them glaring at each other.
Then her father's voice came again, saying, ‘You know what you are, Alice?
You're a bitch.
You're a vain silly bitch.
You haven't got one asset; and above all, you're spiteful and greedy.
You've blackmailed me into spending money these past six years.
Well, now it's my turn to use threats.
That's finished.
All right, tell the girls, do your damnedest.
But you know something?
You needn't worry any more, because you arouse nothing in me and haven't done for many a year.
I wouldn't want to lay a finger on you.
You've got nothing that would even attract a body-starved sailor; even in your young days you were really nothing.
And let me tell you something finally, you can't hold a candle to my woman.
And the reason why I'm home early tonight is, she's in hospital.
But there's one thing I'll hold to, I'll have my own bed tomorrow night and you make your own arrangements for next door.
And if you haven't, I'll go to the girls myself; you won't get the opportunity of blowing the gaff, I'll tell them.
And I'll tell them why I took a woman, and that she's good to me.
By God! she is.’
And then her mother's voice snapped back loudly, ‘And to a number of others, because she's a whore!
I wish you were dead, Arthur Conway, I do, I wish you were dead.
But then you haven't all that long to go, have you?
You've had that pain under your ribs for a long time.
Well, let me tell you, I'll be here when you do go, and God!
I'll make hay with what you've got, every penny of it.’
There followed a silence during which Agnes gripped the stanchion of the door and brought her chin tight into her chest, only to raise it again as she endeavoured to hear what her father was now saying quietly and with a purposeful intent, ‘You shouldn't have said that, Alice.
You've made a mistake.
You shouldn't have said that.’
A movement in the room beyond caused her to fly along the corridor, and as she was passing the kitchen door she blew out the candle and groped her way to her own door.
Once inside, she almost threw the candle onto the bedside table, then, dropping onto her knees by the side of the bed, she buried her head in her folded arms, and as her crying racked her body she groaned out her feelings; but there was no condemnation for either of her parents, only a deep sorrowing sadness.
Although she knew they were both wrong she couldn't apportion blame to either of them, not yet, at any rate; the only thing she knew at the moment was that what she had heard tied her to this house and the business as if she had signed a contract giving away her life.
It was Christmas Eve and Agnes had wondered over the last few days if she had heard aright on the night she had gone to the closet, because the next morning her father had come blithely into the kitchen and said, ‘Your mother is having a lie-in this morning; take her a cup of tea along and a bit of toast.
And by the way, I have an appointment in the city around eleven, so I may not be back to stand in for the dinner breaks.
Do you think you can manage?’
She had given him no answer but had stared at him and he had come back quickly, saying, ‘That was a daft thing to say; you always manage.’
Then he had added, ‘I'll be over at the factory if you need me before then.
Old Tommy is getting beyond it.
Betty Fowler said he nearly brought a pan of sugar over himself yesterday.
He'll soon have to go, I'm afraid.’
Another time she would have protested and asked him pointedly, ‘Well, where will he go?
He's well into his seventies.
He's worked there all his life, starting with your father.
Are you pensioning him?’
But she had said nothing, and she knew from the look on his face that he was thinking she was still bearing a grudge from the incident in the storeroom the previous night.
And then again this morning he had another business engagement, but this time a different one, apparently, for he had put on his best suit and bowler hat and his black top-coat.
And again he had said, ‘You can arrange their dinner hour.’
Arthur Peeble had three quarters of an hour allowed for his dinner, but Nan Henderson's dinner break was only half an hour.
If she herself wanted any dinner she had to slip upstairs at twelve in order that Nan could leave at half-past.
Then Arthur Peeble's dinner time started at one o'clock till quarter to two.
But today he had asked if he could have a quarter of an hour extension and her father had said he would be back in time to take over.
This morning, too, she had said to her father, ‘I want this afternoon off; I want to do some shopping.’
And he had said, ‘Well, you take it.
I'll be back at one.’
‘What about Nan's rise?’ she had then asked.
‘Will I tell her she'll have ten shillings?’
‘Nine and six.’
‘I'm going to tell her ten shillings.’
They had stared at each other without speaking for a moment, and then she said, ‘She deserves a five-shilling Christmas Box.’
But this brought a sharp reply: ‘No! by God,’ he said, ‘we're not starting that.
She'll get the usual half-crown.’
‘Well, I'll give her the other half-crown out of my pay.’
‘You'll do no such thing,’ he had then said.
And to this she had answered, ‘I suppose I can do what I like with my own money.’
‘You're being contrary, aren't you?
This has got to stop.
We can't go on like this.
I made a mistake last night, I'm sorry.
But it isn't like you to hold it against me.’
And at that he had gone out.
It was ten past twelve when she went upstairs.
The kitchen smelt of Christmas cooking.
There was a tray of mince pies on the table and a large bacon and egg pie.
Her mother was at the stove and she didn't turn round to ascertain who had entered the room but said, ‘I'm just doing a fry.
You can have liver and bacon or you can have, a piece of bacon and egg pie.
Take your choice.’
‘I'll have the pie.
Thank you.’
When she sat down at the table her mother said, ‘Well, you can help yourself, I've got my hands full here.’
At this she cut herself a narrow wedge from the pie, and when her mother turned round from the oven and looked at her plate, she remarked, ‘You won't get fat on that.
What's the matter with you, anyway?
You've hardly eaten this week.
And what's more, scarce a word out of you.
Are you sickening for something?’
‘Very likely; and I think it would come under the heading of overwork.
Anyway, when father comes back I'm taking the rest of the day off.’
‘You are?
Making your own arrangements now?’
‘Yes, Mother; and not before time.’
‘Oh, here we go again.’
She looked at the woman, this woman who was her mother, this woman who lived behind a façade, who wouldn't let her husband into her bed and had caused him to take a mistress.
On the night she had heard the conversation she had felt sorry for them both, but not any longer.
They were both selfish individuals and she was now thinking that they deserved each other.
For the last few days she had seen them, not as her parents but as two hating individuals carrying on a private war behind screens.
But of the two, her father was the more proficient at acting out his part, for he could play the jolly man, the thoughtful husband, and the caring parent.
And he was the caring parent, but only for one of them.
The thought prompted her to ask, ‘Where is Jessie?’ and her mother answered, ‘Mabel Aintree called for her.
They've gone out shopping.
And there were one or two things I wanted.
Will you have tea or cocoa…?’
She had a mince pie with her tea, then went to her bedroom and changed from her shop uniform of a black alpaca dress and white apron into a grey jersey-wool dress, then she went downstairs again.
It was now twenty-five past twelve and she said to Nan, ‘Get yourself away.
And look, there's your wage; Father's putting you up one and six a week.’
‘Oh.
Oh, thank you, miss.
Oh, that is good.
Ta.
Thank you.’
‘And there's your Christmas Box.’
She held out two half-crowns, pointing to them separately and saying, ‘That's from Father and that one's from me.’
Nan's pretty face crinkled and her eyes were moist as she said, ‘Oh, ta, miss.
Ta.
That'll make all the difference; five bob.
You are kind.’
‘Nonsense.
You've worked for it.
And I know your mother likes butter fudge; give her this.’
She brought a little parcel along the counter; then, lifting another, she said, ‘And I know this is your weakness.
There's some coconut ice in there and some marshmallows.’
‘Marshmallows!
Me ma'll be ever so pleased.
Eeh!
Ta, miss.
Thanks.
Me brother and the two bairns are coming the morrow and we'll have a good time.
He always brings a bottle with him and we'll drink to you, miss.
Aye, yes, we will, we'll drink to you.’
‘Thanks, Nan.
But now, get yourself away and get back on time if you want to get off early tonight.
And anyway, I'll have to go next door to take over from Arthur if my father doesn't get back in time.’
‘Never fear, miss.
I'll be back on the dot.
And thanks again.
Oh, aye, thanks again; especially for the rise.
It'll make all the difference.’
As Agnes saw the young girl hurrying from the shop her face beaming, she thought: one and six a week to make all the difference.
And why was she getting only half an hour for dinner when he next door could have three quarters of an hour?
That kind of thing irked her, as did the difference in pay between women and men for doing practically the same work.
But it was the same the world over, she supposed.
It's a good job she hadn't time to think too much about these things, else she would get angry and likely join those suffragettes.
Yes, given a chance she could be one of them, the way she thought at times.
Oh dear, why was she so miserable?
But need she ask?
Yes, need she ask?
Her father hadn't come back by one o'clock.
And when Arthur Peeble pushed open the in-between door and came into the store-room, calling politely, ‘Miss Conway.
Miss Conway,’ she left the counter and looked into the room, saying, ‘Yes?’
‘It's one o'clock.
I…
I'll have to be away.’
‘I'll be there in a minute.
Just hang on till Nan comes back.
I can't leave the shop.’
He made no rejoinder but retreated back through the communicating door; and she went on serving the customer.
When Nan rushed in, pulling her hat and coat off as she came in, she laughingly looked at the clock and said, ‘Made it all but a minute, miss.
Agnes nodded and smiled at her; then, as Nan came behind the counter, she whispered to her, ‘His lordship has reminded me of the time.
I must go and stand in until Father comes.’
‘Oh, would be a pity to keep his lordship waiting, wouldn't it?’
Nan hunched her shoulders and laughed.
Agnes now went into the back room and, after washing her hands in a bowl of water that stood on a bench, she dried them, then smoothed her hair back and adjusted the bow at the neck of her dress.
Arthur Peeble was already dressed in his outdoor coat, his hat in his hand, when she went through the tobacco store-room and into the shop.
And he said to her and precisely, ‘I don't suppose you'll get much custom before I return, it being the dinner hour, but you know where things are.’
‘Yes, I think I do.
If I don't, I should do.’
He gave her a pained look before putting on his hat and walking out.
She grimaced to herself while thinking of how that fellow irritated her.
And she wondered how he spoke to his wife and children.
Very likely he used the same precise manner; she couldn't imagine him doing otherwise.
The shop was well set out: the window showed dummy boxes of cigars under the headings of Havana, English, and Mexican; there were boxes of cigarettes, Egyptian, Turkish and even American.
However, she couldn't be certain that the more expensive kinds were there and could be actually obtained inside the shop.
But it was a good window display.
Then there was a glass-fronted cabinet holding a variety of makes of pipes, cigar holders, cigarette holders, leather pouches and all kinds of requisites required by a smoker.
There was even displayed a velvet cap with a tassel.
This was on a stand by itself.
Then there were the tobaccos, Virginia Dark, Virginia Light, Gold Flake, Honey Dew, the latter being a popular brand of which the shop held a good stock in various weights.
There was also the smoking mixture described as Cavalry Extra Special, Cool and Fragrant, quarter- and half-pound tins.
Of course it was only the Captains and the big-business men who might find themselves coming down Spring Street who would pay six shillings and six pence a pound for a smoking mixture; other well-established tobacconists in the city had the custom of the gentry.
And yet their brands were no different and no better than what could be bought here, because her father had been to Harrods store in London and had a contract with them, and they were very good to deal with, for they gave the lowest prices to orders from clubs, messes, hotels and buyers.
Of course, they liked large buyers, but the manager there must have been impressed by her father years ago, probably because although his orders weren't all that large they were regular.
Whatever the reason, he was given good trade rates.
The first customer who came in after Arthur Peeble's departure was a young man.
‘Two packets of Woodbines, miss.’
She gave him the two packets, each holding five cigarettes, received his fourpence, smiled at him and said, ‘Thank you very much.’
‘Thank you, miss.
Happy Christmas.’
‘The same to you.’
The next customer was a middle-aged man who must have been a regular, for he began by saying, ‘Don't often see you on this side, miss.’
And to this she said, ‘No.
I'm standing in for my father.
I'm expecting him back at any moment.
What can I do for you?’
‘Oh, the usual.
Two ounces of Gold Flake, loose.’
‘Two ounces of Gold Flake, loose,’ she repeated.
She paused a moment, turned and looked at the line of narrow drawers, read the label, then weighed out two ounces of loose tobacco.
And then the customer said, ‘And I'm going to treat meself, seeing it's Christmas, have you got any Birds' Eye?’
‘Yes.
Yes, I think we have.
How much would you like?’
‘The same, miss, the same, two ounces.
And it's a ha'penny cheaper, if I know anything.’
‘Yes.
Yes, it is; it's only seven pence; the other is seven pence ha'penny.’
‘Aye, I thought so.’
The tobacco weighed out into the two separate tins he passed over the counter to her, he said, ‘That'll be one and tuppence ha'penny, eh lass?’
‘Yes, you're right, sir,’ she said, ‘one and tuppence ha'penny.’
He picked up the tins; then, leaning towards her, he said, ‘Nice to be served by a pretty face.
The fella in here's usually a bit starchy, I mean the young 'un, not the old one, not the manager like.’
‘He's the owner, my father.’
‘Oh, aye, aye.
Well, good day to you, and a happy Christmas.’
‘And a happy Christmas to you, sir.’
There was a short lull following this exchange, and then the door opened and in stepped the young man who had bought the mice and the toffee a few days ago.
He was carrying a leather case and he walked straight to the counter and stared at her; then he smiled and said, ‘Am…am I mistaken, but are you one of twins?’
She smiled widely as she shook her head, saying, ‘No, you are not mistaken, sir; and I am not one of twins.
I happened to serve you and your wife the other evening with the sweets.’
‘Oh, you're one and the same?’
‘Yes, sir.
Both of these are our shops.’
‘Really?
Well! well!
I…
I was next door getting some more of those candied mice.
My sister made the mistake of letting the children see them and you can imagine they were very soon much depleted.
And since I was coming in to town she asked me to get some more.
So —’ he pointed to the case, saying, ‘I've been next door and bought another dozen.’
She said nothing but looked at him.
His sister, he'd said.
They weren't a married couple.
He was smiling at her, saying again, ‘I thought I must be imagining things or seeing double, or, as I said, you were a twin.’
When he stopped speaking she said, ‘What can I do for you, sir, in the way of cigarettes, tobacco?’
‘Well’— he turned and looked towards the window —‘I noticed as I passed that you had a box of Havana cigars, the…the Excepcionales.
I thought I might like to have a few.’
‘Oh.’
She nipped on her bottom lip.
‘Most of those boxes, I'm afraid, are dummies and I don't know if we have that particular brand in stock at present.
You see, my father generally deals with these; I'm expecting him back at any moment.
However, I'll take a look.’
She turned to a glass case that held a number of boxes, and after a moment she said, ‘No, I'm afraid not.
well’— she paused —‘not exactly, but we have another one of the same name with the addition of Chicas, Excepcionales Chicas.
They are a cheaper brand.’
She now moved away from the case and looked at a list attached, low down, on the wall to the side of the smokers' requisites demonstration case.
It was placed so it could not be seen by the customer.
And glancing swiftly at it, she saw that the named cigar was listed as a box of one hundred for thirty-five shillings and sixpence, while its superior compatriot was fifty-four shillings and sixpence; and its sample of five was three and six, whereas five of this particular brand was only one and ten pence.
But these were the London prices, which she couldn't possibly charge up here.
It was usually threepence ha'penny or fourpence for a single cigar.
His voice now came to her, saying, ‘Look, I'll take what you've got.
They're for my father, not for me, and a change will undoubtedly whet his appetite.’
But even as he spoke he doubted if Excepcionales Chicas would, when the plain Excepcionales was a stand-by, his favourite being Albeans or Invincibles.
She turned and faced him again and on a high note she said, ‘We have a few Dominicoes.’
She did not say it was a sample of five.
‘Perhaps you would like to try those?’
‘No, no; I think we will just stick to the first choice.
I'm sorry I'm putting you to all this trouble.’
‘Oh, it's no trouble whatever; but, you see, my father is more used to the cigar sales than I am.
Can I get you anything else?’
‘Yes, some cigarettes, please.
Do you happen to have any Gold Tip?’
‘Oh, yes sir.
Yes, we have.
We have some fine quality, large size.’
‘Oh, that's good.
They're my brother's favourite.’
He paused before smiling at her and saying, ‘Isn't it amazing the choice that one has in tobacco.’
‘Yes, sir, it is when you come to think about it.
How many would you like?’
‘A box of a hundred if you have them.’
Oh.
She puckered her lips for a moment.
A hundred at one go.
She turned from the counter and glanced through some boxes, then said, ‘I'm afraid we've only got fifty of the large size, sir.
But I could do them in the smaller size.’
‘Well, I'll take the smaller size, thank you.
Have you any ladies' cigarettes?’
‘Ladies' cigarettes?’
She swallowed before shaking her head, saying, ‘I…
I don't think so, sir.’
She smiled to herself and refrained from adding, the ladies who come in here usually ask for shag for their pipes.
‘You are smiling.
You were thinking something amusing.’
She blinked, then laughed as she said, ‘You must be a reader of thoughts, sir.
Yes; yes, I was thinking.
Well, it was your request for ladies' cigarettes.
You see, there are ladies…or women who smoke, but their choice is usually Woodbines; a few ask for Gold Flake, but quite a number ask for shag for their pipes.’
He was laughing with her and he said, ‘Is that a fact?’
‘Yes.
Yes, sir.
A lot of older women still smoke a pipe, at least around the lower quarters.
I'm told they find it soothing.’
‘Have you never tried one yourself?’
‘No.
But there's still time.’
They were laughing again when he said, ‘Well, I'd better not take the shag.
I have a very eccentric aunt who comes to us for Christmas, flying visits.
She seems to spend her life flitting from one country to another, but she always spends Christmas with us, and she's a heavy smoker.’
‘I'm very sorry I can't oblige you with cigarettes for her, sir.
I don't suppose she'd smoke the ordinary ones.
‘Well, she always brings a supply with her and by what I've seen they're rather dainty.’
He surprised her by adding ‘Have you always worked in the shops?’
‘Yes.
Since I left school, at sixteen.’
‘Is it something you like doing?’
That was a strange question.
Her face was straight as she looked at him and she spoke the truth when she answered, ‘I liked it at first; it was like a holiday after school, but not so of late.’
Why had she said that, and to this stranger?
Yet he had asked her a question, a pointed question.
‘Is there something else you want to do?’
‘I suppose so.’
‘But you're not sure?’
‘No.
No.
Except I think I would like to get out, break away, as it were, and see the world.
There's so much that one doesn't know about places and people, so much to find out.’
‘Yes.
Yes, you're right there.
Yet, no matter how far one travels I doubt if one ever really gets to know people, or places, not as one imagines them in one's mind.
Both can prove disappointing.’
His face too was unsmiling as she looked into it and said, ‘Yes, very likely;’ then asked, ‘Do…do you travel a great deal, sir?’
‘Not as much as I would like.’
She turned now as she heard footsteps coming through the store-room, and there was her father standing by her side.
And she said to him, ‘Oh, I'm glad you've come.
You may be able to help this gentleman more than I have.
He would have liked a good cigar.’
‘Is it cigars you're after, sir?’
Arthur Conway's voice was hearty.
‘Yes.
Yes, but I think the young lady has managed to meet with my requirements at the moment.’
‘What has she given you, sir?’
Arthur Conway turned from looking at the man to Agnes as she quickly explained what she had sold the customer.
And when she finished, he said, again very heartily, ‘Oh, well, we can show you one or two other brands equal to the Excepcionales, at least in my opinion.
But I must say, sir, you know your cigar when you picked the Excepcionales.’
He leant towards the young man now and, his voice dropping as if he were imparting a secret, he said, ‘Do you know that they are one of the best brands sold by Harrods of London?’
Agnes found herself surprised at the change in the gentleman's voice as he looked at her father and said, ‘Oh, yes, yes.
We usually shop there when up in town.
They have a splendid department on the ground floor.’
She watched her father straighten his back, then, after a moment's hesitation, say, ‘Yes, sir, yes.
Well then, you will know a good cigar when you taste one.’
‘I never smoke cigars.
They happen to be my father's vice.’
‘Oh, well, there are worse vices, sir, worse vices.’
Her father was no longer at ease, nor was she.
She wished he would stop talking for now he was saying, ‘I've been associated with Harrods of London for many years.
Oh yes, for many years, and my father before me.
You see this department has a history.
It goes back for a hundred years or more.
I was born in the rooms above this shop.’
‘That's very interesting, very interesting.’
The young man was moving his head slowly now while staring at her father.
He seemed a different being altogether from the man she had served.
He was putting her father in his place and she didn't like it.
Yet her father was being stupid, bragging about the business.
Of what interest could it be to the man where her father was born?
And anyway, he didn't say that her great-grandfather had started the sweet shop next door from the proceeds of his wife's slaving over pans of boiling sugar to make home-made toffee in her little kitchen.
And that it was the success of the sweet shop that had enabled her great-grandfather to buy this end of the business.
People never bragged about their beginnings, only about what they had achieved, and never admitted it was through someone else's sweat.
On the whole, her father had had a very easy life of it, too easy.
What was more, her father had been drinking; he smelt strongly of it.
Likely this hadn't escaped the customer.
She said, ‘If you'll excuse me.’
She was looking at the gentleman, and he was looking at her now and as he inclined his head he said, ‘Thank you for your service.’
She said nothing but went out and straight upstairs to her room.
She felt angry inside, not only at her father's stupid bragging but also at the young man's attitude towards him.
She had never known anyone's manner change so quickly.
She now washed her face and hands; then stopping, she looked in the dressing-table mirror at the pale face confronting her and she nipped at her cheeks to bring some colour into them.
Then she got into her thick outdoor coat and pulled on a small brown felt hat, picked up her bag and a list of things she was going to buy and went downstairs, still without seeing her mother.
And she passed through the sweet shop with a nod towards Nan, who was serving a customer, and out into the street.
The wind was blowing high and bringing with it sleet.
She bent her head into it and held on to her hat.
But as she was passing the Misses Cardings' shop she heard a loud tapping on the upper part of the door; then it was pulled open and Miss Belle Carding beckoned Agnes towards her, saying, ‘Come in a minute, dear.
Come in a minute.’
As the shop door closed behind her, Miss Belle, speaking breathlessly as if she had been running, said, ‘We've been on the look-out for you.
We didn't want to pop in else your father would be saying that we're after selling you a new hat again, knowing your weakness for hats.’
She had moved up the shop, between the assortment of hats perched on stands and to the counter behind which the other two sisters were standing, the tall spare-looking Miss Rene and the almost diminutive Miss Florence.
Miss Belle's stature placed her between the two sisters, but whereas the other two were thin, her body was well padded and tightly laced.
‘Hello there, Agnes.’
Miss Florence was nodding up to her, saying now in a whisper, ‘Wait till you see what we've got to show you.’
‘Be quiet, Florence, and you Belle; it mightn't fit her.’
‘Of course it will.
Of course it will.’
Belle was smiling broadly and Agnes, looking now from one to the other, said, ‘It isn't a hat then?’
‘A hat?
No, of course not!’
Miss Rene flapped her hand as if shooing away all hats.
‘Come.
Come, Agnes,’ and saying this, she turned and led the way into the workroom at the back of the shop.
The room was of similar size to the sweet storeroom next door, but whereas there was some order in the storeroom, here there was a chaotic mixture of bare buckram shapes, leghorn straws, untrimmed felts, bonnets, artificial flowers, and rows of silk and velvet ribbons of all colours and widths.
One wall was taken up by a glass cabinet; another by a huge mahogany wardrobe.
The three doors of this were really long mirrors, and it was to the wardrobe that Miss Rene went and, opening it, she lifted down a hanger from which hung a dress and coat.
Holding the hanger high with one hand, she draped the skirt and coat over her outstretched arm, saying, ‘Look at that, Agnes!
Just look at that!’
Agnes looked at the lime-green coat and dress.
That was all she took in at first, until Miss Belle cried in an excited voice, ‘Well, Rene, take the coat off and let her feel it.
Let her see it.’
Agnes was now holding the coat up before her.
The material seemed to her to be a thick heavy silk.
The coat, she saw, was lined, but with a different material and colour, the lining being of a slightly thicker material in deep rose pink.
The contrast between the lime green and the rose pink was striking.
She had never seen anything like it before.
And now she was holding the dress.
It was made of the same material as the coat.
It had a square neck and a deep square cut collar of the same colour as the lining.
The bodice was plain and ribbed to the waist, and hanging from two loops at the side was a fine red suede belt.
Except for a slight flair towards the hem, the skirt was straight.
‘What d'you think of it, eh?
What d'you think of it, Agnes?’
She glanced at Miss Florence and shook her head, saying, ‘I've…
I've never seen anything like it before,’ and she was looking from one to the other, wondering which one it was meant to fit, when Miss Rene startled her by saying, ‘Well, get your coat and things off and try it on.’
‘Me?’
The word was high-pitched and the sisters glanced at each other and laughed in their different keys, and they all repeated together, ‘Me?’ and Belle, looking from Rene to Florence, said, ‘Who does she think is going to wear it, one of us?’
Again their laughter joined.
‘But…but I could never wear that.
Where could I go to wear that?’
‘You could go into the city.’
‘What!’
She was laughing loudly herself now.
‘I'd have all the dogs after me.’
‘Dogs indeed!
You'd have all the men after you.
Get your things off.’
They now practically set upon her, pulling off her hat, her coat, and unbuttoning her dress from the back.
And she, still laughing, said, ‘It's a good job I changed my underwear yesterday.’
‘Well, there's one good thing you won't be able to wear with it and that's three petticoats.’
‘I never wear three, just two.’
She nodded at Miss Rene, who came back at her quickly, saying, ‘Not even two, one will be enough, and it will have to be a lawn one, and your bloomers an, all.’
‘Oh, Rene!
Rene!’ the other two sisters were exclaiming.
When a few minutes later, amid the oohs and aahs from the three women, she stood and looked at the person staring back at her from the long mirror, she couldn't believe it was herself.
She had never imagined wearing clothes like this, or that they could make such a difference.
Her mother had always bought her clothes, or at least been with her to help her choose them: summer dresses had been plain grey or blue, the blue ones often with a small check in them.
Her mother was very fond of that pattern.
Winter coats had been navy or dark grey.
But she had never worn colours, not real colours, not beautiful soft-glowing colours like these, lime green and rose pink and that scarlet belt.
Of a sudden the room was quiet, and when she turned from the mirror and stood before the three elderly sisters, it could almost be said there were tears in their eyes, and in her own.
And her voice broke a little as she said, ‘It's beautiful, so beautiful, but…but I could never wear it, could I?
Now could I?’
‘Yes; yes, you could.’
Miss Rene was wagging her finger in Agnes's face.
‘You've got beautiful features, beautiful hair.
You have never made enough of yourself.
This’— she gently touched the lapel of the coat —‘has brought out your beauty; but you were always beautiful.’
She turned to her sisters now, her head bobbing.
‘I've said that, haven't I?
I've said that time and again.
Jessie's pretty in a dolly sort of way, but she could never come up to Agnes.
I've said that, haven't I?’
‘You have.
You have, dear.’
They were both nodding back at her.
And now they all nodded towards Agnes and Miss Florence said softly, ‘The moment we got it, dear, I said, ‘I know who that would suit, because she has the same figure as Mrs Bretton-Fawcett.’
Didn't I, Rene?
Didn't I?’
‘Yes, you did.
I'll give you that much, you did.
But as for a figure, I wouldn't say that Mrs Bretton-Fawcett has a figure, no more than Agnes here has one, because they are both like drainpipes…’
‘Oh!
Rene.
Rene.’
The two sisters sounded shocked, except that their eyes were twinkling.
And Miss Belle now said, ‘But she's right, Agnes.
She's right.
You haven't got a fashionable figure but you carry yourself well.
You've got what I would call poise.
You know what I mean?’
‘I know what I hope you would mean, Miss Belle; but Miss Rene's right, I have about as many curves as a lamp-post.’
‘You've got a lovely waist, dear.
And your shoulders are good.
Anyway, would you like it?’
‘Like it ?
But…but it must cost the earth.
I…’
The sisters now exchanged glances, and Miss Florence, looking at the eldest one in her family, said, ‘You'd better explain, Rene.’
And Miss Rene's retort was very sharp as she said, ‘I'll do that after she's tried on the brown leghorn or the mink-coloured felt.
Bring them in, Florence.’
Miss Florence seemed to skip out of the storeroom and within a minute skip back, displaying a hat on each hand.
‘Try the felt, first,’ said Miss Rene.
‘It's a very light felt.
It could be worn in the spring or the autumn.’
Agnes stood still while Miss Rene placed the felt hat at a slight angle on her head and then, standing back, said, ‘That's it, that's it, except you will want lime-green ribbed-silk ribbon to match the outfit.
But let's try the straw.’
The leghorn straw was not large for that particular type of hat and it had a brown velvet ribbon on it.
‘Oh, that's nice, better than the felt, Rene.
Now don't you think so?
That, with a velvet ribbon and little streamers at the back.
Oh yes.
And remember, Rene, you weren't for me putting that on show, were you?
You said it would never go in the window.’
‘Well, it hasn't gone, has it, sister?
And it still mightn't go; it all depends on Agnes here, if she wants to buy a hat to go with it all.’
Agnes turned now and looked in the mirror again, and she really couldn't believe what she saw.
But the longer she looked at herself the more she knew that she was going to buy this hat, or perhaps these two hats, and this beautiful, beautiful outfit.
She swung round swiftly now and said, ‘But…but how much would all this cost?’
‘Certainly not as much as it's worth, at least the dress and coat, because, you see, it's this way.
Mrs Bretton-Fawcett is a county lady and she has always patronised us because we have made her hats to suit her.
And when she goes to London in the summer she may order as many as four or five, especially if she is attending the races.
And it may surprise you to know that a number of the county people are not what they appear.
I mean as regards their wealth.’
‘Poor as church mice, some of them.’
Florence was now stressing her words with a deep obeisance of her head.
‘And the ones that have the money are the worst payers.’
This was from Miss Belle.
‘Be that as it may’— Miss Rene's voice had a touch of admonition in it —‘as I'm always telling you: betters do as betters do; it's no concern of me or you.’
‘And I always say, sister, it is our concern when they don't stump up.’
Miss Rene ignored Miss Belle's remark and, turning again to Agnes, said, ‘It should happen that Mrs Bretton-Fawcett had some bills outstanding and that she should at the same time require one or two hats for herself and an equal number for her daughter.
They were going to London for some weeks: they have friends in high places, you know, and the eldest Miss Bretton-Fawcett, the daughter you know, is to come out next year.
Anyway, to cut a long story short, she wondered if we would like to take payment in part with one or two garments.
She assured us they had only been worn a few times.
You see, people in their class cannot wear the same thing often.
You understand, Agnes?’
Agnes made no comment on this statement; yet all the while she was thinking, they shouldn't buy things that they can't afford, especially hats, from hard-working women like these.
But Miss Rene was still talking.
‘And she brought this outfit’— she touched Agnes's sleeve —‘as a sample of how she would pay for her hats.
Of course, this alone didn't meet the cost of the hats or the debt owing, but she said if we could find a buyer for such as this it would, in a way, alleviate some of the debt…’
‘And we haven't had a penny from them for the past two years or more.
Oh, more…’
‘Will you be quiet, Belle!’
‘Anyway,’ Miss Rene continued, ‘immediately we saw this we knew it was of the highest quality.
I can assure you you won't find anything in the city shops here to compare with it: it was made in London, specially modelled.
It's labelled in the back of the dress.
You'll see when you take it off.’
‘How much?’
There was to be no quibbling, just, ‘How much?’ for she had made up her mind that, no matter what it cost, she was going to have this outfit.
She might never wear it, except in her bedroom, but she meant to have it.
‘Well now.’
The sisters exchanged glances, then Miss Belle and Miss Florence nodded towards their elder sister and guide, and she, turning to Agnes said, ‘Mrs Bretton-Fawcett said we could get five pounds of anyone's money for it.
But we knew that was ridiculous.
So we decided that it was worth three pounds.’
Three pounds!
She would have to work for a month for that.
Her winter coat, shoes and hat together hadn't cost that.
But if it had meant working for two months she would have said immediately, as she did now, ‘I'll have it.’
The sisters were laughing quite gaily.
‘I knew you would.
I knew you would.’
Florence was moving from one foot to the other as she helped her off with the coat.
But it was Belle who said, ‘What about the hats?’
‘Yes, what about them?’
Her voice was full of laughter.
‘I'll take them both, but I want discount for buying two at once, mind.’
The laughter filled the room, it filled the shop, it even penetrated the wall into the tobacconist's shop and made Arthur Conway wonder if the three old girls next door had gone barmy or taken to the bottle early in the day, for it was said that they took wine with their dinner.
Yet, how far that was true, he didn't know.
The laughter had subsided, the ladies were folding the coat and dress and were about to lay it on a tissue-papered bed in a cardboard box, when Agnes said, ‘What size shoes does she take?
I can't wear rinking boots with that now, can I?’
Miss Florence and Miss Belle leant against each other, and Miss Rene, trying to quell her own laughter, admonished her sisters: ‘Stop spluttering, you two.
You'll splash the garment.’
Agnes's face too was wet with her laughter.
She dried her eyes, then said, ‘I've got to do some shopping.
I'll call back for my shipping order.’
After putting her hat and coat back on, she looked in the mirror, and she twisted her face up and stabbed her fingers towards her reflection as she said, ‘That isn't me!
From now on that isn't me.’
Then turning to them, she exclaimed, ‘You never told me what you wanted for the hats?’
‘Oh…oh, fifteen shillings for the two.
But we'll trim them up to match your outfit.’
‘Oh, no, no ; that isn't fair.
That felt was in the window last week for twelve and six and…and leghorns are always expensive.
And then there's the yards of ribbon to go round it.’
‘Take it or leave it.
Take it or leave it.’
Miss Rene went before her out of the storeroom, her hand waving in the air, and the other two sisters took it up chanting merrily: ‘Take it or leave it.
Take it or leave it.’
At the shop door they all stood around her, and she looked at them solemnly now and said, ‘Thank you so much.
You know, when I came from’— she thumbed towards the wall — next door, not more than half an hour ago, I was very sad inside.
Life appeared dull.
I couldn't see anything in it.
No bright light in the future, just the same thing day after day.
But, you know, you three dear people have changed all that: you've brought something new into my life with that beautiful dress and coat.’
She lifted her hand and pointed down the shop.
‘And you know, I've never said this, although I've thought it a lot: you've always been kind to me all down the years.
From when I was small, I used to run in here when I was miserable and you, Miss Belle, used to hold me.
And you, Miss Florence, used to take me upstairs and give me milk and a bun.
And, Miss Rene’— she paused here and put her hand out towards the eldest of the sisters —‘you gave me my first book, a book of poems.
Little Orphan Annie came to our house to stay
To chase the chickens from the porch and sweep the
crumbs away.’
Suddenly, she bent forward and kissed them one after the other.
Then, quickly she opened the door and went out and left them standing in a half circle, silent, no laughter on their faces now, just memories of what might have been if they had had a child like the little girl who used to run into them, and a daughter as she was now.
As Agnes hurried down the street it came to her that it had been tactless of her to talk about life being dull and with no bright future; for had they any bright future?
Were their lives not dull?
And yet, no, she didn't think so.
They were nearly always cheerful.
And it was known that they ate well and that they patronised the theatre, and the concerts in the City Hall in Newcastle.
It was also known that two of them had a day off together every week, besides Sunday.
Sometimes it was Miss Rene and Miss Belle, or Miss Belle and Miss Florence, or Miss Florence and Miss Rene.
They took turns.
And on these occasions they would visit the museums or take a trip to Durham, or travel down the river to Shields in the ferryboat.
No, their lives weren't dull.
And they had suddenly taken the dullness out of hers.
But the question was, when would she be able to wear those beautiful things?
Would there ever come an occasion when she could put them on, together with the leghorn hat, or the felt, and the new shoes that she would buy herself?
Would there?
She doubted it.
But never mind, she could look at them and touch them and dream.
The Hall
The room was brilliantly lit by the two wrought-iron gas chandeliers, each holding eight branched lamps, and by the four candelabra on the dining table, two placed at each side of the silver epergne.
There were seven people seated at the long table.
At the head was Colonel Hugh George Bellingham Farrier, retired, owing to a war wound.
At the other end of the table sat Grace May Farrier, his fair, tall, stately wife.
And to her right sat her eldest son, Reginald John Hugh Farrier: a replica of what his father had once been, a tall dark-haired, dark-eyed, handsome soldier.
He was twenty-nine years old, but looked much older.
On her left sat her second son, Henry George Farrier, twenty-eight, a newly fledged parson of the Church of England.
He was not as tall as his brother and had fair hair and grey eyes and his mother's complexion.
His face was round and his eyes merry.
At the Colonel's end of the table and to his right, sat his daughter, Elaine, who was the antithesis in appearance of her mother, being short and plump.
She was now Mrs Dawson-Porter, and the mother of three children.
On the Colonel's left sat his youngest son, Charles William Bellingham Farrier, who was twenty-five years old.
He was a little over medium height, with the same complexion and the same dark brown eyes and hair of his elder brother Reginald.
But where Reginald could be dubbed handsome, Charles was merely good looking.
But seated half-way down one side of the table and with no one opposite her sat an old lady.
No member of the family knew her exact age and whatever they might have guessed she would have denied flatly.
Esther Forester was the Colonel's half-sister, who was known affectionately in the family as Nessy.
And nobody had seen her real face for years, for it was heavily rouged and powdered from the top of her eyebrows to where her wrinkled skin disappeared into the bodice of her bright-red velvet evening gown.
And now she had one bony hand extended towards Charles at the top of the table and in it was her dinner fork with a piece of meat still speared on it.
And she wagged it at him, saying, ‘You are an infant.
You know nothing about women, my dear Charles.
They have been a power behind the scene for centuries, but now they're coming to the fore.
You mark my words.
You mark my words.’
When the piece of meat dropped from the fork everyone at the table exploded into laughter except the Colonel, who said, ‘Nessy! behave yourself.’
‘You be quiet, Hughie.
Grace has been the power behind your throne for years.
Time you were away playing toy soldiers, who do you think looked after this house and the estate?
And women all over the country are doing the same, and, all over the world.’
She now directed the fork towards Elaine, saying, ‘Look at this child, made to produce children like piglets every year and still no more than one herself.’
‘Here! here!
Aunt Nessy.
You're quite right, perfectly right.
What do you think I should do about it?’
‘Make a stand, girl.
Make a stand.
Give him an ultimatum.
Say no, or…’
It was Grace Farrier's voice now that cut in low but firm, ‘Nessy !’
There was another roar of laughter when the old lady, her voice changing, said, ‘All right, I will behave, not because you tell me to but because our dear Henry here will die of shock in a moment.’
'I'll do nothing of the sort, Aunt Nessy,’ the young parson said now.
‘You forget that I am the receiver of confessions.’
‘Oh my!
Yes, high church.
Why, in the name of God!
Why in the name of God! didn't you go over to Rome and be done with it.’
‘I just might in the end.
You never know.
I could graduate…’
‘Graduate, you call it?
My God!
If you knew some of the goings on of that lot in high places.’
‘Well, as I don't, tell me about the goings on, Aunt Nessy.
I'd love…’
‘Henry, you're as bad as she is.
Stop it!’
Henry looked down the table now and grinned at his mother as he said, ‘Yes, Mama.’
‘The quicker you get back to Paris the better, Nessy, for all concerned.’
The Colonel was nodding his head now towards his half-sister.
And she came back, saying, ‘All right, you stiff neck, I'll return tomorrow.’
‘You'll do no such thing,’ was the immediate and simultaneous response from different quarters.
And it was Charles who went on, ‘Don't you think you've done enough traipsing around the world?
Why don't you settle here?’
‘What!
Settle in England?
I wouldn't stay here if they offered me half of the Palace.
But this time when I go back I mean to stay and die there, because, let me tell you’— she wagged her finger first at the Colonel and then at Reginald —‘there's a time coming when there'll be no France and very little England, or any place else.’
‘What do you mean, Nessy?’
It was a quiet question from Reginald now; and she answered him as quietly: bending forward she looked up the table towards him as she said, ‘Strange things are happening.
I go through a lot of open doors in Paris and meet a lot of different people, and I can tell you there is a swift, black current running underneath all that smiling diplomacy.
William of Germany is an ambitious man, and there have been some stupid individuals on the throne here who cannot see further than their noses.
They sell their daughters abroad, and into what?
Royal slavery.
Oh yes, I know you're all shaking your heads, but it's true.
You're a lot of stick-in-the-muds.
Yes, you are, every one of you.
You can't see further than your noses; you never move out of this damn county.
When were you last abroad?’
She was now looking at Grace.
‘I was in Rome last year, Nessy.’
‘For how long?
Three weeks at an hotel with German waiters, half of them spies.’
‘Oh, be quiet!
Aunt Nessy,’ said Reginald now.
‘You must be reading too many of those French novelettes.
There's a number on the market now about Secret Service and spies and assassins and rebellions.’
There was silence at the table for a moment, until the old lady spoke again; ‘You've all forgotten the Boer War,’ she said, ‘although Hughie's carrying a bit of it in his leg.
And what do you think there are people like Reggie for, eh?
What do you think they're training you for, Reggie?’
She was now stabbing her finger towards him.
‘Not to play at soldiers with your men, or let them play in the band in the park on a Sunday afternoon.
They're training you for war.
And it'll come.
Oh yes, it'll come.
Greed must be satisfied.
Turkey's split.
Italy is helping herself to bits of it.
Bits, I say! she's taken Tripoli and the Islands.
And just November gone, Greece annexed Crete.
Everybody wants land, somebody else's.
One country has its eye on another.
And that comes down to the individual.
Remember our grandfather, Hughie, remember him?
He enclosed the green that had been open to the villagers for years, and he bought up Hooper's farm just to tack on his land, this land you're living on.’
‘That was all in the past, Aunt Nessy,’ Charles put in now.
‘We have a Liberal government.
Things couldn't be better for everybody, all round.
Changes are happening every day.’
‘Liberal government!’
The old lady's tone was a sneer in itself.
‘Gutless.
Really gutless.’
‘You would rather have the Conservatives in power?’
‘NO, I wouldn't.
They're another lot.
They're against change altogether, because they've got fingers in too many pies.
Like Lansdowne, with his estates in Ireland.
Now there's a hot-bed that's just waiting for an explosion.
The Conservatives want force, and by God!
I can see they'll get it from that quarter and before very long.
And it's nothing more than what they deserve, for they're a band of turncoats.
There's that Churchill, he was one of them.
But now what does he do?
He's joined the Liberal Party, and now he's a very important cog in the cabinet.
He's working under the new name too of humanitarian.
The latest is he's improving the prisons, and’— her head went back now and she laughed —‘he's wanting a law brought in for heavy sentences for incest.
‘Nessy!
Nessy !
Listen to me for a moment.’
Grace's tone was stern now.
‘This is a Christmas Eve dinner.
Have you forgotten that?
And you're not in Hyde Park, or in one of the boulevards in France, or sitting among half-starved artists in a garret in Paris.’
‘What do you know about half-starved artists in Paris?’
‘More than you would imagine, Nessy.
Remember, I spent three years of my youth there.’
‘Oh, yes, yes’— the old lady nodded from one to the other at the table now —‘in a crocodile, from the school to the church, from the school to the conciergerie, from the…’
She stopped now; then with a wicked grin on her face she added, ‘but never from the school to the Folies-Bergère, eh, Grace?’
‘You'd be surprised at that too, Nessy.’
The old lady now moved her shoulder to let George Banks, the butler, take her plate away and hand it to Patrick McCann, who was standing behind him, then to place before her a plate he had taken from the sideboard; and she, after looking down on it, turned her head up towards him and said, ‘Iced pudding, Banks?
Oh! that's my favourite.
You remembered.’
And Banks tactfully remarked, ‘Madam did, ma'am.’
‘You're a very thoughtful woman, Grace.’
She nodded to her sister-in-law.
‘And I'll have another glass of wine, Hughie.’
She now addressed the Colonel.
‘You've had three already.’
‘Well, are you rationing them?’
‘No, but knowing you, if you go over your limit we'll have to tie you down before carrying you upstairs to bed.’
‘I've never been carried upstairs to bed.
Oh, I'm telling a lie.
Yes, I have, many a time.’
She giggled now and Charles, with a twinkle in his eyes, said, ‘Who's your latest gentleman friend, Aunt Nessy?
I mean, what nationality?’
‘Ah, let me see.’
The old lady dug her spoon into the iced concoction, took a mouthful of it, rolled it round her mouth, swallowed it and said, ‘Mm! nice.’
Then looking again at Charles, she replied, ‘He was a German.
Yes, yes.’
She tapped her brow with her forefinger.
‘Yes, of course, he was a German.
The Germans are very stiff lovers; he didn't last long.’
Whether it was the throaty sound from the two man-servants or whether it was Reginald and Charles visibly choking, or Henry bowing his head, that caused the Colonel to bellow, ‘If you can't behave yourself, Nessy, you will leave the table!’
‘If you make me leave the table, Hughie, I shall go straight down into the kitchen.
I always find good company in kitchens, and I know from experience I'll have a welcome down below.
What do you say, Banks?
And you, McCann?’
She leant her painted face back to look at the two men standing at the sideboard, and it said much for George Banks who, turning to the old lady, said, ‘I feel you would always be welcome in whatever company you choose, ma'am.’
‘There you are, Hughie, you're very lucky, you have a diplomat for a butler.
No one could have answered better.’
But now, looking across at Charles again, she said, ‘To give you the end of the answer to your question.
Of all the men of different nationalities I've met and of all types, I have found good and bad in each, but my favourite still remains the Frenchman, because he can lie so convincingly.
He can make you believe you are the only woman on earth for him, and only a Frenchman out of all the men in the world could look at me and tell me to my face that I am beautiful.
What more could any woman want?’
This did not create the laughter she had intended.
And now Charles said quietly, ‘Well, as an Englishman, Aunt Nessy, I find you not only a beautiful woman, but an amusing and brilliant one.
And if I had to choose a companion to be with me down the years I would take you as a pattern.’
The old lady didn't answer for a moment, and before she did the wrinkles on her neck moved under the effect of her swallowing, and then she said simply, ‘Thank you, Charles.’
There was a moment of silence, and then the old lady, her tone returning to normal, looked at Grace as she said, ‘Now, Grace, when the meal is over and there's all this tosh about the ladies rising so the men can enjoy their port and cigars, here's one who is staying behind because I'm dying for a cigarette.
And knowing the rules, you don't allow smoking in the drawing room.
So if you'll excuse me, I'll join you both later.’
‘Well,’ put in Elaine now, ‘I'd better get upstairs and help Nannie to get the tribe to sleep, because they're so excited.’
When Grace Farrier rose from the table, the men rose with her, and when, a few minutes later, she entered the drawing room she sat down with a sigh, for she was wondering how long Aunt Nessy's stay would be this time.
It was usually a fortnight; she liked to see the New Year in.
She hoped it wouldn't be longer; she hoped it would be less, for as dear as Aunt Nessy was, she always brought a feeling of change and unrest into this quiet and well-ordered household.
It always took some time after her departure to get back into the old routine again…into the old pleasant routine.
The Colonel and his wife had retired to their rooms.
Reginald and Henry were having a game of billiards.
But Charles and Elaine were sitting on the rug before the open wood fire in the drawing room.
They were sitting as they had done as children years ago, Elaine with her legs tucked under her, Charles with his arms round his knees.
For support they both leant against the seat of an armchair.
Elaine's elbow was resting on the edge of hers and her hand was supporting her head.
She was saying, ‘You say you have no intention of marrying.
But what about Isobel Pickering?
I understood from Mama…’
‘That's Mama's idea, Elaine, not mine.
Anyway, as you know, we were almost brought up in the same bassinet, and, as I made out to Mama just a short while ago, if Isobel had to choose between the horse and me, the horse would come out best.’
‘Yes, I think it would.
Anyway, you're better off as you are: you're a free agent and I can't see you married, somehow.
You'll likely end up as a male Aunt Nessy.
Huh!’
She laughed now.
‘Isn't she a character?
I wonder how many men she's really gone through?
It's a pity her two husbands left her so well off that she hasn't had to worry about money.
If she'd had to struggle to write, as you're trying to do…’
‘Thanks, for the…trying.’
‘Well, you know what I mean.
But anyway, with her mind, and I understand she did write at one time, she would have made an impression in some quarter or other.’
‘I think she's made impressions in many quarters.
Reggie gets about, as you know, and he says it's amazing the doors, just as you said, that are open to her, and not only in Paris but in London too.
She's well known in diplomatic circles, and she's quite right in all she said at dinner, and although I contradicted her, there are strange rumours of war going around.
And as Reg says, she's not as dizzy as she sounds.
Of course, I've never thought her dizzy; I've always admired her, and I wish I had a little of her grey matter.’
‘Oh, you've got enough of your own.
You'll get there in the end.’
She now twisted round and stretched her feet outward across the rug, saying, ‘How many years ago is it since we sat like this, Charles?’
He put his head back, thinking, then said, ‘Not since you were married.’
‘No, not since I was married.’
She leant forward now and picked up a log of wood and threw it into the centre of the glowing ashes.
And when it sprayed sparks almost to the edge of the wide hearth he made no comment, such as, ‘Be careful.
You'll have the rug on fire,’ but said unexpectedly, ‘Are you unhappy, Elaine?’
For a moment she didn't answer him; then, supporting herself on her elbows in the seat of the chair, she said, ‘The answer is, yes and no.’
‘Is it Dawson?’
‘Again you could say the answer is yes and no.
Oh, he is, I suppose, the usual run as husbands go, but Charles…’
She now bent forward towards him and said under her breath, ‘I've been married five years, Charles, and I've been five times pregnant.
Dawson is a breeder; I'm his heifer.’
‘Oh, Elaine; don't talk like that.’
‘It's true.
It's true.’
She thrust out her jaw, pursed her lips and in a deep voice said, ‘Come on old girl, up the golden stairs; let's hit the hay.’
And her voice changing to a sad tired note, she added, ‘I was twenty, you know, Charles, when I married.
And as you remember I was a silly young twenty.
I hadn't even flirted properly.
I was naive.
I still believed the chatter of the dormitory; I was there till I was eighteen: marriage would be fun; husbands were adorable creatures.
And too, I had Father for a pattern: he adores Mama, and she him.
But of the two I think there is more love on his side; Mama is inclined to be cool.
So when Dawson came on the scene and swept me off my feet, as the expression goes, I half jumped into his arms.
He was big and burly, and isn't it known that all big and burly men are…gentle giants.
Not that he's cruel in any way, he's just thoughtless.
He's a big, ignorant, horse-mad farmer.
He couldn't even leave the stables to accompany us here over Christmas.
He never has, has he?
Oh yes, once, yes once; but it wasn't a success.
Do you know, Charles?
I don't think he's ever read a book in his life.
Well, perhaps he was forced to at school, but not since.
And another thing, he's thirteen years older than me.
Oh, don't look so sad, Charles, but you're the only one I can talk to.’
‘What about Mama?’
‘Oh, somehow I…
I couldn't talk to Mama in the same way as I'm doing now.
You know something?
When I had the two miscarriages — you didn't know about the miscarriages, did you, Charles?’
‘No.
I was going to ask you about…well, five pregnancies.’
‘I said pregnancies, because I lost one at four months and another at six months.
All Mama said was, ‘Don't dwell on it.
It will be all right next time.’
As for Dawson, he almost ignored it, and me for a time.
I wasn't breeding according to the stud book.’
‘Oh, you're exaggerating, my dear.’
‘Oh, no, I'm not, Charles.
No, I'm not.
And you know I'm not.
Because you never liked Dawson, did you?’
‘Well’— he turned his head away —‘I thought he was too old for you.
You see, I was only nineteen and you were my only sister, and we had always been pals.
No, you're right, I never liked him.
And I must say this to you: if you feel as you do, how can you go on?
Why don't you leave him?
You could come home.’
‘Don't be silly, Charles.
What happens to a woman who leaves her husband anyway?
It's always her fault, isn't it?
And do you think he'd let me have the children?
He's got John riding every day, and the child is only four.
And Grace, too, has her pony.
He doesn't show much interest in Arthur because Arthur cries all the time.
He blames Thompson for this.
He says she's too young for the job.
She's twenty-three and has been nursing babies since she was fourteen.
I said to him, if she can't do anything about Arthur's crying, no one can.’
‘Well, I haven't heard him cry here.’
‘No, that's strange.
A whole week and he's never cried at nights.
Thompson remarked on it, too.
Of course, it might be the different milk.’
She turned her head aside now, saying, ‘I've made you miserable.’
‘You certainly haven't made me feel happy.’
‘Well, forget it.
Where are you going for your holidays next year?’
‘I haven't thought.’
‘Florence again?’
‘Yes, maybe.’
‘You should write a book about that.
You were eighteen when you first went there, weren't you?
And you've been back every year since.
Is that what put you on to this business of writing about old houses?’
‘Yes, perhaps.
But I'd been interested in old houses long before that.’
‘Well, you won't find anything about here like the Medici Villa at Cafaggiolo.
And those hunting lodges that took your fancy.’
‘Perhaps not, but then I'm not writing about the ancient world.
I find it hard enough to do descriptions of today.
But you know, you'd be amazed at the number of castles, manor houses and halls in the North here.
Northumberland is studded with them.
Even Fellburn, four miles away, has some fine old eighteenth-century houses tucked quietly up alleys.’
He stopped speaking as the drawing room door opened and his brothers entered.
Reginald had discarded his officer's uniform that he had worn at dinner and was now dressed in ordinary dark trousers and a blue-velvet smoking jacket.
But Henry, on the other hand, was still attired in his clerical outfit, and as he came in licking his fingers Charles cried at him, ‘Are you still eating, man?’
‘Well it's a long time since dinner.
It's close on twelve and it was only one of those little mice…’
‘Oh you haven't taken them off the tree?’
‘Just from the back, Elaine; it couldn't be seen, in any case.’
‘You're a pig, that's what you are, Henry.’
‘No, I'm not, Elaine; I'm an underfed vicar's assistant.’
‘That'll be the day,’ said Reginald, ‘when you are underfed.
Anyway, I meant to ask you, how have you wangled this leave?’
‘I told you.
I had an operation on the appendix, swift and sudden.
Here one minute and nearly at the golden gates the next.
‘But that was three weeks ago, I understand.’
‘Yes, I know.
But you see, the Reverend has a distant relative whom he means to put in my place and so I was granted sick leave over the holiday in order that his dear Jonathan could come and assist him with the Christmas services.
I love the Christmas services, but I didn't argue with him because I know he means to get rid of me one way or another.
The trouble is, we don't see eye to eye, or, more correctly, our minds move in different channels.
He's a snob.
He would charge for every pew in the church except those that are placed behind pillars.
Not that I'm against paid pews for those that can afford them, but in moderation.
And he doesn't like my form of questioning, as when I asked him if he believed that the gates of heaven could only be opened by gold and silver keys?
And did he think there was a clerk up there that went into one's ancestry?’
They were all laughing now as Charles said, ‘You didn't?’
‘Oh I did, Charlie, I did.
It's the only way you can get at him.
He's one of these suave individuals who won't argue.’
‘And what answers did he give you?
Satisfactory ones?’
Reginald asked.
Henry licked his finger, then rubbed it against his trouser leg.
It was such a childish action that they all laughed again before he said, while striking a pose, ‘You have a lot to learn Mr Farrier.’
And he laughed himself as he ended, ‘But he didn't add, ‘and the best way you'll learn it is to travel from one parish to another, and that's what you're going to do as soon as I can arrange it.’
So, with a bit of luck I shall be leaving the Midlands and returning to grubby old Gateshead or Sunderland, thanks be to God.’
‘Oh!
Henry, you know what you are?’
Elaine was looking up at him, her face wide with laughter now, and he, looking down at her, said, ‘Yes, Elaine, I know what I am: one of God's idiots.’
‘What on earth made you take the cloth, anyway?’ said Reginald as he squatted down at Elaine's side.
The three of them looked at the dark-dressed figure of their brother, his head back, as he stared at the huge oil painting of highland cattle hanging on the broad stone wall of the fireplace, and he answered, ‘I don't know, Reggie.
I don't know.
I've asked myself that question time and again.
I would say I drifted into it, but that wouldn't be true.
It seems, on looking back, one day I was outside and then the next day I was in, as if I'd had nothing to do with it: I had been pushed or drawn or whatever you like.
Oh’— his hand bounced now —‘why bother?
I'm in, and that's all there is about it.’
He now grinned; then looked from Elaine to Charles and said, ‘You know, you two used always to be sitting like this whenever you got the chance.
What d'you talk about?’
It was Charles who answered quietly, ‘Oh, about times past when we were young and silly and, at Christmas, what we were going to get in our stockings.
And would Father get a surprise when he opened his box of cigars, and Mama her perfume?
It was the same every year, wasn't it?’
He looked around, as it were, for confirmation, and they all nodded.
Then Elaine said, ‘Do you remember we used to go out with Mama and buy Father's cigars, and then go out with Father — he would take us into Newcastle and we would get Mama's perfume.
And we were reminded of this last week when, in making our way up from the quay, we passed this sweet shop and there were the sugar mice in the window, and the cat, and that's why we went in and bought some.
‘Oh, I meant to tell you.’
Charles pointed towards her now.
‘You know there was a tobacconist next door?
Well, I called in there today for cigars and I saw this young woman; and you remember the one that was in the sweet shop, she was so nice and obliging; well I thought I was looking at her twin.
She was dressed differently but it was the same face, the same hair, the same pleasant manner, and I said to her, well I put it to her, was she a twin?
And she said, no.
The long and the short of it is, her father owns the two shops — I suppose they're joined at the back — and she was standing in for her father.
That was odd, wasn't it?’
‘Yes.’
Elaine nodded at him.
‘It was odd.
Did she know as much about cigars as she did about sweets?’
‘Yes, she was quite knowledgeable.
But her father came in and oh, he was knowledgeable too and he let one know it.
Had he been quite sober I'm sure he wouldn't have talked so much.’
‘He was tight?’
Charles looked at Reginald: ‘Nearly so,’ he said; ‘he smelt strongly of it and his tongue was very loose, trying to impress.’
‘Was she pretty?’
‘You mean, the girl, the young woman?’
Charles bit on his lower lip and looked to the side as if there he would find the answer to the question; then shook his head, saying, ‘You know, I couldn't say.’
‘No, she wasn't pretty.’
The three brothers looked at their sister, and she went on, ‘She had an interesting face that could be beautiful.
She could never be just pretty; she was, well, rather vivacious in a subdued sort of way.’
‘D'you mean to say, Elaine, that you took more notice of her than he did?’
Henry was now thumbing towards Charles.
‘Or is he just playing safe?
I bet you thought she was beautiful,’ He was now giving his whole attention to Charles, who said, ‘If you say so, Henry, then it must be right.
But if I recall, my impression was, she was a nice person.’
‘That's something to start on.’
‘Oh, don t take that tack, Reg.
‘Why not?
There are some very smart shop-girls.’
‘She's not a shop-girl as such.
Her father, as I told you, owns the place.’
‘Well, she serves in the shop, in both of them, by what you say.
So, she's a shop-girl.’
‘Now, Reg, I know what mood you're in.
You washed your dinner down very well and, after, you almost drowned yourself in port.
Now if you want to argue about shop-girls, you take on Henry here.
He must know a lot about shop-girls from his experience in his industrial parish.
But here's someone who's going to bed.
How about you, Elaine?’
He got to his feet and held out his hand, as also did Reginald, towards Elaine and, together they pulled her to her feet.
And, looking from one to the other, she now said, ‘Goodnight, fellows, and a happy Christmas.’
‘And to you, sis.’
And one after the other they kissed her on the cheek.
Then she, linking an arm in one of Charles's, left with him, and as the door closed on them Henry looked at Reginald and said, ‘Elaine's changed.
She's not happy any more.’
‘What makes you say that?’
‘Oh, just practice, I suppose, looking at people, listening to them.’
Reginald now moved a step towards his brother and, putting an arm around his shoulder, he said, ‘You're a funny old stick, you know, Henry.
You always have been.’
‘Don't you be so damn patronising, Reginald Farrier.
And not so much of the old stick.
And let me tell you, you pompous individual, that there are more wars to be fought than those with guns.
And I'll tell you something else while I'm on: if I were you I'd go easy on the women.
Oh, don't pull that face; I hear things.
I was at the Combeses' yesterday, and the Hammonds were there.
Sarah's not very pleased with you.
You took her pet lamb Joseph out on a spree, didn't you?
And then there's Frances Combes.
Why has she turned down David Pickering?
Ma and Pa Pickering tried to probe, but I was sorry I couldn't help them.
I think, dear boy, the quicker you get back to your regiment the better.’
‘Well, I'll be damned!’
Reginald now pushed Henry none too gently in the shoulder.
‘You are an old snooper, aren't you?’
‘No, I am not.
That is something I am not.
But because of the cloth’— he now pulled at the front of his collarless coat —‘they either think that one isn't quite human and is devoid of all these naughty feelings that trouble an ordinary man, or they imagine you hold all the answers.
And then there's the inn at Fellburn.
You're not a stranger there, either, are you?
And don't you recall the ribbing you got off Father when you were fifteen and were caught in there with a girl…or was it a woman?
And he got you into the coach by putting his toe in your backside, and he was only stopped from horsewhipping you by Mama's gentle persuasion.
So when referring to me in future, dear brother, remember that although I wear the cloth, Henry George Farrier is still underneath it.’
‘Well!
Well!
You know, you've always surprised me, Henry.
Here's me taking you for a prancing little parson when all the while the cloth is a covering for a frustrated sex maniac.’
‘Oh!’
Henry flapped his hand at his brother.
‘You know where you can go to, boy, and take your shovel with you.’
As Henry turned away and walked down the room Reginald bellowed with laughter; and when his brother reached the door he shouted, ‘Happy Christmas!
Rev.’ at which Henry turned and quietly now and in his jovial manner, he said, ‘And to you, Reg.
And God bless you.’
Reginald remained in the middle of the room staring at the closed door for a moment; then, his head making small jerks, he turned towards the fire and, leaning his elbow along the mantelshelf, he looked down into the dying embers.
Go easy on the women, Henry had said; whereas what he should have said was, ‘Tell the women to keep off you.’
Yes, to give him the chance to find the right one, the one that would stir him in such a way that he felt he couldn't do without her.
Some feeling like that which had attacked Jim Nesbitt last year and made him marry that girl in Durham, who, to his mind, had nothing going for her.
Plain as a pikestaff, really, even prominent front teeth; yet, he had been unbearable until he got her; and now, as Jim himself said, he felt like a lame dog who had found a wonderful home.
He thought it was a very strange simile, because he had never looked upon Jim as a lame dog, more like a gay dog.
Then there was Arnold, Arnold Beaumont.
After losing his wife he had nearly gone to pieces; yet they had been married six years.
Surely he should have been over the romantic stage by then.
But no; he almost left the regiment.
It had been difficult to convince him that such a step would be the worst one he could take.
And when the colonel himself seemed to have taken matters into his own hands by delegating him to a job that tired him out day after day, week after week, it seemed they had been successful.
But not so, not entirely.
What was it that these two friends of his felt for women that had never touched him?
Was there something wrong with him?
When he came to think of it, was there something wrong with the three of them?
Charles was avoiding marriage like the plague, and Henry had taken on the cloak of religion.
And yet parsons got married.
But he couldn't see that happening to Henry.
They all seemed, in a way, to be avoiding the main issue of life.
Yet, look at their parents: there was a love match, if ever there was one.
Even his father's ice-cum-iron exterior had never been able to hide the feeling he had for his wife.
Well, there was one thing sure: whatever that feeling was he hadn't passed it on to even one of his three sons.
But what about his daughter?
Henry seemed to think she wasn't happy.
But she had three children, yet that didn't really signify anything: cows had calves, horses had foals, pigs had litters.
Man wasn't very far removed from the animal in that sense.
It didn't need love to create; for then the population would surely be very much reduced.
No; it was a particular feeling that seemed to be lacking in the three of them.
He started slightly when he heard McCann say, ‘Oh, I'm sorry, sir.
I thought you…you had all retired.’
‘I'm sorry too, McCann, for keeping you up.’
He moved from the fireplace.
‘Not at all, sir, not at all .
It's Christmas Eve and everybody's been busy.
But doesn't the tree look splendid, sir?’
‘Yes.
Yes, it does.
The children will be delighted with it in the morning, and they'll have us all up before breakfast, I've no doubt.
Well, good night, McCann.’
‘Good night, sir, and a happy Christmas.’
‘And the same to you.
The same to you.’
McCann stood to the side until Reginald had left the room; he then put the chairs back in place, puffed up the feather cushions on the chesterfield, rearranged the small tables, swept the ash from around the hearth, brought a straight iron fireguard and placed it before the fire.
Only then did he stand with his back to the fireplace and look about the room.
He liked this room: it was splendid yet comfortable.
He liked his employment.
He liked the family: they were a fine lot.
He was lucky to have a job like this.
He really had fallen on his feet, and if only Jane would look more kindly on him, they'd both be set for life.
Of course he was thirteen years older than her, she being but twenty; but then she would take into consideration that he was the footman and it was a splendid rise for her from kitchen maid.
Then, of course, if Rose Pratt were to leave because of her rheumatics, and she being forty-five, there was a chance that Jane would move upwards.
Not that he wished any harm to Rose, and it wasn't as if she would be on her own because, being the wife of Peter, and he the stable man, she was well set in their cottage.
Oh, life was good.
But it could be better, and it was promising to be so; and for every member in the household, God bless them, for there were never a better master nor mistress.
They gave you your place, yes they did, they gave you your place; and you gave them theirs; and that was how things should be.
As he turned out the gas jet he whistled to himself.
Jessie
‘Don't say it, Jessie.
Don't say it.’
Agnes actually put her hands over her ears as she looked at Jessie sitting close to her on the edge of the bed.
Her sister's head was bowed and her hands, clasped tightly into fists, were resting on her knees.
‘You must be mad, insane,’ Agnes almost yelled at her, only to clap a hand over her mouth and glance towards the door as if expecting it to open and her mother to appear; and for a while there was silence between them, except for the slight moaning sound coming from Jessie.
‘They'll go mad.
They won't stand for it.’
Agnes's voice was so low that it was hardly audible to herself; it was as if her thoughts had escaped and were afraid of their own sound.
Following another brief silence, she said, ‘When…when did this happen?
I mean…?’
‘Over…over two months ago.’
Jessie's head was still bowed and her hands still clenched.
My God in heaven!
Agnes said the words to herself, her mind telling her that this was the end of June and her sister must have been carrying this dreadful secret since…when?
Sometime in April.
Why hadn't she noticed the change in her?
Why hadn't she questioned her about her constant visits to the lavatory first thing in the morning?
Her mother had questioned her lack of appetite.
Her father had questioned the lack of gaiety in their pretty daughter.
Her mother had given herself the answer to her question: girls these days didn't know what they wanted.
And her father's answer to the question given himself had been: those tests at the secretarial college were making his daughter nervy; and the quicker they were over the better.
But in the main her mother had continued to live in her own world and her father in his, and she herself had been waging an inward war of words against the narrowness of her existence and with no hope of seeing a way out: she had given the final ‘no’ to Henry Stalwort and convinced Peter Chambers that it was useless him thinking she would change her mind.
And after she had done the latter?
All she had experienced was a new emptiness.
The only excitement in her life now seemed to be the exchange of clothes for hats by Mrs Bretton-Fawcett.
She now had three of that lady's outfits in the wardrobe and there had not yet been an occasion on which she could wear one of them: the last one had been a winter coat sporting a large fur collar, and the previous one, as Miss Belle called it, an afternoon tea gown.
Why had she bought them?
She didn't really know.
Perhaps because she liked the feel of the material; perhaps because they opened up a glimpse of another world…
She didn't know.
‘Aggie.’
Jessie was sitting up straight now, the tears running down her face, and she asked as a child might, ‘What am I going to do?’
Agnes again stopped herself from yelling, ‘How do I know!’ and she was about to say, ‘You should have thought about this before,’but this would have been a stupid reply, for when that urge was tearing at your body and there was a way of getting rid of it, would one stop to think?
No.
No, one wouldn't.
Suddenly she put her arms out and pulled the young girl to her; and when Jessie's sobs rose she warned her quickly, ‘Be quiet!
Be quiet!
You'll have her in, or, worse still, Father.
We've got to think.
Where is he, this…this fellow, Felton?’
And when the muttered reply, ‘He's…he's gone on a trip to try and make some money so we could…could get married,’ came from her shoulder, she pushed Jessie upwards, saying, ‘Oh my God !’
‘Oh, Agnes, don't say it like that.’
‘How do you want me to say it then?
If he was here this minute I would feel like killing him.
Does he know?’
‘Yes.
Yes.’
‘Oh, well then, that trip could go on for years.
You've seen the last of him.’
‘Oh, no, I haven't!
I haven't !’
Jessie pulled herself away from Agnes and further along the bed: ‘He loves me and I love him.’
‘Jessie.
I'm afraid you'll have to wake up to the fact that that kind of man from that kind of a family wouldn't know the meaning of love.’
She was surprised when Jessie sprang to her feet, saying ‘You know nothing about him.
He's different, he's different from the rest of them.’
‘Well, he would have to be, wouldn't he? because it was in the papers only last week that one of them was sent along the line to Durham for fighting.
Actual bodily harm, it said.
And another of them has just come out after doing time for burglary.’
‘He's not like that, I tell you.
He's not like them.’
Jessie's voice was now a vibrant hiss.
‘He wants to break away.
He means to.
He's rough, yes, but…but he's got ideas.
Given the chance, he could get on.
As he says, he's never had a chance.
There's six of them older than him, and his mother.
She's the ringleader; the father's dead.
You don't know him.
You'll have to meet him and talk with him.’
‘I'm doing no such thing .
And I'll say it again, I'll be surprised if you ever see him or talk to him again.
Anyway, let's stop arguing about his merits.
Sit yourself down here’— she pointed to the bed —‘and let's work out what's to be done.’
When Jessie was again seated and her anger was deflated, Agnes said, ‘How…how far is it, really?’ and Jessie drooped her head as she muttered, ‘Three months or so, and it's beginning to be…be prominent.’
‘Well, in that case, you've got to come into the open.’
‘I'm…
I'm frightened, Aggie.
More so of Father than of Mother.
What she'll be worried about is the talk in the street and around, but Father, I…
I just daren't think.’
‘Nor do I, Jessie.
Nor do I.’
‘Will…will you tell them?’
‘One of us will have to, and I suppose it had better be me.
But be prepared for Mother wanting to get rid of you, put you out or hide you, in some way.
You must look out for that reaction.
But I've no idea what can prepare you for Father's reactions.
No, I haven't.’
‘You…you could tell him that I…
I'm going to be married.’
‘Oh, don't be silly, Jessie.
Don't rely on that.
All right, all right ; don't get on your high horse.
But anyway, saying to Father that you, who are the apple of his eye, and in whom he considers he's bred a lady, telling him that you hope to marry one of the Feltons, the quay Feltons.
Oh, my goodness!
He'll go down there and fight the lot of them.
He'll be capable of doing murder.
By the way, when do you expect…him back?’
‘In a fortnight's time, or perhaps a day or so before; it all depends on the weather.’
Agnes sighed, then bit on the front of her forefinger before she turned to Jessie again and said, ‘Look; if you're so sure he'll turn up, we'll say nothing for the time being.
You can lace up tight for the next couple of weeks and try to act normal.
And then if he's serious in marrying you, my advice to you would be to skip off and do it.
Once the deed is done Father couldn't do anything about it, especially if you're away from the town.
Oh, yes, you'd have to be away from the town.
Well, that's all I can think of at the moment.
But if he doesn't come…’
‘He will.
He will, I tell you .
‘All right, all right ; don't get excited.
Go and wash your face in the basin’— she pointed —‘and comb your hair, and do try to act as usual.
By the way, have you any money saved up?’
‘About…about eight pounds.’
‘That won't get you very far.’
‘Well, you know I only get five shillings pocket money; he pays for everything.’
‘Has that boy…that man any money?’
‘Just…just what he earns.
I think, though, his mother is well off; but…but she's an awful woman, loud-mouthed.’
‘Have you met her?’
‘No, but I went down to the quay one Sunday and I heard her.
She was at a stall; they sell all kinds of things.
She's a dreadful-looking woman, big, fat, and her voice is more like a man's.’
‘Well, you'll not get much welcome from that quarter, will you?’
‘I don't want it.
Neither does Rob.’
A voice came from the corridor calling, ‘Agnes!’
Agnes pushed Jessie towards the basin, hissing, ‘Stay there!’ then hurried out of the room to meet her mother in the corridor, the while calling, ‘I'm coming.
I'm coming.’
‘What are you up to?
You know you are due down in the shop.
And then there's the linen to change in the house.’
‘Mother.’
Agnes stood directly in front of her mother now as she said, ‘Would it do you any harm either to go down into the shop or to go over to the house and change the linen?
One or the other?’
‘Don't you dare speak to me like that, Agnes.
This is your duty.
Your father pays you and pays you well for your work.
Where would you get fifteen shillings a week and board and lodgings?’
‘My God!
Mother.’
She put up her hand, palm vertical.
‘Don't say another word, else I'll go back into that room and pack my case and be away.
Do you hear me?’
‘Well, that wouldn't altogether surprise me because I know you're up to something, buying second-hand clothes from those dotty old maids next door.
And what good are they going to be to you?
You can never wear them.’
‘You never know , Mother; I may one day move up into society.
Surprising things happen.’
‘Don't talk rot, girl.
And I'm telling you, don't speak to me in that fashion or I'll have to have a word with your father.’
‘Oh, do that, do that, Mother.
And he'll have a word back at you.’
Alice Conway turned about and walked down the corridor, her hands spread out as if in appeal, her head bobbing as she said, ‘What's come over people?
What's happening to this house?’ and Agnes, as she made her way to the linen cupboard, called back over her shoulder, ‘You've got the answer to that, Mother, if you dare to face up to it,’which left Alice Conway open-mouthed and dumb.
A few minutes later Agnes was hurrying across the yard with the fresh linen in her arms, making for the house at the end of the square, when a man passing along the pavement glanced at her, then stopped and, raising his hat, said, ‘Good afternoon,’ and stepped towards her.
‘Good…good afternoon.’
‘I…
I haven't seen you in the shop for some time.
Have you been unwell?’
‘No.’
She blinked her eyes, then shook her head before repeating, ‘No.
But very often I'm…
I'm in the factory.’
She pointed next door to the house in front of which she was now standing and said, ‘That is where we make most of our sweets.’
‘Oh, that's interesting.’
Then he looked at the linen she was holding across her arms, and she followed his gaze and said, as she motioned her hand towards the door, ‘This…this is our house too.
We let it for short terms to captains and such like.’
‘Oh really?
You have quite an expansive business one way and another.’
‘Yes.
Yes, we have.’
She hitched the linen further up into her arms.
‘It's been wonderful weather of late, hasn't it?
Everybody is still crying out for rain; no one is ever satisfied.’
He smiled broadly; and she smiled back at him, saying, ‘No; you can't please everyone.’
When she again hitched the linen up to ease its weight, he said, ‘Well, I must be going.
It's been very nice meeting you again.
I…
I may see you in the shop one of these days.’
‘Yes.
Yes.
Good afternoon.’
‘Good afternoon.’
It was she who turned away first and when she rested her arm against the wall to support the linen whilst she put the key in the lock, he came forward, saying eagerly, ‘Let me.’
And she let him turn the key and open the door.
And when she straightened up and went to take the key from the lock his hand was there before hers, and as he handed the key back to her, he said on a laugh, ‘I see you don't intend to be locked in from the outside.’
She said nothing, but looked at him.
His face was not more than a foot away from hers and his dark brown eyes were smiling into hers.
She didn't smile back, but said again, ‘Thank you.’
And as she stepped forward into the room, he stepped backwards into the yard and, raising his hat he again said, ‘Well, good afternoon,’ to which she also replied, ‘Good afternoon.’
After closing the door, she stood leaning against it, the linen now pressed against her body, her hands crossed over it.
She found she was breathing deeply, almost gasping.
Then, pulling herself upright, she moved across the little sitting room and to the stairs that went straight up from the corner of the room.
In the bedroom above she dropped the linen onto a chair; then, going to the window, she stood looking out, as she usually did, over the chimney pots towards the river.
But she wasn't seeing the chimney pots or the river; what she was seeing were the clothes in her wardrobe, those beautiful clothes.
And she asked herself why she should be thinking about those now, which seemed to bring forth other questions: Who was he?
What was his name?
Where was he from?
Some place quite near, she imagined.
He had said he hadn't seen her in the shop, so he must have called in on occasions when Ann would be in the sweet shop and Arthur Peeble in the tobacconist's or her father was there taking Peeble's place; he rarely served in the sweet shop.
Will he come again?
When would he come again?
Oh, woman!
She swung round from the window.
Hadn't she enough to think about?
There was Jessie.
Oh my God!
Yes, Jessie.
And whichever way she looked at Jessie's case there was going to be trouble, deep trouble, awful trouble, frightening trouble.
Tommy Grant placed the big, round, iron, copper-lined sugar pan on the side of the stove, straightened his back as far as it would go; then, turning to the bench, he pointed to the five tin trays of liquid toffee, saying, ‘That should give us a fresh start in the mornin', miss.
At least, those two imps of Satan will get their hands in straightaway instead of wasting their time jabbering.’
‘Oh, Tommy, you know that Betty and Doris don't get the chance to waste much time under you.
And by the way, remember what we talked about the other day?
That pan is getting too heavy for you.
Now, now, now! no more denials.
I'm going to talk to Father.
You want a sturdy young fellow here not only to lift that but also those sacks of sugar and such.’
‘Miss, you listen to me.
When the time comes an' I can't lift a hundredweight of sugar or me old black pan, then it'll be time for me to retire upstairs for good.’
‘Well, you should have done it a long time ago; you need a rest.’
‘I'll get a long, long rest when I get in me box, miss.
An' I'm not lookin' forward to it, I can tell you, 'cos they won't let me take me pan with me.’
He grinned at her.
‘Go on with you!
Get upstairs.
I'm going to lock up.’
‘I can do that, miss.’
‘Oh, I know what happens when you lock up.
Look; it's a quarter to nine now, you'll be here till a quarter to ten fiddling around.
Go on, get yourself away.’
She shooed him, and the old man, laughing now, obeyed her, saying, ‘You're gettin' as bossy as your dad.’
She waited until he had passed through the door that led to the stairs; then she covered up the trays of now cooling toffee, put a saucer of milk down for the cat, stroked the animal's purring head, saying the while, ‘Now you get to work, Flotsie, and put your score up tonight,’ then she went out, and locked the door.
The weather had changed.
Earlier in the day it had been raining, now there was a high wind blowing.
She bent her head into it as she crossed the yard, only to lift it up sharply as she heard a voice saying, ‘Psst!
Psst!’ then, ‘Miss!’and to see a young man stepping from the side of the coalhouse where he had evidently been waiting.
As he came towards her her hand went to her throat, and he said, ‘It's all right.
It's all right.
It's me, Robbie Felton.
I only want a word.’
Her mind was galloping.
Jessie was right: he had come back, but much sooner than she expected.
Jessie had said a fortnight, but it was only nine days since she had broken the awful news to her.
He said, ‘You're her sister, I know.
She's talked a lot about you.
Can…can I see her, miss?’
He spoke in a thick Northern Geordie dialect and, listening to it, she asked herself how Jessie could ever have come to love this young fellow?
In a rough kind of way he was good-looking, but he was heavily built and looked an aggressive type.
She heard herself gabbling now, ‘You should be ashamed of yourself.
Do you know what you have done to my sister?
She's…she's in a state.
There'll be great trouble for her.
Do you know that?’
‘Aye, I know that, miss.
And aye, I know what I've done to her.
And I know what she's done to me an' all.’
‘What could she have done to you?’
‘Well, it's hard to explain, miss, hard to explain.
She's made me think, think differently about…about gettin' on an' that, betterin' mesel'.
An'…an' that's why I want to marry her.
Well, don't just want to, I mean to.
‘Have you thought what her father will say…and her mother?’
‘Aye, I've thought of that.
I know they won't consider me her kind, her havin' been to a fancy school, an' the typin' stuff an' all.
But if she was marryin' one of her own kind she wouldn't get anybody to care for her any better than me.
An' anyway, miss, it's a waste of time talkin'; I'm goin' to marry her.
So d'you think you could tip her the wink an' tell her I've got back early?
We berthed at Shields.
I'll…
I'll wait down here.’
‘Oh…oh, I don't think so, not tonight.’
‘Aye well, miss, if I don't see her the night on the quiet, I'll only come to the shop the morrow, an' I'll put it plainly to her da.’
‘You mustn't .
You mustn't do that.
You've got no idea in what regard he holds her.
He's liable to…to…’
She looked at him before going on, for she had been going to say, ‘beat you up,’ but she couldn't imagine anyone attempting to beat this young fellow up.
‘I…
I won't keep her long, miss, just to sort of…to reassure her, like, that I'm back.
An' I mean to go through with it, we both mean to go through with it.
I know how she feels about me an' I feel bloody lucky she does.
Excuse me, miss, but y'see I feel strongly about this.’
She looked to the side for a moment.
Jessie was in love with this young man, this young bruiser of a fellow, because that's the only name you could give him, at least by the look of him.
His dress, his speech, his looks, everything pointed to the word.
But then, as he had said, if he didn't see her tonight he would come to the shop tomorrow.
She said in a whisper, ‘Wait here; but…but keep out of sight.
I'll…
I'll try to get her down.
But don't, please, don't keep her talking.’
She turned from him now and ran to the door and up the back stairs.
In the corridor she glanced first one way then the other before hurrying along to Jessie's bedroom.
She didn't bother tapping on the door but pushed it open and straightaway saw that her sister wasn't in the room.
She hurried back down the corridor and opened the sitting room door, more slowly than she had Jessie's, thinking that her mother might still be there and not, for once, have retired early.
But that room, too, was empty.
Dashing into the kitchen now, she found Jessie standing at the table and squeezing a lemon into a glass and she had almost pulled her from the table towards the door before she managed to say to her, ‘He's…he's downstairs in the yard.
Go on; but don't stay more than a few minutes.’
‘Rob?’
‘Yes.
Who else, girl?
But for God's sake! be careful; Father will be up in a minute, it's on nine.’
As she pushed Jessie forward she hissed, ‘Go quietly; Mother's got ears.
No more than a few minutes, mind.’
She almost staggered back to the kitchen table and sat down and as she did so the kitchen clock struck nine.
She looked at it.
How long would it be before her father came up?
Arthur would be gone on the stroke of nine, and Ann too, if it was possible.
He had only to turn the keys in both doors, take the cash from the tills and then he would be upstairs.
He did sometimes stay in the storeroom and check the day's accounts.
But would he do that tonight?
She got up from the table and poured herself out a glass of water, and then sat down again.
The clock now said five minutes past nine.
She glanced towards the door willing it to open and show her Jessie.
It did open, at seven minutes past, but it was her father who entered the kitchen.
‘Hello, there.
What's the matter with you, drinkin' water?
Feeling faint?’
‘No.
No; I was just thirsty.
I've just come across from the factory; it's windy out.’
‘Where's Jessie?’
‘She's…she's in her room.’
He was making for the door when he stopped and half turned back towards her and said, ‘By the way, Aggie, very little escapes you, as I know only too well, but have you noticed any difference in Jessie of late?’
‘What?’
She swallowed deeply, then said, ‘What do you mean, difference?’
‘If I knew I wouldn't be asking you, and if I didn't know her inside out I would have said she was worried about something.’
If he didn't know her inside out.
She felt her head going back, then brought it forward again as she said, ‘It's…it's been pretty hot lately; it affects us all.’
‘It doesn't usually affect youngsters like her; they revel in the heat.’
His eyes narrowed; then, stepping towards her and leaning his hands on the edge of the table, he said, ‘You're not holding anything back from me, are you?
I mean, you don't know something that I don't know?’
‘Nobody around here knows anything that you don't know.’
‘Don't be flippant.
I've had an odd feeling of late, and I don't like odd feelings.’
He turned abruptly from her and went out.
She heard the door open and close, then his footsteps coming back along the corridor and go into the sitting room.
She heard that door close; and then the steps hurrying now towards the bedrooms.
It seemed that the next minute he had thrust open the kitchen door and was advancing on her; and then he was gripping her shoulder, saying, ‘Where is she?
Come on, out with it!
Where is she?’
She swung her body away from him and upwards, remonstrating with him now, ‘Don't you try any rough stuff with me, Father!
You should know by now it won't work.
Where do you think she is?’
‘She's out somewhere.
What I want to know is where has she gone?
And who with?’
‘Well you had better ask her when she comes in, hadn't you?’
‘You're maddening me aren't you Aggie?
You know all about what's going on; and it's been going on under me nose.
I've smelt it but couldn't believe it.
But by God!
I'll get to the bottom of it.’
As he stormed from the kitchen she cried after him, ‘Do that!
Do that!
And I wish you luck.’
Half-way along the corridor, he stopped.
Wish you luck, she had said.
He was standing in front of a narrow window, one of two that faced the yard.
It was draped in a pair of thin gauze curtains looped at each side into a narrow brass clasp.
The window actually overlooked the top of the yard where the lavatories and the coalhouses were situated, and it was the white material fluttering from the end of the coalhouse that attracted his eye.
He thrust the curtains wider, pressed his face to the glass but still all he could see was the white material flapping backwards and forwards in the wind.
It was enough, though.
He almost sprang from the window and was down the back stairs and into the yard within seconds.
Then he saw them.
They came into full view; his daughter in the arms of what appeared a working man.
It was an actual roar he let out and it was mingled with Jessie's scream as he tore her from the shelter of the coalhouses and the young man's arms.
His voice filled the yard as he yelled, ‘You dirty little hussy, you!’
And when he thrust at her, still yelling, ‘Get up into that house, there!’ and almost pushed her onto her back, the young fellow sprang forward and grabbed her; then, with one arm around her and the other fist doubled, forefinger pointing out straight at the man, he cried at him, ‘You lay another hand on her like that, mister, an' that'll be the last thing you do.’
The tone, the attitude, the look on the young fellow's face sobered Arthur Conway for a moment, but only for a moment, for now he bawled, ‘Get your hands off my daughter!
And who the hell are you?
But need I ask.’
He peered further.
‘My God in heaven! that she has let the likes of you touch her.
You're a Felton, aren't you?
One of the scum from the quay.
Christ Almighty!’
‘I'm no more scum than you, mister.
At least when I take a wife it'll satisfy me.
I wouldn't go whoring.
Look’— he stepped back, at the same time pushing Jessie to the side —‘I don't want to knock you out, seein' as you're her father, but by God!
I'll do it, if you come at me like that again.’
But no warning could check Arthur Conway's fury, and with a lightning leap he managed to grip the young man's throat, and so fiercely that he forced him backwards, only the next moment to have his arms snapped downwards, when he would have fallen on his back if he hadn't come up against the coalhouse wall and, unfortunately, a shovel that was propped there.
It was done in an instant: the coal shovel, like a boomerang, sped at the young fellow's head, but unlike a boomerang, it did not return.
And when Jessie saw this man that she loved slide down the wall, then drop onto his side, she screamed; but her screaming was soon checked by her father who, staggering towards her, put his hand over her mouth then twisted one of her arms behind her and thrust her towards the staircase door.
But he had to release his hold on her mouth as he dragged her up the stairs, so she screamed at Agnes and her mother, who were already on the stairhead, ‘He's killed him!
He's killed him, Aggie.’
‘In the name of God! what's all this about?
What is the matter?
Will someone tell me?’
At this Agnes now turned on her mother, crying, ‘Yes, I'll tell you, Mother.
Jessie is going to have a baby.
She's over three months gone.
The father is downstairs and by the sound of it your husband, and my dear father, has just killed him.’
As she stared into her mother's horrified face it came to her how strange it was that she had never liked her mother, because her mother had never liked her.
In fact, her mother didn't like anyone.
She turned from her and ran down the stairs and into the yard, there to stand for a moment petrified when she saw the young fellow lying on his side, the blood oozing from somewhere above his ear.
Her two hands went to her face; then she was flying to the door next to the factory and, hammering on it, called, ‘Tommy!
Tommy!’
When a window opened and Tommy put his head out, she looked up at him and spluttered, ‘Come and help me, Tommy.
Please.
There's a young man…he's been hurt.
I don't know whether he's dead or not.
Father's hit him with a shovel.’
‘Wha…at !
What you talkin' about, lass?’
‘Come down, please, Tommy.’
When the old man came into the yard she pointed towards the coalhouse; the next minute, looking down on the bloodied form, he said, ‘God in heaven!’
‘Can…can you help me lift him?
Open…open the factory door.
You've got a key.’
‘Aye, yes.
Aye, lass; it'll have to be the factory, we'd never get him upstairs.
We'll have to drag him across; you can't lift him and I'm past it.’
‘Go and get the key.
Go and get the key.’
She now knelt down by Robbie Felton's side and tentatively, she put her hand inside his thick blue cloth jacket, then drew in a long slow breath when she could feel the beating of his heart.
When Tommy Grant next appeared, his wife was with him.
She was a sturdy woman, some years younger than him; and, looking down at Agnes kneeling by the side of the young man, she said, ‘Oh, miss, miss.
What a to-do!
What a to-do!
But come on, come on, the three of us can get him in.
Tommy, you take his legs.
Miss, will you put your arm under one other, an' I'll do this side.
Oh my! the blood.
Look at the blood!’
Half carrying, half trailing the inert figure, they reached the factory door, then edged their way in and laid the unconscious form on the floor.
‘Get a light, Tommy!
Get a light!’ she called to her husband.
‘He might just be stunned.
There seems to be a lot of blood, but, you know, a little blood goes a long way.
Hurry with the light, Tommy!’
After lighting the gas jets, he also lit a candle which he held above the young man's face.
Mrs Grant now turned to Agnes who was kneeling by her side and said, ‘Oh!
Oh, look at that.
Just look at that, miss.
The end of the shovel must have caught him.
Pretty deep there; it's a wonder it didn't slice the top of his head off.
Eeh!
I think it's a hospital job, this.
D'you know where his folk live?’
‘No.
No; I don't.
I only know he's one of the Feltons.’
‘The quay Feltons?’
It was Tommy now asking the question; and when she nodded, he said, ‘Oh my God! this'll mean trouble.
They're a rough lot, them.
How did he come into the yard?’
‘Well, you'll know soon enough.’
She glanced from him to his wife.
‘He's been seeing Jessie and’— she bowed her head —‘she's going to have a baby.’
The old couple were silent; then Mrs Grant sighed and Tommy said, ‘Bad business.
Bad business;’ and his wife added, ‘It happens though; 'tis nature.
It happens though.
But he must be got somewhere.
I wouldn't like to be the one to go and tell his folk.
I think 'tis best if we could get him to the hospital.
'Tisn't all that distance.
But it's a stretcher we need, an ambulance, sort of.
Tommy, you put on your coat and go down to the police box and they'll know what to do.’
‘Aye, that's good advice, Bella.
Aye, that's good advice.
But my God! for the boss to do this.’
‘And hurry up, Tommy, if you don't want this lad to croak.’
Her words stabbed at Agnes like an ice pick.
Yes; what if he croaked?
What if he died? and she cried within herself.
Yes, do hurry up!
Someone please hurry up!
Oh dear God!
Why had this to happen?
It was twenty minutes later when the ambulance arrived.
What had happened? the first man asked of Agnes.
And she replied with the answer she had prepared in her mind: ‘He slipped in the yard and caught his head on a shovel.’
‘Slipped and caught his head on a shovel!
What's his name?’
She paused: ‘Robert Felton,’ she said.
‘Felton?’
The two ambulance men now exchanged sharp glances, and one of them said, ‘Robbie Felton?’ then added, ‘Slipped and caught his head on a shovel?
Well, well; strange things happen.
Let's get him up.
‘May I come with you?’
‘Yes.
Yes; they'll want particulars; somebody'll have to come.
But;— the man hesitated —‘you're no relation, are you?’
‘No; I'm no relation.’
As they carried Robbie into the yard she glanced towards the staircase door and wondered if she should ask them to wait a moment until she went and got a coat and hat.
But, once upstairs, she knew she would have a job to get out again, especially if her father knew her destination.
Yet, she felt slightly naked in having to get into the ambulance without a coat or even something on her head.
Nevertheless, she allowed herself to be helped up the high step and onto a bunk opposite the one on which Robbie was now lying…
She had never before been in the Royal Victoria Infirmary.
The size of the place alone amazed her and the bustle confused her.
She had followed the stretcher into the emergency department there, to be asked particulars about the patient.
And all she could repeat was what she had said to the ambulance men.
Where did he live, the patient?
What was his address?
She couldn't tell them.
The nurse at the desk was a bit sceptical.
Why was she with him then?
He had been visiting her home and when he left he had slipped in the yard, et cetera.
Take a seat, they said.
She took a seat and from it she saw nurses going in and out of the cubicle where they had taken Robbie.
Then a doctor appeared and more bustle followed, until a wheeled stretcher was pushed out and Robbie was wheeled away.
She rose swiftly and went to the cubicle, where a nurse was straightening the bed and she asked, ‘Where are they taking him?’
‘To the theatre,’ was the abrupt answer.
‘Is…is he very…bad?
I mean…’
‘Well,— the nurse turned from the bed —‘he's got a cut in his head that I wouldn't like.’
‘How long is he likely to be in the…theatre?’
‘Don't ask me.
It all depends on what they find.’
Her voice changed to a kindly note.
‘Go along to the waiting-room.’
She went ahead of Agnes out of the cubicle and pointed.
‘It's just down there.
I'll try and let you know.’
The forms in the waiting-room were most uncomfortable and at one period she got up and began to walk about, apparently to the consternation of other people who, docilely, were also waiting for news.
So she sat down again and looked at the clock and she couldn't believe what she was seeing: fifteen minutes past ten!
It was exactly eleven o'clock when the nurse came to her and said, ‘You may go and see him for a minute.’
‘What?’
I said, you may go and see him for a minute, he's out.
‘She…she didn't want to go and see him; she just wanted somebody to tell her he was alive and, what seemed important was, how she was going to tell his people what had happened to him and where he was.
She said to the nurse, ‘I…
I'd rather not see him.
All I want to know is, will he be all right?’
‘Yes, I suppose he will.
But it's a stroke of luck.
Whatever implement it was that hit him went a long way round his skull but didn't penetrate very far, for which he should thank his stars.’
‘He…he won't die then?’
The nurse gave a small laugh as he said, ‘Well, not until he's ready, and I should think not this time.
But he'll have a sore head for a pretty long time, I should imagine.’
Then Agnes said something that sounded very silly even to herself.
She said, ‘My name is Agnes Conway.
My father owns a confectionery factory and shops in Spring Street.
I…
I rushed out without any money, and before I go home I must go and inform Mr Felton's people where he is.
Do you think there's anyone who would loan me, say, a shilling for a cab fare?’
The nurse looked at her as if she were a new species from a different planet.
This girl, this young woman, coming here and asking for the loan of a shilling for a cab fare.
She'd had some requests made of her in her time but none seemingly as outrageous as this.
And yet, she didn't look a sponger, she didn't sound a sponger.
She said, ‘How far is it to his people?’
‘I…
I don't know.’
‘Then how d'you know you're going to get there?’
‘Well, I know they live near the quay, and the cabbie would know of them; they are well-known.’
Oh yes, yes, they are well-known.
‘Well, I haven't got a shilling on me.
You wouldn't expect me to carry money around in my uniform, would you?
You can try the voluntary box people.
Oh’— she gave an impatient twist to her apron —‘that'll be put away.
Anyway, they've gone this hour.’
‘You want the loan of a bob, lass?’
A man who had been sitting silently by on the wooden form got to his feet, his hand outstretched, and he said, ‘There! take it; and if you want to pay it back put it in the voluntary box she was talking about.’
He nodded towards the nurse.
‘Oh, thank you.
Thank you very much.
But…but I'd rather pay you.
What is your name?
How can I get in touch?’
‘Any day in the market, miss.
Bill Stoddart's my name.
But it's all right.
What's the name of your sick friend's people?’
‘He is not a…’
She closed her eyes for a moment, then said ‘His name is Felton.’
‘Felton?
One of the Feltons from the quay?’
‘Yes, I suppose so…’
‘Huh!’
He laughed.
‘And he brought into hospital!
It's generally the other way round; lass; it's them at the other end of the Feltons' fists who generally land up here.
I'd like to see the end of this.’
He laughed again.
‘And you were about to say, lass, he's no friend of yours.
I picked that up from the look on your face.
Anyway, good luck to you when you tell 'em that one of their tribe's got his head busted.
If he hadn't been covered with blood I would have recognized him.
Which one is it?’
‘His name is…is Robert, I think.’
‘Oh aye, Robert…
Robbie.
He's the youngest.
Anyway, if you want a cab, lass, go to the stand in the Haymarket, just down the road opposite.
You're bound to find somebody there till twelve o'clock and any one of them will be able to take you to your destination.’
‘Thank you.
Thank you.
And I will return the money to…to the box as soon as possible.’
‘Do that, lass.
Do that.
An' thank you, 'cos you've lightened me night by the very fact that one of the Feltons has been busted up an' knocked flat.’
‘Goodbye; and thank you again.’
She nodded at the man, then at the nurse before hurrying out.
Outside, she stood and looked about her at the maze of buildings.
And her mind didn't question how she had got into this situation but how she was going to get out of it.
The wind had gone down but the night had turned chilly and she shivered as she hurried towards the hospital gates, which were brightly picked out, as was everything else, by the moonlight.
She was thankful for the moonlight for, without it, she knew she would never have found her way to the cab rank.
She wasn't acquainted with this end of the town, never having had any need to visit a hospital.
When she reached the main road she didn't know which direction to take, but seeing two men accompanied by two women she hurried to them and said, ‘Would you, please direct me to the cab rank?’
‘Cab rank, lass?
Straight across the road; your first turning right and there you are.’
She thanked them, then actually took to her heels and ran.
There were two cabs standing by the kerb.
She said to the driver of the first one, who was standing within the shelter of a doorway smoking, ‘I…
I understand you will know where the family called Felton live?
They work on the quay.’
The man nipped out his cigarette, pushed the stub into his breast pocket; then peering at her closely, he said, ‘There are a number of Feltons, but you say the ones that work on the quay.
You sure?’
‘Yes, I'm sure; there are a number of men in the family.’
‘Oh, aye, if that's the Feltons you want there are a number of men in the family.
Well, get in, miss.
Get in, and let everybody mind their own business.
That's what I say.’
‘How much will you charge?’
‘What?
Charge?
Well, it's only a short distance, I know — you could have done it in less than five minutes in the daylight — but we won't see eleven o'clock again.
It'll be a bob.’
‘That'll be all right.
That's what I've got.’
Again he peered at her, then taking her elbow, he helped her into the cab.
‘You must have been in a hurry to come out without your coat; you'll feel the chill afore the night's out.’
The door banged.
She heard a ‘Gee up! there,’ and then the cab was rolling over the cobbles.
If she could have walked it in five minutes, then the cab should have done it in less, but it seemed a long five minutes before it stopped again and the cab driver opened the door, saying, ‘Here we are then, lass.’
‘Thank you.’
‘That's it, there.’
He pointed.
‘And they're still up; there's lights on up and down.’
The house was one of a number in a terrace.
It wasn't a slum terrace, as she had expected, but from what she could make out through the moonlight they were good working-class houses, each with its small rectangle of iron-railed garden in front.
She thanked the driver, lifted the latch of the low iron gate and took four steps that brought her to the front door.
Here, she hesitated before she raised her hand and lifted the black knocker.
She heard voices from behind the door; then it opened and a tall burly man was looking down at her.
‘Aye?’ he said.
Then bending forward, he asked, ‘Who might you be?
And what you after?’
‘I…
I am Miss Agnes Conway.
I…
I have some news about your brother.’
‘You've got news about who?’
He turned and looked back into the room and towards what she dimly made out to be a number of people.
Then, looking at her again, he said, ‘Must be wor Robbie you're after?’
‘Why…er yes.
I mean…’
‘Aye, well, lass, if you're after wor Robbie you've come to the wrong shop.
You'll have to take a good swim to find him the night, over to Holland, I'd say.
Now, now, don't start any of that.
Whatever you've got on wor Robbie is between you and him.
So…’
‘Your brother's in hospital.
May I come in?’
Her voice was loud now and held a tone of command.
Another figure appeared near him.
‘What's up?’
‘Don't ask me.
She's after our Robbie.’
‘I am not after Robbie .
I have news of him.
He is in hospital .’
‘Bring her in.
She's no tart; certainly not wor Robbie's type.’
The men stood aside and she walked in between them…almost stumbled in between them; and then she was in a large room in the middle of which was a long table covered in oilcloth.
At the far end of the table was a spirit bottle and two glasses, at the nearer were two beer cans and two mugs, and spread about the table were playing cards.
The room was quite brightly lit by two gas brackets, one at each side of a shining black stove.
The mantelpiece above was crowded with gleaming brasses, which she vaguely made out as candlesticks.
The room was warm and smelt musty.
It was a strange smell; she did not liken it to spirits, beer and maleness, only that it was increasing her feeling of faintness.
The man who had opened the door looked at the two men seated at the table and said, ‘This dame here says she knows about wor Robbie; she says he's in hospital.
What d'you think of that, when just about now he's supposed to be hitting Holland?’
The two men stood up and one, who looked older than the others, came towards her.
He stood quite close to her and he said, ‘I don't know who you are, lass, never clapped eyes on you, and from the look of you an' your voice you're not the kind wor Robbie would pick up with.
Now come on, what's your game?’
‘May I…may I sit down?’
‘No, you may not, as you put it, until you tell us what all this is about.’
‘Arthur.’
It was the other man speaking now.
His voice was quiet.
‘I told you some time ago I'd seen wor young 'un with a piece.
They were standing outside that school office, the young lasses' typin' school, you know.
I told you.’
‘Was it this one, Willie?’
The man motioned his hand towards Agnes; and the man called Willie stepped towards her now and said, ‘No; this one was younger and very bonny.’
‘That…that…’
Again she heard herself say, ‘that', and then she managed to stammer, ‘w…was my sister,’ before the floating feeling overcame her and she-knew she was falling into somewhere.
It was like a pit, and as she fell she clutched at a hand, but the hand turned into a foot and the foot kicked her.
But Mike Felton's foot hadn't kicked her, he had moved it quickly out of the way and caught her as she fell and so saving her head from coming into contact with the brass coal bucket.
‘God  Almightly !
She's passed out.
Go and get Ma up.
Go on!
Shout her, somebody.’
One of the men now rushed from the room and along a passage to some stairs.
‘You, Ma!
Ma!’ he called.
‘You know she'll be dead to the world.
Go on up and give her a shake.’
Meanwhile there was pandemonium in the kitchen.
These men who, with their fists, knocked others insensible, the art of doing so having been passed down as a necessary part of their growing up, had evidently never had to deal with a fainting female before; and when the big, fat, enormous-breasted woman came into the kitchen, bawling, ‘What the hell d'you think you're at!
What's up here?’ her reaction on looking down on Agnes was just as loud and domineering: ‘Which bloody fool among you brought her in!
‘Listen, Ma.
Listen.’
It was the biggest of her sons speaking now, the one who had opened the door, and he said, ‘She's a classy piece, Ma, and she's come with some strange news.
She says wor Robbie's in hospital.’
‘And you swallowed that?
Then you're a sillier bugger than I thought you were, Mike.’
‘Look, Ma, silly bugger or not, I can tell a piece when I see her, or smell her, and this one isn't wor Robbie's type, nor none of our types.
But just afore she passed out she said something about her sister and wor Robbie.
‘But his boat isn't in yet; he's not due for days.’
‘She says he's in hospital.’
The fat woman now bent over Agnes and felt the quality of her dress, which was a fine Irish linen.
Then, turning up the hem some way, she now fingered her petticoats.
‘Bring a mug of cold watter.
Go on!
One of you move, an' stop starin'.’
When she was handed the mug she dipped her fingers in it and began to splash Agnes's face with the cold water.
But when this produced little response, she brought the palm of her hand in short slaps on each side of the pale cheeks, and when Agnes gulped at the air, she cried at her, ‘That's it!
Come on now.
Come on,’ and, turning, she said to no one in particular, ‘Pour out a tot of that whisky.’
There was a scramble to the table now, and when she was handed the glass, she put one hand behind Agnes's head and raised it, then put the glass to her lips and commanded, ‘Get that down you.
Come on, swalla!
Get it down you.’
as if she had heard her, Agnes swallowed the spirit, only immediately to splutter and choke and cough.
‘That's it.
That brings the dead round.
Get her on her feet an, into a chair.’
Two of the men now hoisted her up, and when she was seated in the chair she slowly opened her eyes, and the first thing she saw was the great broad face of Betty Felton.
In fact she imagined the woman's body to be filling the room, spreading right across it, blotting out the men behind her.
She had never seen such a fat woman; voluptuous was the word that came into her mind.
She whispered, ‘I'm…
I'm sorry.
I…
I must have fainted.’
‘Aye, well, if you didn't you made a good stab at it.
What's your name?’
Agnes drew in a deep breath, then said, ‘I'm Miss Agnes Conway.’
‘Aye, you're Miss Agnes Conway.
And where're you from?’
‘I live in Spring Street.
We…we have the tobacconist's and confectioner's shop there.’
She knew that her voice was slow and her words were spaced.
It was as if she were learning to talk.
Betty Felton now put her head back and looked from one to the other of her four sons and she said, ‘Aye, there's a confectioner's an' baccy shop in that street.
Been there for years.
Aye, an' the name is Conway.
But what the hell is she doin' here?’
‘Well, you'd better ask her, Ma, hadn't you?
As she says, she knows wor Robbie.’
‘Or her sister does,’ put in another one of the men.
Betty Felton's tone was a little softer now as she said, ‘Well, lass, come on, tell us what you're doin' here and how it's come about.’
Agnes pulled herself up straighter in the chair and, looking into the broad face, she said, ‘Your son has been seeing my sister clandestinely.’
‘What?’
A voice behind her said, ‘She means on the quiet, Ma.’
‘I know what she means, clever bugger.
Go on.
Go on,’ and she now stabbed Agnes in the shoulder with a none too clean finger.
But it was a moment or so before Agnes obeyed and when she did her voice was stiff as she said, ‘And your son has given her a —’ How was she to put it?
Should she say ‘a baby’? or, ‘made her pregnant’? or, ‘my sister is with child’?
No, no; that sounded too much like the Bible, so she plumped for the simple way and finished, ‘He has given her a baby.’
But now she added quickly, ‘But he…he wants to marry her, and she him.’
‘God Almighty !’
She watched the big woman flop back and onto a chair, then look from one to the other of her silent sons as she said, ‘Did you hear that?
Did you just hear that?
That young scut has put a fancy piece in the family way.
Well, begod!
I'll say this, if he's done it, he's done something more than you hulks 'ave ever done; it's been left to me two lasses to breed.
And it was in me thoughts that I bred a bunch of punch-drunk pansies who couldn't use their heads or, for that matter, any other part of their make-up, 'cept their fists.
Well! well, well; an' so me young Robbie's gone an' done it.
But what's this about a hospital?’
She was bending forward towards Agnes now.
‘Aye, what about the hospital?’
It was the biggest son enquiring again.
‘You said he was in hospital.’
‘And he is.’
She looked at the man.
‘Apparently his boat came in sooner than expected and docked at Shields, and he came up to the house hoping to see my sister, and he did.
And my father found them, and…and they fought.
I must tell you, though, that your son could, I am sure, have injured my father, but he didn't.
My father was in a mad rage and — she now bowed her head —‘he picked up a shovel and threw it.
The end caught…well, it caught your son on the side of the head.
And so I had to do what I could; I…
I got him into the factory and from there we got the ambulance and…and I took him to the Royal Victoria Infirmary.’
The room became quiet until a voice said, ‘She's tellin' the truth.’
The woman turned and looked at the speaker, and there was scorn in her expression, but she said nothing until she turned on Agnes again and said, ‘How bad is he, lass?’
‘From…from what I gathered from the nurse it wasn't as serious as they at first thought.
Apparently it is a big cut, but not so deep that it has done any irrevocable damage, at least that's the impression I got.
But I…
I think you will find out more when you see him —’ and to this she added, ‘naturally.’
The big woman got to her feet now and, looking at her eldest son, she said, ‘I'm goin' up to get into me things.’
Then, turning to Agnes again, she said, ‘Have you got a cab outside, lass?’
‘No, I…
I came out without any money.
I really had to borrow the fare here.’
‘Oh, well, the lads will see you home.
You, Willie, go with the young miss here.
Oh, there had better be two of you.
Arthur, you go along of Willie, because the Pritchards don't sleep, you know, and in one way or another they'll get you, or have a damn good try after the last business.
And you Mike, and Jimmy, come along o’ me.’
‘Will I call a cab, Ma?’
‘No, you'll not call a cab.
Would you like to call The Journal and tell them what's 'appened?’
‘No, Ma; I just meant…’
‘I know what you meant.
An' you should know that this city 'as got a bigger mouth than any reporter from any newspaper.
So use your loaf.
And lass’— she now bent over Agnes —‘if that Dad of yours has done me lad any deep damage he'll pay for it.
By God! he will an' all.
But to you…well, you must have stood out against him to do what you've done the night so…so far; you 'ave me thanks.’
And on this she turned away; and Agnes got to her feet and not until then did she realise how tired and even sick she was feeling.
The two men, one called Willie and the other called Arthur, were standing with their caps on, and as she walked towards them the man called Mike, the big one, said to her, ‘Sorry I was rough on you, miss.’
She looked at him but made no reply; then she went out escorted, one on each side, by the two men, and neither of them spoke to her nor exchanged a word with each other until they were crossing the main road, when seemingly out of nowhere stepped a policeman, and they all came to a halt.
Looking from one man to the other, he said, ‘Well, hello there.’
Then bending forward, he almost peered into Agnes's face, enquiring, ‘You all right, miss?’
‘Yes, constable; I'm all right.’
‘You sure?’
‘Perfectly sure, constable, thank you.’
‘Yes, she's sure,constable .’
The last word was stressed and almost on a growl.
‘She happens to be a visitor to wor house an' me ma sent us to escort her home.
Would you like to ‘company us?’
‘Yes, I could do that an' all.’
‘There's no need, constable.’
Agnes's face was placating.
‘I had to take a message to these’— she almost said gentlemen —‘to Mrs Felton about her youngest son; he's in hospital.’
‘Oh, he's in hospital?
Well that's no surprise; but it's been a long time in coming.
What d'you say lads eh?’
‘What I say,constable , is’— and now it was Arthur speaking —‘there's such a thing as 'arassment, that's what they've told me when I've been up afore the old bloke.
'Arassment, he said, and it can come from all quarters, you know.
An' we've got a witness…
Miss, here.
Well, she's a lady an' she'll always speak the truth.’
‘On your way.’
The policeman stepped aside; and they went on their way, silent once again.
When at last they came to the lower end of Spring Street, Agnes stopped and, looking from one to the other, she said, ‘This is where I live; I'll be all right now.
And…and thank you very much for…for accompanying me.’
‘Been a pleasure, miss, a pleasure.’
She recalled now that this was the one who had explained to his mother what clandestinely meant, and he, too, was the one who brought in the law when confronted by the policeman.
He seemed to know about it, at least, the wrong side of it.
Yet, she couldn't say that she disliked him, or the other one, come to that.
‘Good night, miss.’
‘Good night, miss.’
‘Good night, and thank you again.’
They turned away and she walked up the street, past the baker's, past the shoemaker's, and the hat shop, and she rang the bell that was attached to the wall at the side of the door leading into the sweet shop.
This rang in the corridor outside.
She rang it twice, she rang it four times, but there was no response.
She now hurried round the corner and into the yard and there she knocked on the back staircase door.
After the third knocking a light went on in Jessie's room; then there was the sound of muffled voices.
The light went out, but still no one came downstairs.
He couldn't mean it.
He couldn't mean he wasn't going to let her in.
She looked across the yard.
She had no means of getting into the end house, as the keys were upstairs.
And if she woke Tommy, where could she sleep there?
They had only two rooms.
And she couldn't sleep on the floor of the factory with the mice skittering round, and the black beetles everywhere.
A great desire to stand and cry descended on her.
The next minute she was running out of the yard and into the street again and into the shelter of the doorway leading into the hat shop.
There was a bell here, too, that communicated with the Misses Cardings' rooms above.
She was pressing it for dear life now as if she was in a panic, and she kept her finger on it until, through the glass door, she saw the flicker of a candle weaving its way down through the shop.
Then a voice said, ‘Who's there?’
It was Miss Rene's voice, and she cried out at her, ‘I can't get in!
He won't let me in.’
The door opened.
‘Oh! my dear, you're shivering.
Where've you been?
It's midnight.
Come in.
Come in.
Florence’— she turned to where the two sisters were hovering in the background —‘get back upstairs and light the gas; and stir up the fire; it isn't out, so use the bellows.
And you, Belle; you put the kettle on the stove.
She needs a hot drink; she's shivering like a leaf.’
Upstairs, she put a shawl around Agnes, saying, ‘There you are, dear.
Sit down.
Sit down.
You'll have a hot drink in a minute.’
It was too much, too much.
Agnes began to cry, quietly at first, then it mounted into sobs, then almost into hysteria and in it she gabbled out incoherently to the three gaping sisters what had transpired from the time she had taken the linen across to the house.
She even told them about the nice young man who said he hadn't seen her for some time.
She told them everything, right up to the fact that two of the notorious Felton brothers had actually brought her home to this very street, only to find there was no home to go to.
Again she was plied with whisky, but this time in hot water and sweetened with brown sugar; she was then led to the sitting-room couch that had been made up as a bed for her.
Left alone now, she fell into a troubled sleep and a dream in which her father was decapitating men in the back yard, and one of them was the nice young man whose name she didn't know nor from where he came.
And the dream took her into hospital where the nice young man was lying in bed with his head bandaged and she was holding his hand; and the dream brought a little comfort to the events of a night that was to be the turning point in her life.
It was a week later and Agnes was in the state of not knowing if she could put up with this present situation even one day longer.
On the day following the night she had spent with the gentle sisters, her father had stormed in and demanded that she return home, and she had replied, ‘What!
After being locked out in the dead of night?’
And she had asked him what would have happened to her if she had not had these good friends who had come to her aid and given her shelter, and when, in the form of an excuse, his answer had been, didn't she realize that he was distracted? she had come back with, didn't he realize he had almost killed a man, that he was lucky he wasn't in gaol now answering a charge of murder?
But he was in no way repentant, for he had parried this by saying he wished he had killed him and if he ever came across him again he would make another attempt.
When she told him she had no intention of coming back and working for him, that her mind was made up and she would be staying with the Miss Cardings until she found other employment, he had became almost pathetic in his pleading: he couldn't do without her.
Her mother was in a state.
As for that other one, which was how he now alluded to the daughter he had always doted on, she was in her room and there she would stay until she saw sense.
It was this latter statement that had got Agnes back into the house, because she could see her sister, in her present state devoid of any common sense, doing something drastic.
And when later that day she did return she found that her mother, worn out with upbraiding the daughter who had disgraced her, had taken to her bed.
As for Jessie herself, she had held her in her arms and reassured her that her Robbie would be all right, even though, from the scanty information given her by the nurse, she couldn't know for sure if he would be.
When by the third day her father had still not allowed Jessie out of her room, and Agnes confronted him, saying he couldn't keep her incarcerated forever, and that if he didn't let her out then she was leaving, and that she meant it, he had gone along to his daughter's room, taking with him a Bible, on which he made her swear that if he gave her the freedom of the house she would not attempt to leave it.
Jessie swore on it, and he left, leaving her door open.
But immediately Jessie said to Agnes, ‘I'm going at the first opportunity, Bible or no Bible.’
‘Listen here, girl.’
Agnes had pushed her onto the bed.
‘That young fellow's still in hospital.
I don't know how bad he really is; I only know it will be some time before he'll be able to come out and take you away and, what is more, work for you.
So where would you go?
You couldn't go to his people.
I've been; I've seen them.
His mother is a big, fat, raucous woman.
She has four great big sons.
They too are raucous, and they are known to the police.
Even at night the policeman recognized the two who brought me home.
And one brother is very conversant, I should imagine, with the inside of a courtroom, from what passed between him and the policeman.
Anyway, it's only a small house; where would you go?
Now, what you've got to do is to be wily.
Bide your time.
I will try to go to the hospital tomorrow and find out how Robbie is.
I can see now he is extremely fond of you.
And if you're determined to have him, then you must be married.
That's got to be thought out.
And after that, wherever you go it must be far away because, as Father said, he missed killing him this time, but he won't the next.
And you know something I've discovered?
Father has a gun.
He might have had it for some long time, I don't know, but I came across it in a drawer in the small bedroom when I was putting his clean linen away.
It's a pistol and it's in a case.
Now let that give you an idea how serious things are.
Stay here.
Stay up in the house.
Don't venture down into the shop.
It's a good job that Nan has been off with her bad leg these past two weeks.’
When Jessie now ventured, ‘Do you think Mabel might help me?
Her people…’
‘Mabel Aintree?
Oh, don't be silly!
Jessie.
They would scorn you in the condition you're in.
No matter what Mabel might think, it's her parents you've got to think about.
It's always the parents.
Don't you know?
Can't you learn?’
And she had left her with an impatient gesture.
It was shortly after this that her mother approached her and in a voice that she rarely used to her, she said, ‘Agnes, I…
I want to have a word with you.’
The very tone of the voice surprised Agnes, and so she followed her mother into the sitting-room, and there Alice Conway sat on the couch and motioned her daughter to sit beside her.
And then she began: ‘Agnes, this situation can't go on.
You can see yourself it can't go on.’
‘Well, how do you think you can change it, Mother?’
She watched her mother turn and look towards the window before she said, ‘She's…she's got to go.’
‘Go?
Where can she go?
Run away on to the streets?
But she's promised Father not to run away, hasn't she?
So, what do you mean, she's got to go?
Where could she go?’
Her mother was looking at her again.
‘I…we can't have…have her here.
She's already beginning to show; the whole street will know.’
‘If they don't already know, Mother.
Nan's no fool, and our precise Mr Peeble, who I am sure is quite used to pregnancies, will have detected something before now if not from the narration he has heard above his head over the past days.
So where do you propose to send her?’
‘Cousin Mary in Durham.’
‘Cousin Mary?’
Agnes first screwed up her face, then she stretched it before she muttered, ‘That cousin Mary in Durham, the one you haven't spoken to for twelve years, if not longer, or, as I should say, who hasn't spoken to you since she married Mr Boston, a man of supposed wealth and position, and got too big for her boots, as you've often stated?
You propose sending your pregnant daughter to her ?
Well!’
She sat back on the couch.
‘I'd like to know how you're going to go about it, Mother.’
‘Please, please, Agnes, don't take that attitude.
I'm trying to be calm and…and helpful for us all round.’
‘You can exclude me from the all round, Mother; and I think it's a little late for you to say you're trying to be calm and helpful.
To my mind it's a pity you didn't take that attitude when you were first made aware of the situation, because when I returned from next door you were still yelling your head off at her and painting a vivid picture of what her life would be with an illegitimate child tacked on to her.
If I remember rightly, you pointed out forcibly that no man would look the side she was on ever again because cheap women had no hope of anything in the future but of being used.
Am I right?’
‘Agnes .
Please, please, don't go on.
Can't you see I'm so upset I feel ill.
And what is more’— her voice dropped now and she leant towards Agnes —‘I'm afraid of your father, I mean, for him, what he will do to that…person if he meets him again, for he will certainly do him an injury.’
‘He's already done that, Mother.’
‘Yes, but this could be worse.
And then what's going to happen to us?’
There it was, ‘what's going to happen to us?’
She meant, what was going to happen to her if Father should commit a crime and she was left here on her own.
Of course she wouldn't be on her own, she herself would be here.
Oh yes, she would be here.
But then there would be the scandal to hide from.
Oh, she knew her mother.
She said, ‘Well, when do you propose to go and see her?’
‘Oh, I couldn't go.
She…well, as you know we haven't met for years, and she…she moves in quite different circles, among the elite of Durham, and he's a churchman connected with the Cathedral.’
Again Agnes's face screwed up as she said, ‘And you expect them to take Jessie?’
‘Well, if not actually take her, Mary was always doing good works, that kind of thing, that's how she got to know Mr Boston.
Of course, at the time I know I said it was all put on just to impress him, because she was no more for doing good works than I was.
I…
I've always been honest about it.’
Yes, yes, her mother had always been honest about her lack of initiative in that direction.
‘Well, what do you propose doing?
Write to her?’
‘No; what's the good of writing?
I thought it would be evident; you are generally very quick on the uptake.
I thought you might go and see her and ask her if she can help.
Well, if she knows of any place where…’
‘No, Mother, in no way am I going to this Mrs Boston's.’
They were both standing now.
‘Well, tell me’— her mother's voice and manner reverted to normal —‘what then is going to happen to her?’
‘She could get married, Mother.
No matter what the young man is, he feels for her and she for him.’
‘Do you want murder done, girl?
Because that's what would happen.
Don't you realize that neither you nor me have really had any consideration from your father in years.
It has been Jessie this, Jessie that, and Jessie the other.
He even wanted her to stay at school after she was sixteen, but she got round him there.
And the typing college was a come down, I can tell you, from his idea that she would go into a profession; he'd even thought of university.
Oh, you don't know anything about the plans he had for his dear daughter, and you stand there and talk of her marrying a man from the lowest scum family in Newcastle.
If she had picked on anyone else there might have been some hope; but not a Felton.
Dear God in heaven!’
She threw her head back and appealed to the ceiling.
‘A Felton.
They're notorious; the father died in a fisticuffs battle.
You'd think people only bought newspapers to see what's happened to the Feltons.
One has just come out of prison after doing two years for bodily harm.
And this is the family you propose Jessie should marry into.
I really cannot believe I'm hearing aright.’
‘Then you'd sooner let her have an illegitimate child?
You know what name is tacked on to such a child.
Do I have to speak the word ‘bastard’?’
‘Yes, yes, I would.’
‘And you would bring the child up here, in this house?’
Her mother's chest seemed to swell as she said, ‘Don't be more troublesome than usual, Agnes.
There are places, at least ways and means to deal with such a matter.
It could be adopted.
Anyway —’ Her manner once again changed and now she was pleading, ‘Do this for me, Agnes.
It isn't often I ask anything personal of you, now is it?’
No, that was true.
There had been no intimacy between them, never as far as she could remember.
But to go to a strange woman and ask her…what would she have to ask her?
Where to find a home in which to put Jessie?
Oh, that was unthinkable.
Or to take Jessie into her own home?
That was even more unthinkable.
And yet, she felt sure now, it was this that was in her mother's mind because, as far as her mother knew, her cousin was childless.
But there appeared to be one good thing about her mother's suggestion.
If it were possible for Jessie to go and live in Durham, it was also possible that at times she could meet Robbie Felton, and then perhaps they could get married and go off somewhere.
And it would have to be somewhere far away where her father couldn't find them.
It was strange, but the thought of her sister marrying one of those terrible Feltons no longer filled her with abhorrence; far better that than bring a child into the world that wasn't wanted and whom her mother had already thrown off for adoption.
She was brought back to her mother's voice, as though enticing her, yet with a slight sneer in it now, saying, ‘It would give you an opportunity to wear some of those clothes you've been spending your money on lately.’
Yes.
Yes, it would.
She didn't voice her thoughts but she immediately saw herself wearing the lime-green dress and the coat with the rose lining.
How many times had she put that on in the privacy of her room and seen the different being it presented, especially when she also donned the leghorn hat.
The girls, as in her mind she thought of the Misses Cardings, had trimmed it with a deep tone of lime-green velvet ribbon and in the heart of the bow at the side they had placed two tiny red silk rosebuds.
‘You'll go?’
‘I'll think about it.’
‘Well, don't take too long, girl, because I cannot bear the atmosphere in this house much longer.’
‘What do you think Father will say to your proposal?’
‘He'll agree to it.’
‘What makes you so sure?’
‘Because’— and now the words were stressed —‘he no more wants to suffer the shame of such an exposure than I do.’
‘Then what do you think he'll do when your cousin won't take her and he has to suffer it?’
‘I don't know.
I don't know.
The only thing I do know is that something must be done to get her away from here…anywhere.’
‘Yes.
Yes.
As you say it,anywhere .’
It was later that evening.
Nan had just gone and Agnes had bolted the door, pulled down the blind over the window.
and was about to turn off the gas jets when her father appeared in the doorway.
Few words had passed between them over the past week, and now she could see that it was with an effort he said, ‘Your mother tells me about this idea of hers.
I'll go along of it.
When do you intend to go through?’
‘Tomorrow.’
‘I'll come with you.’
‘Oh, no.
No.’
Her head went up, shoulders back.
‘This…this is a delicate matter.’
‘You propose to go to Durham by yourself?’
‘It isn't America or Timbuctoo, Father.
I propose to go to Durham, or anywhere else I choose, by myself.’
‘Now, don't start that again.’
‘I have never stopped, and just you remember that, Father.
I am my own mistress and I can walk out of here tomorrow if I want.
This minute if I want.
Just remember that.’
She watched him now take his hand and draw it slowly down over his face, stretching the pouches under his eyes in the process.
And when he muttered, ‘My God!
I can't believe what's happening, nor how long I can stand it.’
And on this he turned from her and hurried through the store-room, leaving her trembling, and not a little, at her own audacity in daring to speak to him like that.
She didn't know whether it was from the night that she had overheard his conversation with her mother in the bedroom, or when she saw him fling that shovel at the young man who, she knew, could have felled him with one blow, that she had lost all respect for him.
And, too, another part of her mind was asking how he dare go almost insane because his daughter had committed the so-called sin when he himself, by his own admission, was keeping a woman on the side.
Life all around was dirty.
She wrinkled her nose against it, then went upstairs and into Jessie's room.
Jessie was already in bed but not asleep, and so she sat on the side of the bed and, her voice just a whisper, she said, ‘Listen.’
And Jessie listened for a time, but then she said, ‘But she must be a total stranger.
I don't remember seeing her.
How…how can I go there and live?’
‘Well, would you rather stay here in this prison?
Use your mind, girl.
If you're away from here there might be a chance of seeing Robbie now and again.’
‘He'd…he'd kill him if I did, if he found out.
And he won't miss the second time.
I don't want Robbie hurt any more.’
‘Well —’ Agnes brought her face close to the pretty one, saying, ‘Do you want to have a bastard child?’
‘It'll be that in any case, won't it?’
Jessie's voice now was a thin hiss.
‘I've faced up to it.
That's how it will have to be.’
‘Don't be so silly, girl!
This…this cousin Mary of Mother's, whatever she's said about her, might be a compassionate woman; and I don't think she has any children of her own.
If…if, though, she doesn't let you stay with them, then Mother will try to arrange for you some place else.
That would certainly cost money, and I can't see Father spending any on you in that way.
Oh, no, no.
In the state of mind he's in, he'd rather put you in the workhouse than provide one penny towards bringing a child into the world whose father happens to be one of the Feltons.
If nothing comes of this he'll keep you here.
And what would your life be like then?
I can tell you one thing, I won't be here to be used as a buffer.
Oh, no.
As soon as you're settled one way or another I'm out of it.’
‘Oh!
Agnes, don't leave me.’
The young girl was clinging to her now.
‘I've only you.
There's no one else, there's no one in the wide world.’
‘Well, in that case you'll have to make a break for it along of me.
Where on earth we'll go, I don't know.
Anyway, one day at a time: tomorrow I go to Durham and, as Mother said’— she pursed her lips now —‘it will give me an opportunity to wear some of the clothes I have been spending my money on.
By the way, Jessie, do you love Mother?’
‘Our mother?’
Jessie peered upwards at Agnes, and Agnes said, ‘Yes, our mother.
Whose mother do you think?’
‘No.
No, I don't love her.
I don't even like her.
And…and I've known that for a long time.’
‘Strange’— Agnes rose from the bed —‘we're both of the same mind.
And it's sad, isn't it?
So sad.’
She turned and went from the room.