

 Dear Member,
You may have read in the press recently that your Board intends to recommend to Members that Abbey National changes its legal form and becomes a public limited company (PLC).
Although it is unlikely that Members will be asked to vote on conversion until some time in 1989 I am writing this letter to give an early indication of the main reasons for the recommendation.
The overriding objective of the Abbey National Board is to ensure that the Society can continue to meet the present and future requirements of its Members.
The financial resources of Abbey National are exceptionally strong and our reserves have been built up over many years through a combination of prudence and innovation.
Our plans for the future are to ensure this strength is preserved and that we are fully equipped to meet changing conditions.
We believe for these reasons that:
1.
In order to meet customer needs we must be able to respond more quickly and flexibly to changing conditions.
The market place in which we operate is changing rapidly.
Banks, insurance companies and other financial institutions are already offering comparable services.
As a PLC we would have the greater freedom and flexibility vitally needed to match the increasing pace of change and to provide new or different services — and we cannot afford to be too slow or too late.
2.
We need to be able to raise extra capital more easily and economically
Today's highly competitive business world requires a great deal of capital at the lowest possible cost.
For example we need to provide our Members with better services and facilities, with larger branches and with more automation.
We need more space in our branches to improve the comfort and convenience for customers and to talk to them and serve them better.
Capital for major expenditure or investment can be raised in a number of ways but as an PLC we would have easier access to the most appropriate funding alternatives.
At the same time, we would be helped in keeping our reserves strong.
3.
We need to ensure an ample and steady flow of mortgage funds at competitive rates as a principal service to our borrowers
By being able, as a PLC, to choose and manage a supply of funds from a wide range of sources, we could ensure we offer mortgage loans at very competitive rates and the flow should be better protected against sudden economic changes.
4.
We need to be able to meet increasing competition from American, Japanese and European financial institutions in the U.K.
Foreign competitors can enter our market on more advantageous terms and can gain a hold as they have for instance, in the motor and electronics industries.
In addition, 1992 will see the European Community as one free market and we have to prepare ourselves for further competition from other EC countries.
As PLC we would be able to meet competition on equal terms.
This, very briefly, gives the background to the proposed recommendation and the reasons for it.
Your Board has also, of course, looked very hard at how it would ensure we maintain the present secure and friendly image of Abbey National.
The aim must be to concentrate on personal financial services, and not commercial banking services, and we would not, for example expect to lend to’ Third World’countries.
In short, we would not become just another bank, but will remain Abbey national and all that has traditionally meant, and in addition will offer as wide a range of personal financial services as our customers require now and in the future.
We will continue to be innovative and will provide value and high standards of service and safety for all investors and borrowers.
I thought you would be interested to see some of the questions raised by Members so far, and I am enclosing these and the responses to them at this current stage of our thinking.
I will continue to keep you informed and as matters develop will write again on the pros and cons of the conversion, and on the broader issues.
It is also intended in due course to hold a number of open meetings in various places in the U.K. which I hope many Members will be able to attend.
May I take this opportunity to thank you for your continuing support of the Society.
Yours sincerely,
Campbell Adamson
WHATEVER YOU'RE PLANNING TO BUY YOUR MONEY GOES A LONG WAY WITH ABBEY NATIONAL
ABBEY NATIONAL
MORTGAGES
CAN WE HELP YOU CUT THE COST OF YOUR MORTGAGE?
Our range of mortgages is designed to suit all incomes and needs — so whether you're buying your first home, you're on the move or you're thinking of switching mortgages — we can find you an excellent mortgage deal.
To help you afford the house you've set your heart on, choose either our low start or deferred payment options — these will make buying your home easier during the crucial first years of your mortgage.
With the current high interest rates, it's especially important to make sure you're not paying more than you need for your mortgage.
Our current standard mortgage rate is 15.40% (16.80% Typical APR) variable.
And there is a special rate of 14.75% (15.90% typical APR) variable if your mortgage is over £60,000.
Choosing the right mortgage
We will help you arrange the ideal mortgage for your present needs and future plans:
Endowment — designed to repay the loan and may provide a cash lump sum at the end of the mortgage term
Repayment — the straightforward way to pay off your loan
Pension — the tax-efficient plan that helps you save for your retirement as well as repaying your loan
We will require a charge on the endowment policy.
Fast, efficient and friendly service, that lasts
We make sure your mortgage goes through as quickly and as easily as possible.
And once you've become an Abbey National mortgage customer, you won't be forgotten.
We will send you a regular helpful magazine containing exclusive money-saving offers.
Plus we will be pleased to give you personal financial advice about our services and investments — over the phone.
For an information pack, phone free on 0800 800424 24 hours a day or return the reply card.
A written quotation is available on request from any Abbey National branch.
LOANS
LOOKING FOR A LOAN?
WE'LL HELP YOU FIND THE BEST OPTION
Whatever your reason for borrowing — a new car, home improvements or a holiday — we have the loan that suits your needs.
And our competitive rates mean your repayments are easy to manage.
Home Improvement Loans
When you wish to transform your home, an Abbey National Home Improvement Loan is the convenient and flexible way to pay.
You can decide how much you want to borrow and the repayment period that suits you best.
There are two types of loan to choose from — secured and unsecured.
A secured Home Improvement Loan is secured on your property and allows you to borrow up to 95% of your home's value at our standard mortgage rate (currently 15.40% (16.80% Typical APR) variable)—but you must have an Abbey National mortgage or own your home outright.
With an unsecured Home Improvement Loan you can borrow between £500 and £7,500 at a fixed interest rate over a flexible period, so you know exactly how much you'll be paying each month.
Car Loans
If you need a loan to pay for that car, whether it's the latest model or a classic, an Abbey National Car Loan could quickly provide you with the money you need, at competitive rates you can afford.
An unsecured Car Loan lets you borrow between £500 and £7,500 — quickly and without fuss.
Personal Loans
Wether you've decided to treat yourself to that trip of a lifetime or invest in a valuable antique, an Abbey National Personal Loan offer you real freedom.
Decide how much you need and how long you want to pay — and leave the rest to us.
You can borrow between £500 and £7,500 with an unsecured Personal Loan and arrange all the details quickly and conveniently.
A written quotation is available on request from any Abbey National branch.
Unsecured Loans
A straightforward way of borrowing up to £7,500
Special interest rate for loans £1,500 and above which are paid by Direct Debit
Easy to arrange, you can obtain approval in minutes
Flexible repayment terms
Interest rate is fixed throughout the whole term
Up to £1,499 Typical APR is 26.4%.
For loans of £1,500 and over, repaid by direct debit, Typical APR is 24.4%.
For an information pack, phone free on 0800 800484, 24 hours a day, or return the reply card.
Payment Protection
For more security and peace of mind, this low-cost insurance option guarantees your mortgage or loan repayments in the event of accident, sickness or unemployment.
Life cover is included.
All rates correct as at 1 March 1990.
CONTENTS INSURANCE
YOUR POSSESSIONS ARE COVERED AT HOME AND ABROAD
Without adequate insurance, repairing or replacing your belongings could be extremely expensive.
With Abbey National's home contents insurance, you have complete peace of mind.
It covers your contents — from your more personal possessions (such as your jewellery)— to your most valuable household goods (like your stereo equipment and video).
It even covers your garden furniture, whether it's out in the garden or inside the shed.
Your possessions are covered anywhere in the world, with our optional all risks cover.
And this includes your money and credit cards — so you can be sure you're covered when you're away from home.
New for old replacement — for anything less than two years old
Quick and easy to arrange
Competitive rates — and free legal advice on items covered by the policy
Premiums payable monthly at no extra charge
Abbey National's insurance cover is extremely flexible.
You can extend it to cover any personal possessions that cost over £1,000 each or £3,500 in total.
Plus you can add on Family Legal Protection (which would cover legal expenses in certain circumstances).
We will suggest a minimum amount to insure your home contents — and we index link this amount every year as a safeguard against inflation.
For a quotation, phone free on 0800 252545 Monday–Friday 9am–5pm, please quote your postcode when calling, or return the reply card.
HOSPITAL PLAN INSURANCE SERVICES
 Dear Mrs Balazs,
This unique Number 4850158 has been selected especially for you in the latest by invitation-only Hospital Plan Cash Match Prize Draw.
Entry is FREE and WITHOUT COMMITMENT.
This letter also officially confirms that only you are personally eligible to claim any Money Prizes that the above Number may have won.
It's very good news.
Because you are one of the lucky people picked to receive an invitation AND be issued with your unique Number 4850158 — you are already well on your way towards a CASH Win.
All Winners will be notified within four weeks and must claim their prizes at the very latest by Friday 22nd June.
If you are notified as being amongst the lucky Winners, simply fill in, sign and return the official Prize Claim Form that will be attached.
You could win a Runner-Up Prize of £100.00 or £10.00 — £50.00 or £5.00 — £20.00 or one of the 10 Fifth Prizes each of £500.00 or the 5 Fourth Prizes of £1,000.00 or the £5,000.00 Third Prize, the £10,000.00 Second Prize or the First Prize of £30,000.00 or even £60,000.00 if it is returned promptly.
The sooner you reply, the more you can win!
Look out for the official Prize Claim envelope.
It's white and marked’ PERSONAL’with our Coat of ARms in the top left-hand corner.
If you don't claim your Prize by the 22nd June your Winners Number will go to someone else.
So be ready to fill in and post your Prize Claim Form right away.
Best of luck.
Yours sincerely,
Paul Brett Prize Draw Director
P.S. If you're one of the big Money Prize Winners, you will be invited to receive your Cheque at an expenses-paid Prize Winners Champagne Reception!
MIDLAND
 Dear Mrs Balazs,
However secure your income today, however comfortable your family life, this could all be placed in jeopardy by something that happens in just a few seconds…a serious accident.
We all know that accidents can happen to anyone, at any time.
On the roads, at home, at work.
But a serious accident can cause far more than purely physical damage.
It can have far-reaching financial consequences affecting not just you, but your home and family too.
That's why we negotiated a special scheme for our customers, with leading insurance company Sun Alliance.
It's called the Midland Personal Accident Plan and we strongly recommend it if you have any kind of regular financial commitment to protect.
As an existing Midland customer, your acceptance into this Plan is guaranteed without a medical examination or even any medical questions to answer providing you reply before 27 April 1990, and are eligible.
As a policyholder, you would receive cash for a wide range of permanent disabilities or you could receive a proportion of these payments for permanent partial disabilities.
These benefits are free of any UK Income or Capital Gains tax.
You would receive up to £80 per day for every day you spent in hospital following an accident, from a brief overnight stay up to 100 days.
And, under a special agreement for Midland customers only, you will also receive a lump sum payment of up to £800 to help you convalesce.
Payable on leaving hospital after a stay of 10 days or more.
In the unfortunate event that your accident should prove fatal, your estate will receive up to £40,000 — useful supplement to any life assurances you may have.
This sum will be doubled up to £80,000, if both husband and wife die as a result of the same accident.
We know that cash is not the answer to everything, but it's surprising how much comfort it could bring to your life and the lives of those around you.
It could allow you to build an extension to give you a ground floor bathroom an bedroom if you can no longer use the stairs.
It could pay for you to have your car adapted, so you keep your mobility and independence.
It may well be sufficient to pay off your mortgage to take the biggest financial burden off your family's shoulders.
It could even be invested to help bring you security and a regular income in the future.
You'll pay only for the amount of cover you feel you need because the Midland Personal Accident Plan provides two levels of cover — Gold Cover and Silver Cover, for less than twice the monthly cost.
We strongly recommend Gold Cover to our customers.
All benefits quoted in this letter relate to Gold Cover.
Why not extend the cover to your partner or family?
When you consider the disruption to your lives if any one of your immediate family was disabled, I am sure you will agree it makes sense to cover all of you.
Details are in the enclosed brochure.
To join, just complete the simple Enrolment Form enclosed and return it in the pre-paid envelope provided.
You pay nothing now and will have 15 days to study your policy after it arrives.
If you are not completely satisfied, return it within the 15 days and it will be cancelled.
You will have lost nothing.
But most important, please decide today to give yourself the financial protection of the Midland Personal Accident Plan.
A few minutes spent now completing your Enrolment Form could make a world of difference to the rest of your life and your family's, if one day a serious accident happens to you.
Yours sincerely,
Tony Massey Manager Customer Information
P.S. If you reply by the close date, not only will your acceptance be guaranteed, you will also receive a free two-piece telephone with our compliments.
Your Enrolment Form gives full details.
How you'll benefit from our experience
SUN ALLIANCE INSURANCE GROUP
 Dear Midland Customer,
The Midland Personal Accident Plan has been specially negotiated for you, between ourselves at Sun Alliance, and Midland Bank.
It offers vital financial cover in the event of you being permanently disabled in an accident.
Over many years, we at Sun Alliance have gained a solid reputation for dealing with Policyholders, promptly and efficiently.
But our activities extend well beyond the day-to-day business of meeting claims and dealing with queries.
In this fast-moving world, more and more people find themselves in situations which, without the protection of effective and specific insurance cover, can have serious financial consequences.
It is a major part of my job to provide genuine protection against such circumstances.
For Midland customers, aged 18 and over, and resident in the UK (excluding Northern Ireland), your acceptance into the Plan is guaranteed.
You don't have to undergo a medical, or answer any questions about your health.
In addition, you will be under no obligation whatsoever.
You may return your Policy within 15 days of receiving it, if it does not meet with your full approval.
I urge you to seriously consider this offer and to ensure that you reply before the closing date.
Yours sincerely,
John Westlake Manager
A reputation that spans nearly three centuries
With nearly 300 years of insurance experience, SUN ALLIANCE is one of the largest and most experienced insurance groups in the UK, and has an unrivalled reputation in providing first-class insurance products.
Sun Alliance Offices in Horsham, Sussex.
Lloyds Bank
Should a serious accident strike, there is a plan that pays you substantial cash benefits to help you rebuild your family's future.
 Dear Mr Clear 
Have you ever stopped to consider how you would cope financially if you or a member of your family were seriously injured in an accent?
It isn't a subject that most people like to dwell on; it may never even have occurred to you.
But serious accidents can and do happen every day of the year.
Sadly, most people find themselves totally unprepared financially and the consequences of that can be disastrous.
That's why Lloyds Bank Insurance Services have negotiated with the Sun Alliance Insurance Group, to bring you, a valued customer of Lloyds Bank, Accident Cashguard — a Plan that helps protect you and your family from financial hardship should a serious accident strike.
The Plan will pay substantial cash benefits directly to you, free of income tax under current Inland Revenue regulations, if you are permanently disabled as a result of an accident.
And even if you already have private medical insurance and life insurance, you may still need Lloyds Bank Accident Cashguard.
Because neither life insurance nor private health plans normally cover you against the financial consequences of a seriously disabling accident.
Just consider this for a moment.
Many families now rely on a joint income to meet their living costs.
If anything happened to you, or your spouse, that stopped you working, are you sure you would be able to manage financially?
If you're self-employed the outlook would be even worse.
As a Bank that looks after its customers' financial welfare, we know just how important the benefits offered by this Plan could be to you as they are paid at a time when you would need real financial help.
You see, even the most sympathetic of employers may not be able to afford to carry on paying you.
And the State Invalidity Benefit (March 1990) of just £43.60 a week is unlikely to be sufficient to meet all your commitments.
What if you were unable ever to work again?
Accidents strike without warning.
But one thing is certain — all your household expenses would still have to be met.
And it isn't just yourself or your spouse you should consider.
Because the fact is, if any member of your immediate family were disabled it could put a severe strain on your finances.
That's why you should do something now to actually avoid those financial consequences.
Lloyds Bank Accident Cashguard safeguards the needs of you and your family in no less than four important ways and with two levels of benefit: Cashguard Standard and Cashguard Plus.
The following benefits are quoted for Cashguard Plus.
If you are permanently disabled as the result of an accident you'll be eligible to receive a tax free lump sum of up to £80,000.
If you were to die as a result of an accident the Plan would pay out up to £40,000 to your estate.
And if you and your spouse are covered under the Plan and you both die as a result of the same accident the Plan will pay double the normal individual death benefit, making a total of up to £160,000 paid direct to your estate.
In addition to any lump sum benefit you receive, Accident Cashguard will pay you up to £80 a day for each day you spend in hospital, as a result of an accident, up to a maximum of 100 days.
To help you convalesce you will be paid an additional tax free lump sum of up to £800 if an accident results in a stay in hospital for ten days or more.
There is no upper age limit but to keep costs of premiums down, the benefits are halved for persons over the age of 65.
More details of the Plan are contained in the enclosed brochure.
And the cost of this valuable protection is much less than you might think…premiums of Cashguard Plus start from just £6.95 a month and when you consider the amount of cover you can enjoy for that amount, the Plan really does represent value for money.
Naturally we very much hope that you will never be seriously injured in an accident, but sadly, every year, serious accidents do happen to over half a million people in Britain.
With Lloyds Bank Accident Cashguard cover you'll have the security of knowing that if the worst did happen, at least you can be financially prepared.
To take advantage of this important Plan all you have to do is complete the enclosed application form, and return it in the reply-paid envelope provided.
As one of the Bank's valued customers your acceptance into the Plan is guaranteed provided that you are eligible and that you apply to join the Plan before the close date shown on your application form.
You will not be asked to undergo a medical.
As soon as your application is received you will be sent your policy to study at home without obligation.
If you decide not to go ahead, just return the policy within 15 days and that will be the end of the matter.
No salesman will call.
It only takes a few moments to apply for Accident Cashguard's important cover.
But it could mean the difference between financial security and financial disaster for you and your family should a serious accident strike.
I do hope you will give this opportunity serious consideration.
Yours sincerely,
K.G. Hanslow Customer Services Manager
P.S. As a special welcome into Lloyds Bank Accident Cashguard, when you have paid your first premium you will be sent a very useful First Aid Kit.
But you must reply by the close date shown on your application form.
AMERICAN EXPRESS EUROPE LIMITED
 Dear Mr Clear 
Have you ever paid a little more for a better seat at the theatre, and thus enjoyed a far more memorable evening?
Or have you ever needed a break from the pressures of work and paid a few pounds more to escape the holiday crowds?
Or even chosen an important purchase, like new tyres for your car for example, based upon safety rather than price?
In fact, don't you agree that sometimes value matters more than cost?
And that when it comes to quality, service or safety, it's often worth spending a little more?
That's why the American Express Card is not free.
As you may know, we charge an annual subscription of £32.50.
However, there are no other charges.
No interest charges.
No enrolment fee.
Yet this one modest sum brings you some remarkable advantages.
Let me give you a few examples:
Suppose you have just paid a lot of money for some hi-fi equipment.
You accidentally drop it in the street 3 minutes later and damage it.
Wouldn't you like to know it was automatically insured?
Just about every retail purchase you make with the Card is immediately covered by Purchase Protection against accidental damage, loss or theft for up to 90 days and begins where any existing cover you may already have leaves off, up to £20,000 per Cardmember.
Or suppose you're setting off on a driving tour of Spain and you don't speak the language.
Wouldn't it be good to know that if you had an accident, you could be referred — in English to a lawyer or doctor immediately?
If you have an urgent legal or medical problem anywhere in the world, one phone call to our Global Assist service puts you in touch with help at any time of day or night — absolutely free.
Or suppose you're in an antique shop and find the writing desk you've always wanted.
It's excellent value for the price but you have to pay for it in full.
As an established Cardmember you may have two further options, beyond simply paying with the Card, that allow you to spread the payments over future months.
Personal Reserve, which lets you borrow up to £7,500, and the Optima SM Card — the new credit card from American Express.
Both let you spread out payments.
You see, few people realise the unique value of American Express Cardmembership.
So let me spell out a few more advantages you may not have realised before:
We do not impose a pre-set spending limit.
Based on the relationship of spending and payment you establish with us, you will be able to spend more — or less — depending on the situation you find yourself in.
In finance you need records.
That's why you don't just get a print-out every month from us; you get a set of charge forms.
You can check what you bought and where.
And if you ever have a query, you can call us at any time, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
If you ever run short of money on holiday, you can cash personal cheques, or change currency and travellers cheques, at most of our l, 500 Travel Service and Representative Offices around the world.
They'll also act as your poste restante and friendly English-speaking local tourist office.
When you buy a holiday from a U.K. Travel Office we'll take care of all your holiday needs — and you'll get commission-free Travellers Cheques.
What's more, when you charge your travel tickets to the Card, you'll automatically receive up to £75,000 Travel Accident Insurance at no extra cost.
If the card is lost or stolen anywhere in the world, we can usually replace it within one business day.
Whether you're in Manchester or Milan, no-one acts faster than American Express.
This is an especially good time to apply as we're offering you the chance to win two tickets to either the Men's Final at Wimbledon, Ladies Day at Royal Ascot, England vs.
New Zealand at the Oval, or a performance of the West End triumph’ Miss Saigon’.
(A description of each event is provided in the enclosed brochure.)
Clearly, the American Express Card is something you shouldn't be without.
Why not start by completing your application today?
Yours sincerely,
Andrew Randall General Manager Personal Card
P.S. You may share all the benefits of Cardmembership with your partner or other family member over 18 for the modest additional cost of £15 for each Supplementary Card.
See your application for details.
AA FINANCIAL SERVICES
Introducing an affordable health care plan from the AA — now you'll never be faced with a long wait for hospital treatment
 Dear AA Customer,
If you suffered an injury — like a slipped disc, a dislocated knee — or if you needed a hip replacement or maybe something even more serious, you'd naturally want to go into hospital without a long delay .
But with over one million people currently on waiting lists around the country, + you may find that the NHS just can't treat you as soon as you'd like.
That's why AA Hospital Plus was developed.
It's a special plan that enables you to avoid the long wait for medical treatment — but without the high costs of so many private health schemes.
AA Hospital Plus will cover you for private health care of up to £10,000, £20,000, or even £40,000 , if the National Health Service cannot treat you within six weeks.
If an NHS hospital bed is available within this time, you must become an NHS patient.
However, in this case, the plan pays you a tax-free cash benefit of £26 a night while you are in hospital.
That's £182 a week to spend as you wish.
By working with the NHS in this way, AA Hospital Plus can give you access to the highest standards of health care —at a very affordable monthly cost.
Payments start from as little as £6.50 a month.
That's under 22 pence a day — less than the cost of most daily newspapers.
You don't have to take a medical examination to join AA Hospital Plus: in fact,your acceptance is guaranteed .
We'll even send you £15 of Boots gift vouchers when you join the plan, if you apply before the date shown on the enclosed Application Form.
A generous range of benefits especially for the AA
AA Hospital Plus was created especially for us by Private Patients Plan — one of the country's leading health insurance companies.
We have negotiated a range of additional benefits with PPP, which are exclusive to AA Customers like yourself:
•You will be covered for private medical treatment of up to £20,000 , if you are involved in a road accident abroad.
•If you are treated in an NHS hospital as a result of a road accident, the cash payment you receive would be doubled, from £26 to £52 a night ,tax-free .
•If you and your spouse are both being treated as in-patients by the NHS for the same road accident, this payment will be tripled to £78 for each night , again free of tax.
•AA Hospital Plus provides full insurance cover for pre-existing medical conditions, once you have been covered for two years without a recurrence.
•If you have to accompany one of your children under 9 years old into hospital, the plan will pay your bed charges for the period of their treatment.
•And if you yourself are in hospital for 10 or more consecutive nights in any 30-day period, your monthly payments will be refunded, for up to six months in any year.
What's more, you'll enjoy ALL the benefits of AA Hospital Plus for a cost that is 20% lower than PPP's own Private Hospital Plan.
You'll find full details of all benefits and monthly payments in the enclosed brochure.
The best health care — with the best service
We wanted AA Hospital Plus to offer the high standards of service and value-for-money that our Customers expect from the AA.
Which is why we chose PPP to arrange the plan.
Over the past 50 years, PPP has built up an excellent reputation for its prompt and caring service.
PPP can approve claims, often before treatment has actually begun — and claims are normally settled within a week .
In addition, when you join the plan, you will receive a special Membership Card, which will act as your identification if you need to check into a private hospital.
In most cases, it will also enable the hospital to charge your bills direct to PPP.
Apply today without any obligation
To join AA Hospital Plus with guaranteed acceptance , all you have to do is complete the enclosed Application Form and return it in the envelope attached.
We've already paid the postage — so you won't even need a stamp.
You'll receive full details of the plan, including your policy documents, to examine at your leisure — and you will be covered straight away.
At the same time, you will have a full 30 days to consider the benefits of the plan — and if you decide to cancel for any reason, you can return the policy to PPP without obligation.
Provided you have not made a claim, any payment you have made will be refunded in full.
If you care about your health, I strongly recommend that you join AA Hospital Plus today.
After all, it could give you invaluable peace of mind, if you ever have to go into hospital.
Yours sincerely,
G. Scott Senior Client Manager
P.S. AA Hospital Plus is available to all members of your family, including children.
However, if you are aged 60 or over, the AA Retirement Health Plan may give you tax relief on your monthly payments.
Just tick the box on your Application Form for details.
+College of Health statistics, March 1990
National Westminster Insurance Services Limited
 Dear Customer 
I am delighted that you have asked for a personal illustration and further details of SaverPlus 2001.
This is an excellent opportunity to receive a substantial cash sum in the year 2001, to enable you to celebrate in fine style.
The Plan offers the safety and security of a with-profits endowment assurance, plus the protection of increasing life cover as bonuses are added to your Plan.
SaverPlus 2001 is underwritten by Clerical Medical, one of the leading investment groups in the UK.
They have a proven record of bonus payments to their with-profits policyholders for every year since 1824.
NatWest Insurance Services, the insurance broking Company of NatWest Bank, are pleased to offer you this attractive savings opportunity designed to produce a substantial cash sum in the year 2001.
If you have any queries, or are not sure that this Plan is exactly what you require, please ring the NatWest Insurance Services' Helpline on Bristol (0272) 263723.
Dave Towers or one of his colleagues will be there to answer your questions.
Yours sincerely,
Stuart Frost Managing Director
Lloyds Bank
Mr and Mrs Jacks 72 Charles Street Oxford OX4 3AA
Ref: 1127
Should a serious accident strike, there is a Plan that pays you substantial cash benefits to help you rebuild your family's future.
 Dear Mr and Mrs Jacks 
Have you ever stopped to consider how you would cope financially if you or a member of your immediate family were seriously injured in an accident?
It isn't a subject that most people like to dwell on; it may never even have occurred to you.
But serious accidents can, and do, happen every day of the year.
Sadly most people find themselves totally unprepared financially and the consequences of that can be disastrous.
That's why Lloyds Bank Insurance Services have negotiated with Sun Alliance and London Insurance plc, to bring you, a valued customer of Lloyds Bank, Accident Cashcard — a Plan that helps protect you and your family from financial hardship should a serious accident strike.
The Plan will pay substantial cash benefits directly to you, free of income tax under current Inland Revenue regulations, if you are permanently disabled as the result of an accident.
And even if you already have private medical insurance and life insurance, you may still need Lloyds Bank Accident Cashguard.
Because neither life insurance nor private health plans normally cover you against the financial consequences of a permanently disabling accident.
Just consider this for a moment.
Many families now rely on a joint income to meet their living costs.
If anything happened to you, or your spouse, that stopped you working, are you sure you would be able to manage financially?
If you're self-employed the outlook could be even worse.
As a Bank that looks after its customers' financial welfare, we know just how important the benefits offered by this Plan could be to you as they are paid at a time when you need real financial help.
You see, even the most sympathetic of employers may not be able to afford to carry on paying you.
As the State Invalidity Benefit (May 1991) of just £52.00 a week is unlikely to be sufficient to meet all your commitments.
What if you were unable ever to work again?
Accidents strike without warning.
But one thing is certain — all your household expenses would still have to be met.
And it isn't just yourself or your spouse you should consider.
Because the fact is, if any member of your immediate family were disabled it could put a severe strain on your finances.
That's why you should do something now to actually avoid those financial consequences.
Lloyds Bank Accident Cashguard safeguards the needs of you and your family in no less than four important ways and with two levels of benefit: Cashguard Standard and Cashguard Plus.
The following benefits quoted are for Cashguard Plus.
•If you are permanently disabled as the result of an accident you'll be eligible to receive a tax-free lump sum of up to £80,000.
•If you were to die as the result of an accident the Plan would pay out £40,000 to your estate.
And if you and your spouse are covered under the same Policy and you both die as the result of the same accident the Plan will pay double the normal individual death benefit, making a total of £160,000 paid direct to your estate.
•In addition to any lump sum benefit you receive, Accident Cashcard will pay you £800 if an accident results in a stay in hospital for ten days or more.
There is no upper age limit but to keep the costs of premiums down, the benefits are halved for persons aged 65 or over.
More details of the Plan are contained in the enclosed brochure.
And the cost of this valuable protection is much less than you might think…premiums for Cashguard Plus start from just £6.95 a month and when you consider the amount of cover you can enjoy for that amount, the Plan really does represent value for money.
Naturally we very much hope that you will never be seriously injured in an accident, but sadly, every year, serious accidents do happen to over half a million people in Britain.
With Lloyds Bank Accident Cashguard cover you'll have the security of knowing that if the worst did happen, at least you would be financially prepared.
To take advantage of this important Plan all you have to do is complete the enclosed Application Form and return it in the reply-paid envelope provided, or if you prefer, ring 0752 600400 for immediate cover.
As one of the Bank's valued customers your acceptance into the Plan is guaranteed provided you are eligible and that you apply to join the Plan before the close date shown on your Application Form.
You will not be asked to undergo a medical.
Your cover will begin as soon as your telephone call or Application is received by Sun Alliance.
You will then be sent your Policy Document to study at home without obligation.
If you decide not to go ahead, just return the Policy within 15 days.
No salesman will call.
It only takes a few moments to apply for Accident Cashguard's important cover.
But it could mean the difference between financial security and financial disaster for you and your family should a serious accident strike.
I do hope you will give this opportunity serious consideration.
Your sincerely,
M. Warren Customer Services Manager
PS As a special welcome into Lloyds Bank Accident Cashguard, when you have paid your first premium you will be sent two stylish watches — entirely free.
But you must apply by the close date shown on your Application Form.
Take up the Accident Cashguard Plan…and receive these two stylish watches — FREE
Apply for Lloyds Bank Accident Cashguard before the close date shown on your Application Form, and these two handsome watches will be yours — entirely free.
With stylish roman numerals, gold-plated case and soft leather strap, these elegant watches are a pure delight to wear.
And thanks to their accurate quartz movement you need never be behind time.
Guaranteed for a full twelve months, the watches will be sent to you once Sun Alliance have received your first payment for the Plan.
So make sure you don't miss this opportunity to protect yourself and your family with Accident Cashguard.
Ring 0752 600400 now for immediate cover or return this Application Form today while time is still on your side.
Please allow 28 days for delivery.
If for any reason we are unable to send you the watches, we reserve the right to offer you an item of equivalent value.
Accident Cashguard offers even better value for family cover — so why not include your Spouse and children on your Application.
The fact is that every ten minutes somebody in Great Britain is seriously injured in an accident.
Do you think it could never happen to you?
It happened to these people
But because they had taken out a personal accident insurance, they or their beneficiaries received a substantial cash lump sum just when they needed it most.
A multiple pile-up on the road
After a minor accident in Oxfordshire, a man in his 50's attempted to leave his damaged car.
His car was struck by a third vehicle pinning him and severely injuring both his legs, one of which was later amputated.
Hill walking in the Highlands
An architect on holiday in the Scottish Highlands was out for an afternoon's hill walking.
In attempting to cross a small stream at the top of a waterfall he lost his footing, slipped and fell to his death.
He was only 48.
A fall in the kitchen
While working in her kitchen, a woman tripped and fell catching her face on a cupboard.
The result of this minor fall was serious.
She lost sight in one eye.
Eating out
A retired solicitor hit his head when he fell down some stairs in a restaurant.
He never regained consciousness.
Like you, these people probably thought an accident would never happen to them.
But they had the foresight to prepare themselves financially in case one ever did.
Shouldn't you do the same for yourself and your family?
Apply today for Lloyds Bank Accident Cashguard.
It won't help stop an accident happening — but it will help you rebuild your family's future.
Clerical Medical Investment Group
Investments Pensions Life Assurance
An offer to NatWest Customers to enjoy high potential growth on their savings.
Celebrate the year 2001 with a substantial cash sum and enjoy a valuable free gift now…plus automatically-increasing life assurance — through a special savings opportunity for NatWest Customers, arranged by NatWest Insurance Services, the Bank's insurance broking Company.
 Dear Mr Jacks,
By requesting a personal illustration for SaverPlus 2001, you've made a wise decision.
Because in today's financial climate, it's more important than ever that your savings earn as much as possible for your family's future.
Who better to achieve this for you than one of the oldest and most respected savings companies in Britain…with a proud record of profitable bonus payments to savers for every year since 1824!
Although it should be remembered that past performance is not necessarily a guide to future performance.
Now we can help you to become more prosperous.
As your personal illustration shows, this Plan is designed to produce a substantial sum in the year 2001, which under current legislation if free from personal taxation (Clerical Medical will have paid any taxes due on its life fund).
It's yours to spend in any way you wish.
And you enjoy extra, added protection for your family.
Because, as the value of your Plan increases, so too does the life assurance cover which SaverPlus 2001 automatically gives you.
And as an added incentive you could receive a gift of your choice absolutely free regardless of which savings option you select, if you apply before the 26th July, 1991.
How does your Plan increase in value?
It's quite simple…
When you take out your Plan, you decide how much you want to contribute — from as little as £10 a month up to £100 or more.
And each year, Clerical Medical may apply a bonus, increasing the value of your Plan.
Once issued, bonuses cannot be withdrawn by Clerical Medical regardless of future economic conditions and provided the policy is maintained in full force until the end of the term.
The when your Plan matures in the year 2001 — you could stand to collect yet another type of bonus: a final extra payout to boost that cash sum which you then receive.
And with SaverPlus 2001, you don't even need to undergo a medical examination if you can answer the simple questions on the Application satisfactorily.
Given the wide choice of contributions plus the superb savings growth potential of SaverPlus 2001 — it makes sense for your partner to apply as well.
In this way, you could increase your benefits from the Plan.
And of course, also increase the life assurance protection for your family.
It's very easy to apply for SaverPlus 2001.
Simply complete the enclosed Application Form and return it in the reply-paid envelope, not forgetting to complete the Direct Debit Instruction.
And, if we receive your completed Application before the close date, the free gift of your choice will be sent to you once your first month's premium has been paid.
And as well as the security which SaverPlus 2001 offers you, you have an extra safeguard.
Even after your Application has been accepted, you still have 14 days in which to review your Plan.
You have the legal right to cancel in this period, under the Financial Services (Cancellation) Rules and any premiums you have paid will be returned.
I hope you will take advantage of the excellent savings opportunity which SaverPlus 2001 offers you.
To do so, please ensure that we receive your completed Application Form — including your choice of free gift — before the close date.
Yours sincerely,
Mike Lingard Manager
P.S. If you have any questions about SaverPlus 2001, please ring our Helpline on 0800 378181 during office hours.
We shall be pleased to help you and, of course, the call is FREE!
Choose your Free Gift when you apply for SaverPlus 2001
Choice of Free Gift when you or your partner take out SaverPlus 2001
Please indicate on your Application Form whether you would like to receive free the Telephone Radio Alarm or Three-Piece Luggage Set shown overleaf.
PLUS
If both you and your partner invest the minimum £10 per month, or more, in the SaverPlus 2001 Savings Plan, you are entitled to receive a free gift each.
Your gift will be sent to you once your Application has been accepted and your first premium paid.
SaverPlus 2001.
As your profits grow so does your security
Your Benefits in 10 Years
In order to provide an indication of possible benefits that might be paid under this policy, Lautro (the regulatory authority for the marketing of life assurance and unit trusts) has made rules which lay down two bases on which future benefits may be illustrated.
The figures quoted in these illustrations comply with the rates of return and other factors set out in the Lautro bases, the higher illustration representing a future rate of return of 10.5% per annum and the lower illustration representing a future rate of return of 7% per annum.
These two amounts do not represent the upper and lower limits of the possible amount of benefit.
What is actually paid will depend on the bonuses added to the guaranteed benefits under the policy.
These illustrations should not be used as a basis for comparing similar policies issued by other life assurance companies or friendly societies.
The figures in this table are based on the assumption that you are acceptable at the ordinary rates of premium.
The illustration should not be taken as a forecast and the actual policy proceeds may be higher or lower than the amounts illustrated, depending on future investment conditions.
Each year, Clerical Medical announces the rate of annual bonus to be added to each eligible policy.
Once added the amount cannot be taken away by Clerical Medical provided the policy remains in full force until the end of term.
Important Information
Surrender Values
A life assurance contract is designed to give the best return if the investment is maintained for the full term.
However, should it be necessary to cash the policy in early, a surrender value may be available.
The tables below show the possible cash values of various premium levels for this 10 year endowment plan at the end of each of the first 5 years.
The surrender values set out in these tables have been calculated according to the rules prescribed by Lautro,(the regulatory authority for the marketing of life assurance and unit trusts).
Clerical Medical and General Life Assurance Society does not guarantee that the amount to be paid if the contract is terminated at one of the durations specified will be as high as the amount indicated.
The amount actually payable will depend on the bonuses added to the policy and the surrender basis in force at the time.
Bonuses
The policy is with-profits and it is entitled to receive a share of the profits of Clerical, Medical and General Life Assurance Society's life fund in the form of bonuses.
Clerical Medical is a mutual office which has no shareholders and all distributable profits are available to participating policyholders.
The calculation of the total profit and the payment of any bonus will be decided by Clerical Medical.
There are currently two types of bonus.
‘Reversionary’ bonus is added over the term of the policy and once added becomes part of the guaranteed benefits and cannot be taken away by Clerical Medical provided the policy is maintained in full force until the end of the term.
This type of bonus is not payable a face value until the policy become a claim.
In addition a ‘terminal’ bonus may be payable when a policy becomes a claim by death or maturity; the level of this bonus may be reviewed at any time without notice to reflect the changes in the value of the assets of the life fund.
It would not normally be expected to change more than twice a year.
The assets are actively managed and represent a wide spread of fixed interest stocks, U.K. and overseas equity shares and property.
Taxation of Benefits
If present law is still in force when the policy matures, the benefits from a qualifying policy will usually be free of all personal taxes including capital gains tax.
If you are, or are close to being, a higher-rate tax payer, and you discontinue your policy during the first 7–1/2 years, you may have to pay tax on the amount by which the surrender value exceeds the sum of the premiums paid.
Clerical Medical is liable to United Kingdom tax on the income and certain gains arising from the assets backing this policy.
Income on any overseas assets backing this policy may be subject to a local withholding tax.
All statements regarding taxation are based on Clerical Medical's understanding of current law.
The laws relating to taxation may be subject to changes which cannot be foreseen.
Cessation Of Premiums
If premium payments are stopped, the policy may be made paid-up for a reduced guaranteed sum assured.
Provided death has not occurred, the policy may be reinstated at any time during the following twelve months on payment of all unpaid premiums together with an addition for late payment.
Alternatively, the policy may be terminated and any surrender value taken.
Commission
Clerical Medical and General Life Assurance Society will pay commission to National Westminster Insurance Services Limited who are remunerated on this basis.
Details of the scale of commission payable in respect of this contract will be sent to you shortly after a firm application is made on your behalf.
Statement Of The Effect Of Inflation
Both the purchasing power of the ultimate benefit and the real cost of any future premiums/investments payable will depend on the rate of inflation over the period of the contract.
By way of illustration the following table shows what £1,000 will be worth in today's money at the end of the periods shown, if the annual rate of inflation over the period is as shown.
Effect Of Charges Or Expenses
The above reduction in yield table refers to expenses which are expected to be made in respect of this contract and has been calculated on the basis laid down by Lautro.
Assuming that the contract is not terminated before the end of the contract period and the rate at which charges or expenses will be made in respect of the contract continues unchanged during that period, the deductions to be made in respect of those charges or expenses may be expected to reduce the investment return by an amount approximately equal to that reduction in yield figure.
Notice Of Your Statutory Rights Under The Access To Medical Reports Act 1988
If we require medical information from your doctor, you have certain rights under the Access to Medical Reports Act 1988.
Your consent is required before we apply for a report and you may see the report before it is returned to us.
If you indicate that you wish to see the report, you will be advised if one is requested.
We will tell your doctor that you wish to see the report and you will then have 21 days to contact him to make arrangements for seeing it.
If you disagree with the contents of the report or consider it misleading you may ask the doctor to amend it; if he disagrees you may add your own written comments.
The doctor may withhold all or part of the report from you if he thinks that it would be in your interest, or that of others, to do so.
At no time will the report be sent to us without your consent, but without the report we would be unable to proceed with your Application.
(Please amend the declaration on your Application if you wish to see any report before it is sent to us.)
Please note:
If you are not permanently resident in the U.K. or you work or reside overseas you may not be eligible for this offer.
Please complete the enclosed Application giving details as appropriate.
On receipt of your Application, we will advise you further.