

Chapter Seven
They ate in the banqueting hall at the farthest end of the table from the motionless Calatin.
‘He cannot hear us of course,’ said Fael-Inis.
‘His body sleeps the sleep of all whose souls are held captive inside the Prison of Hostages.’
Fergus said, ‘Has anyone ever returned from the Prison of Hostages?’ and Fael-Inis regarded him thoughtfully.
‘It can be done,’ he said evasively.
‘But a very high price has to be paid.’
‘A soul for a soul,’ said Taliesin softly, and Fael-Inis turned his strange inhuman eyes on to him.
‘You have understanding,’ he said at length.
‘Yes, that is the immutable law.
Measure for measure.
The Sons worked to free Calatin, but they were rather stupid.
They knew,’ said Fael-Inis, industriously dismembering a portion of chicken, ‘but they did not apply what they knew.
They thought they could regain his soul by sorcery, and so they devoted all of their time to weaving a spell to do so.
It did not work, of course.
They muddled around the fringes of true power, never quite brave enough or decisive enough to take the plunge.
To acquire real power,’ said Fael-Inis, ‘you have to be brave beyond the normal.
Have we honey in that dish?
Thank you.’
Fergus said, ‘But wouldn't one of them offer his soul to free Calatin's soul?’
‘Would you?’ said Fael-Inis with one of his direct looks, and Fergus, thinking of the terrible finality of the Prison of Hostages, said, ‘No.
No, I suppose I would not.’
‘You have to love someone very greatly and very selflessly to make such a sacrifice,’ said Fael-Inis, and Taliesin looked up, because there had been something unexpectedly gentle in Fael-Inis's tone.
But Fael-Inis was concentrating on spreading honey on to a wedge of bread, and seemed not to notice.
‘What must we do to travel with you?’ asked Taliesin, and for a moment Fael-Inis did not reply.
Then, ‘I cannot take you with me without the sorcerers’ help,’he said.
‘But—’
‘I cannot,’ he said.
‘You are Mortal, and you would die in the Time Fire.
It is white hot.
It is so fiery that you would shrivel instantly.
The heat you encountered inside the Chamber of the Looms is as nothing compared to the heat of the Time Fire.’
‘Then-’
‘You must be given the sorcerers’ protection,’he said.
‘It is a spell which Calatin will know.’
‘But Calatin is lost to us,’ said Fergus.
‘Is he?’
‘Well, his soul is in pawn.’
‘That is rather different.’
‘And the Sons are all dead.’
‘Yes.’
‘Butchered by the Conablaiche.’
‘The Conablaiche takes what it will.
It will have offered their hearts to Crom Croich, and Crom Croich will be surfeited.
For the moment, that is,’ said Fael-Inis, ‘for he is a greedy god, Crom Croich, and he will soon require more.’
‘The slaughter of the first-born boys,’ said Fergus slowly.
‘Yes,’ said Fael-Inis, eyeing Fergus again.
‘Medoc will revive that, for it fits well with his fear of the Wolfprince, whose birth has been prophesied.
He will send the Conablaiche to kill every male child in Ireland,’ said Fael-Inis, ‘for he believes that in that way, he will kill the child who will one day rise up to challenge him.’
‘But,’ said Fergus, leaning forward, his eyes absorbed, ‘surely that is just a legend?’
‘Is it?’ said Fael-Inis.
‘Well, it's a very old story at any rate,’ said Fergus.
‘Is it?’ said Fael-Inis, the golden eyes glowing and piercing, so that Fergus felt as if Fael-Inis was seeing into his mind.
Fribble, who had been eating his supper with industrious pleasure, said, ‘I never heard that story until lately, you know.
The lost Wolfprince — dear me, there's a very evocative ring to it, don't you think?
And of course, Medoc would be sure to know if there was such a child in Ireland.
He has his sources,’ said Fribble.
‘Well, don't we all.
But Medoc's servants are nasty creatures.
I daresay he's used the Guardians more than once,’ he added, eating cheese with composure.
Taliesin said, ‘But no such child has been born-’ and Fael-Inis grinned at him.
‘For all your surface cynicism, you are very innocent,’ he said.
‘Have you never heard of bastard lines?
Of children born and hidden away?
Medoc believes that a child exists somewhere in secrecy, and that it possesses the ancient wolfblood.’
Fribble, still eating his cheese, said, ‘And the legend has never said a legitimate child.’
‘I should like to believe the legend,’ said Fergus slowly.
‘But I don't think I can, you know.’
‘No?’ said Fael-Inis.
‘And yet six years ago the music of the sidh was heard in Ireland again, Fergus.’
The sidh, the strange, cold, faery race, who would steal up to the gates of Tara and sing the Wolfline into the world…
‘But,’ said Fael-Inis, ‘for the moment we are concerned with the Conablaiche, and with turning back the First Herald.
Plague…
Calatin will be able to weave the spell that will protect you from the fire of the Time Chariot.’
‘You are saying we must wake Calatin?’ said Taliesin.
‘Yes.’
Fael-Inis continued to eat his supper.
‘He is not dead,’ he said, and smiled at them.
‘But to wake Calatin,’ said Fergus, ‘then a soul must be given in return.’
‘Yes,’ said Fael-Inis, and it seemed to Taliesin that he watched Fergus very intently now.
‘The supreme sacrifice,’ he said softly.
‘One of you must be prepared to lose his soul in exchange for that of Calatin.
‘And since the only one who can cage a Mortal soul and carry it to the Prison of Hostages is the Lad of the Skins, we must call him up.’
He stood up and light streamed from him.
Taliesin had not thought it would be possible for the darkness surrounding the House to deepen, but it deepened in those minutes after Fael-Inis made his pronouncement.
He knew that the darkness had not really changed, that it was because of the strength of the light within, and that it was because of Fael-Inis's radiance.
The brightest of all the angels before the Fall…
Son of the Morning…
But no, that had been that other one, the wicked, overreaching Lucifer.
Yes, but this creature would have known him, this one had been there, he had seen the Creation and the Fall…
Do I believe any of this? wondered Taliesin.
How does any of this square with the teachings of my own people?
And he thought that it did square, that there was a common root, a matrix of beliefs.
Even so— are we being manipulated? he thought.
And then, are we being bewitched?
Fael-Inis caught the thought at once, of course , and the slanting eyes rested on Taliesin with amusement.
‘You have an enquiring mind, Mortal,’ he said.
‘But you may be at ease.
I was there, and I did see, and were I to tell you, your Mortal mind could not comprehend.’
Suddenly he looked remote, and there was an aching sadness about him.
‘It was all lost to us,’ he said, half to himself.
‘All of the beauty and all of the love.
We might have had it all, had it not been for that One.’
That One…the Shining One…the Son of Aurora…
Lucifer the Light-Bringer…
‘He is destruction and decay and despair,’ said Fael-Inis.
‘He is corrupt and evil beyond belief.
He has many servants in the world, and the Dark Lord Medoc is one of them.
’ He looked at them.
‘But you knew that,’ he said.
‘I saw the Fall,’ said Fael-Inis, his eyes distant.
‘But I did not declare for the Light-Bringer, and I have never done so since.
You may trust me, Mortals.’
I am what I am…
‘And if you are being bewitched,’ said Fael-Inis, ‘and if you are being manipulated, then it is only so that we may save the world.’
For the Four Horsemen are waiting, and already the First has gone into the Future…
There is no time to lose…
Fribble, whose eyes were bright and whose whole bearing was alert, wanted to know what they had to do.
‘It's all very interesting,’ he confessed.
‘I've never seen the Lad of the Skins…well, I've never wanted to.
I don't suppose anyone really wants to see him, do they?
Will he come?
I expect I ought to take notes, because the other Druids will like to know all this.
The fat fool will never get over it.
I'm very glad I came,’ said Fribble, and accepted a glass of the wine that Taliesin poured.
‘And I'll say this for you,’ he said, ‘I didn't want to bring you.
I knew how it would be.
A Tyrian, I said.
Dear me, that's not  such a good idea.
But it's turning out remarkably well.’
He beamed and drank his wine.
Taliesin said almost automatically, ‘Wine is as the breath of life, Fribble,’ and raised his own glass in salutation.
And then, looking at Fael-Inis, ‘Will the Lad come?’ he said, and Fael-Inis said, ‘Oh yes.
Oh yes, he will come.
He fears me a little, but neither can he resist me, and he will certainly come when I call.
We have had many battles, he and I, and many confrontations.
We are old enemies.
But I have always defeated him.
That is why he will come.’
‘To try for victory?’ said Fergus, and Fael-Inis said, ‘Yes, of course.
He believes that one day he will prove to be the stronger, and for that reason, if for no other, he will never resist when I call to him.
He will come,’ said Fael-Inis, looking round the table.
‘But when he does, you must be ready for what will happen.’
‘What will happen?’ asked Taliesin.
‘That is up to you,’ said Fael-Inis, and without warning his eyes grew remote and fiery; they became inward-looking, and slanted more strongly than before.
Light streamed from him, and his hair became a golden aureole about his narrow skull.
They saw that between his fingers he held a slender, intricately carved set of silver pipes and, as they waited, he lifted the silver pipes to his lips and began to play.
In all of the stories of enchantment and in all of the legends of bewitchment, there is one that stands above the rest.
A persistent, recurrent theme; a single strand of ancient lore in the weave.
The beckoning of enchanted music.
The allure of pipes, of a lute, of a lyre, a flute.
Pan, seated on his grassy bank, leading the naiads and the dryads where he will.
Orpheus, using a lyre to charm the denizens of hell into giving him back his lady.
And others.
Sinister stories.
The Black Man of Saxony, playing grisly tunes so that the children would follow him to his terrible mountain lair, there to be given up to the Man of the Mountains.
Ireland's own counterpart: the Old Woman of the Mountains, who lures children into her warm firelit cave to weave their skin and flesh and hair and nails into her dreadful cloth.
The Macaber, the hooded, skeletal apparition, coming down from the Black Tower to dance amongst the plague-ridden townships of the Middle Ages, leading them in the dread danse macabre, forcing them to dance with him until they dropped…
Shoes that must obey the call of the music and dance on and on until their wearer fell from exhaustion.
And perhaps the best-known of them all; the apparently harmless street musician who came to a little township called Hamelin, and agreed to rid the town of rats by means of his music…
The travellers knew some of the stories, for Tara had met many Time Travellers, and the tales had echoed back.
What they did not know they could imagine.
The music of allure.
Enchanted music.
Cold and inexorable and wholly irresistible.
As Fael-Inis began to play, each of them drew a deep breath and surrendered, and each of them experienced the deepest contentment at hearing the silver pipes of enchantment.
Fael-Inis was seated against the window, his whole outline bathed in light, his hair liquid gold, his eyes burning slits of topaz.
His fingers closed about the pipes and they were translucent, as if the substance that ran in his veins might be light instead of blood.
The music was like a gentle bewitchment; it spun tiny filaments of delight, brittle and cold and cobweb fine.
You could not be afraid of it, you could not possibly fear something so delicate and so insubstantial.
They could not have told when the music tightened its hold and began its pull, but to Taliesin, afterwards, it was as if there was a moment when he knew that he was able to resist, and then another moment when he had surrendered completely.
Taliesin thought there were voices inside the music now…
Follow me, for I can give you beauty and I can give you joy, and all the delights and all the pleasures of the world…
Follow me, for I am the core and the centre, and there is nothing now but the music…
There was a moment when Taliesin was able to stand back and think: we are being bewitched.
And then he felt the music's pull again, and thought that hadn't they summoned Fael-Inis to help them, and wasn't it sensible to obey him?
And a man might die and count himself honoured for music so sweet…
Any man, any creature, might be pardoned for answering the music's lure…
Any creature…
Through the dark forest, along the narrow woodland path, came the sound of slow, dragging footsteps, and on the chill night air came the sound of crying.
The Lad of the Skins, walking abroad, scouring the night for victims…
‘Let me in for I am cold and desolate and hungry.’
Into the drugged minds of the travellers crept a warning note.
Something out there asking to come in?
Danger!
But it is so cold, they thought.
And the creature is surely little more than a child.
‘Let me in for I am lost and alone and frightened.
I have no one and nothing in the world.’
Careful! thought the travellers, struggling to remember.
Careful now.
There is something here we have to be very wary of.
‘Take me in by your fire for I am shivering with cold and I am lost in the forest…oh be merciful and let me share your fire and give me a cup of milk to sup and a mouthful of bread…’
There was doubt and anguish in the faces of the three travellers now.
Even so, thought Taliesin, struggling against the Enchantment, even so , there is something — if only I could remember — we have to be very wary of the crying in the night outside…
Fael-Inis continued to play without ceasing, and the music spun and shivered and soothed, and across the slanting features there was a look of the utmost concentration now, for it is only at the invitation of a Mortal that the Lad of the Skins can enter a house and do his terrible work.
For Calatin's soul to be rescued, one of the three travellers must lose his soul in return, and for the Lad to take the soul, it must be one of the Mortals who invited him in.
‘I have not eaten and I am in rags and all I ask is a share of your fire before I am turned out into the cold night again…
’ There was a long sigh and then a sobbing, and so desolate and so hopeless was the sound that the three listening minds were splintered with anguish.
‘Let me in, of your charity…
I shall be no trouble, all I ask is a quiet corner of your warm room…’
There was the sound of footsteps outside, hesitant, light, submissive…
Surely there was nothing here that could threaten.
‘All I ask is a corner to warm my cold hands and a sip of milk…oh let me in…’
There was a tapping at the window now, light fingers, child's fingers, poor weak fingers numb with cold and tired and trembling with hunger.
Fael-Inis spun the music fractionally quicker, and in that fraction of a moment Fergus stood up and moved to open the door.
At first he thought it was a bundle of old clothes left on the step.
‘I gathered it up,’ he was to say, ‘I actually scooped up the evil hungering thing in my arms and carried it into the house and laid it down by the fire.’
It felt light in his arms; a child starved of love and food and warmth: ‘And although a part of me, deep buried, hidden away, knew,’ he said, ‘still I wanted to weep for the pity of it.’
But yet the pity of it, O the pity of it…
He laid the thin little thing down close to the blazing fire, and he moved to the table and poured milk and wine into a cup, and sliced bread and meat.
The creature that Fergus had carried in was sipping the milk, crouched, shivering, near to the fire.
‘Lapping it up like a weak kitten,’ thought Fergus.
And all the while, while he was handing him the plate of meat and bread, and while he was holding the cup to the trembling lips, a little silvery voice was beating inside Fergus's head: this is all wrong.
I know it is wrong.
I cannot remember why it is wrong, but it is something to do with the music, and it is something to do with Calatin…
And then the music stopped and Fael-Inis laid down the pipes and turned his golden gaze on Fergus, and the spell faded, and a cold awareness flooded Fergus's mind.
The Lad of the Skins!
The hunter of souls!
And I have asked him in and I have fed him and given him milk and wine and a share of the fire!
The Lad of the Skins.
The hungry soulless being who served Crom Croich and walked abroad crying to be let in, and who carried on his back a dripping sack…
He was sitting up now, regarding Fergus with a sly glittering smile, and there was a  terrible knowledge in his eyes, and there was a knowing look.
For you know what is in store for you…
He was slender and pale and dark-haired, and his hair fell raggedly about his ears and his eyes were huge and dark-rimmed.
And there are some eyes that can eat you, Mortal…
Fergus stood, unable to speak or move, and the Lad smiled, and Fergus shuddered, for although the Lad was young and firm-fleshed, the smile revealed the evil beneath.
His lips were red and full and soft, like an overripe fruit with the juices bursting through the skin — a fruit turned, and just beyond its best, so that while the outer layers remained fresh and moist, just beneath would be the beginning of soft over-sweetness.
Decay and corruption.
Putrefaction.
And greed.
Above all, the most overwhelming greed…
There are some eyes that will eat your soul…
The Lad moved then, grinning, his hands reaching out.
Terrible hands, claws with the nails curved and nearly but not quite rotten and ready to fall out, the fingertips swollen and ripe and splitting and spilling pus in little dribbles.
And there was a stench now; rotting flesh, warm cooking meat, corpses oozing decay and filth and dissolving into putrescence.
Fergus was back against the table, one hand held up to ward the Lad off, and Taliesin and Fribble had sprung to their feet, both free now of the insidious music of Fael-Inis's pipes.
But the Lad had his eyes fixed on Fergus.
‘And Fergus will never escape him,’ thought Taliesin, and caught an answering thought from Fael-Inis.
‘But Fergus does not want to escape him.’
‘This is what Fael-Inis wanted,’ thought Taliesin, and knew, even as the thought formed, that Fael-Inis had not wanted it, but that it had been necessary.
For Tara, and for Ireland, and for the world of the Future, and perhaps also for the legendary Lost Prince who will one day rise up and defeat Medoc…
A soul for a soul.
Fergus in exchange for Calatin, for only Calatin could weave the Enchantment which would allow them to ride in the Time Chariot.
It has to be done, thought Taliesin, torn between agony for Fergus and the knowledge of what they must do.
A soul for a soul…
Because already the First Horseman is in the world of the Future.
Plague.
Plague already stalking the  world, scattered by the Conablaiche.
Famine beginning.
‘And then shall the Beast Apocalypse ride into the world…’
Weighed against all that, what did one soul matter?
But it is Fergus! cried Taliesin silently.
The Lad was coming onwards, his eyes glittering, his hands outstretched, the nails curved and predatory.
Saliva dripped from his parted lips and ran down over his chin, and Taliesin and Fribble both shuddered, for the Lad would savour Fergus; he was licking his lips and salivating over him.
I shall tear out your soul, and carry it away to the Prison of Hostages, and then perhaps the Conablaiche will come to tear out your heart, for there is nothing my Master likes so well as a warm heart, a Mortal heart, still beating, fresh and running with blood and juices…
Fergus had fallen back across the table and Taliesin and Fribble both moved to stand between him and the Lad.
‘We would have done anything to prevent the Lad getting to Fergus,’ said Taliesin later.
‘There was nothing we would not have done.’
And then Fael-Inis stood up, and the Lad stopped and looked around, and his eyes fell on Fael-Inis, and Taliesin thought he had never seen such fear and such undiluted hatred in any living creature's eyes.
Fael-Inis regarded the Lad quite coolly, and at length he said in an amused voice, ‘So, jackal, we face one another again, and fight for a soul,’ and the Lad drew back with a snarl, his eyes showing red.
He stood looking at Fael-Inis from the corners of his eyes, like a trapped hare.
‘You cannot escape me,’ said Fael-Inis.
‘Your mind is subservient to mine.
You have owned me to be your superior before, and you will do so now.’
He began to move round the Lad, and Taliesin, who was watching closely, thought that Fael-Inis was creating an invisible circle.
For a moment he thought that a sprinkling of light fell wherever Fael-Inis walked, but as it touched the floor it vanished, and he could not be sure that he had seen it at all.
But he thought that it was as if Fael-Inis had somehow taken a shard of pure light and splintered it, and then scattered it about them.
Fael-Inis was perched on the edge of a chair now, his eyes never leaving the dark-eyed figure of the Lad.
After a moment he said, ‘Come now, a bargain.
We both know what is wanted.’
He looked to where Fergus stood, and the Lad snarled again and wiped his mouth with the back of his hand.
‘Let the old man go,’ said Fael-Inis softly.
‘You have had your fill of him.
Take this one instead.
You know who he is?’
He paused and the Lad nodded.
‘I will allow you to take his soul,’ said Fael-Inis again, ‘but I must have your promise that you will not give his body to the Conablaiche.
Well?’
And then, as the Lad hesitated, ‘You know I always keep my word,’ said Fael-Inis.
‘You know that I am a prince of a very high order, and you know I obey the Ancient Code of Honour.
’ He looked at the Lad and Taliesin thought the Lad nodded very slightly.
Fael-Inis seemed to withdraw his gaze fractionally.
‘Very well,’ said Fael-Inis, as if something had been settled.
‘Very well, I will let you take Fergus in exchange for Calatin.
Do what you must.’
In that instant, the Lad leapt on Fergus.
There was nothing any of them could do.
‘It was over before we knew it,’ said Taliesin later, ‘and even if it had not been, I do not think we could have got near to the Lad.’
‘It was the Light,’ said Fribble.
‘The Knife of Light, Fael-Inis called it.
White and dazzling.’
Fergus had been knocked backwards by the Lad's spring; he was lying on his back on the littered table, and the Lad was crouching over him, his eyes enormous, his face intent.
His ragged hair fell across his brow, and his hands slid under Fergus's skin.
The Knife of Light was hard and brilliant.
It seemed to slither across Fergus's skin, and they thought that he cried out.
And then the Knife flashed again, describing an arc in the dark room that stayed in the watchers' vision for a long time.
Fergus gave a truly terrible cry, and for a moment it seemed as if a sudden coldness had descended.
‘Something has gone from here,’ thought Taliesin.
‘Something that was warm and alive and filled with hope and joy and fear and laughter, and all the living things, has suddenly gone from the room.’
And then the Lad held up something that shimmered and rippled before their eyes, and that was beautiful and terrifying and —‘Powerful,’ thought Taliesin.
‘So strong and so powerful and so vulnerable.
Whatever it is, it is a force field, a magnet.
It will attract every good influence in the world, and every evil one as well, and it will reject or accept, as it wishes.
Wonderful  and fearful and filled both with great weakness and immense strength.
’ But he never spoke of the pitiful way in which the soul bowed its head humbly and submissively before the Lad.
He thought later —‘When I could think,’ he said — that it was as if the soul knew that it must surrender itself into the Lad's hands, to do with as he wished.
There was a terrible resignation about it and a patience, and the pity of it slammed Taliesin at the base of his throat.
The Lad stood for a moment, his hands caressing the formless thing.
As he did so, Fribble and Taliesin caught a flicker of movement from Calatin.
Then the Lad darted across the room like a fleeing hare, and vanished, and Calatin opened his eyes and looked right at them.
Fael-Inis said very softly, ‘There was no other choice,’ and his hand came out to rest on Taliesin's arm for a moment.
‘I am strength and power and light and speed, Taliesin,’ he said, ‘but even I cannot protect you from the Time Fire.
Only Calatin can do that.’
Fribble said, ‘He's awake, you know,’ and they turned to look to where Calatin was sitting in his chair, his single eye open, searching the room with a look of bewilderment.
‘Bless my soul,’ said Calatin in a deep rumbling voice, ‘bless my soul, I believe I dropped off for a while.
Where's that pesky creature that was footling about outside?
Did he get in?
The boys said it was the Lad of the Skins, although I don't suppose it was any such thing.
Still, you can't be too careful.
And the boys would let in anyone who asked politely, of course.’
He rubbed his single eye and beamed.
‘And we have guests,’ said Calatin.
‘Dear me, not the thing to fall asleep when there are guests.
You'll forgive the discourtesy, sirs?
Well, I daresay you'd know I wouldn't nod off in the normal way.
Have we finished supper?
Dear me, here's a littered table.
And dust!
My word, I shall have to speak to the boys about this.
Of course, you get a lot of dust in from the forest.
But they might have run round with the mop and a bit of beeswax.
I don't know what they do all day, I don't really.’
Fael-Inis said, ‘You have been sleeping the sleep of the soulless, sir,’ and Calatin turned a look of great astonishment on him.
‘Have I?
Well, do you know, that's a very curious thing.
Inside the Prison of Hostages, was I?
Well, now there's a place not many escape from…well, there isn't anyone that has that I can think of offhand.
Now I come to think about it, that pesky Lad was dancing about somewhere outside.
Did he get in?
Did he?
I suppose he told a good tale and the boys let him in.
Kind hearts every one of them, but no brains.
Just like their mother.
Dear me, she'd have been sad to see this day.’
He drew out an enormous red spotted handkerchief from a capacious pocket somewhere and mopped his eye.
‘Of course, the Lad can be very clever,’ he said, having blown his nose vigorously.
‘And the boys would never see they were being fooled.
’ He moved one arm cautiously.
‘Yes, I am a bit stiff,’ he said.
‘Dear me, I must have been asleep for…
No, I'd better not be told, because I should only begin counting up all the things I'd missed, and you're better off not knowing what you've missed.’
‘Indeed you are, sir,’ said Fribble, fascinated.
‘Well, if the boys let the Lad in, it's their lookout,’ said Calatin.
‘Time and again I've warned them, but they think they know best.
They like things to be loud and dramatic, and if there's one thing you can't have in good sorcery, it's loud noises and drama.
Bless my soul, it's all down in the Amaranth Chronicles.
Get the spell right, I tell them.
Keep the Looms well oiled and follow the Chronicles, I tell them, but they don't listen to a word I say.
You'll forgive me, sirs, but I've forgotten your names for the moment.
My memory isn't what it was, although I daresay your names would come back to me if we waited a bit.’
He tapped his forehead.
‘Old age,’ he said.
‘Dear me, it's a sad trial at times.
A very sad trial.’
And he looked at them expectantly.
Fael-Inis said, ‘We are merely travellers, Calatin.
But seeking your assistance,’ and Calatin sat up straighter and looked pleased.
‘I'm often sought out,’ he said.
‘All kinds of people come to ask my advice, you wouldn't believe.
Well, we had to make a better road through the forest, although I see through the window that it's grown up a bit recently.
Unwieldy.
Yes, you'd need a hefty axe, not to mention a good stout sword to get through there.
Odd, I've not noticed it until now, and of course the boys never tell me anything.
And then again, if I've been  shut away in the Prison of Hostages, I expect I've been away for quite a time.
Is it a Court matter you're here on?
The High King?
No, of course it isn't, he's long since dead, Dagda rest him.
Dear me, a high old time of it we all had when Cormac was at Tara.
My word, I could tell you some tales.
Spells and love potions — not that Cormac ever needed them of course, because there wasn't a woman in Ireland who'd have resisted him.
But I always did a good line in love potions.
It'll be some quest for his daughter then?
Yes, and she could tell a few tales as well, not that wild horses would drag them from me, not in a gnat's eyeblink they wouldn't.’
Fribble started to say, ‘But she isn't-’ and Taliesin trod heavily on his foot.
‘There was no need for that,’ said Fribble afterwards with injured dignity.
‘I wasn't going to say anything out of turn.’
‘I get it a bit muddled,’ said Calatin, looking round the room vaguely.
And the boys don't tell me things these days.
They'd like me to retire if the truth was told, but what I say is, why retire when you don't want to?’
He beamed amiably at Fribble, who at once said, ‘Quite right.
Dear me, sir, you possess good sense, I see,’ and Calatin looked pleased and slapped Fribble on the back which, as Fribble later pointed out, was rather alarming, because —‘Although he's quite a small giant as giants go,’— Calatin was still twelve feet tall and his hands were like York hams.
‘I was bruised for days afterwards,’ said Fribble, ‘but I didn't say anything, because it wouldn't have been courteous.
And he's very amiable.
It's all very interesting, isn't it?’
Calatin was very amiable indeed.
He insisted on them taking supper with him, and would not hear of a refusal.
‘We've eaten supper,’ began Taliesin.
‘But we can always manage another one,’ put in Fribble.
‘And the Tyrian has some rather good wine.’
‘Oh, so you're a Tyrian, are you?’ said Calatin, inspecting Taliesin with interest.
‘My word, our ancestors had some rare old times together, didn't they?
Haven't you heard of the sorcery wars between the Amaranths and the Tyrians?
Haven't you?
Well, it makes a very good tale, only I don't know if I could remember any of it’ He beamed on Taliesin, and then said in an aside to Fribble that he had never yet heard of a Tyrian who didn't judge his wine remarkably well.
Taliesin, hearing this, at once uncorked the wine flask and offered it to Calatin, who accepted it, said he took it very kindly of Taliesin, and drained the flask in two gulps.
‘Very good,’ he nodded, mopping his mouth.
‘I never thought to see a Tyrian at my table, but you're very welcome, sir.’
Taliesin said, ‘I will dine with any man who will serve wine, and I will talk with any race who will provide interesting discourse.’
He raised his glass to Calatin.
‘You are providing both, sir,’ he said, and Calatin said, ‘Am I really?
My word, that's very true,’ and turned with relief to Fribble, who was trying to explain about their journey and about Medoc having taken Tara.
‘Ah, you're from the Court, are you?’ said Calatin.
‘Well, that is interesting.
I daresay I shall be a bit of out of touch, of course.
But the boys will tell me everything.’
He took another sup of wine reflectively.
‘Dear me, Medoc's got Tara, has he?’ he said.
‘I never cared for Medoc.
My word, it's a bad business and no mistake.
Dear me, I don't like to think what the end might be.
He's arrogant,’ said Calatin, nodding and tapping the side of his nose with a forefinger.
‘Very arrogant, that Medoc.
One of the Northern lot, you can always tell.
They think they can rule the world, well, to be fair, they probably could, only it's as well if you don't let them know it.
And it's always a good idea to let them think you've got better enchantments in your armoury than you actually have, if you take my meaning, even if you haven't got any enchantments at all.
But that's for you to worry about.
I'm only a plain sorcerer.
An artisan.
It's all quite easy.
So long as you keep the Looms properly oiled and follow the rules you can't really go far wrong.
No need to pretend otherwise, although I could tell you some stories…
But I mustn't breach trade secrets.
I'm going to write my memoirs one day,’ he said confidingly.
‘That'll make a few people sit up.
I'm looking forward to that.
But I don't gossip,’ he said again.
‘I'm quite safe.
You can tell me anything you like.
The boys are a bit over-chatty sometimes.
I wouldn't like to tell them anything that oughtn't to be widely known.
They go to all these get-togethers.
Sorcerers and wizards, and a few necromancers as well, I shouldn't be surprised.
One of them had the effrontery to bring a wraith back once.
Over my dead body, I said.
You take that hussy out of here, or you go through that door and  don't come back.
Well, we couldn't be having that sort of person in here.
I don't know what his poor mother would have said.
But they're good boys.
They work very hard.’
He nodded portentously, and Taliesin said in an undertone to Fael-Inis, ‘This is terrible.
We'll have to tell him.’
‘In good time,’ said Fael-Inis gently.
‘He has a lot of missed time to make up.’
‘And so I won't ask too much about why you're here,’ said Calatin, looking hopeful all the same.
‘Unless there's a plot against the Throne.
Now that is something I won't have anything to do with.
I'm very loyal.’
He looked quite fierce as he said this, and Taliesin and Fribble both backed away, because when a giant — even a small one — looks at you fiercely, it is not easy to stand your ground.
Fribble poured himself another measure of wine.
‘For courage,’ he explained.
Taliesin said, ‘You may be sure, sir, that we are the Queen's men through and through,’ and Calatin said he was very glad to hear it.
‘If you're fighting for Her Majesty, you have my support,’ he said rather emotionally.
‘To the death and beyond,’ rejoined Taliesin, although Fribble later pointed out, how could anyone fight beyond death?
‘You'll forgive me for making the point,’ said Calatin, ‘but you do get the odd rebel, even these days.
Not that the Queen has much trouble putting down rebels, hey!
My word, what a firebrand!’
Fribble started to speak again, but received such a blazing look from Fael-Inis that he subsided.
‘I thought he ought to know which Queen we were fighting for,’ he said afterwards.
‘Why?’ said Taliesin.
‘He is loyal to the High Throne of Ireland and to the Wolfline.
Grainne is Dierdriu's granddaughter by an unbroken line.
It would only confuse him to tell him the truth.
As well as that,’ said Taliesin, ‘it would take too much time to explain, and time is what we haven't got.’
‘You do use complicated sentences,’ complained Fribble.
‘I suppose it comes of being a Tyrian.’
‘I am as well read as the best scholars of the world, and I use the language of the gods and the verses of the poets,’ said Taliesin, ‘but I will try to speak more simply in future.’
‘Flowery nonsense,’ muttered Fribble.
Calatin had eaten his supper with enjoyment.
‘Because,’ he  said, mopping his plate industriously with a piece of bread, ‘when you've been asleep for — no, I don't want to know — you're bound to feel a bit peckish when you wake up.’
He ate a gargantuan meal, starting with some plovers' eggs they had overlooked earlier, working on through a few roast geese with a brace or so of ducklings on the side, and ending with one half of a cheese and a couple of bowls of fruit.
‘And now,’ he said, having mopped up the last crumb, ‘now, what is it I can do for you?
I should mention the — dear me — the fee,’ he added, lowering his voice to a whisper, as if this was rather an impolite word.
Taliesin said, ‘We have not the riches of the East, nor the wealth of the world, sir.
But I believe we can meet your fee.’
‘I have to be expensive,’ explained Calatin, sounding apologetic.
‘For one thing there's this house — you wouldn't believe the way it gets through money.
If it isn't the dry rot in the roof, it's insects chewing the timbers.
And the boys aren't cheap,’ he said.
‘They like their little get-togethers with other sorcerers — and why not, I say.
But they will belong to the Sorcerers’ Fellowship, and then there's the Old Boys' Academy of Wizardry — mind you, I like to go along to that myself.
And they're all Comrades of the Loom, which of course is very useful.
Secret handshakes and rituals,’ he said, lowering his voice impressively which, as Fribble said, could still have been heard on the other side of the forest.
‘And it all costs money,’ said Calatin, shaking his head and refilling everyone's glass.
(‘I oughtn't to have any,’ said Fribble.
‘Just a half glass perhaps.
Well, if you insist — your good health, sir!’)
‘Yes, it's all very costly,’ said Calatin.
‘Subscriptions to this and that, and then suppers at people's houses, and of course you have to return the hospitality.
And my family weren't what you'd term rich,’ he added in another of his vast whispers.
‘Everyone thinks the Amaranth Line was enormously wealthy, but so much of it went in the Sorcery Wars — dear me, I intended no discourtesy, sir.
But sorcery itself isn't a well-paid profession, you know.
We get what we can.
But it's as well to make these things clear.’
Taliesin murmured something that sounded like, ‘All the riches of the world we shall lay at thy feet,’ and Fribble, who  felt that a note of practicality was called for, said, ‘Be assured that we can pay your fee,’and Calatin looked pleased.
‘And you know, you haven't yet told me what it is that you want,’ he said, and sat back, and eyed them expectantly, first one and then another, which Fribble found disconcerting.
‘If he had two eyes like any one else,’ said Fribble, ‘I could stand it.
It's this single unblinking stare I can't cope with.’
But no giant single-eyed stare could prevail against Fael-Inis.
He leaned forward and looked directly at Calatin.
‘Well?’ said Calatin who was, truth to tell, becoming just the smallest bit afraid of this strange, golden-eyed creature, but who would not have dreamed of showing it, because you did not show discourtesy to guests, not if you wanted business from them.
And so he waited for these really rather unexpected people to explain what they required, and hoped he would be able to do whatever it was.
And so when Fael-Inis looked at him and said, ‘It is something that is easily within your capabilities, good Calatin,’ Calatin was very pleased, and said at once that he'd do his best.
Fael-Inis said softly, ‘Protect these men from the Time Fire.’
Calatin sat back in his chair and stared at the three strangers in his house and said, ‘Oh dear, you're not going into the Far Future?’
‘I'll do it,’ said Calatin at last.
‘I don't like it, but I'll do it.’
‘Is there a difficulty?’ asked Taliesin.
‘Well, there is and there isn't,’ said Calatin, frowning, which made him look rather odd.
‘A one-eyed frown,’ murmured Fribble.
‘Dear me, I never thought to see such a peculiar thing.’
‘The spell can be spun very easily,’ said Calatin.
‘My word, it's basic stuff, that.
I can do it standing on my head, although I won't.
And fresh off the Loom it will be.
And there's the thing.’
He leaned forward.
‘It's a spell that has to be very fresh indeed for it to work,’ he said.
‘You'll have to be inside the spell and out of here into the Time Chariot so fast you couldn't say ‘caterpillar's boots’, always supposing you wanted to say such a ridiculous thing, which I don't suppose you do.
‘But then you'll want to come back,’ said Calatin, ‘because it stands to reason that you won't want to stay in the Future — well, no one would.
A nasty place, the Future,’ he said, with  a shudder which rocked the table and made Fribble spill his wine.
‘You'll want to come back,’ said Calatin, ‘and there's the problem.
You'll have the spell with you,’ he said, ‘but will it stay potent?
And if it doesn't, what will you do?
I don't know a great deal about the sorcerers of the Future,’ said Calatin, who actually knew nothing at all about them, but thought it would sound unprofessional to admit this, ‘but I don't think we should rely on them.
For one thing we don't know what they'd charge, and for another they might not understand about the Time Fire.
It's a bit risky.
Are you sure you want to go?
Yes, I can see you do.’
He looked at them.
‘Shall we say noon today?’ he said.
‘But you'll have to remember that under no circumstances at all can you expect the spell to last longer than seven days.
‘If you stay in the Future for longer than that, the spell will certainly be dead.
You would never be able to come back.’
If the gallery outside the silver door had hummed and quivered and thrown out heat before, now the sensations were magnified and multiplied a hundred times as Calatin set the Silver Looms to harness the power of the sorcerer.
‘He's a very able sorcerer,’ said Fribble, as they sat together in the banqueting hall.
‘He might seem a bit bumbling, but he's very good.’
Taliesin said, ‘The bodies of the Sons-’ and Fael-Inis said, ‘He will not see them.’
‘The Cloak of Invisibility in addition to all else?’ said Taliesin lightly, and Fael-Inis said, ‘Exactly,’and Taliesin looked up sharply, because although he had not been entirely flippant, neither had he been altogether serious.
Fael-Inis said tranquilly, ‘Calatin will not see the bodies until he has woven the spell we need.’
‘Have you any of the higher feelings?’ said Taliesin, and Fael-Inis looked amused.
‘I have deeper feelings than ever you could comprehend,’ he said.
‘When I walked away from the Great Rebellion, my heart bled with the pity and the waste and the anguish of it.
When the doors closed on the place in which I had dwelled, and I found myself alone in the world of Men, I was in more agony than you could dream exists.
There has never been a day, nor yet an hour, when I have not ached for the loss of that which existed  before Lucifer led his followers against the gods.
He suffered defeat and banishment, but there were others who had to suffer it with him.
And though I cannot return until it pleases the gods to end the world, I have never ceased to long for it.
’ He looked at Taliesin.
‘I have many of the higher feelings,’ said the rebel angel softly, ‘just as you have, Mortal.’
Taliesin said lightly, ‘I am uncaring and careless.
I have no feelings for anyone.
’ He reached for the replenished wine chalice at his elbow, and lifted it rather challengingly.
Fael-Inis smiled.
‘You have imagination and sensitivity, and you care a very great deal,’ he said.
‘You care for the future of mankind, and you care for the future of Ireland as well.
That is why you accompanied Fergus and Fribble.’
‘I cared only to escape from a life that was irksome and narrow,’ said Taliesin, drinking his wine and reclining in the chair rather negligently.
‘Rubbish,’ said Fribble, unexpectedly.
‘Guts and imagination, that's what you've got.
Unusual to find both together, you know.
Especially unusual to find them in a Tyrian, because as a rule Tyrians only care about making money.
That's all very well in its way,’ said Fribble, beaming, ‘but there're other things to life as well as making money.’
‘Other things in life-’ Taliesin grinned at them both, and lifted the wine to his lips.
‘Fribble is right,’ said Fael-Inis, sending Fribble his sudden smile, and Fribble said at once, ‘Of course I am.
People think I'm silly, but I'm not nearly as silly as I appear.
It's quite useful to let people think you're silly sometimes.
You get away with a good deal,’ he said looking at Taliesin thoughtfully.
‘It's nearly as clever to let people think you don't care as it is to let them think you're silly.
For a Tyrian you're quite an interesting person.’
Taliesin laughed, and Fael-Inis said, ‘Why did you accompany Fergus and Fribble?’ and Taliesin glanced involuntarily to where Fergus's body lay on the velvet-covered couch beneath the window that looked out on to the forest.
‘To save the world,’ said Taliesin in a mocking tone.
‘What else?’ and Fael-Inis smiled.
‘Is that also the reason you will assume Fergus's mantle and go into the Far Future to bind the Apocalypse and turn back the Four Horsemen?’
‘Must I do so?’
‘Don't you think you must?’
There was a silence, and Taliesin felt Fael-Inis's eyes boring into his mind again, and thought: of course he knows what I am thinking, and of course he knows what I am feeling.
Does he?
Do I know myself?
Despite himself, he heard again Fael-Inis's words earlier: who told you that life was intended to be easy, Mortal?
Aloud he said, ‘Is Fergus completely lost to us?’ and for the first time saw the golden-eyed creature hesitate.
But Fael-Inis only said, ‘We have certainly saved his body from the Conablaiche, for the Lad will not dare to break his promise to me.’
‘Can we be sure of that?’
Fribble wanted to know.
‘Assuredly we can.
The Lad will not invoke my wrath,’ said Fael-Inis, and his eyes glittered rather frighteningly.
‘Did I not say we were old enemies, he and I?
Fergus's body will stay as it is.
‘And,’ said Taliesin, ‘his soul?’
‘That is rather different,’ said Fael-Inis.
‘For there are other powers, and other laws that govern the soul.
’ He looked at them very gently.
‘But it is possible that Fergus's soul will never return,’ he said.
‘Are you using Fergus's sacrifice to compel me to take his place?’ said Taliesin suddenly.
‘No.
Are you?’
‘I thought I was not,’ said Taliesin slowly.
‘But you are thinking that it would be a dreadful irony if Fergus had given his soul into the captivity of the Prison of Hostages, only to have his quest abandoned?’
Taliesin stood up and regarded Fael-Inis steadily.
‘Well?’ he said.
‘Wouldn't it?’
‘You will do it?’
‘Save the world?’ said Taliesin, and all of the old careless mockery was there.
‘How could I do otherwise?’
And then Fribble said, ‘The Looms have stopped.’
‘I think it will work,’ said Calatin.
‘It's being finished.
It's cooling, you might say.
You'll have to treat it carefully, because it's a fragile sort of spell.
Don't let it get torn or worn.
’ He eyed them severely.
‘Are you ready to leave?’
‘The Chariot will be here at dawn, good Calatin,’ said Fael-Inis, and Calatin at once said that this was a very good time for a journey.
‘Dawn, there's the thing.
My word, you can't beat a dawn journey,’ he said, pleased.
‘I'll bring the spells down to you, and then you'll be off and away.
Dear me, what an excitement.
I've made one for each of you, of course.’
It was then that Fribble said, ‘I'm not going.’
He was very definite about it.
‘I should be in the way,’ he said firmly.
‘Dorrainge was quite right, only I wanted to argue against him, fat fool.
It doesn't do any good to let him think he can overrule me either — well, he can't really, because I'm Chief Druid after all.
But he needs to be reminded now and again.
I was reminding him when I said I'd come with you.
And I've enjoyed it all very much,’ said Fribble, quite seriously.
‘It's all been very interesting and I've learned quite a lot of things I didn't know before.
But I should be in the way from here on.
Taliesin will do very well on his own.’
Taliesin, rather appalled at the ‘on his own’ part of this speech, said, ‘But we might need you for all kinds of things, Fribble.
We might need your knowledge.
You know things that I don't.
You certainly wouldn't be in the way.’
‘Yes I should,’ said Fribble.
‘It's polite of you to say that, but it's a young man's venture this — well, that's not to call Fael-Inis a man precisely, and that's meaning no disrespect either,’ he added to Fael-Inis, who replied with grave courtesy, ‘None in the world.’
‘You will be in my thoughts of course,’ said Fribble in a down-to-earth tone.
‘Well, you'll know that.
And there's a lot of strength in properly ordered thoughts, you know.
People don't think it, but there is.
I shall set aside a part of each day to think about you.’
He regarded them quite severely.
‘What will you do?’ said Taliesin.
‘Well,’ said Fribble, ‘Calatin here has been so kind as to invite me to stay for a while.
’ He glanced over his shoulder to where Calatin was trumpeting into a red spotted handkerchief.
‘It's hit him very hard, you know,’ said Fribble.
‘About the Sons and the Conablaiche.
Fael-Inis told him very gently and very nicely, but you can't expect him to be other than quite dreadfully upset, can you?
‘So I thought I'd stay with him,’ said Fribble.
‘We shall have a good deal to discuss, you know.
I shouldn't be bored.
We're  going to write his memoirs, well, we're going to start writing them, and that will be extremely interesting.
And then we're going to edit the Chronicles of Amaranth, and after that,’ said Fribble, ‘after that, we're going to embark on a history of the Sorcery Wars between the Amaranthines and the Tyrians.
Of course, that will take a very long time indeed.
But I expect I shall learn quite a lot.
Also,’ said Fribble, glancing to the velvet couch beneath the forest window, ‘also I do think that one of us ought to stay with Fergus.’
‘Yes of course,’ said Taliesin, his eyes going also to the motionless figure, because it was certainly unthinkable that they should leave Fergus like this, in the middle of a dark old mansion at the heart of an ancient forest.
Fribble beamed.
‘Do you know, you're improving by the hour,’ he said.
‘You'll be quite a good sort of person by the time you return from the Future, supposing you do return, of course, because I didn't like the sound of that spell, did you?
Seven days only, that's not long.
I should miss you,’ said Fribble seriously.
‘Dear me, yes I should.’
‘That is extremely ki—’
‘Well, I should miss your wine,’ said Fribble, ‘because it's really very good.
No, I wasn't hinting — well, perhaps we ought to speed you on your way.
My word, that's a large helping you're pouring me.’
Dawn.
Birdsong and rebirth and the sheer undiluted delight of living creatures awaking to face another day.
Tongues of colour washing over the old grey mansion.
The vibrant hues of coral, and the rose and gold of dawnlight.
The shimmering dusky pink of a poppy field under a dawn sky.
Fergus should have been standing here, thought Taliesin, and there was a pain and an aching void at the knowledge, for this had been Fergus's quest and his covenant.
Standing in the dawnlit hall of Calatin's house, Taliesin knew that for Fergus this had been not just a venture, a battle for the Fiana, but something much deeper.
The restoration of the Wolfqueen…
And Fergus had made that final, overwhelming sacrifice so that Ireland should be safe, and so that the Wolfqueen should regain Tara.
He should be here, thought Taliesin again, but since he is not, since he is forever inside the Prison of Hostages, then I must carry out the quest for him.
The morning light was piercing the old house now, sending shafts of pure colour sliding across the floor, making the dust motes dance in and out of the rays.
With the light came the music.
‘The Beckoning,’ said Fael-Inis.
Taliesin could never tell afterwards where the light ended and the music began.
‘The light ran into the music,’ he said, ‘and the music into the light.
I was dazzled and bewitched.’
Even so, he was able to look at the fireglow of the Chariot, and he was able to look into the light and see the salamanders with their wise faces and their eyes filled with ancient knowledge.
He felt the cool silky spell woven by Calatin brush his skin like a thin liquid cloak, and he remembered that there were only seven days for Fergus's task to be performed.
There was a strong sweet scent; sandalwood and patchouli and freshly cut grass on a summer morning.
Applewood burning on an autumn night.
Everything that makes up Ireland, he thought.
I wonder if I am afraid?
And he knew he was not the least afraid, he was only afraid of failing Fergus, who had surrendered his soul that the Wolfqueen might rule again.
And then the music was drawing him into the fire and the light, and he could see the massive shape of the Chariot limned against the forest now, bathed in its own radiance, hung with silk, lined with satin…
The echoes were all about him now, and the beautiful fragile images created by the people of the worlds not yet born…
A Chariot of the Sun is being given to you…
And the light is a garment…
A flying chariot through the fields of air…
And time and the world are ever in flight
And love is less kind than the grey twilight
And hope is less clear than the dew of the morn
.
And I am going into the light and I am going into time, and if I am to save the world, then I shall have served the world, and if I do not save the world, then at least I shall have tried.
Because nobody ever said life was meant to be easy anyway…
He caught the glint of a smile from Fael-Inis at that, and felt a sudden delight, because the fire was surging up all about them, and Fael-Inis had taken up a stance at the fore of the Chariot, and he was gathering up silken reins between his hands, only the reins were of living colour and shifting light, and there were  certainly spells within them as there had certainly been spells in the Chamber of the Looms…
There was the sweet warm fragrance of gentle heat and of silken bodies, and the salamanders tossed their manes, and sparks of light cascaded across Taliesin's vision.
And then Fael-Inis lifted the silver pipes to his lips, and there was a final burst of music, and the forest and the house and the Ireland of Tara's Court vanished, and they were pulled into the Far Future.
Chapter Eight
Lugh of the Longhand thought things were going rather well.
It was not everyone who could lead a party of men from Innisfree on to the mainland without being spotted.
Lugh was certain that there had been nothing in the least bit noticeable about their journey.
There had been a certain amount of bustle about it, but you could hardly have a journey — any journey — without a bit of bustle.
You certainly could not lead upwards of twenty men, never mind a pair of Druids, on to Ireland's mainland without being a bit noisy.
But nobody would think anything of it.
As for Dorrainge's idea of travelling by night, stealthily and furtively, Lugh had never heard anything like it.
They would go openly and honestly by day, he said, and pretended not to hear when Dorrainge said they were inviting all kinds of trouble.
What Dorrainge did not realise was that Lugh was being subtle.
It would pay off, they would all see.
Lugh was going to be playing a decisive part in this victory.
Dorrainge was in for a very big shock.
The setting up of the secret camp and the training of the men was a blind and a cover to fool Medoc, and people who said lugubriously that Medoc could not be fooled did not know what they were talking about.
Lugh was going to fool Medoc very neatly, and they would all eat their words.
While the men were training and getting their eye back for archery and broadsword fighting, Lugh would be creeping up on Tara, studying the Bright Palace to find out its weaknesses; he would be charting the movements of the guards and sentries, and counting up the number of people on watch at the Western Gate.
He knew that there was a whisper among the men that they ought to have had Fergus with them, but Lugh knew that Fergus was no great loss.
It was plain to Lugh, as it should have been to everyone else, that Fergus — and whoever he took with him  — was going to get into severe difficulties in the Far Future.
Lugh had never thought it a good idea, and he had said so at the time, only nobody had listened.
The Queen had agreed to it because the Queen would agree to anything Fergus wanted, everyone knew that.
Lugh had heard a few extremely surprising tales about Her Majesty and Fergus, but he had not gossiped, because Longhands did not gossip.
You could not call what Lugh had done gossip, because he had done it for their own good.
And he had done it tactfully as well, just mentioning to one or two people who had Dierdriu's ear that Grainne and Fergus were sometimes seen together in rather questionable circumstances.
Tact and discretion he had used, and he dared say that Dierdriu had been told who had been at the back of it.
She would have thought the better of him for it as well, Lugh knew he could be sure of that.
He had not liked doing it, but he had known his duty.
Anyway, it had been a very long time ago, goodness gracious, it had been at least six years.
It might even have been seven.
Fribble was not really very much of a loss to this expedition, because he would only have got in the way, falling asleep at important meetings (Lugh liked meetings), and eating all of their supplies.
Lugh was being very fair about distribution of supplies.
‘It's to be fair shares for all,’ he had said to Cathbad, and Cathbad had at once said, ‘Oh dear me, yes of course.
I don't know how else we should do it,’ and had gone off to prepare their evening meal.
And it had been extremely unkind, not to say ill bred of several of the younger ones to remark on Lugh's own plateful of stew and to compare it unfavourably with their own portions.
Everyone knew that the leader of the party had to be given larger helpings than anyone else.
But Lugh would rise above it all, and would not bother to listen to complaints about who was getting larger helpings of stew, or who was having the most comfortable sleeping quarters, or even who was getting up a bit later than everyone else.
Leaders needed their sleep more than the people they led.
Lugh was not sure, now, if it had been a good idea to bring Dorrainge.
He ought to have known that Dorrainge would meddle, well, he had known it, but it had actually been rather difficult to leave him behind.
‘He's Second Druid,’ said Cathbad.
‘You can't leave him  behind.
’ And he had gone off to brew up a kettle of some herbal concoction, which he had said would do wonders for the men's aching joints after the long march.
‘Legs and knees,’ said Cathbad busily.
‘Legs and knees, and probably thighs as well.
My word, thighs have to be looked after, don't they?
You can't march an army unless your legs are in order.
I'll just give them all a little bit of a massage, shall I?’
Dorrainge was turning out to be very meddlesome.
He poked his nose into things that ought not to have concerned him, ‘How much dried bear meat have we?’ he asked.
‘Dear me, is that all?’
And, ‘Are you sure we ought to make camp here?’ he said.
‘Don't you think we can be seen too easily?
We're in a direct line from Tara for Medoc's spies.
Of course it's nothing to do with me.’
It was nothing to do with Dorrainge at all; Lugh would make the decisions about where they pitched camp and how much bear meat they brought.
They would probably not bring very much bear meat at all, because Lugh was not especially partial to bear meat, but it would have looked odd to say this.
Lugh would address all the meetings as well, and Dorrainge would not get a look in.
Lugh always showed well at meetings, and he was good at speeches.
It was not many who could make a speech like Lugh.
‘It's not many who'd want to,’ said Cathbad, distracted by the necessity of having to provide supper early on one of Lugh's meeting nights.
‘There's me with thirty-five men to feed, and not a morsel in my larder tent!’
Cathbad did not contribute very much to the meetings, and so Lugh did not pay him very much attention.
As for Dorrainge's complaints, the camp site they had chosen was very good.
It was unkind of Dorrainge to criticise and say that Medoc would be able to see them, and that Medoc would be able to tell everything they did.
Medoc would not be able to see them, not when Lugh had finished his cunning arrangement of branches and twigs and leaves.
Ah, the Longhands knew how to conceal things.
‘But it'll take you the best part of two days to provide the concealment,’ said Dorrainge, surveying Lugh's neatly drawn plans and watching the men sawing off branches and raking up leaves from the forest floor.
‘What do you suppose is happening all the time we're making the cover?’
Lugh said it would not take two days and it would not even take all night.
Medoc would not see them.
‘It's too close,’ said Dorrainge.
‘I said it was and now I see I'm right.
We'll be seen.
We've probably been seen already.’
Lugh kept his temper extremely well and pointed out all the advantages of the site.
He was logical and courteous, so that it was unnecessary for Dorrainge to say that he supposed a Longhand had nearly always featured in Ireland's greatest defeats, and Lugh was only following tradition.
‘We'll be seen,’ he said again.
‘You mark my words.’
Lugh did not enter into an argument.
He walked away with dignity and went off to tell Cathbad to make several small fires instead of one big one that night, just in case their usual large fire was large enough to attract unwelcome attention.
‘Little groups of us,’ said Cathbad nodding.
‘Cosy.’
Cathbad thought it was a good site.
‘Plenty of nice dry wood for the cooking,’ he said, ‘and I'll just collect some of those wild mushrooms, shall I?
There's nothing to beat a handful of mushrooms in with a rabbit stew.
And look at the wild sorrel!
Sorrel with fish.
I must gather some.’
Dorrainge said that at any minute Cathbad would start talking about holding a pig-sticking party, and Cathbad, who was plunging about happily in the wild sorrel, said, ‘And if we could only hold a pig-sticking party…
’ Several of the younger soldiers hooted with laughter, and Cathbad looked hurt and had to be brought out of the sorrel and soothed.
‘And I've been stung by nettles,’ he said, injured, and pretended not to hear Dorrainge who said it was a mistake to pamper nettle stings, and they hadn't the time to soothe people's silly imagined injuries.
The soldiers liked being close to the Bright Palace, and they thought that Medoc would probably not be able to see them.
Medoc was not that powerful, surely he was not, they said.
‘Yes he is,’ said Dorrainge.
‘I've told you.’
But the soldiers thought it was great altogether to be near to Tara, and began to talk about getting up a party to go along and take a look, because wouldn't it be the finest old inspiration a man could have to see the Bright Palace again.
‘It's not bright any longer,’ said Dorrainge, and the soldiers looked as disappointed as children.
Cathbad clicked his tongue, because this was not the sort of thing you should say to soldiers, who were easily cast down and sent into gloom and doom, something you should certainly avoid before going into battle.
Somebody asked why the Bright Palace was no longer bright, and Dorrainge said, ‘Because of Medoc's dark enchantments of course,’ and looked at the soldier as though he thought him a complete fool.
‘Which,’ said the soldier afterwards, ‘I am not.
I only asked a polite question.’
‘To be sure you did,’ said his colleagues, ‘and isn't that the way of Druids to be so squashing.
’‘I wouldn't have come,’ said the soldier, who would not have missed it for worlds, ‘I wouldn't have come if I'd known there would be Druids squashing and glooming.
Because if it isn't Dorrainge telling you how we'll be defeated, it's Lugh Longhand making speeches half the night.’
Several people said it was, to be sure it was, and didn't it make a plain man flinch.
‘And if it isn't that,’ said the soldier, who was a man of fixed purpose, ‘if it isn't that, it's that Cathbad forever trying to get his hands on your-’
‘But Lugh makes quite rousing speeches,’ put in another soldier, rather hastily.
‘And it's all quite friendly.’
‘It isn't so friendly out here,’ said the first soldier with a shiver.
‘It's downright sinister.
We're far too close to a lot of nasty things.’
‘What sort of nasty things?’
‘Medoc's sentries.
Medoc's spies.
The Twelve Dark Lords.’
‘Oh, these woods have seen far worse than Medoc and the Twelve Lords,’ said Lugh airily, who happened to be listening to this.
‘Much worse,’ he said wisely, but Cathbad said that nothing could be worse than Medoc.
‘Medoc comes from the most ancient line of necromancers,’ said the soldier who had asked why Tara's brightness had been quenched.
‘The ancient unbroken line; the evil sorcerers who command the Dark Ireland.’
Somebody asked, a bit hesitantly, how you would define the Dark Ireland, and Dorrainge, who felt he had been left out of this conversation for too long, said it was rather difficult.
‘Because nobody has ever seen the Dark Ireland, and nobody has ever visited it,’ he said.
‘But it's believed to be a kind of dark mirror-image of this world.
The creatures who inhabit it are cold and greedy and evil and corrupt.
Perhaps they are distorted and warped.
Certainly they are forever trying to find  a chink between their world and this.
They would devour us if they could, and rule the land until the skies were dark with blood and the river ran with gore.
‘The Dark Ireland is ruled by the powerful wicked enchanters of the North,’ said Dorrainge.
‘Beings such as Medoc and the old Erl-King, although the Erl-King was vanquished by Cormac in the last century.’
The first soldier remembered that Medoc had always been called the dark, evil, beautiful one, and Dorrainge said, ‘Oh yes, he is all of that,’ and several people looked thoughtful.
One of the soldiers wanted to know if it was true that Medoc was preparing for the birth into the world of the monster god-idol, Crom Croich, and an argument sprang up as to whether Medoc and Crom Croich were the most evil and most powerful forces ever to come out of the Dark Ireland, or whether the Erl-King had been worse.
‘The Erl-King ate the children,’ remembered one of the soldiers softly, and Cathbad shuddered, and wished people would not remember this sort of thing.
‘But if Medoc does summon Crom Croich,’ said another soldier, ‘he'll send out the Conablaiche to tear people's hearts from their bodies, and that's just as bad as the Erl-King.’
‘But the Erl-King didn't-’
‘And then he'll offer the hearts to Crom Croich.’
‘I still don't think-’
‘On a silver platter,’ said the soldier obstinately.
Several people said you could not get anything nastier than a warm and dripping heart on a silver platter.
‘And then Crom Croich eats the hearts,’ said the soldier, and Cathbad, who had been very busy all afternoon supervising the skinning and jointing of an ox and had been planning to serve braised ox heart for tomorrow's midday meal, turned quite green and tried to remember if they had any salted pig left.
Lugh said with amused tolerance that these were all fairy tales, but some of the soldiers said, were they indeed.
Didn't they all know about the terrible appearance of the Conablaiche last time, and how it had prowled the country, snatching sleeping children from their beds and tearing out their hearts for its Dark Master.
‘And they say that after the Conablaiche would come the Lad of the Skins,’ said the soldier, and a sudden silence fell, because everyone knew about the Lad of the Skins and the Knife of  Light, and how, if you fell into the Lad's clutches, he would take your soul and you would be thrown for ever into the Prison of Hostages.
‘They do say,’ said Cathbad, ‘that if you ever found your way to the Prison of Hostages, you would find all the children whose hearts were given to the Conablaiche during that time, and whose souls were taken by the Lad.
The Lost Children, they call them.’
Several people said wasn't that the most heart-rending story you'd ever hear, and had they finished all of the mead yet?
The mead was passed, and the mugs were refilled, and the fires burned a bit lower.
Lugh, who had listened to all this with tolerance (because of being a good leader), thought that now was probably as good a time as any to slip away and take a real look at Tara.
It was not everyone who would have relished going off into the dark forest; Lugh did not relish it at all, in fact.
But he would be quite safe because he would keep a sharp look-out for anything and everything, and he would not be captured because no Longhand ever had been captured.
He moved warily through the forest, making very little sound.
He was not really so very far from the camp either.
He could hear the men beginning the old bawdy ‘Thousand and One Nights of the Wolfking ‘, which had been written about Cormac, and which Lugh did not care for overmuch, because even if you discounted half the things it said, you were still left with a patently exaggerated tale.
The trees were thinning now, and he was drawing farther away from the camp.
Moonlight was pouring over the valley, black and silver, and presently Lugh was standing at the edge of the forest, looking down into the shallow dip that sheltered the great Manor of Tara.
Tara.
The Shining Palace, the bright centre of all Ireland.
The heart and the core and the living, breathing pulse.
The place that the High Kings and Queens had called Medchuarta.
Seen like this, across the valley, seen by thin moonlight and mists, it was a place of shadows; it was a dark, rather forbidding fortress of night enchantments and of black sorcery.
Lugh knew, as they all knew, that Tara's light had been quenched by Medoc, because Medoc was a necromancer, a dark enchanter of such power that no light could live in his vicinity.
If Tara's brilliance, if the radiance that had once shone for Ireland's High Kings  was ever to be kindled again, Medoc must be driven out and destroyed.
Lugh was the man to do this of course.
He stood, fascinated, watching Tara.
He was not a fanciful man (the Longhands did not believe in fancies), but he felt as if it was a miasma rising from a swamp, a sickness and a corruption.
Because the Dark Ireland is waking…
He thought he could hear voices now; silvery, gentle voices, dark voices, that made you think you might be being watched.
He remembered the ancient legends of the Guardians, the Brotherhood of Sorcerers who would serve and master if they were paid enough, and who would guard anything in the world if someone would employ them sufficiently profitably; he remembered as well that the Conablaiche and the Lad of the Skins were abroad in the world again.
What might be watching him from the shadows?
The thin light was casting curious shadows everywhere now, and Lugh blinked and rubbed his eyes, because just for a moment it had seemed that figures were appearing through the mists ahead of him.
The swirling greyness shifted again, and the shadows flooded nearer, but after all there was nothing to see.
Or was there?
Had that been a silent watching figure just over there?
Something dark and anonymous?
Something that wore black armour and had a visored face, and who would not materialise unless a dark and terrible enchantment was spun…
Were the Twelve Dark Lords close by?
And then the shadows moved again, and Lugh could see that there was nothing there at all, and that he was nearer now to Tara than he had thought, and after all it had only been a trick of the light.
He remembered that he was being extremely clever and extraordinarily subtle about all of this, and that it would be subtlety that would win this war.
Ah, they would all of them be astonished at how well Lugh of the Longhand had done tonight.
He would go very quietly now, and he would go very stealthily, and he would slink inside Tara, and he would find out quite a lot about Medoc.
And there was nothing at all to be afraid of.
Chapter Nine
Fergus had not been aware of the precise moment when the Lad of the Skins drew his soul from his body with the Knife of Light, but he had known a great coldness, and a sense of desolation, and an abandonment so complete that it had overwhelmed him, and for a time he had scarcely been aware of what was happening.
He had wanted to wrap his arms about his body for warmth, but he had not been able to move, and his vision had been blurred.
He had tried to cry out, but something had smothered his cries, and he had wanted to reach out and clutch on to everything that was dear and familiar and real and safe.
But Calatin's banqueting hall and the house in the forest had wavered and grown dim —‘as if I am seeing it through water,’ thought Fergus — and there had been a great heaviness within him so that it was difficult to breathe.
He thought he was dying, and panic seized him.
And then he remembered the piercing coldness of the Knife of Light slicing deep into his body, and the Lad's evil greedy eyes and grinning mouth, and he knew that he was not dying, that this could be worse than death, for he was to suffer the soulless existence of all who become victims of the Knife of Light.
I shall never die and I shall never be released, and henceforth I shall wander alone in the eternal light…
Black despair engulfed him, and a loneliness so absolute closed over his head that he felt himself drowning in it.
Forever alone…
From now on, I shall be forever alone…
The cold was within his heart now, and he knew it for the heartcold of the truly bereft.
‘I shall never see my own world again,’ he thought.
‘I shall never see Grainne.’
The house was becoming smaller now and distant, and he had the impression that he was being drawn away from it, and drawn away from the living warm world he had known.
For a  breathspace he saw his own body; he thought that Taliesin and Fribble had carried it to a settle beneath a window, and he wanted to grasp at them, for they had been dear, good friends, and the knowledge that he would never see them again was scarcely to be borne.
But the pull on his soulless mind was too strong now, and he felt himself being drawn up and up into a vast emptiness, and into the endless skies of infinity.
He knew that he was being sucked into the Prison of Hostages, for it is to that great and awesome dwelling that is not quite in the world of Men but not quite out of it that all soulless ones must go.
Panic threatened to engulf him again, and the terrible desolate coldness was like an icy vice about his heart, and he knew he had never been so completely alone.
There was the sensation of immense speed now; he thought the skies were rushing past him, and there was a whirling, dizzying feeling, as if he might be at the centre of a maelstrom.
He remembered how the travellers and the seafarers who came to Tara had always told that at the centre of every whirlpool, at the heart of every tempest, is a great tranquillity, and he caught and held on to this thought.
He glimpsed the Gates then —‘Ornate and tipped with something that catches the light and gleams,’ he thought.
And saw, within the Gates, glinting points of colour…the Gates of Paradise, studded with chalcedony and jasper, inlaid with firestones and cedarwood, rimmed with turquoise and moonstones…
But these are not those Gates, thought Fergus, these are the Gates of a place reserved for those who are denied admittance to Paradise.
But the Gates were opening, and he could see that they were more beautiful and more majestic than anything he had ever seen or dreamed.
‘Sea-washed, sunset Gates…the Gates of Light, unbarred and ajar…’
And then he was passing beneath the huge, towering Gates, and he saw how they stretched above him into infinity, and he felt the timelessness of the great Prison descend on him like a huge, unseen weight.
The ceaseless light closed all about him.
Forever in the light.
Forever open and vulnerable to the never-ceasing light of the skies.
There had been some kind of vast domed hall as he passed through the Gates; he thought there had been colours within the light then, and he had received a dim impression of a far-off vaulted ceiling.
From somewhere deep within his mind, he remembered the whispers of the great and terrible Hall of Light, through which the soulless one must journey before being allotted a resting place here.
But the Hall of Light faded, and the impression of great elegance and immense silence and a drifting unfamiliar scent faded, and he was falling forward and there was some kind of cell waiting for him, and this was surely the end of everything, and this was surely all he could ever expect anywhere in the entire world…
He thought that he lost his hold on sanity for a time then; he knew, later, that the black despair and the agony of loneliness had closed about him fully, and for an unmeasurable time while his reason spun wildly out of control.
But the training that had been such a part of his life, the long hours of studying the Twelve Books of Honour for entry into the Fiana at the age of eleven; the days and the weeks spent schooling his mind so that all situations could be calmly appraised, came to his aid and, at length, exhausted and drained, Fergus began to look about him and assess this strange, out-of-the-world fortress.
He had thought, insofar as he had thought about it at all, that all prisons must be akin; that there must be stone cells, barred windows, grilles, gaolers, other prisoners close by.
But although he could see areas of hewn stonework that seemed to close him in, and although he could certainly see barred windows through which light streamed, there were no gaolers, and there were no other prisoners.
There was only himself and the vast, endless mansion of the skies, and Fergus, used all of his life to human companionship, thought that this solitude would be more than he could bear.
And then he remembered that it had to be borne, that there was no other choice, and that there would be no escape from this place.
Would there?
Fergus knew the stories; he knew how it was whispered that once inside the Prison of Hostages no one ever returned to the world of Men, but to Fergus, who had led the Fiana from the age of eighteen, and who knew the secrets and the devices and the weaknesses of half the ancient fortresses in  Ireland, no prison was ever sealed so utterly and so completely that there was not a way out of it.
He began to study this idea, and he was to think later (‘When I could think sanely again,’ he said) that this was one of the things that saved his reason.
There is no prison from which an initiate of the Fiana cannot escape.
It was not quite one of the codes of the Fiana, but it was very nearly so.
Fergus, who had stormed castles and laid siege to fortresses and who knew the arts of infiltration as well as he knew the Twelve Books of Honour, found himself summoning every shred and every tag-end of legend and myth and lore ever whispered or recounted or imagined about the Prison.
For if there is the smallest hope of escape…if there is the merest chance that I could return to the world and to Grainne, I would tear this place down stone by stone.
He knew that escape would not be made by force but, even so, his mind returned again and again to the grains and snippets of stories that had somehow (how?) permeated into the world of Men.
The Great Hall of Light through which the soulless one must first pass — yes, I came through that, thought Fergus.
Great pouring swathes of golden light, and the far-off glint of blue and silver, as if there might after all be something solid and man-made within the Prison.
And some kind of early judgement had there been?
Yes! thought Fergus.
Yes, as if I was being assessed for a place, a level, a grading here.
This was unexpectedly encouraging, because it was familiar.
Within every structured society, certainly at Tara and very definitely within the Fiana, there were strata, tiers, sections and subsections.
So there's a structured society here, is there? thought Fergus, and felt at once warmer and less alone.
And then, because it was inherent in his nature to question and appraise and assess, he continued his exploration of the threads of knowledge he possessed about the Prison.
The Twelve Chambers of the Blameless and the Praiseless which is to say fools and idiots, thought Fergus caustically.
Yes, that certainly comes next.
I suppose that is where I am.
And there were others, places with exotic, sometimes meaningless names…the Vale of Mists…the Hall of Golden Columns…
Yes, I know these, I have heard them.
He was  concentrating furiously now, for, he thought, if I know of these places, then surely it must be because people have been able to talk of them.
It must be because people have come out.
People have come out.
The knowledge gave him renewed confidence, and now the strange bizarre names came to him more easily.
The Cage of Stars, the Lake of Darkness.
The River of Souls which flowed nine times round the Prison.
Was there a way out there?
If I could find the River, I could ford it somehow, thought Fergus, his mind tumbling now with ideas and plans, and with half-forgotten memories.
And there was the Star of the Poets, and surely there was
Oh yes, thought Fergus, how could I have forgotten?
The Stone Hall of Judgement.
It was that through which he must pass next.
But he did not know how long he would have to wait to do so.
It was this last that gave him pause, for, he was to say, ‘Although I had no knowledge of it — that place where the Twelve Judges sit — I believed that I had long since dreamed it, and I knew it for a place of great finality and immense power.
Once inside the Stone Hall of Judgement, once subjected to the decision of the Twelve Stone Judges who pronounce on all Mortal creatures, I believed I should be beyond all hope of escape.’
And once that happened, Ireland was lost to him, for although he supposed Taliesin and Fael-Inis would continue the fight, he would never know its outcome.
He would never see the world again.
Far beyond and far above that, Grainne was lost to him.
A bitter smile touched his lips at that, for hadn't Grainne long since been lost?
Hadn't she been lost seven years ago, in the misty dawns and the drowsy afternoons?
Hadn't she been lost to him before even he had seen her.
Seven years.
He had been the newly appointed Head of the Fiana, eighteen years old, heady with the power of it.
He had been the youngest ever to head the ancient, honourable Fiana; there had been seven years within its ranks only, and he had been intoxicated with the knowledge.
Perhaps he had been arrogant, and certainly he had been imperious.
But after all, he thought, after all, I was very young.
He could remember how his father had said that he need bow his head to no man in Ireland, save the High Queen, and he could remember how he had laughed, and said to be sure he  would call no man master, and certainly no woman either.
He had been wildly ambitious and intensely purposeful; he had been sure of his own worth, and determined to succeed.
It had been the confidence of ignorance, of course, but he had not known it then, for who at eighteen recognises such a thing?
He had been ready to defy the conventions and take on the world — and win! he thought.
Yes, I was ready to fight the world and win.
If you intend to climb a mountain, you do not look at the foothills and worry; you keep your eyes fixed on the summit, and that way, if you are very lucky and very determined, you may achieve it.
The summit.
He had achieved it more easily and more quickly than ever he had expected.
‘Charm,’ had said the tolerant, smiling on the young Fergus, prepared to accept him for what he was, but, ‘Arrogant,’said the older, more cynical courtiers.
And, ‘Favouritism,’ said yet others, who remembered how the High Queen Dierdriu had ever an eye to dark-haired, blue-eyed young men who smiled with charm and impudence, and who could woo birds from trees and noble ladies into bed.
It had not been charm alone, and it certainly had not been favouritism that had taken Fergus on his upward journey.
Dierdriu had been kind, certainly.
She had smiled on the new young courtier, and she had helped him, and he had been fascinated by her, for although she was ageing, there were still easily discernible traces of the famous beauty who had led armies into battle and lovers into bed; who had brought Ireland to the brink of something so truly great that its fame would echo down the centuries.
Dierdriu had maintained the legend begun by the first Wolfkings, but her granddaughter would create a new legend altogether.
Grainne.
Barely eighteen, wide-eyed and a little awe-struck by the Court; receptive and responsive.
The Crown Princess, the future High Queen, beautiful and untried, and more desirable than any woman Fergus had ever seen before or since.
But she is not for me nor I for her.
He thought she had not known of his feelings, until the night of the receiving of new candidates into the Fiana, at which Fergus, as its head, must preside.
It was an ancient and rather solemn ritual, the admitting of young men of good family into Ireland's small and carefully chosen band of warriors.
The Fianaigheacht said, ‘Only the very highest in the land may enter.’
Fergus had questioned this, because his own father had been an ordinary townsman, one of the small landowners near to Tara.
Well-to-do in an unassuming way; certainly respected.
‘But of the people,’ Fergus was to say with unconscious arrogance.
‘Not of Ireland's nobility.’
Why then had his father made that curious statement: ‘You need bow your head to no man in Ireland save the High King or Queen.’?
The candidates had strength and stamina and charm, and Fergus, presiding over the banquet, watching them perform feats of skill and endurance and strength, smiled.
He would accept all of them; presently he would cross the floor to where they would stand, and he would bestow acceptance on them.
He had started to move across the Sun Chamber, and a hush had fallen, for at such a ceremony, as the Fiana's head, Fergus commanded absolute obeisance.
And then he had turned his head and seen that Grainne was watching him, and a sudden, surprised joy unfolded within his heart, for there was such desire in her eyes that lights exploded inside his head, and he wanted to stand still and savour the moment.
He wanted to drink it and touch it and explore it, for, he thought, surely there can be nothing so magical as the moment when you know, beyond all question, that the woman you desire desires you in return.
He had turned it aside, of course, for the Court was waiting.
But the knowledge had lain beneath his thoughts, a warm, secret spring of joy.
If I beckon, she will come!
Performing the ritualistic Acceptance almost without thinking about it, he had seen, quite clearly, the two paths down which he could travel.
He thought: we are still safe, she and I. I have not yet taken the step.
I have not yet beckoned to her so that she will come running to me, so that I shall lie with her today and tonight and tomorrow, and for a great many tomorrows.
He was aware of the immense arrogance of this, but he knew he had not mistaken that long, steady look.
If I beckon, she will certainly come to me! he thought, and his mind whirled, so that for a moment he barely saw the waiting Fiana candidates and the glittering Sun Chamber.
Or should he turn desire aside and pretend that there had  never been that brief, blinding flare of longing between them?
Should he take the honourable path, the virtuous path?
Should he bank down desire and quench the longing, so that in the end desire would die and longing would shrivel and life would go on very much as before…
He had waited for her in the forests that fringed Tara, his mind filled with light and hope, his body more fiercely aware than ever it had been in his entire life.
He felt as if he was about to take his first woman, and as he stood beneath the trees, watching her running towards him, Fergus felt himself trembling.
He could not move, and he thought he probably could not speak either.
He thought: I believe that this is how I shall remember her when it is over, as over it will surely be sooner or later.
This is the image, the picture, the memory I shall fold away, so that somewhere in the future, somewhere on the other side of the pain I know awaits, I shall be able to unfold the memory and I shall never quite lose her.
If I can lie with her once, thought Fergus, if I can taste the sweetness, if I can possess her just once, she will be forever mine…
He had caught her in his arms, and there had been a soaring delight, an exchange of joy, wordless, mindless, stronger and infinitely sweeter than anything he had ever known.
She clung to him, and his mouth found hers, and she tasted as fresh and as new as the morning, and desire had exploded within him, and he thought that after all he had been wrong: once would never be sufficient, he wanted her for always, he wanted to be with her, to share everything with her.
Share Tara? said a small treacherous voice he had not known he possessed.
Would you share Tara if it was offered?
The thought slid serpent-like into his mind, and he thought: to share Tara.
Oh yes, to be with her and be at her side.
Oh yes, I could do that.
And my son would rule Ireland.
For a moment he had seen it clearly; himself and Grainne in the Sun Chamber; he had seen as well the child, the dark-haired creature of life and light and mischief…
Grainne's son and mine…
A sweet, deep pain closed about his manhood, and it was then that desire rocketed out of control, and he felt himself become as hard and as high as the beech trees that stood sentinel to Tara's western avenue…
Grainne arched her back like a cat, and Fergus began to peel the thin robe from her shoulders, kissing her bare skin, feeling her response, feeling the swing of her hair against his shoulders and chest, and exulting in it, for there is something so intimate and so wholly precious about the feel of a loved one's hair against your skin…
There had been a moment when he sat back and looked at her, naked and submissive in the grass, and his heart started to sing and his mind spun into a dazzling vision of what might be…because we can only ever be a might-have-been, my dear love…that little boy with dark mischievous eyes, slender and supple, and Ireland's future Prince…
Fergus had been so intensely aware of every separate part of her that it had been a pain and a torment.
He had wanted to take each part; eyes, skin, hair, bones, and he had wanted to scoop her up and hold her between his hands and never release her again.
Passion had swept in then, and he had entered her, unable to help himself, clinging to her as she had earlier clung to him, and although he had been gentler than he had ever been with any other woman, she had cried out, and her face had twisted with pain, and Fergus had felt blood on his thighs.
And although I was sharing the pain with her, still I was exulting, because I had made her mine, and what I had had and what I had taken, no man ever in the world could have of her.
White-hot heat coursed through him, and with it came the rare, precious fusing of mind and body, so that her thoughts and her emotions flowed out to him, and his to her…we were truly one on that morning, thought Fergus.
We were swept into the bitter-sweet dream, and there would be no going back, but on that morning we were truly one.
The dream had turned sooner than he had thought.
Alone, in the eternal light of his timeless Prison, Fergus winced away from the memories, and then, with sudden resolve, turned about and faced them.
For memories are the only things I can ever have of you now, my sweet, lovely girl…
He remembered every single one of the stolen meetings; how he had gone to her bedchamber by night, how she had come into the warm drowsy afternoons to find him, when everyone was busy about something and no one knew where anyone was  and she would not be missed.
He had been lost to all sense of preservation, both for himself and for Grainne.
The summons had come within a week.
‘The High Queen will receive you in the Sun Chamber,’ and Fergus had known at once what was ahead.
But he had been unafraid, although a tremor had gone through him as he entered the great Sun Chamber and found Dierdriu alone and waiting for him.
He paused in the doorway, because it was rare to see the High Queen without at least a dozen courtiers; certainly he had never seen the Sun Chamber like this, bathed in the glow from the dying day, alive with the strong, pure magic of the Purple Hour, the huge crystal windows that looked out over all Ireland ablaze with light.
He thought that Dierdriu was outwardly calm, but that, in reality, she was not, as he was not.
She turned and regarded him, and after a moment walked slowly and deliberately to the Ancient Throne of Niall of the Nine Hostages and seated herself on it.
In the fading light, her eyes were yellow-gold and gleaming, and Fergus thought: wolfeyes! and saw Dierdriu smile, for she had picked that one up with ease.
Of course she did, thought Fergus.
Was not the Samhailt, the ancient art of hearing the thoughts of others, bestowed on the Royal Line long ago?
But Dierdriu only smiled at him, and Fergus saw that it was the cruel, charming smile of her ancestors, who had lain with the wolves.
She said, ‘Do you find it strange to see the Sun Chamber so empty, Captain?’ and Fergus thought: oho! she is calling me Captain.
Then we are to be formal, are we!
He said, mildly, ‘I am accustomed to seeing it filled with people, ma'am.’
And waited for her to make the next move.
But she only said, ‘I am often here alone at this hour.’
‘Why have you sent for me, ma'am?’
Dierdriu regarded him thoughtfully.
‘We shall not play games,’ she said.
‘You have transgressed the law.’
‘Yes?’
Fergus put up his chin.
‘We all of us do that at some time or other.’
You do, said his tone.
The smile deepened.
‘Oh, Fergus,’ said Dierdriu softly, ‘you will have to curb that rebellious arrogance if ever you are truly to serve Ireland.’
Fergus felt a surge of real anger now, because how dare she treat him as an inferior, how dare she speak to him as if he was no more than one of her serfs, a possession, a pawn, a thing.
Dierdriu said, ‘You cannot have her, you know.’
Fergus looked up, because for all Dierdriu's hubris, he had not expected her to be so suddenly direct.
He drew breath to speak, and Dierdriu said, ‘Shall I tell you why you cannot?’
‘You do not need to,’ said Fergus, his eyes holding the golden ones.
‘She is a Princess of Tara.’
And thought: let us leave it there, Dierdriu.
Let us not say what we both know to be true.
Let us pretend that it is only that Grainne is too far above me, and let us continue the pretence, for I do not think I can bear it any other way.
Dierdriu said, ‘Yes, she is a Princess of Ireland,’ and looked at him and waited.
‘She is of the old pure Wolfline,’ said Fergus, meeting her eyes.
‘And that line must never be defiled or sullied.’
‘Yes,’ said Dierdriu, and stood up and came over to him.
‘But there is something else, Fergus.
’ And now her expression was softer, gentler, the yellow glint in her eyes dimmed.
‘She is your sister,’ said Dierdriu.
Fergus heard his own voice break the silence that followed.
‘I know.’
He had known for longer than he could remember.
He could not remember a time when he had not known.
Perhaps he had been told when he was first taken to Court.
Perhaps he had guessed, without being told.
‘Remember,’ said the man who had reared him, ‘remember that you need bow your head to no one save the High King.
’ And he had looked at Fergus rather sadly when he said this.
‘Of course he did,’ said Dierdriu.
‘For to him you were a changeling, you were a malartan.
Grafted-on stock.
He reared you, but he could never have understood you.’
No one ever has.
Fergus did not say it, but he thought that Dierdriu would hear the cry, and he thought, as well, that she would also have experienced the immense lonelinesses, the sudden fierce panics, because it was inevitable that when you were a creature not quite Human, you would instinctively look for your own kind.
And there are no others left of the old enchanted Beastline…
Only there had been.
There had been Grainne.
Was that all it had been?
Like recognising like?
The call of kinship?
Oh no, my love, for to believe that is to deny anything and everything we were to one another.
Dierdriu was still seated on the High Throne, watching him, and Fergus knew a quick anticipation, and thought: is she about to tell me the truth about my birth? and was both intrigued and apprehensive, for he had never been told anything of his true parents.
Dierdriu said, ‘I am not going to tell you that, Fergus,’ and there was a wariness in her tone now, so that Fergus looked up, startled.
‘It is not a story that bears telling.
But you may know that hearts were broken and minds were splintered.
’ She looked at him.
‘If the truth had ever become known, Tara would have fallen.’
The old, old curse revived, and the Bright Palace threatened?
The Dark Ireland waking?
‘You were taken away,’ said Dierdriu, ‘into safety.
You were given into the care of people who reared you well.’
Made into a changeling.
Cast out by my own kind…
A Wolfchild abandoned, put out to Humans…
The thought was instantly and fiercely hurtful.
‘No,’ said Dierdriu.
‘You were put into safety, Fergus.
Your safety.’
‘And Tara's?’
‘Oh yes,’ she said.
‘Tara's also.
That was of paramount importance.
We all knew it.
We all knew that Ireland must not fall under the power of the Dark Lords.’
So it was the Dark Ireland you feared, madam…
‘I have always feared the Dark Ireland,’ said Dierdriu, and her eyes were huge now, and looking on a terrible possibility.
‘My ancestors — yes, Fergus, your ancestors also — waged endless battles to keep the Bright Palace and to beat back the necromancers and the dark sorcerers from that other Ireland.
And if the truth of your conception had been discovered-’
‘Why will you not tell me?’
‘It would do no good,’ said Dierdriu again.
‘And once you knew, you would wish you did not.’
‘But we are — Grainne and I — we are full brother and sister?’
‘Yes.’
The light had shifted in the Sun Chamber now, and Fergus saw that Dierdriu's eyes were bright with unshed tears.
‘Oh yes, my dear, you are full siblings.
’ And then, reaching out to touch his arm, ‘I would that it were otherwise, Fergus.’
Fergus did not speak.
He thought he need not have asked the question, and he wished he had not asked it.
For while I did not know, there was still some hope.
Because half kin might have been acceptable…
Pain sliced through him and a terrible cold desolation.
Then I must let you go, my love, and after all there is nothing anywhere ever, and there is no one in the entire world…
Dierdriu said gently, ‘Had you been half siblings, something might have been permitted.
As it was, there was nothing anyone could do.’
‘Full brother and sister.’
‘You are twins,’ said Dierdriu, ‘born within the hour.
You were born here in the Sun Chamber, Fergus.’
She stood up and began to pace the floor.
‘Twins,’ said Dierdriu, ‘one of Nature's cruellest twists, Fergus.’
She stood framed in the great crystal window, her eyes on the plains and the rolling fields and the forests below Tara.
‘What was done was done for Ireland,’ said Dierdriu.
‘You must believe that.’
Fergus said in a clear, hard voice, ‘Why am I not in Grainne's place?
Why is she the Crown Princess, while I am only her Captain?’
Dierdriu paused and then turned to look at him.
‘Yes,’ she said at last.
‘Of course, you would wonder about that.’
And came again to seat herself on the High Throne.
‘You are a Prince of Tara, Fergus.
It is your inheritance and your birthright, and although we may appear to have taken that from you, we have not really done so.’
She frowned, and Fergus waited.
‘On the night you were born,’ said Dierdriu, ‘the Wolves were restless in the forests, and there was the sound, very faintly, of the sidh singing at Tara's gates.
’ She glanced at him.
‘The sidh have not been seen in Ireland since my own father's day, but they are still here, Fergus.
The most purely magical creatures in all Ireland.
No one has ever looked on them and lived to tell of it, for they are greedy for the souls of Humans.
But when a High King or Queen is born, they have always come up to Tara's gates, and sung him — or her — into the world.
And although it is almost certain death to look on them, Fergus, I stole out of the Palace that night, and I saw the green and blue smoke that indicates their presence, and I saw, just for a moment, the Elven King, Aillen mac Midha, seated cross-legged on the ground.
I heard the cold faery music.’
She paused again, her  eyes faraway now.
‘The music of the sidh is the most remarkable thing you would ever hear,’ said Dierdriu.
‘Cold and inhuman and filled with their strange faery enchantment.
It is said that there is a spell within the music, and that they always spin it for the true heir, and that it protects that heir throughout his life.
‘But they have long since vanished from Ireland, Fergus, and it may be that I will be the last Queen to have seen them and heard them.
There is a legend that says they will return when the Lost Prince of Tara appears, and that it is he alone whom they will serve.
But,’ said Dierdriu, ‘that is only one of many legends, and people have always talked of a great and mighty ruler who will appear from the ranks of the ordinary people and lead Ireland to greatness.’
The Lost Prince…
Ireland's once and future King…
‘I wept on the night the sidh were last seen at Tara,’ said Dierdriu, ‘for I knew that they could only sing for one of you, and that there could only be one ruler.
I knew that these might well be the sidh's last days, and I knew as well that I must find the courage and the strength to send one of you away.’
Fergus said, ‘But why?
I don't understand any of this,’ and Dierdriu closed her eyes and leaned back, so that Fergus suddenly thought: after all, she is no longer young.
No longer the wild young Wolfqueen who rode into battle with the armies of all Ireland at her back, and who took and discarded lovers at will.
She is no longer young, thought Fergus, and pity stirred in him, and with it a thread of forgiveness.
When he said, ‘Tell me,’ his voice was very much gentler than it had yet been.
Dierdriu sat up a little straighter.
‘What I am about to tell you is known to only a handful of people,’ she said.
‘Certainly it is not known outside of the Bright Palace, and equally certainly it is not known outside of the innermost Council Chambers.
It is something that is passed on down the generations, from each High King or Queen to the direct heir.’
She paused, and appeared to select her next words carefully.
‘As a Prince of Tara, you are, after all, entitled to be told, but as a Prince of Tara, you must promise, solemnly and absolutely, that you will never, no matter the circumstances, reveal what I am about to tell you.’
‘I do promise,’ said Fergus, and Dierdriu looked at him very intently.
‘Yes,’ she said at last.
‘Yes, you mean it.’
And then, leaning  closer to him, ‘I should know if you did not mean it,’ she said.
‘You understand that?’
‘Yes,’ said Fergus.
‘We are of the same Line you and I, ma'am, and although I have not the ancient Samhailt, I understand it.
You may trust me.’
Dierdriu said, ‘You know the ancient curse laid on Tara at the beginning of her history?’ and looked at him and waited, and Fergus said, half to himself, ‘If Tara should ever belong to a pure-bred Human, then it will fall into ruin, and the Bright Palace will be no more…’’‘‘…and all Ireland will seethe with evil, and the skies will darken, and the rivers will run with blood.’
Yes,’ said Dierdriu, ‘of course you know.
All Ireland knows.
‘But what you do not know, what very few people know, is that there is more.
‘When the first High Queen cheated the curse by creating the Enchantment of the Bloodline,’ said Dierdriu, ‘the sorceress is said to have turned back and made a curious prophecy.
’ Her eyes were slitted in the gathering dusk, but her voice was clear.
‘You may think to deflect the curse,’ said the sorceress, ‘and for a while you will do so, for your sorcerers are powerful, and the Enchantment they have woven will endure.
Half-Humans will rule Ireland for many centuries.
But one day your Line will divide, and it is then that the magical Beastblood will fade, and you will find you can no longer strengthen it by lying with the creatures of the forest.
It is then that Tara will belong to the Humans.’
The Line will divide’,’ said Dierdriu, looking at Fergus.
‘Divide.
The sorceress could see into the future, and she could see how her curse might again fall on us.’
Fergus said ‘The Line will divide…?’ and looked at Dierdriu, not understanding, and Dierdriu said, ‘Twins, Fergus.
If ever twins are born into the Royal House, then the Enchantment of the Beastline will lose its potency, and the curse will revive.
Enchantments can die, Fergus, but curses can not.
They can only be set aside for a time.
‘Eighteen or so years ago, my dear, you and Grainne were born in this room in the Sun Chamber of Tara.
Twins.
And from that day, the ancient curse has been waking.
‘We did everything we could,’ said Dierdriu, pacing the room again.
‘We summoned the sorcerers, and we sat long nights in  Council, for we knew that we dare not wait until it was time for the Ritual of the Beastline to take place; we had to know long before that if the birth of twins into the Royal House had truly damaged the Enchantment.
‘And we did know,’ said Dierdriu, her face haggard and old now.
‘The sorcerers knew at once.
I do not understand the finer points of sorcery,’ said the Wolfqueen, and a brief, suddenly youthful grin lifted her lips, ‘but I know a little.
They permitted me to go down into Tara's Sorcery Chambers for this.
I was there when they took the Enchantment of the Beastline and laid it across the Silver Loom, and I was there as it fell to shreds in their hands.
Have you ever seen a dead enchantment, Fergus?
No, of course you have not.
It is the most pitiful thing in the world.
It was dead, shrivelled, blown to dust, exactly as the sorceress had said it would be, centuries earlier.
The ancient curse was reviving…
‘And so we separated you,’ said Dierdriu, and now there was an immense sadness in her eyes.
‘We decided that you must be brought up apart from one another.
The sorcerers believed that that would weaken the strong kinship that would exist between you.’
And then, seeing his expression, ‘Oh, my dearest boy, forgive me-’
‘It does not matter.
Go on,’ said Fergus.
And then, as something else occurred to him, ‘Was that, then, the only time that twins had ever been born to the Wolfline?’
‘No,’ said Dierdriu, but now she spoke so softly that Fergus had to move closer to hear her.
‘No.
Once before, twins were born.’
‘What happened?’
‘They were separated, but they were separated so fully and so completely, and so soon after their birth, that the threat withdrew.’
‘How-’
‘The Time Travellers took one of them,’ said Dierdriu, and it seemed to Fergus that an old, never-quite-healed agony was in her voice now.
‘They took the boy-child, and no one in Ireland ever knew what happened to him.’
And then, with an abrupt gesture, ‘But it was a very long time ago, and I do not know the details, for I was never told.
And all who knew are dead now.’
Again the shadow was in her eyes, and Fergus, who would have wished to know more of this, felt her retreat a little from him.
But he only said quietly, ‘Go on.’
‘The Panel of Judges was summoned, to decide which of you had the stronger vein of wolfblood,’ said Dierdriu.
‘That was believed important, for with the Enchantment useless, we knew that we had to keep the Wolfline alive for as long as we could.
We had to give the sorcerers time to find the Enchantment or weave a new one.
The adjudging of the beastblood is something else I do not fully understand,’ said Dierdriu, ‘but it is a little to do with the eyes, and a little to do with the movements…
And with other things I have never meddled in.’
Fergus said, ‘And so I was sent away and Grainne was permitted to remain at Tara.’
‘Yes.’
Dierdriu's eyes fixed on him.
‘Yes, we sent you away, Fergus, but I know now that we did not send you far enough.’
She reached for his hand.
‘Forgive me for that.
But you were of my blood, and I had already lost so much-’
‘Yes?’
Fergus held his breath; he thought: now will she tell me of my parents?
But Dierdriu only said, ‘And so you went away, and Grainne stayed, and when you came back to Tara, first as a soldier in the Fiana and then as its head, I could not bear to send you away again, Fergus.
’ And then, softly, ‘And indeed, the damage was done by that time.
Why should you not take a high place in the home of your ancestors?’
‘Why not indeed?’ said Fergus, lightly.
Dierdriu looked at him very directly.
‘When we sent you away, Fergus, you were a babe, no more than a few days old.’
‘Yes?’
‘The secret was kept in the way most secrets are kept, which is to say that although the truth did not get out, something got out.
Something that became woven into the legend and the myth of the day,’ said Dierdriu.
She looked at him again, the golden wolfeyes hard and unblinking, and Fergus staring, said, ‘The Lost Prince-’
‘Yes.
Your banishment from Tara began the legend, Fergus.
You were Tara's Lost Prince.’
Tara's Lost Prince.
The abandoned Wolfchild sent away, made an outcast, given into the care of the Humans.
Fergus, lying sleepless and alone in the Prison of Hostages, could still feel the pain and the bewilderment, and the terrible  knowledge that he, who loved Ireland beyond measure, had been a part of her doom.
Because I was born twin to Grainne…because the Royal Line must never divide…
Even so, thought Fergus, staring up at the light, even so , there is something Dierdriu did not tell me.
My parents.
She did not tell me that.
It was something that had puzzled him during all his years at Court, and it was something that had stayed with him.
Who had they been, those poor tragic people who had brought forth the twins who were to fulfil the sorceress's prophecy?
How had they felt?
How did it feel to know that you were the instrument and the cause of something so enormously and comprehensively dreadful?
Had it been Dierdriu's son?
Or a daughter?
Strange, thought Fergus, turning restlessly and trying to escape the light, strange that throughout all Court history and  throughout all Court gossip (and gossip at Tara had ever been lively), that no one has ever referred to Dierdriu's child, to the heir to Tara who disappeared.
No one has ever spoken of the child who must have been born to Dierdriu, and who had given birth to himself and Grainne.
Why not? thought Fergus.
And then — she called me the Lost Prince, but supposing there is another Lost Prince?
Chapter Ten
After a time, the nightly footsteps inside the Grail Castle ceased to trouble Grainne.
It was not that they went away, it was that they became interwoven with the strange elusive echoes and the memories that lingered in the vast dark Castle.
Grainne was no longer quite sure that they were real, for the Castle seemed to her to be so brimful of lingering emotions and the resonances of the past that the footsteps might have belonged to the distant past, or the far-off future, or to a world outside Ireland altogether.
She explored the Castle tirelessly —‘although you will never quite discover all of it,’ said Raynor.
‘It keeps its secrets.’
‘Secrets?’
She thought he looked at her rather searchingly, and she held her breath, for surely there would be strange untold stories about this place and surely he would know of them?
But he only said, ‘It was raised from the rock by the first High Kings, and it is filled with rather strange enchantments.
It does not obey the same laws as other dwellings.’
Grainne, exploring carefully, stealthily, could feel the enchantments thickening the air all about her, and she thought: but after all, this is not a place of sadness.
And because she wanted to know more, she wanted to find out all there was to find out about this dark, ancient stronghold that her ancestors had known, at times she stole out from her bedchamber after nightfall and stood listening to the night rustlings and the soft settling of the old, old timbers (and the footsteps? didn't she still hear the footsteps every night?) and thought that if only she knew the right words, or if only she had the power, she could summon the enchantments and lay bare the secrets and understand this place.
And: there are immense and terrible secrets here, she thought.
As Tara's Crown Princess and then as its High Queen, she knew something of the Castle's history.
She knew about Cormac  of the Wolves, her great-grandfather, who had been exiled here for five years, and she knew about the others as well: Niall of the Nine Hostages, caught and chained and kept prisoner with nine faithful Lords until he broke out and regained the Throne.
Nuadu Airgetlam, Nuadu of the Silver Arm, who had lost his left arm in a battle and been driven from the Bright Palace by the fearsome Gruagach.
But Nuadu had returned; he had been made whole by the Court Sorcerer, and he, also, had regained his Throne.
Grainne thought it was strange that she had never before realised how many Kings of Ireland had been exiled and had later returned.
Shall I return?
Or shall I go down in history as the High Queen who lost Tara for always?
She could not let it happen.
She would rally the creatures of this Castle, and the Cruithin, and drive out Medoc and beat back the Dark Ireland.
And Grainne smiled briefly, because it was certainly possible that these thoughts were flowing outwards and being absorbed by the ancient stones.
Perhaps she, also, was leaving a few secrets and a few memories behind.
And the Castle was not entirely made up of sadness and shadows.
There were sudden patches of light that you came out on to when you least expected it.
You might walk down sombre corridors and gaze upon dim, seldom-used halls, and you might run your hand across the scarred surfaces of the old walls, and then, without the least warning, you would find yourself in a sun-drenched quadrangle, or a courtyard where gentians grew or mountain ash flared.
You came across patches of happiness here, just as you came across patches of colour.
When Grainne said rather diffidently to Raynor, ‘People have been happy here, I think,’ he said at once, ‘Yes, there is happiness here.
’ And then, with one of his sudden, gentle smiles, ‘But it is necessary to look quite deeply for it, Your Majesty.
And it is necessary for us to hide it as well.’
‘More secrets?’ said Grainne, willing him to unfold.
But he only said, ‘Where people perceive happiness, ma'am, they will ask questions,’ and he retreated again behind a courteous mask.
‘You hide so much here,’ said Grainne.
‘Because it is necessary.
Because we do not wish the world to look upon us.’
He regarded her.
‘The Cruithin have a little of the old magic,’ he said, ‘and the Castle itself has its own.’
He looked at her with his piercing stare, and Grainne, who had  begun to understand a little of the Castle's strangeness, said tentatively, ‘The happiness within is not apparent from without.’
‘It is not intended to be,’ said Raynor.
‘The Castle wishes to keep its secrets.
The Cruithin have,’— a pause —‘the Cruithin have harnessed some of its darkness,’ said Raynor.
‘And they have thrown it outwards.’
‘It is very forbidding on approach.’
‘Yes,’ said Raynor softly.
‘Oh yes, it is very forbidding on approach.’
And, looking at her, ‘that is the inner darkness turned outwards.
You understand why.’
The Castle was forbidding and dark on approach because its occupants wished to keep intruders out.
This was interesting and a new idea, and Grainne would have liked to know more.
But Raynor only said, quite politely, ‘There are many such castles in Ireland, ma'am.
There are many enchantments which have been woven into dwellings and which need only to be harnessed.
It is only that people have lost the secret.’
People have lost the secret…
But it must be found, thought Grainne.
Somehow I must find it again…
Raynor and his people had made Grainne and the others very welcome.
There had been no ceremony about any of it, for ceremony of any kind seemed to be something that they did not embrace.
But there was an acceptance, and a you-are-one-of-us that Grainne found restful.
The Beastline were interested in all she could tell them of Tara and of the exiled Court.
They listened and asked a great many questions, but Grainne thought the questions were those of curious children, mentally exploring a fabled land…
We shall never go there, we shall never dare to go there, but all the same, we like to hear of it.
We like to think about the might-have-beens.
And Grainne, who had her own might-have-beens, understood, and tried to make her stories of the Bright Palace interesting and amusing, and tried to minimise the rigours and the heartaches of exile on Innisfree.
And if she told them of her world, they, in turn, made her free in theirs.
They each had their appointed tasks, and their place in the running of the Castle, and Grainne, unused to being included in such ordinary daily tasks, felt it enfold her gently and naturally.
Rinnal, the fox man, showed her the garden where they grew their own vegetables and fruit.
‘For,’ he said, ‘everything we  eat we must provide for ourselves.
Over there is our herb garden, and here are some fruit trees, from which we are cultivating a new strain.
We think they will be ready next year, and we are looking forward to tasting the fruit.’
Two of the younger ones rather shyly explained about the workings of the creamery.
‘Butter and cheese,’ they said, and Grainne was pleased that she understood the machinery, and even managed to churn quite an acceptable pat of butter, which the two Beastline creatures at once stamped with a wooden mould on which was carved, in reverse, the outline of a castle.
Bec, the girl with a badger's furry snout and soft dark eyes, showed her the great sculleries where they all took turns to prepare the food.
‘All of us, even Raynor,’ she said, and smiled.
‘Although he is not the best of our cooks, ma'am.
But sometimes he prepares a dish of what we call Cais Breac — that is lake fish cooked in wine, with our own herb cheese.
Quite delicious.
We eat that when there is something to celebrate.’
‘Raynor is your leader?’ asked Grainne.
‘In as much as we acknowledge a leader,’ said Bec, regarding Grainne thoughtfully.
‘He is the strongest, you see,’ she said.
‘I do not mean physically, although he is strong physically.’
‘Mentally,’ said Grainne, half to herself, and at once Bec said, ‘Yes.
Yes, you do understand.
I thought you would.’
And Grainne was struck all over again by the complete lack of subservience of these creatures.
‘When we falter,’ said Bec, peering into a huge simmering cauldron of something that smelled savoury and good, ‘it is always Raynor who helps us.
It is to him we go when we need support.
Sometimes, you see, it is difficult for us.’
Grainne said slowly, ‘It is to be expected that you would despair at times,’ and Bec responded at once, ‘Oh no.
Never that,’ and Grainne looked at her, startled.
‘To despair is our most grievous fault,’ said Bec.
‘Only think, ma'am, of the true meaning of despair.
The giving up of all hope.
An abandoning of hope that there is something — anything better.
To truly despair is one of the most terrible things in the world,’ she said severely, and Grainne, listening, thought: well yes, of course.
How very strange that I should never have seen that.
‘We are the failed spells, ma'am, we must live here in secret, guarded by the Cruithin and also by the Castle's own strange  protections.
And although there are times when we falter — black times,’ said Bec, her eyes huge and sad, ‘we strive never to fall victim to despair.’
She gave Grainne a sudden, very sweet smile, and Grainne felt all over again the integrity and the tranquillity of these strange beings.
Fintan and Cermait Honeymouth, along with Tybion the Tusk, were establishing cautious friendships with the Cruithin.
‘Although,’ said Fintan, ‘to get to know them you have to find them, of course.’
‘They're around,’ said Fintan firmly.
‘They come and go a bit silently, of course, but that's not to say they're furtive.’
‘They're hospitable,’ said Cermait, who, along with Fintan, had spent several very convivial evenings in the low-ceilinged, apple-scented room.
‘And my word, their stories!
My word!’
Fintan said it was not the stories but the poteen, and it was only three nights since Cermait had had to be carried to bed.
‘No I was not,’ said Cermait.
‘Three of us carried you, and I was one of the three, and I had to tip a jug of water over you next morning to wake you.’
Cermait said, rather huffily, that it was a well-known fact that even an acorn-full of poteen sent you fast asleep, and Fintan gave vent to a derisive hoot.
‘You snored all night,’ he said with relish, and Cermait got up and removed himself from this low vulgar company, because you could not stay in a room with people who told the High Queen that you snored.
He said, with great politeness, that he would be in the buttery, always supposing anyone wanted to know, and Tybion the Tusk got up and helped him open the door, just to be friendly.
‘He looked so upset,’ he said.
‘I was upset at being kept awake by people snoring,’ said Fintan, but after a moment he got up and went off to the buttery himself, ‘because we need to know if the parsley butter is ready,’he said rather defiantly.
‘There's baked lake fish for supper, so I hear, and some nice parsley butter will go very well with it.
Bec's baked soda bread as well.
I'll just go along and find out.’
As the days slid by, the Cruithin became a little less elusive, and Grainne waited, because she knew that to befriend them, to lead them back into Ireland, would be the greatest service she could render her people.
When at last they began to come out to her in the sun-drenched quadrangle on the Castle's south side, where she liked to sit, she was patient and cautious.
It was a bit like sitting very quietly in a forest and waiting for a rare and timid wild animal to come out.
But when they began to steal away from their tasks to sit beside her and smoke their pipes, Grainne felt more honoured than at any time since she had occupied Ireland's Throne.
The Cruithin were interesting and learned.
They talked to her about her ancestors, and about the Bright Palace which they called Teamhair in their soft voices, and they told her about the battles and the people who had made Ireland magical and marvellous and richer in folklore than any country could ever be.
Grainne listened, absorbed and serious, and in her mind she began to see the old Ireland, the Ireland of the lost enchantments, very clearly.
She could see the Beastline overlords who had sat with the Wolfkings at Tara; proud and noble and dignified, and just very slightly cruel, but charming and strong as well, and utterly loyal to the High King.
She could see them standing on the ridge of hill that rose up behind Tara's eastern boundaries, sending out the strong magic of the Samhailt to their creatures, so that the woods and the streams and the hillsides thrummed and quivered with the Mindsong.
‘And every wild creature, and every forest animal had to obey,’ said the Cruithin, their eyes bright.
‘They had to come streaming out of the forests and down to the Bright Palace, in answer to the summons of their Lords…’
When the Cruithin said, ‘The Enchantment is lost to us, ma'am,’ Grainne turned to them, her eyes brilliant, and said, ‘But we shall find it again,’and saw them nod and smile, and felt suddenly and deeply happy.
Even so, there was a dreadful sense of loss in hearing these stories of her ancestors; there was an ache and a feeling of bereavement.
Ireland has had so much, she thought; there has been so much magic and so much strength, and now all of it has gone.
Hadn't it?
Can I truly bring it back? thought Grainne, watching the Cruithin disperse to their work again, leaning forward and hugging her knees.
Am I being artless when I say that?
Am I deceiving myself and deceiving us all?
Why should I be the one?
She thought it would not be possible to talk about this to  anyone — my burden and I must bear it, she had believed — but she found herself discussing it easily and naturally and very trustingly with Raynor.
‘There is such a sense of loss,’ she said, looking at him to be sure he understood this.
‘Ireland has lost so much.’
‘But you are restoring it,’ said Raynor softly.
‘You are bringing the magic back,’ and looked at her and waited, and Grainne said in a whisper, ‘Am I?’
‘Oh yes, my dear.’
And there was such a caress in his voice that Grainne felt her heart lurch.
‘The Cruithin will follow you, ma'am,’ he said.
‘And you?
You and the others?
Would you follow me also?’
She felt his retreat at once, and saw the shuttered look come down over his face.
‘I would that it were possible,’ he said.
‘Could it not be?’
Grainne felt her heart thudding with such a fierceness that she could almost imagine he would hear it.
But he only said, very softly, ‘For you I would ride into hell.
I would endure fire and flood and the agonies of the world.
But I cannot face the world that you have left, ma'am.
Do not ask it of me.’
‘I do ask it,’ said Grainne, standing very still.
‘Very soon now, I will ask it.’
‘Look at me,’ he said in a low, anguished voice.
‘Look at what I am.
Deformed.
Distorted.
A sorcerer's error.
A failed spell!
If you have any pity, Grainne, do not ask it of me.’
Delight ran all over her at his use of her name, and she wanted to reach up and take his face between her hands and say, ‘You are beautiful and strong and gentle.
Please do not hide from me.’
She fell into the way of sitting with him at supper, liking the custom that the Beastline creatures had of making each evening a little ceremony in its own right.
‘We come to the supper table,’ explained Bec, ‘rested and relaxed and ready to engage one another in conversation.
Perhaps there have been odd, amusing little things that have happened during our day's work, and we share these.
Perhaps one of us is tired or discouraged.
Then we all try to lift him out of discouragement.’
The nightly supper table was pleasant and restful.
It was a focus in the day; a point to look forward to, to work towards.
As Bec said, you found yourself encountering something amusing or interesting during your day which you stored up to tell.
You knew that the others would be doing the same.
But it was Raynor who told her things about the Castle she did not know; how it had been built for the first High Queen of all, and how the ancient pure magic had been woven into its walls.
Grainne, listening, watching, saw how his eyes darkened when he became absorbed in something, and how the planes of his face shifted so that at times the eagleblood was more strongly marked than others…how the cap-like golden hair shone beneath the light from the wall sconces…
What would it feel like beneath her touch…?
Shall I ever dare to find out?
‘The Castle will always withhold something,’ he said.
‘That was the first High Queen's instruction when it was being raised from the rock.
A place of immense secrecy.
A place which could keep within its walls those things which must not be known.
She knew,’ said Raynor thoughtfully, ‘that long-ago Queen, that there would be times in Ireland's history when things would need to be hidden.’
‘We have many stories of that first High Queen,’ said Grainne, cupping the wine chalice between her hands, her expression intent.
‘How she fought and intrigued and made Ireland great.
How she bargained with the sorcerers to build the Bright Palace for her.
How she was so beautiful that everyone in Ireland loved her.
Men would travel hundreds of miles just to catch a glimpse of her.’
Raynor said softly, ‘But you are so beautiful that men would die for you,’ and Grainne looked up, startled, because the words had been so soft that she could not be sure she had heard them correctly, yet she knew she had.
Her heart began to thud erratically, and she felt as if a great weight was pressing down on her making it difficult to breathe.
Raynor stayed where he was, his eyes on her, and Grainne felt a surge of the utmost exhilaration.
I am not mistaken!
He wants me!
And waited.
But he only said, ‘I am privileged to serve you, ma'am,’ and turned away, and Grainne thought: oh damn!
Can he not tell!
What must I do?
He is the most remarkable looking creature I have ever seen, and I believe I could love him very much, and I believe that with him I could forget Fergus.
Forget Fergus.
The thought still brought a pain: for how could I ever truly forget you, my love?
Lying wakeful in her  bedchamber that night, Grainne knew that she would never truly forget Fergus.
But since I can never have Fergus, not ever, why should I not have Raynor?
There is no disloyalty.
Why should I not?
Raynor.
The unknown eagle-creature, created out of sorcery, but a creature of such strange, inverted beauty, and such strength.
A creature who had never seen a world outside this Castle.
Grainne had sometimes wanted to renounce Tara, she had sometimes wanted to forsake the Throne and flee to obscurity, but this was a creature who had renounced the world without even knowing it.
And who had still achieved peace of mind.
She would never forsake Tara, of course, just as she would never forget Fergus.
But — I believe I could learn to live with the memories, she thought.
I could live comfortably with the knowledge of those nights with Fergus that should never have happened.
I could live in peace with the might-have-beens as well; the elfin-faced, slant-eyed boy who never existed…
Ireland's Prince…
She had hated Dierdriu on the terrible day that Dierdriu had told her that she and Fergus were to be parted.
She had bowed her head and accepted Dierdriu's words, for she had known, at once, the truth of what Dierdriu said.
Your brother.
He is your brother, Dierdriu had said, her face expressionless, but her eyes compassionate.
And therefore he is forbidden to you by every rule, natural or manmade.
Grainne had not questioned the truth or the logic, or even the history that must lie behind this.
She had known, instantly and completely, that Dierdriu spoke the truth.
For there was that closeness, that oneness, that immense and remarkable understanding between us…
Was that all it was, my love?
Only the call of the blood?
Only the instinct of the wolves, our ancestors, recognising a member of the same pack?
It does not matter, she had thought, numbly, for whatever it was and whatever it has been, it was forbidden for all time.
Forbidden for all time.
If I waited for a hundred years, if I devoted my life to fasting and asceticism and scholarship as the Druids do, still it would make no difference.
I can never have him, nor he me.
There had been black bitterness, and there had been a great aching void for longer than she cared to remember now.
There  had been anger as well at the cruel jest of fate that had brought her into love with her own brother.
She had not shown any of it, she thought.
She had smiled and raised rather amused brows at the stories that tumbled in then of Fergus's progress.
An experience of women that would extend over many nations…
Yes, the words fitted by then, no matter who had written or said them.
She had even managed to shrug and say that, after all, the Fiana's Head must be a person of some charm.
And she had accepted what had to be accepted, and she and Fergus had parted.
Except that we were never completely apart, my love, for you were always beside me, and you were always there, and I think that without you there there were times when I should certainly have been crushed by the weight of a Crown I did not really want.
She had of course questioned the decision that had left her heiress to Tara, while Fergus, so indisputably a leader, so plainly possessing the natural authority Grainne believed she lacked, was relegated to the command of the Fiana.
‘A high position,’ Dierdriu had said.
‘But he is a Prince of Ireland!’
Grainne had cried.
‘Why is he not here at Tara!’
Dierdriu had looked at her for a long moment.
Then, ‘My child, you will one day know,’ she had said.
‘For now you must bear the loss.’
Grainne had nodded, and she had done as she was told, but deep within her had been a spurt of anger, for when had Dierdriu ever borne loss, when had Dierdriu ever lost a lover?
Lying wakeful in her bedchamber, with the Grail Castle silent all about her now, Grainne remembered vividly her emotions all those years ago.
Dierdriu had never lost a lover, for Dierdriu had been reckless and abandoned, and had had any man she had ever wanted.
And then Grainne sat up in the bed, and thought: in my position now, what would Dierdriu have done?
And felt the beginnings of a smile curve her lips.
What would Dierdriu have done?
The Grail Castle was not entirely in darkness when Grainne slipped out of her room and closed the door carefully, but there was not very much light.
Was there enough to see her way?
There would have to be, because it would be quite difficult to  make her way to Raynor's room burdened with flaming torches.
Also, it would attract attention.
Grainne did not mind about attracting attention, but it would be better not to.
And again there was the quiver of amusement, because had Dierdriu ever been discreet when she went to a lover's bed?
Dierdriu, thought her granddaughter, had probably gone noisily and wantonly along brightly lit corridors, brandishing torches, attended by half the Court, very likely conducting a few odds and ends of State business along the way.
None of it would have done for the Grail Castle and the gentle remote creature to whose bed Grainne was going.
The Castle was faintly lit by the soft light of the moon, and Grainne, pausing to look down over the courtyard through a small side window, saw how the countryside was bathed in radiance.
And smiled, because there was a radiance within her.
For surely he will not reject me…
Would he?
But if I do not go to him, he will never come to me, said her mind.
She supposed she ought to feel apprehensive, but she felt only deep delight, and it seemed the most natural thing in the world to be making her way through the moonlight to Raynor.
The most natural thing in the world…and had we but world enough and time, my love…
Yes, the echoes were still all about her, and there was a comfort in them, for she felt that she was not alone.
Only that I cannot tell if the echoes are from the past or the future, or some other world altogether.
His room was in the oldest part of the Castle, along a narrow galleried landing, with thick dark hangings that stirred faintly as she passed.
And although it was no moment to stop and remember those night footsteps that passed her door so regularly, Grainne did remember them.
Part of the Castle's secrets?
Perhaps.
Perhaps I shall find out what they mean, thought Grainne, moving on.
The door to Raynor's room was down a flight of steps and through a narrow archway.
Someone had thrust a burning torch into an old iron wall bracket, and there was a warm soft light and the faint scent of fragrant wood burning.
Pearwood was it?
Grainne stood very still and knew she was going forward into something that might well be a delight, but that might also be a torment.
He may reject me.
He may take me tonight and then reject me tomorrow.
Which would be worse?
But the decision is made, she thought.
I think the decision was made long ago.
I cannot go back now.
And she descended the stairs and, tapping lightly on the door, turned the handle and went in.
There was firelight in the room, a soft gentle radiance that warmed the old stone walls and sent huge, fantastical shadows dancing across the ceiling.
There was the impression of light and space, and of great tranquillity.
Even so, Grainne, standing in the doorway, absorbing it all, felt beneath the tranquillity  an aching solitude, and thought: yes, he has been quite unbearably lonely here.
And knew that the remoteness and the gentle strength had been hard won.
And then a log broke in the hearth, sending sparks cascading, and the shadows leapt, and Grainne remembered all of the old stories, and could almost have believed that the ancient Ireland had awoken at last; that goblins and satyrs and cloven-hoofed, pointed-eared creatures were prancing in the room with them.
And then she looked back at the bed and saw the naked longing in his eyes, and something that was better than desire and that was more enduring than passion broke within her, and she moved forward, and said, ‘Oh, my dear love’
Raynor held out his arms and Grainne went straight into them.
He had no defences and no armour.
He had wanted her almost from the first moment, and he had loved her for nearly as long.
They had been desires to be quenched, as he had quenched other desires over the years.
He believed himself a near-monster, a deformity, a half-Human creature born of a sorcerer's mismanaged spell-weaving.
‘But I have feelings and longings,’ he might have said.
‘I have a Human side.’
It was a part of his creed never to give way to these emotions.
He believed that the creatures inside the Grail Castle must not breed, for it was not to be thought of that the nightmare perpetuated by the sorcerers should be passed on.
Flawed stock could not be allowed to spawn.
He had not laid such an imposition on the others, nor would he have tried to do so, for, he would have said, who am I, knowing so little of the world, to make laws and rules for my fellow creatures?
But he knew that the other Beastline creatures looked to him for guidance, and he had accepted the leadership they imposed on him, for he knew that there must always be those who govern and those  who serve.
Bec had said to Grainne that when they faltered or fell prey to despair, it was Raynor who helped them.
‘But,’ she might have added, ‘we do not know who it is who helps Raynor, for he does not come to us.’
He did not go to anyone.
He fought his own despairs and his own bitternesses, and he had believed that he had built up an inner tranquillity and a strength, so that he was armoured against the lure of any woman.
But when Grainne came to the Castle, he knew himself lost, and he knew that the carapace so diligently acquired over the years was melting.
The Wolfqueen was waking in him longings and emotions that he had striven to bury.
When Grainne slipped silently into his room, desire blazed up so uncontrollably that the banked-down emotions of a lifetime were swept aside, and he knew he would take her fiercely and violently.
He would try not to hurt her, but the minute she touched him, the minute he felt her skin against his body…
She slid the thin silk robe from her shoulders and stood naked before the fire, looking at him, and he saw the humility and the fear in her eyes, and felt something fierce and triumphant uncoil.
For I am on equal terms with someone for the first time in my life.
I have been sought by this remarkably beautiful creature who is offering herself to me…
He moved cautiously now, unused to the preludes, unsure of what she would expect.
He stood for a moment longer, looking at her, unable to speak, seeing that she was so beautiful it was hurtful to him, thinking that in other circumstances he would be unmanned by such beauty, except that he was not unmanned, that was the very last thing…
And then: perhaps after all I am not such a deformed thing, he thought, and a sweet heady joy began to pulse through him.
When he lowered Grainne on to the pile of thick fur rugs before the fire, he was trembling, but when he stood up and began to unfasten his own clothes, he did so with a calm sureness and a gentle authority.
Grainne had known that when it finally came to it, she would be afraid — for I have never known anyone other than Fergus, and with Fergus it was so natural and so sweet — but she had not expected this sudden rush of tenderness.
She had gone to his  room ready to play the wanton, certainly believing she would have to seduce him into her arms, and there had been an undercurrent of panic at this.
But the desire and the longing in his eyes had given her strength, and he had moved to her at once, so that she had known, once and for all , that there could never be anything strained or awkward between them.
He had watched her cast aside her thin robe, and he had smiled with such infinite love and such intimacy, that pain had twisted through her from breast to womb.
He had thrown aside his own robe then, and had stood for a moment looking down at her, the firelight playing over his body, and Grainne had felt her senses tumble, for surely, oh surely there had never been anything so beautiful and so strong…
He is half-eagle, and I have never seen such an exquisite thing…
His skin had the golden sheen of an eagle's plumage…skin but not quite skin — oh yes! thought Grainne, drowning in delight now.
When he turned to look at her, the firelight cast shadows across his body, so that she saw his arms not as arms, but as wings…and they will enfold me so strongly and so sweetly that I shall never want to be free…
His legs were supple and strongly muscled, and Grainne half closed her eyes, and let her mind race forward, and anticipated the feel of his thighs against her…
There was a tangle of dark golden hair; it was not rough and harsh but silken, as if the true eagleblood might be centred between his legs…
When he touches me, I shall certainly be helpless…
But I believe I shall be his, completely and for ever then…
When she touches me, I shall be hers for all time, and when she touches me, I shall be so hungry for her, that I may hurt her.
The thought was hardly to be borne.
Raynor paused, looking down into the half-closed eyes, and saw Grainne smile, and saw, as well, that despite her apparent tranquillity, she had been nervous, and that it had not been easy for her to come to his room.
He thought she would certainly have had other lovers, for he knew a little of the way of the Court, and he pushed the thought away.
For she is certainly mine now, and surely in a way she has never been any other man's…
Even so, he thought that never before had she been the hunter, and as the thought was framed, Grainne said softly, ‘You are right.
It was not easy,’ and Raynor smiled at her and said very gently, ‘The Samhailt?’
‘I barely possess it,’ said Grainne, unable to take her eyes from him.
‘Although it is my heritage, I barely possess it.
It is only that-’
‘It is that we are closely linked, you and I, my love.’
My love…
Natural and right and entirely familiar.
I should be feeling disloyal to Fergus, I should certainly be wondering if what I am doing is right, and if I am going to be hurt.
She did not wonder if it was right, and she knew there was no hurt ahead for her.
Not this time.
And oh Fergus, my dear, lost love, am I doing you so much harm?
Was not the harm already between us, before we had loved and before we lost, and perhaps before we were born?
She knelt before the fire, facing Raynor now, leaning her head back as he began to explore her body, feeling his hands, tentatively at first and then growing more assured, sliding over her shoulders and her breasts…
His hands were not quite skin and not quite plumage…
Silken and smooth and so deeply loving that the pain was there again…
Only that this one will never hurt you…
This one.
This strange, remote, eagle creature, whose body was bathed in incandescence from the fire, except that it was not quite the fire; whose eyes were dark with passion, and whose arms, strong and safe, were enveloping her, and laying her down on the thick fur rugs before the fire…
There was the pure and unalloyed joy of reaching down to cup his passion between her hands, and of feeling a tremor go through him…
Fires banked down so strongly for so long…
He is on fire with hunger, thought Grainne, her senses spinning.
He is on fire, and I believe we shall both drown in the heat, and I believe neither of us would care if we did…
And then Raynor entered her with a strong swift movement, and the fires engulfed them both.
Grainne lay in Raynor's arms before the fire, warm and drowsy, and more deeply happy than she could ever remember being.
She thought she could so easily stay here, learning the ways of Raynor's people, working with them.
Perhaps teaching them a little of her own world.
Oh yes, I could do that, thought Grainne, sleepless and still half drowning in the warmth and the sweetness.
I could be happy here, in this great, shadowy, secret-laden  place, where there are unexpected patches of happiness, and where memories sometimes echo back, and where you can feel the history of the years swirl about you.
You would never quite know what you might find here; you would certainly find unexpected flights of stairs which might lead anywhere at all, and you would surely sometimes come upon doorways you had not known existed.
You would continually find gateways, thought Grainne, falling a little more deeply into sleep.
Yes, there were gateways here in this Castle, where midnight footsteps trod purposefully down the halls…
Footsteps.
The sleep vanished, and she was fully awake at once.
Footsteps.
Going silently and steadily through the Castle, somewhere quite near by.
Grainne raised herself cautiously on one elbow, trying not to wake Raynor, and looked towards the door.
Yes, the footsteps were the ones she heard every night in her own part of the Castle.
She hesitated, and looked down at Raynor, and saw that he was watching her, and saw, as well, that he understood.
Grainne said, ‘The footsteps…every night…’ and Raynor said ‘Yes.
Yes, it is time you knew.’
And, reaching for his clothes, he pulled her to her feet and said, ‘Come with me.’
If it had been possible for the old Castle to grow darker, Grainne thought it would have done so in the hour that followed.
She lost all sense of direction and, ‘I never knew quite where Raynor took me,’ she said afterwards.
As they moved through the halls and the corridors, she felt as never before the layers upon layers of history.
She thought she could almost see the memories and she could certainly hear the echoes.
Happiness and despair and hope and fear and intrigue and acceptance.
Plots and counter-plots and escapes and incarcerations.
Torments and delights and pain-filled nights and promise-filled dawns.
Cormac of the Wolves, sitting out the long years of his exile; Niall and the Nine Lords chained and starving in the dungeons.
Nuadu of the Silver Arm, submitting to the sorcerers so that he might be made whole again.
And what of myself? thought Grainne.
Am I also leaving a mark here?
In time to come, will someone else walk these halls and remember the Wolfqueen who lived here for a time, but  who brought the Cruithin out of hiding, and drove Medoc from the Bright Palace?
Yes.
And she smiled at Raynor and saw him smile back, and felt renewed and restored, and understood how it was that Bec and the others came to Raynor for help.
Raynor said softly, ‘There is pain ahead for you,’ and Grainne said, ‘Yes.
I understand.’
‘Would you wish not to go on?’
‘No.
I must see whatever there is to see.’
And she thought she knew about pain anyway, because there had been pain in losing Fergus, there had been nights and days and weeks of aching torment.
Raynor said gently, ‘There are different levels of pain, Grainne,’ and Grainne looked startled, because he had heard her thoughts.
‘I think you are acquiring the Samhailt, Raynor,’ she said, and saw sudden delight flare in his eyes.
But, ‘It is just that we are in sympathy,’ he said.
To himself he thought: supposing she is right!
Supposing that after all the sorcerers did not fail?
Supposing that I could stand on the hills surrounding this Castle and send out the Samhailt, the ancient and precious gift bestowed on the Noble Houses of Ireland?
Supposing I could call up the eagles?
And then: what has she awoken? he thought, and in spite of his deep love for her and his longing to protect her, he knew a tremor of fear.
This, after all, was the Wolfqueen, the last of a lineage so old that its beginnings were wreathed in legend and lore and magic.
He knew that Grainne was gentle and strong and sensitive; he knew this as if it was something he had been born knowing; even so, he found himself remembering that the Wolfline were said to have old enchantments in their blood, and that the old enchantments were tinged with the dark sinister magic of the first sorcerers, and that the descendants of those long-ago Wolfkings could still spin their own bewitchments and weave their own spells.
And, Is this what you have done, Lady? he thought.
Have you summoned the ancient golden strength, to bind me to you once and for all time?
He thought he would not care if she had in truth done so, although he knew it to have been unnecessary.
But as he walked at her side through the dark halls of the Grail Castle, he remembered, and wished not to  remember, that she might well have within her the strange power that could awaken all manner of sleeping bewitchments and lost enchantments.
And the things that lie hidden in this Castle?
Oh yes, certainly those, thought Raynor, putting out a hand to guide Grainne down a flight of stairs.
Grainne, going cautiously through the Castle, thought that this was certainly not a journey she could have made alone.
Alone through the silent halls, where midnight's arch stretches far above us…
I am hearing the echoes again, thought Grainne, staring about her, her eyes huge and dilated.
And the footsteps?
Were the footsteps also all about them?
This is like the centre of a dead world's soul, thought Grainne.
I think I am beginning to be very much afraid of what Raynor is taking me to.
The old stone walls closed about her, so that at times it seemed to be suffocatingly hot, and she found herself putting up a hand to her throat.
There was despair here now — and it is the real and truly terrible emotion, thought Grainne.
It was like falling into a black well, where you knew there would never be light, or it was like being cast adrift on a night ocean when you knew no ships would ever pass.
Alone forever, and with no hope, no joy, no warmth…
I do not think I can bear this, thought Grainne, but even as the thought was framed, she knew that for someone it had had to be borne, there had been no escaping it, this bottomless dark pit, this vast endless night sea…
Raynor said very softly, ‘Down here,’ and Grainne hesitated, and then thought: yes, but why is he whispering?
What does he fear to disturb?
The steps led downwards, there were crumbling stone walls, so that they had to clutch at narrow ropes sunk into the wall at intervals.
The steps were worn away at the centre, and Grainne wondered if it was from the footsteps which passed this way every night, or whether it was simply from age.
‘A little of both,’ said Raynor, and frowned briefly, for he was hearing her thoughts more clearly now.
The Samhailt wakening?
The Wolfqueen acting as some kind of lodestar?
Is she affecting the Castle? he thought.
And then — and this was more sinister by far— or is the Castle affecting her?
And then Grainne said, ‘It feels as if we are going down into some terrible prison,’ and Raynor said, ‘Yes, it is a prison.
It  has been used as a prison many times.
I do not know how many.
But it has a dark and ancient history.’
He led her along a cold flagged corridor now, where the walls gleamed faintly with phosphorescence, and where, although wall sconces flared bravely, the light was greenish and lack-lustre, so that it was rather like walking under water.
Raynor came to a stop outside a thick, low door set into the wall, and stood for a moment looking at it, as if summoning up some inner resolve.
Grainne saw that there was a small oblong grille set high up.
To see in?
Or to see out?
At length Raynor said, very softly, ‘Before we go farther, you must give me your promise that whatever happens inside here, whatever is said, you will not leave my side.
You must not, under any circumstances at all, progress more than several paces into the room.’
The sudden intimate smile lifted his lips.
‘Should I ask your pardon, Wolfqueen, for appearing to issue orders to you?’
‘No,’ said Grainne in a whisper.
‘Oh no, never that.’
‘Then I will not,’ said Raynor.
‘You will do as I ask?’
‘Yes.’
The brief smile glinted again.
‘Unquestioning obedience,’ he said.
‘I am fortunate.’
And reached for a heavy key and turned the lock.
The door swung open.
The room beyond the heavy iron-studded door was larger than Grainne had expected.
There was light of a kind, but it was the thin unreal light of the moon, and Grainne, standing still, adjusting her eyes to the room, saw that there were windows high up, and that moonlight, tinged with green from the forest, poured in from outside.
There was the sound of the forest trees rustling.
Or was it just the trees?
Trees did not make that dry, brittle sound, as if old, dead bones were being rubbed together.
Trees did not whisper and murmur and chuckle with an evil malevolence…
There is something in here that is barely human.
The room looked as if it might be quite comfortable.
There were chairs, a table, a deep settle.
Through an alcove was a narrow bed.
But there were strong iron bars at the windows, and there was the dry, stick-like sound of bones; there was the mindless chuckling again…
The room should have been entirely normal.
There were  normal things in it; there were chairs and a table, on the table was a water jug, a bowl of food of some kind, fruit.
The jug and the bowl were chained to the table.
Advancing stealthily into the room, Grainne felt the hairs prickle on the back of her neck.
As she moved, the something, the creature that chuckled and rubbed its dry-bony hands together moved with her, as if copying.
Was it?
Was it only her imagination?
Two steps farther in, and the creature moved two steps as well.
Grainne stopped, and the creature stopped with her.
Three steps now.
A slithering of chains, a horrid steel-on-stone sound, and three steps to match.
Grainne stood very still, although she did not close her eyes, for to do so in here, with a creature, a something that was watching from the shadowy corners and grinning and copying her every move, was not to be thought of.
But she half closed her eyes, and she put her head back very slightly, and felt the shadows stir and felt the something wait, and felt the wrongness and the lack of humanity that pervaded the room sweep over her.
Like water flooding over your head.
Like steam coming at you from a cooking pot over a camp fire.
Like a sudden scent, borne on the wind.
A scent.
And then she knew, with the extra sense that her ancestors, the wolves, had possessed, she knew suddenly what the wrongness and the dry evil intelligence meant.
Madness.
There is sheer blazing madness in here.
And we are locked in with it…
Grainne gasped and put out a hand to Raynor.
They were not locked in with it, of course they were not.
But just for a moment she had felt the weight of emptiness, she had felt how it must be to be shut away down here, bereft of even human companionship, away from the light, losing count of the days.
Chained and caged.
Aye, cabbin'd, cribb'd, confin'd…
The echoes swirled and eddied all about them, but whether from the future or the past, Grainne was never able to tell.
Anger rose up in her for whatever poor pitiful creature was shut away down here, and her eyes blazed yellow-gold in the duskiness, so that Raynor, watching her, thought: yes, that is the wolflight.
That is the power and the light and the strength of Tara's wolves!
And felt again the primitive thrill.
Grainne was only faintly aware of Raynor at her side now.
Her eyes were searching the corners, scanning the farthest recesses of the dungeon that someone had tried to make into the semblance of a comfortable apartment.
The unseen creature was still, and Grainne had the sensation of being watched, inspected, assessed.
The chains slithered again, and there was a scuttling movement in the shadows, and Grainne turned to see what crouched in the corner.
Her first feeling was of relief.
Not Human!
After all it is not Human!
Some poor animal, some poor travesty that has been imprisoned for its own safety and the safety of others.
Some living breathing thing that has succumbed to insanity, or been born that way, and which the Beastline and the Cruidlin have taken care of.
Not Human.
She moved nearer, heedless of Raynor's warning hand on her arm, not exactly pushing him from her, but summoning, without realising, the authority and the remoteness that had come down to her; certainly assuming the unconscious imperiousness that she had never known shone from her, and that was shining from her now in the dim, moonlit cell.
Raynor, more closely attuned to her now than he would have believed possible, felt the strength and the sudden arrogance and the automatic shouldering of a burden, and knew that it was this quality, this mastery, that set her so much apart.
The creature in the far corner was watching Grainne's approach from sly, slit-like eyes.
As Grainne drew closer, a dry hand, the back covered with teethmarks as if it had been gnawed, came up and, with an abrupt gesture, pushed back the mat of hair that half covered the face.
Horror coursed through Grainne, so that for a moment the stone room tilted all about her.
Human.
Fettered and chained, with a mat of coarse brown hair, with sly, utterly mad eyes, but Human.
This is unbearable.
The creature was dressed plainly and simply.
Some kind of loose gown, thought Grainne.
But nearly in rags.
Torn and stained and ripped.
Here and there clawed.
Anger flared, for surely they could have dressed the poor thing better.
The bright brown eyes were intent on Grainne now and, without warning, a new alertness came over the figure.
It had been half sitting in the corner, now it seemed to crouch, as if ready to spring forward.
Its chains slithered across the stone floor again, and there was a breathspace when Grainne thought it cowered.
Raynor made a warning movement, but the creature was before him, and in the uncertain light they could see the gleam of moonlight on bare sinewy thighs, which quivered with strength and intent to spring…
As Grainne stood, unable to move, bars of moonlight fell across the creature's face, and the planes of its features, the angle of its bones, seemed to melt and dissolve into one another.
The eyes narrowed even more and became inverted and reddish; the mouth thinned and slavered; there was the white gleam of teeth, pointed and dripping with saliva…
And then it sprang, the dreadful face a mask of blazing fury, the eyes fiery with hatred.
The mouth was a mouth no longer, but a muzzle, a pointed snarling maw with snapping teeth that would certainly rend human flesh to shreds, with a lolling red tongue that would snake out and lick the blood and the marrow…
Grainne fell back as the creature lunged, and there was a furious yelp followed by a long-drawn-out howl as the iron chains held and jerked the creature back.
But the nails that were nearly but not quite claws had reached Grainne, and a burning, lacerating pain sliced through her shoulder.
She staggered and half fell and, as Raynor caught her, the wolf creature gave a howl of triumph and fell back on its haunches, making a scuttling, circling movement as a cat will make a nest for itself before sleeping.
A cat.
Or a dog or a fox.
Or a wolf…
Grainne, sick and dizzy from the pain in her shoulder, said, in a voice she did not recognise as her own, ‘Who is she?’
Raynor's hand closed about hers.
Then he said, very gently indeed, ‘Her name is Maeve.
She is the only daughter of Dierdriu, and the rightful High Queen of Ireland.’
And as Grainne stared at him, horror and comprehension dawning in her eyes, he said in a voice of extreme tenderness, ‘And she is your mother, Grainne.
‘But she has been caged inside the Grail Castle for the last twenty years.’
Chapter Eleven
Raynor's room was a refuge and a haven.
Grainne sat huddled before the fire, her torn shoulder bathed and dressed, her arms wrapped about her, shivering.
Raynor had tipped a basket of logs on to the fire, and warmth and light were washing over the room.
But — shall I ever be warm again? thought Grainne.
Shall I ever be able to shut out the sight and the sound?
Raynor had fetched wine from a corner cupboard, and was heating it with a thin iron rod which had been resting in the fire's embers.
Grainne took the hot fragrant wine gratefully, and cupped her hands about the goblet for warmth.
When she said, ‘Tell me.
Tell me everything,’ she saw his eyes soften and knew that he would surely tell her all there was to know.
‘It is not my story,’ said Raynor, speaking slowly now, ‘and although I know it, the Cruithin will know the whole.’
Yes, the Cruithin would certainly know.
Loyal to the death, hiding the shameful secrets of Ireland's Royal House.
‘Your mother was born to Dierdriu,’ said Raynor, ‘in the days when Ireland's Golden Age was at its height.
It was a marvellous time, I think.
Tara was the finest, the most glittering Court in the western world.
Your great-grandfather, Cormac, had made it so, and Dierdriu, his daughter, continued the tradition.
People travelled from remote lands just to be a part of it, for no one was ever turned from the door.
Your great-grandfather was the most remarkable High King Ireland has ever known, Grainne; he liked to listen to the talk of people from other cultures, and he liked to learn about other lands.
’ He smiled at her.
‘In a way, he is still with us,’ said Raynor, ‘for Ireland has never forgotten him, and never will.’
‘True immortality,’ said Grainne in a whisper.
‘Yes.’
‘Go on.’
‘Dierdriu was betrothed to a northern Chieftain,’ said Raynor.
‘There was no mystery about it, but there was no particular distinction, either.
It was as suitable a match as any could be for Ireland's heiress.’
He smiled briefly.
‘And they say that everyone knew that Dierdriu would never be faithful to one man.
I think no one expected her to be.
Also, the Beastline Enchantment was still so strong that it was not judged necessary for the Ritual to be invoked and the ceremonial mating with the Wolves to take place.
Perhaps it was not thought important who Dierdriu married.’
Grainne said, ‘It is very carefully and very strictly planned, that Ritual.’
‘The marriage took place, and a child was born,’ said Raynor.
‘They called her Maeve, for a long-ago lady of the north.
Shortly afterwards, the Chieftain was killed in a battle, and although there was a time of mourning, it was probably not very great.
The marriage had been a business arrangement, nothing more.’
Grainne said, ‘Yes.
I understand’
‘The little girl grew up at Tara,’ said Raynor.
‘She was pretty and loved, and she was biddable and sweet-natured.
If she had not quite the fire and the golden glow of her ancestors, nobody remarked it.
They would certainly have noticed it, but there are other qualities useful to a sovereign.
It was thought that with strong, carefully chosen ministers, she would do well enough when the time came.
’ He paused, and sipped his wine, staring into the fire's depths.
‘In time, the pretty, biddable girl began to be sought in marriage.
She was fifteen, sixteen.
She was a prize to be won.
She might have had anyone she chose,’ said Raynor, and a shadow seemed to fall across his face.
‘She might have married any of the Chieftains or the Lords who came to Tara, or the foreign Princes, for all knew that Ireland went with her.
‘But she disliked them.
She was not perhaps very courageous, which was unexpected in one of her ancestry.
She was nervous of all Men, and preferred to be with the women of the Court.
Everyone said it would pass, and everyone still smiled tolerantly on the pretty, amenable child.
‘It did not pass.
She began to hide away when State banquets were in progress.
She ran away from feasts and ceremonies.
People began to worry.
How could one so shy and so timid rule Ireland after Dierdriu was gone?
‘And then one night,’ said Raynor, his eyes unreadable now, ‘one night there was a great banquet for Samain, and that was the night that Medoc first came to Tara.
‘No one knew him,’ said Raynor, ‘no one recognised him, and for that the gate-keepers and the sentries must take great blame.
They should have penetrated his disguise and they should have alerted the Royal guards and the Fiana and every sorcerer in the Palace so that he could be driven out.
‘But Medoc is clever, Grainne.
He is called, and with reason, the dark, cruel, beautiful one.
He knows exactly how to present himself in the light best calculated to deceive.
And it is true that no one ever expected him to walk openly and directly up to Tara and request admittance at the Western Gate.
‘But that is what he did, and since he was garbed as a traveller, in a plain dark cloak with a pack on his back, no one thought very much about it.
Cormac's hospitality was famous, and no one was ever turned away.
‘Medoc was not turned away,’ said Raynor, sipping the wine, his expression absorbed.
‘He was asked in with his companion.’
Grainne looked up.
‘His companion?
But in all of the legends, Medoc travels alone.’
Raynor said, ‘He had with him a young boy, little more than a child, it seemed.
A child with huge dark hungry eyes, and ragged black hair.
And a sack on his back.’
Silence.
And then Grainne said, ‘The Lad of the Skins.’
‘Yes.
The Lad is one of Medoc's most devoted servants.’
‘Two of Ireland's greatest enemies…’
‘Yes.
They were invited in, and given a place at the Samain feastings, and they took part in the revelries and the banquets.
It is said that they were friendly and ready to be pleased by everything.
Medoc talked interestingly and learnedly, and finally, little by little, the entire Sun Chamber fell silent and sat listening to him.
He held them in thrall.’
Raynor paused.
‘He has many gifts, Medoc, and he has at his beck a wardrobe of enchantments.
For this time, he was a charming, rather scholarly traveller.
Not young.
A pilgrim.
The Lad was his attendant — perhaps his son.
He fooled them all.
And no one was expecting him.’
No one had been expecting him…
‘The Samain revelries were reaching their height,’ said Raynor, his voice faraway now.
‘The feasting would go on for seven days.
All the banqueting tables had been placed carefully, with full consideration to the dangers that abound on Samain.
But,’ he said, looking at her, ‘you would know far more of that.’
‘Samain is the one night of the year when the Bright Palace is vulnerable.
It is the night when demons walk and when every evil in the world is abroad.
Also,’ said Grainne, ‘there is a belief that at Samain the sidh sometimes return.
They vanished from Ireland during my great-grandfather's time, but on the night of Samain, the gateways between their world and ours open of their own accord, and they come back.
They are the most purely magical beings ever known, the sidh, and they covet the bodies of Humans.
Their king is Aillen mac Midha, and in the past he would sit at the foot of the Palace ramparts, slender and blue-green, and with the chill faery blood of all the sidh in his veins.
If his creatures capture a Human, they will steal one of the Human's senses — his sight, hearing, sense of smell, sense of touch, taste.
There are terrible stories of how men have had their eyes torn from their sockets, or their tongue ripped from the roots by the sidh.
And although they have not been seen in Ireland for many years, sometimes they are heard.
But despite their greed,’ said Grainne seriously, ‘they have always been loyal to the Wolfline.
It is said that when a High King or Queen is born, if the child is Ireland's true heir, they will sing him into the world and they will weave a spell of protectiveness.’
She stared into the depths of the fire, and Raynor said, ‘Tell me of Samain.
Make me see it,’ and Grainne turned back.
‘They light the Druidical Fires.
That is a ceremony in itself.
There is a procession to the Plain of the Fál, to the great bonfire, and there is a chant in the Ancient Lost Language.
No one understands that now, but we still use it.
And there are banquets and rituals and revelries.’
She put out a hand to him.
‘And one day you will see it all, and one day you will share it with me,’ said Grainne.
‘Perhaps.’
‘Oh yes.
But tell me of Samain when Medoc came to Tara.’
‘The feastings had drawn to a close,’ said Raynor.
‘And the Court was about to assemble for the procession to the Plain.
It was then that Medoc acted.
They say he walked to the centre of the Sun Chamber, and that as he did so, the disguise fell from him, and everyone saw him for what he really was.
The dark, evil, beautiful one.
The most powerful Lord of the Dark Ireland.
He stood at the centre of the Sun Chamber, and a terrible hush fell.
‘Dierdriu was on her feet, summoning the Fiana and the Palace guard, but although they came running, it was already too late.
Medoc had begun to spin the Draoicht Suan, the ancient and powerful Enchantment of Slumber.
It spun and shivered on the air, and the threads and the filaments began to descend on the Court, covering them with the strong powerful magic.
They were helpless, and Medoc had them at his mercy.
‘He stood watching them,’ said Raynor, ‘and it was as if he was searching for something.
At last his gaze came to rest on Maeve, and his eyes widened, and a smile curved his lips.
The Princess was powerless; when he beckoned to her, she went to him like a lamb.’
Raynor's hand came out to Grainne.
‘She would not have been able to resist him,’ he said.
‘For he is dark and beautiful and possessed of all the attractions when he wishes…
‘He swirled his black necromancer's cloak about her, and he carried her from the Sun Chamber and out through the great doors, and out into the night and none could stop him.
He carried her out of the Manor of Tara, and across the Plain of the Fál, and through the Forest of Darkness.
There is a folklore that is closely guarded amongst the villages on the edge of the Forest,’ said Raynor.
‘A handed-down tale of how a vast yawning chasm opened once in the sky over the Forest of Darkness; of how the people in that part of Ireland saw a glimpse of the true world of the Dark Ireland: the fiery furnaces where the manacles and the chains of evil are forged; the towering Black Looms of the necromancers; dark evil citadels and huge screeching night-crows and ravens; the silhouettes of wraiths and banshees and hags.
For a few terrible moments they saw it all, and cowered, covering their eyes.
And then there was a screech of triumph as the doors closed and the dreadful mirror-world claimed their Dark Lord and his victim.
‘The Court was left trapped in the Draoicht Suan,’ said Raynor, staring into the depths of the fire, his eyes lit not from without but from within.
‘Dierdriu and the courtiers slept all of the time the Princess was held captive inside the Dark Ireland.
No one could dissolve the Draoicht Suan.
Medoc had spun it truly and well, and they remained as Medoc and the Lad had left them, seated at the banqueting hall, apparently dead.
‘Tara's doors were closed,’ said Raynor, ‘And somehow the secret was kept.
The sorcerers worked long and hard to break the Enchantment but they could not, and the Sun Chamber became a grim and sinister place, where the High Queen and the Court slept a timeless sleep.
Great brier hedges grew up around the Palace, and for many months Ireland had no ruler.’
‘Who ruled?’ asked Grainne.
‘Those who had not been in the banqueting hall banded together and created an Emergency Council.’
‘Did the people not know?’
‘Tara has always been remote,’ said Raynor without expression, and at once Grainne thought: and that is not a good thing!
Those who govern should be close to those they rule.
‘After many months had passed,’ said Raynor, ‘they say that the chasm was wrenched open from within, and the gaping hole appeared in the sky over the Forest of Darkness.
The villagers close to it believed that the Dark Ireland was about to ride into the world, but only Medoc rode out, astride a coal-black horse, with Maeve thrown across the saddle before him.
He rode leisurely through the Forest, and across the Plain of the Fál, and finally along the avenue of trees that leads to Tara.
He carried her into the Sun Chamber, and stood eyeing the sleeping Court with amusement.
They say,’ said Raynor thoughtfully, ‘that Medoc, of all the necromancers, has a sense of humour.
And he found amusement in the slumbering Court.
As he watched them, he released the spell, and they began to rouse, and when at last he turned to Dierdriu, she was awake and listening to him.
Madam,’ said Medoc, ‘you see that I have returned what I took.
She is yours for as long as you care to keep her.
But Tara is mine, and will soon be mine completely.
One day, quite soon, I shall ride back into your Palace, and I shall reign in your place.’
‘He vanished then,’ said Raynor, ‘and with his going, the last vestiges of the Draoicht Suan vanished.
And although there are even today people who know what happened, you will find no one who will speak of it.
There are many secrets your House has kept, Grainne.’
Many secrets…
Myself and Fergus, thought Grainne.
Yes, for sure that was one of the closest secrets of all.
‘What happened to — my mother?’ she said at last.
Raynor stared into the fire for a long while.
At last, he said, ‘That is something no one can be entirely sure of.
But she had lived inside the Dark Realm for many months, she had been forced to see the terrible creatures that hold sway there, and she had been at Medoc's mercy for all of that time.
And the creatures of the Dark Ireland, Grainne, are soulless and cruel and evil beyond your comprehension.
Their powers are subtle and strong, and they have the knowledge to wake in the minds of their victims that which would be better left unwoken.’
He turned from the fire to regard her, and Grainne saw the leaping flames reflected in his eyes, hundreds of pinpoints of light.
‘Your mother was of the Wolfline,’ said Raynor.
‘She was a direct descendant of the High Kings and Queens who had submitted to the sorcery of the Beastline, and lain with the wolves, and given birth to the Royal House.
‘The Dark Ireland had woken the wolf, Grainne.
Maeve had become a ravening, mindless wolf…
‘She was brought to the Grail Castle twenty years ago,’ continued Raynor.
‘The Cruithin brought her, and they guard her, and they guard the knowledge of her existence.
In as much as is possible, we help them to do that.
It is a service we can perform for the Royal House.
But it is one of the reasons why the Cruithin disappeared towards the end of Dierdriu's reign.’
He looked at her.
‘We know only the barest details of what took place after Medoc brought your mother back from the Dark Realm,’ said Raynor.
‘For Tara, like this place, keeps its secrets well.
But we know of the birth — your birth, Grainne.
We know that on the night you were born, the sidh's music was heard.’
He took her in his arms.
‘You were born shortly after Maeve was returned,’ he said.
‘And therefore you had been conceived behind the closed gates of that dreadful other Ireland.
‘And since Maeve was your mother, then, my dearest love, Medoc was your father.’
Medoc is my father.
Mine and Fergus's.
Lying sleepless in the firelight, Raynor beside her, Grainne thought perhaps after all she had known.
Not the entire truth, never that, but that there was something.
A darkness.
A fear.
Something so terrible that it must remain deeply buried, it must never be allowed to emerge into the light…
Medoc is my father.
I am the daughter of the darkest necromancer of them all.
It has to be faced, said Grainne to Grainne, staring up at the ceiling where the shadows leapt and danced.
It has to be faced, as the knowledge that Fergus was my brother had to be faced.
It is one more secret within my family, and it is a secret I shall keep, as I kept the secret of Fergus.
I faced that, and I can face this, thought Grainne.
Could it be done?
Could she come to terms with the fact that Medoc, the evil, cruel Lord of the Dark Ireland had sired her and Fergus?
Could she come to terms with the knowledge that they had been conceived in that dreadful place?
She did not know very much about the Dark Ireland; she thought no one knew very much.
But snippets and fragments of legend and lore had filtered in from somewhere.
And what had Raynor said?
A yawning chasm in the sky, through which people had glimpsed fiery furnaces where the chains of evil were forged…the necromancers' Black Looms…
Grainne had once seen the massive Silver Looms that the sorcerers of Tara spun their enchantments on, and she had been awed and terrified and overwhelmed.
There would be dark fortresses in that world as well, and the skies would be forever heavy and lit to a reddish glow with the incantations and the dark sorcery that would rise like a miasma from the dark citadels…
Grainne blinked and shook her head, because just for a few seconds she had seen with dreadful clarity the Dark Ireland, the Evil Realm, the world of malevolence and malignancy.
And my father is Lord of that Realm…my father is Ireland ‘s greatest enemy and he has driven me from my Throne…
A deep, hard anger began to rise then, and, as dawn streaked the skies to the east of the Grail Castle, Grainne felt the golden strength well up again.
The power and the light and the strength of the Wolves of Tara…
The power that was turned inwards in my mother, but that I shall turn outwards.
O Medoc, thought Grainne, her eyes brilliant, her mind tumbling with images, every sense alive, O Medoc, you may be powerful and clever and subtle.
You may be versed in necromancy, and steeped in alchemy, and schooled in the ancient cruel arts of your realm.
But I am the Wolfqueen, Medoc.
I have within me the Enchantment of the Beastline that was created at the beginning of Tara's history.
I am the descendant of Cormac and  Dierdriu, and Niall of the Nine Hostages, and I can beat you, Medoc, I can ride against you, and I can defeat you.
I am going to send you back to the Dark Realm of that other Ireland, and we will seal up the Gateways so that you and your creatures and your Lords of Evil will never be a threat to us again.
And Ireland will be truly safe at last.
They stood together on the hillside that rose up behind the Castle.
‘The Purple Hour,’ said Raynor softly, and Grainne smiled, and thought that after all the old legends and the old myths had been right.
Twilight, the Purple Hour, when magic was abroad and when spells awoke and enchantments stirred.
If you listened very carefully and if you looked very closely, you could see it and you could hear it and you could feel it.
Shadows and mists and approaching night, and fingers of deep purple stealing across the forest.
They were all there with her.
At her back stood the Cruithin, alert and bright-eyed, ready for whatever might be asked of them.
Loyal to the last drop of blood.
Close by stood Fintan and Cermait Honeymouth and Tybion the Tusk, and Grainne looked at them and knew a deep and abiding affection for them.
The people of the Beastline were ranged directly ahead, facing her, as she had asked, and they were watching her with animal stillness.
Raynor was a little apart, his eyes unreadable and such an intense concentration about him that Grainne knew he was hearing her thoughts.
He knows what I am about to attempt.
The golden strength was coursing through her, and with it an immense and unstoppable confidence.
I know I am right.
I know that deep within these creatures, these poor abandoned creatures, are the seeds of the Lost Enchantment, the thin, almost-dead bewitchment spun by the first sorcerers.
I know that it is there, and if only, if only I can choose the right words, and if only I can tap the exact right source of power, then I shall see it ignite and flare into life.
There was no thought of failure in her mind, and there was no trace of doubt.
These are the Royal Lines of Ireland, and I am about to release the bewitchment, and I shall take them out of here, and together we will rout Medoc.
But when at last she spoke, she did so simply and directly, for although the moment was solemn, and although it was probably historic as well, these were not creatures who would react favourably to grandiloquence.
Their lives had been plain and unadorned, and it was in such language that Grainne would address them.
She glanced across to Raynor again, and saw him bow his head in brief acknowledgement, and she smiled inwardly, for it was Raynor who had given her the clue, the idea, the knowledge of how to approach his people.
‘Many years ago,’ said Grainne, looking at them all very directly, ‘Ireland's rightful Queen was taken and held captive within the realms of the Dark Ireland.
We know nothing of her months there, and we only know that when she returned it was with the dark inner side of her nature woken, so that she must be kept chained and guarded.’
A pause.
No one spoke, but Grainne could see the listening alertness in them all.
‘When Maeve was taken,’ said Grainne, and those nearest noted that she did not falter over the name, ‘when Maeve was taken, the huge and fearsome Gateway to the Dark Ireland opened for a time.
There are people living today who will tell you how, for a brief, terrible space, they looked straight into that world.
How they glimpsed the Dark Lords who hold sway there, how they saw that the skies were dull and clotted with evil magic and black bewitchments.
How they saw wraiths and hags and harpies, and the shadows of nightmares and the shapes of ancient and forbidden sorcery.’
Again the pause.
‘And now Medoc, the terrible Overlord of that Realm, sits in Tara,’ said Grainne.
‘With him are the Twelve Lords of Evil — each one the embodiment of the world's great wickednesses.
You know their names,’ said Grainne, and a shiver went through the Beastline creatures and the Cruithin, for everyone knew the litany: Decadence, Hatred, Vice, Corruption, Jealousy…
‘Medoc and the Twelve Lords are gathering strength,’ said Grainne.
‘Already they have in thrall the villages and the farms that surround Tara.
Already they have forced those people to work for them.
And it is a terrible thing,’ said Grainne, ‘to be forced to toil for a necromancer.’
She looked at them again, and felt the intense concentration, and thought, and then was not sure, that something else had stirred.
A knowledge deep in their eyes?
Oh please let it be.
‘Medoc has already summoned the beast Conablaiche and the  Lad of the Skins,’ said Grainne.
‘They walk in the world today.
We believe that now he will prepare Ireland for the rebirth of the monster-god Crom Croich.’
She paused, and saw the shiver go through them again.
Yes, they knew these names; even isolated out here, they knew of Crom Croich.
‘It must not happen,’ said Grainne more quietly, and several of her listeners saw the golden light beginning to glow in her eyes.
‘We must drive out Medoc, we must send him back to the Dark Ireland, and we must seal up the terrible Gateway that he opened before the creatures and the monsters of that Realm flood through it.
‘You must help me to do it,’ said Grainne, very gently.
‘You must ride out with me, leave the Grail Castle, and come with me to Tara.’
She drew a deep breath, and felt, as if it was a tangible thing now, the intensity of their thoughts.
They do not understand, and yet they are beginning to understand.
She stood for a moment looking at them, and saw how their heads were tilted in the listening attitudes of forest creatures, how their ears were pricked, and how their eyes were bright and intelligent.
Behind them, in the forest, a tiny wind began to whisper, and a faint awareness stirred the air.
Delight flooded her in a great wave, and — oh yes, I am right! cried her mind.
In a stronger voice, she said, ‘I ask you to do this, because I have the right to ask it.
Because of what you are.’
Another pause.
Was the forest wind becoming stronger?
‘You are the Ancient Bloodline of Ireland,’ said Grainne.
‘You are the Noble Royal Lines, the Enchanted Creatures created by the sorcerers at the beginning of Tara's history.
You have the power over the beasts.’
She looked at each of them, her eyes steady and brilliant, the wind scurrying across the forest now, nearly with them.
‘I cannot do it without you,’ said Grainne.
‘I cannot drive out Medoc without the Royal Houses who have been lost, but now are found.
’ The wind had reached them, and it was lifting her hair.
She raised her arms.
‘Send out the Mindsong,’ cried Grainne.
‘Call up the creatures whose blood you possess.
Together we will form the finest army that Ireland has ever known.’
The wind was whipping about them now, billowing cloaks out and ruffling the hair and the fur of the Beastline.
Behind them, deep within the forest, a low humming had begun.
‘Do it!’ cried Grainne, above the wind and the rhythmic sound.
‘Call up the beasts!’
And stood waiting, and saw  puzzlement touch them, and knew a moment of pure panic.
I have miscalculated.
I have lost them.
But she stayed where she was, not moving, and the wind dimmed to a steady moan, and the sense of anticipation increased.
Grainne thought: now it is up to them.
I do not think I can do any more.
It must come from them.
Have they understood?
Have I reached them?
Have I awoken the deep and ancient Beastline Enchantment?
It was Bec who spoke first, puzzlement in her dark eyes, but something new in her voice — assurance was it?
‘But ma'am — Your Majesty — we cannot do it.
We have no power.’
Rinnal said, ‘We are the failed ones, Your Majesty.
The travesties.
Look at us.’
‘I look at you,’ said Grainne softly, ‘and I do not see travesties.
I see a new interpretation of the Royal Houses.
A rebirth of the Noble Lost Lines of Ireland.
I see the Enchantment of the Beastline again.’
From where he stood, a little removed from the others, Raynor said, half to himself, ‘A palimpsest.’
‘Yes,’ said Grainne.
‘Oh yes.
A palimpsest.
New writing on an old manuscript.’
Bec said, rather uncertainly, ‘But we are not the Ancient Nobility, ma'am.
We are not the True Line.’
Grainne looked at them all with love and delight, and with an immense tenderness, and said, ‘Are you so sure?’
The Purple Hour had deepened to its utmost now, and the shadows were heavy with magic and heady with mystery.
And in the depths of the forest, the humming is still strong, and the wind is still swirling all about us, and something is stirring, something that is so strong and so purely magical that no one has ever been able to resist it…
The Lost Enchantment waking.
Oh please, thought Grainne, please let it be that, for I have come so far to find it.
And anything will be worthwhile — the loss of Tara, the loss of Fergus — it will have been worthwhile if only I have woken the Enchantment of the Beastline.
And, said a tiny treacherous voice, the loss of Raynor?
Could you count that worthwhile as well?
Oh no, not that.
And then — but if I must, then I must, she thought.
Only — not that.
The Beastline were standing close together, silhouetted against the sky.
And slowly, slowly, so gradually that it was barely  perceptible, the watchers became aware of a change.
At first Grainne thought it was that power was stealing over them, and then she thought that it was not power but strength, only that did not seem quite right either.
And then she knew, quite suddenly, that it was neither of these things.
It was confidence, and it was awareness, and it was the dawning of knowledge.
They were beginning to believe…
We are the True Ancient Nobility of Ireland…
Yes! cried Grainne silently.
Yes!
You are the Enchanted Ones, the Royal Houses reborn, and you have within you the power and the strength and the light, just as I have!
The wind was moaning more strongly now, and there was a sense of something powerful and irresistible drawing nearer.
The Mindsong.
The humming increased and became a chant: low, steady, throbbing.
The forest seemed to become alive, and the wind swept across the surface of the trees, as if a giant hand had reached down to caress it.
A great exultant joy was sweeping through Grainne.
I was right!
These are the creatures of the True Line!
The Enchantment was not lost!
The sorcerers succeeded, and the Beastline still lives!
‘The spells succeeded,’ whispered Grainne, tears streaming down her cheeks and, as she turned towards the forest, the ancient magical Samhailt thrummed all about them, and the skies began to darken with Eagles and Hawks and White Swans, and the hillside became alive with Foxes and Badgers and Hounds and Deer and Gazelle, and Hares and Chariot Horses and Stags.
All rushing down the hillside to obey the Samhailt.