

Primary Education in Leeds: the Report
Teaching strategies
In moving now to consider the fate of the third PNP aim — that concerned with the promotion of ‘flexible teaching strategies’— we stress the close connection with our discussion of curriculum in the previous chapter.
It is not so much that curriculum is the ‘what’ of education and teaching the ‘how’, as that the teacher's classroom strategies are what transform curriculum from a mere bundle of inert ideas to experiences through which children learn.
In this sense, therefore, the ‘how’ and ‘what’of education are one.
This being so, there is some degree of arbitrariness in the division of issues between this and the previous chapter, and there will also necessarily be some overlap.
The chapter has two main focuses: the character and impact of teachers' classroom strategies; and the wider professional context within which such strategies are developed, supported and improved.
POLICY
As we have seen, the Primary Needs Programme was based on a list of aims rather than a comprehensive statement of policy.
The list referred only briefly and somewhat obliquely to classroom practice, recommending (but not defining): a stimulating and challenging learning environment; flexible teaching strategies to meet the identified needs of individual pupils; and specific practical help for individuals and small groups.
Subsequently the Authority issued more detailed and comprehensive statements of its policy in relation to primary education, notably in Primary Education :A Policy Statement (Leeds City Council 1988), and The Curriculum 5–16 :A Statement of Policy (Leeds City Council 1990a).
However, neither of these documents was available during the early years of PNP, and neither gives detailed guidance on classroom practice, being more concerned with underlying principles, aims and objectives.
Before the appearance of these two documents, teachers learned of the preferred modes of classroom practice in other, more informal ways: from attendance at in-service courses or from discussions with advisers and advisory teachers, and conversations with their head teachers, PNP coordinators, and other  colleagues.
However, the main channel during the critical period when schools were being brought into the Primary Needs Programme phase by phase (1985–8) was the Authority's substantial programme of in-service courses mounted at the Primary Schools Centre, and discussed in Chapter 7.
There was an unfortunate lack of clarity about the status of the ideas which were introduced at the courses dealing with classroom practice.
Some teachers saw them simply as points for discussion and considered themselves free to accept or reject them without prejudice to their professional future in the LEA.
Others believed that practices described and demonstrated at length by persons of high status in the Authority must at the very least be strongly recommended and might even be — or become — mandatory.
In fact the central message of these courses, though diffuse, was consistent.
Recommendations about classroom management, group work, the planning of projects, the fostering of pupils' self-reliance, the use of resources, classroom display and a number of other topics, reinforced by the powerful visual device of a model classroom, identified the various items on the advisory team's agenda for reforming classroom practice.
Taken together, they conveyed a view of primary teaching which had a distinctive character.
The physical and organizational settings in which children's learning took place were to be all-important, and the combination of PNP resourcing, advisory effort and enhanced school staffing were all to be directed to their improvement, or to establishing what advisory staff termed ‘the quality learning environment’.
The emphasis, then, was on the context rather than the processes or content of learning.
Whatever the strengths of this approach as a way of giving teachers a practical basis for beginning to change their practice, it carried the risk that some might presume that changing the physical arrangements of a classroom would of itself produce improved learning.
Interviews and observations carried out during a long-term follow-up study in fifty classrooms revealed that the classroom practice of nearly 50 per cent of the respondents had not changed in any perceptible way as a result of their attendance at such courses.
Of these, half had already been working alone the lines advocated, and although some of them enjoyed the reassurance of seeing classroom practice like their own being commended to others, several expressed the view that such an experience did not merit time away from their classes.
The other half of this group (about a quarter of the entire sample) either rejected the Authority's recommendations entirely or claimed that although they agreed with them in principle they were prevented from implementing them by unsuitable classroom conditions or other school circumstances.
On the other hand, for a little under a third of respondents the courses were highly successful, capturing their interest and provoking major changes in their thinking and classroom practice.
A smaller group, comprising just under a quarter of the sample, spoke highly of such courses but had made only very superficial moves or token gestures in the direction of their recommendations.
In this group there were some wide discrepancies between what teachers were doing in their classrooms and what they said — and seemed to believe — they were doing.
It is clear that this kind of INSET provision could have been much more effective if the membership of each course had been carefully targeted and hence more homogeneous; many of the teachers who attended would have been better served by a simpler, more sharply focused presentation of recommendations specifically relevant to their own current practice.
The complexity and diffuseness of the Authority's messages had a further effect.
There was so much on offer that highly selective and incomplete incorporation of course recommendations was common.
This sometimes led to productive and satisfactory change; but in some classrooms it resulted in confusion as procedures became separated from their underlying objectives, and as teachers strove to balance the conflicting demands of a mixture of well-tried and untried practices, of a wide variety of grouping strategies, and of many different activities going on simultaneously in their classrooms.
As a consequence, the complexity of some teachers' classroom organization appeared to greatly increase the proportion of the time during which children were distracted, awaiting attention or working only sporadically.
There are, however, three overriding reservations about the approaches commended in Leeds during this period.
First, although their ambience was ostensibly child-centred, they concentrated considerably more attention on teachers and classrooms than on children.
Teachers had to take as self-evident what in fact needed to be closely questioned — namely, assumptions about how children learn and claims about the causal connection between such learning and particular strategies for teaching and classroom organization.
Second, although much was made of the principle of ‘flexibility’ in both the PNP aims and its various courses and documents, there was an inherent contradiction in the notion of flexibility being mandated from above, especially given the didactic power of the model classroom.
The message to teachers seemed to be that they could be flexible in the prescribed way but not in their own.
Third, the package of suggestions, recommendations and prescriptions was justified in terms of a notion of ‘good primary practice’ which was frequently provided as a validating label but never openly defined or explored.
Consensus was assumed; the possibility that ‘good practice’ might be problematic was not.
We shall return to these points later.
PRACTICE
The classroom context: display and layout
Leaving aside for the moment the matter of the educational validity of the principles under discussion, their most immediately apparent influence — as might be expected — was on the physical appearance of PNP classrooms.
The extent and quality of classroom display improved dramatically during the period of PRINDEP's evaluation, though we became increasingly aware of a tendency towards a certain repetitiveness in colour schemes and styles of mounting, conveying a sense of conformity rather than creativity.
That teachers felt constrained in matters of display and layout by Authority guidelines (Leeds City Council 1989d) was confirmed in many interviews and questionnaire responses.
Figure 4.1 Type One classroom layout
Figure 4.2 Type Two classroom layout
Figure 4.3 Type Three classroom layout
Figure 4.4 Type Four classroom layout
Of the teachers we spoke to, two-fifths reported that they had rearranged their furniture, and well over nine-tenths of them had made some kind of change to their classrooms as a direct consequence of suggestions or recommendations made to them as part of the Primary Needs Programme.
We were able to corroborate such claims observationally.
A few of the suggestions about the deployment of furniture were fairly generally rejected.
For example, only a minority of respondents were willing to abolish the teacher's desk, and very few felt able to dispense with the convention that each pupil should have his or her own place, or to accept the idea of a classroom in which there were, as a matter of policy, fewer chairs than children.
A common response to the PNP messages was to convert at least a part of the room into workbays which were generally, though not invariably, dedicated to specific areas of the curriculum.
Most classrooms had at least one such area, usually a reading or library corner, and a few teachers had organized their rooms entirely in this way, forming as many as six or seven work areas.
A popular arrangement involved four areas, devoted to reading, art, maths and language.
The area of the curriculum most commonly given a corner of its own was reading.
Art came second, with more space devoted to it than either maths or language; it accounted for just over a quarter of all curriculum-specific work areas for younger pupils, and a fifth of those for older pupils.
In contrast, only 4 per cent of curriculum-specific work areas were devoted to science.
In seeking to understand the extent of the LEA's influence on primary classrooms it is instructive, as we have already noted, to compare our own findings with those of Mortimore et al .
(1988) from ILEA junior schools.
In the London sample, one-tenth of classrooms had tables or desks arranged in rows: in Leeds we observed none (though that is not to say that none existed).
In London, curriculum-specific layouts were rare: in Leeds they were the norm.
Our analysis produced four main classroom layout types (compared with Mortimore's three), and these are shown in Figures 4.1 to 4.4.
The proportions in our sample were as follows: Type 1, 8 per cent; Type 2, 50 per cent ; Type 3, 39 per cent ; Type 4, 3 per cent .
A more detailed analysis appears in Alexander et al .
(1989: 247–54).
The strong emphasis on visual appeal and curriculum-specific classroom layout has a distinct local genealogy in the approaches inherited from the West Riding.
However, not all teachers found curriculum-specific organization easy to implement or operate, and it provides a good example of a practice commended in the name of ‘flexibility’ which makes the work of some teachers less, rather than more, flexible (a tension which emerges in research elsewhere — Alexander 1988).
Moreover, the practice has been shown by other studies, notably those of Mortimore et al .
(1988) and HMI (DES 1990c), to reduce rather than enhance children's learning, in some situations and in the hands of some teachers, at least.
If the practice is introduced from a sense of obligation rather than conviction, the adverse effects on children are likely to be even greater.
In view of the high incidence of these arrangements in Leeds, and their adoption and dissemination during a period when the massive resourcing of PNP appeared to have little impact on reading test scores, it might be worth carefully pondering HMI's finding, referred to towards the end of the previous chapter, that
some of the poorest work in reading occurred where the organization and management of the class were weak.
Examples included too many groups of activities running at the same time and an emphasis on individual work which could not be sustained in sufficient depth for all the children in the class.
(DES 1990c: 15)
The classroom context: grouping
The most obvious influence of PNP on teachers' approach to the management of learning was the encouragement of group work.
This was consistently commended by advisory staff throughout the period under review and still remains a central component of expected practice (for example, Leeds City Council 1989a, 1989e, 1990a, 1990c).
The norm, as we have noted, was for different groups to be working in different curriculum areas simultaneously.
The most common way of grouping was to sort the children by ability (as informally rated by the teacher) and to make the groups as homogeneous as possible.
Groups formed in this way tended to remain relatively stable, moving as a whole from one activity to another, although in a few classes they were formed only for specific activities (generally mathematics) and disbanded for the rest of the day.
An alternative form of ability grouping was to aim for as wide a range of ability as possible in each group.
A minority of teachers used other grouping criteria.
An eighth of them opted for friendship groups for at least part of the time, and a few grouped their pupils by age.
We found that the larger the group, the less time its members tended to spend on task.
However, against the obvious conclusion that small groups are more effective one must set the increased managerial challenges of having a larger number of groups.
It was by no means uncommon for teachers to switch from one type of grouping to another as the activities of individuals and groups of children changed.
This fluidity of grouping practice, in classrooms dominated by curriculum-specific work areas in which a wide range of totally dissimilar tasks were simultaneously undertaken, occasionally led to extremely complex organizational problems and a good deal of confusion.
Though grouping of some kind was the norm in the classrooms we visited, our interview and observation data revealed it to be a somewhat problematic strategy for many teachers.
Grouping children was an organizational device as much as a teaching approach, a way of maximizing the opportunities for productive  teacher-child interaction as well as a means of encouraging cooperation among the children and flexibility in curriculum.
However, as we show below, there could sometimes be a significant gap between intention and outcome.
One-to-one teacher-child interactions were brief and (for most children) infrequent; and collaborative group work was rare (cf.
Galton et al .
1980; Galton and Simon 1980).
As for the goal of flexibility, grouping can be distinctly double-edged, permitting teachers to concentrate as much or as little of their time on particular children or particular curriculum areas as they wish.
The danger, witnessed sometimes in practice, is that certain children (notably the most able, the oldest, the best-behaved, and girls) are tacitly deemed ‘undemanding’ and may be left to their own devices for long periods, denied the kinds of challenging interaction which they, like all children, need.
In turn these children may give no signals to a busy teacher ‘scanning’ the class while working with another group that they are other than fully and productively engaged in their learning tasks.
Indeed, some will actively adopt strategies to convey this impression and secure a quiet life (Galton 1989; Bennett et al .
1984).
By the same token, certain curriculum areas (notably topic work and art) might be seen as of tow priority and requiring little more than occasional and cursory monitoring by the teacher, with the result that unless the tasks set have an exceptionally high combination of challenge, motivating power and self-monitoring potential, children may spend excessive amounts of time either off-task or only partially engaged, or undertaking low-level learning.
In combination, this double neglect must mean that certain children, when working in certain areas of the curriculum, are getting a distinctly raw deal.
Yet many of the teachers we interviewed, far from being unaware of this risk, perceived only too clearly that it was inherent to the LEA's preferred combination of group work and multiple curriculum focus teaching.
The dilemma can be expressed as follows: the more accessible teachers seek to make themselves to all their pupils as individuals, the less time they have for direct, extended and challenging interaction with any of them; but the more time they devote to such extended interaction with some children, the less demanding on them as teachers must be the activities they give to the rest; and the less demanding an activity is of their time and attention as teachers, the more the likelihood that the activity in question will demand little of the child.
The strategy of ‘unequal investment’— deliberately concentrating attention on specific groups — was a conscious response to the dilemmas of grouping.
In some cases a carefully monitored rolling programme ensured that over a given period of time, say a week or a fortnight, the teacher engaged directly with every child in every area of the curriculum; but in other cases the inequality of investment was not adjusted in this way, and the result was the persistent neglect of certain children and certain areas of the curriculum.
One way through, explored by researchers like Galton (1989) and Bennett (1987), is to exploit much more fully the potential of collaborative tasks within groups.
In our own studies, the ostensibly collaborative setting of the group  tended to be one in which children spent most of their time on essentially individual reading and writing tasks.
Much of this time could be wasted while children awaited the teacher's attention or were simply distracted.
The early findings from the Leverhulme Project (Wragg and Bennett 1990) show that where learning tasks are genuinely collaborative, children will use the group rather than the teacher as their main reference point, and the ratio of work to routine interactions will improve.
Collaborative group work is not a panacea, but it is certainly a strategy worth exploring.
Equally important, as we urge later on, the kinds of dilemmas and compromises associated with all teaching strategies, and perhaps especially with group work, need to be admitted and addressed.
Unfortunately, the climate of PNP did not encourage this.
A final point to note on grouping is the mismatch we frequently witnessed between the ostensibly collective strategy of grouping and the predominance of individualized work tasks.
Common sense dictates that task and setting should as far as possible be consistent.
Just as collaborative activity is difficult in a traditionally arranged classroom, so the concentration needed for individualized tasks may be difficult within a group.
We gained the impression that — like several other practices in primary education — the strategy of grouping has become an end in itself rather than a device adopted for particular educational purposes; moreover, as a strategy grouping may have become so deeply ingrained in primary consciousness and practice that to ask questions about its educational purposes may seem, to some, almost impertinent.
Our data were gathered, as we have emphasized elsewhere, during the period immediately before the introduction of the National Curriculum.
Since it was frequently predicted that the pressures of the latter would lead to an increase in whole-class teaching, it is useful to supplement our comments by reference to more recent data, gathered as part of another project based at Leeds University, the SEAC-funded evaluation of the 1991 Key Stage One National Curriculum Assessment directed by Diane Shorrocks and Robin Alexander.
In a national sample of primary classrooms, four fifths were divided into groups and the number of groups per class averaged four to five, with a mean group size of 6.1.
Although those who predicted that the National Curriculum would cause a wholesale shift away from group work are apparently proved wrong by these figures, the matter is not that simple.
The national sample of teachers spent only a third of their time interacting with groups: the bulk was divided between whole-class and individual interactions.
Thus what the emerging national data seem to confirm is the Leeds data's sense of a pervasive incongruence in classroom strategies between pedagogic style and mode of organization.
The Leeds local data pointed up a mismatch between predominantly individualized learning tasks and the collaborative setting in which children were expected to undertake them.
The national data suggest a further mismatch — between this same collaborative setting and the teacher's predominantly individual or whole-class mode of interaction.
Two interpretations are suggested.
The first is that grouping is the ideal  organizational arrangement in that it gives the teacher the flexibility to move freely between individual, group and whole-class activities in a way which the traditional arrangement of desks in rows does not.
The second, however, is that the physical arrangement of grouping in primary classrooms has acquired such a powerful doctrinal status that no other arrangement is even entertained.
Whatever the interpretation, the cumulative research and survey data since 1978 suggests an urgent need to took at the justifications, dynamics and effectiveness of grouping.
The classroom context: planning
Teachers' planning, as we showed in Chapter 3, varied greatly in its time-scale and degree of formality.
The time-scale ranged from the very short-term to the comparatively long-term: from daily to yearly, with many intermediate steps.
The degree of formality ranged from elaborate and schematic written documents to a simple mental rehearsal of what would happen next.
There was also considerable variation in the structure of teachers' planning.
Some teachers showed a comprehensive awareness of the balance of different lessons and their place in the curriculum as a whole, as well as a very clear concern with progression, continuity, the acquisition of underlying skills and the achievement of goals.
Others adopted a more incremental approach, planning as they went alone (Clark and Yinger 1987).
They were much less concerned with the details or wider context of future activities, and much more interested in trying out ideas in practice before moving on to further planning.
There were also teachers in the sample who were grappling with several complex long-term and short-term schedules and forecasts at a time, and others whose only apparent work plan was to set up a succession of ad hoc activities with little long-term coherence or progression.
Methods of curriculum planning are inseparable from teachers' thinking about what has to be planned, and the arrival of the National Curriculum is dictating a much more considered and long-term approach than was adopted in at least some of the classrooms we visited (NCC 1989, 1991; Alexander et al .
1990).
The classroom context: record keeping
We found very few teachers who kept no records of any kind.
The records which were kept varied from the elaborately formal and comprehensive, involving a good deal of detailed and meticulous clerical work, to the admittedly casual and labour-saving.
Some teachers were chiefly concerned to chart the acquisition of underlying skills, but many were satisfied with checklists of tasks completed.
Only about one teacher in three had any kind of supervision in the matters of planning or record keeping.
Again, the requirements of the National Curriculum will make minimalist approaches to record keeping difficult to sustain, let atone justify to parents.
The agenda of educational objectives to be charted — and perhaps the record-keeping format too — are now very clear.
The working day
On average, children in the classrooms where observation took place spent
59 per cent of their time working;
11 per cent on associated routine activities (getting out and putting away books and apparatus, sharpening pencils and so on);
8 per cent waiting for attention from a teacher or other adult;
21 per cent distracted from the task which had been set;
1 per cent other (unclassified).
These figures are averages which cover a very wide variation between individual classes.
They are broadly consistent with those from earlier studies carried out in other parts of the country except that children in the present study spent more time waiting for attention, in spite of the presence of an unprecedented number of support teachers and other ancillary staff and helpers.
Figures like these usually occasion adverse lay comment, and these particular figures featured prominently in the press coverage of the Leeds report.
The journalistic and political inference was that children in primary classrooms are not working nearly hard enough; generally this was based on an aggregation of the percentages for ‘routine’, ‘awaiting attention’ and ‘distracted’to produce the claim that 40 per cent of time was ‘wasted’.
We wish to distance ourselves from such inferences, even though naturally we would expect our findings to generate constructive discussion about the effective use of pupils' and teachers' time in primary schools.
Quite apart from questions of sample size and representativeness, this particular aggregation is wholly inappropriate.
The more legitimate aggregation is of the ‘working’ and ‘routine’categories, since both are necessary aspects of the learning task.
Moreover, it is impossible to define what constitutes the ‘appropriate’ proportion of time which a 5-year-old, or a 7- or 11-year-old, should spend on task in a school day of some five and a half hours.
To set the issue in its proper perspective, we might care to consider the way time is used in adult work settings.
Adults, too, spend much time distracted and on routine activities — indeed, such time may even be dignified as ‘incubation’ or ‘thinking time’— and few work for anything remotely approaching 100 per cent of the time they are employed.
We suspect that in many work settings 70 per cent of time spent on task or on associated activities would be a remarkable achievement.
Yet we are talking here not of adults but of children.
Nevertheless, the figures give pause for thought.
Clearly it is important to find strategies to reduce the proportion of time children spend awaiting attention and distracted.
Whole-class teaching, usually seen as the device most likely to keep children on task, may well reduce distraction (or at least distraction of an undisguised kind) but it may also increase the time children spend awaiting attention, and indeed our own figures on group sizes tend to confirm this.
In any event, the global figures above are less significant than variations which can be shown to relate to specific categories of children, kinds of learning and classroom contexts.
Thus, girls generally spent more of their time than boys on work and associated routine activities.
Boys were more often distracted, and also spent more time waiting for attention from their teachers.
Older children were less inclined to wait for attention than younger children.
In maths and language they were less distracted and spent more time on work and routine activities, although in art the pattern was reversed: older children were more often distracted and did less work.
Children whose teachers rated their ability as average tended to spend less time on work and routine activities and more time distracted or awaiting attention than either those who were thought to be above average in ability or those who were rated as below average.
In the absence of any objective index of the children's true ability we cannot know the extent to which the teachers' ratings were themselves unduly influenced by the observed behaviour.
In classrooms where there were two adults, children were generally less distracted and spent more time working than in classrooms where there was only one.
Beyond that point, however, there was no tendency for the presence of additional adults to bring about more work and less distraction, partly because extra adults tended to introduce extra challenges and more complex organizational structures.
Moreover, as we shall see when we discuss collaborative teaching later in this chapter, it is much easier for two teachers than three or more to undertake the shared planning on which the success of classroom collaboration depends.
Children generally spent less time working and more time distracted as the size of their work groups increased from one to twenty.
In even larger groups, however, this pattern was reversed, partly because of the nature of the tasks that were undertaken in large groups, but mainly because of the whole-class style of supervision to which they were subjected.
We noted in Chapter 3 that the large amounts of time allocated to language and mathematics were sometimes the least efficiently used.
The overall percentages are shown in Table 4.1.
Such figures appear to challenge the conventional assumption that the way to improve standards is to give the subjects deemed most important more and more time.
Perhaps familiarity breeds contempt — among teachers as well as children.
Perhaps, too, there is a Parkinsonian effect at work here: the standard allocation for mathematics in primary schools.
often regardless of the ground to be covered, has for decades been the equivalent of an hour a day.
A clearer understanding of such anomalies, however, comes from probing beneath the curriculum labels.
In Chapter 3 we identified ten ‘generic activities’ which we found to underpin primary classroom practice regardless of the subject labels used by the teacher, and argued that these activities therefore constitute at least as important a curriculum reality — certainly for children — as terms like ‘topic’or even ‘language’.
Table 4.2 shows how each of these generic activities generates different patterns of task-related behaviour.
Table 4.1 Percentage of time spent by pupils on task related behaviour in different areas of the curriculum
table 4.2 Task related behaviour in different generic activities (percentage of pupil time)
Thus, children in our classroom practice sample spent a high proportion of their time working when they were engaged in tasks which involved talking to the class, talking to the teacher, construction, listening or collaboration.
Their work levels were lowest in writing, drawing/painting, or tasks which involved movement from one part of the room to another, and all three of these activities generated very high levels of routine behaviour.
For the most part, high levels of distraction were found where work levels were tow, and the highest distraction levels of all were in tasks involving writing, drawing/painting, and reading.
In general, the most work and the least distraction occurred in the rarest activities.
The striking feature of the activities at which children worked for a high proportion of the time was involvement with other people; conversely, most of the activities at which children worked for the lowest proportion of time writing, reading, drawing/painting — involved no other people and could have been carried out most effectively in isolation.
Thus, there could be a significant mismatch between the tasks which children were given, and the setting in which they were required to undertake them.
The importance of these variations in children's use of classroom time lies less in the precise quantifications than the questions they provoke.
Why do such variations occur?
To what extent are they inevitable?
Does the situation warrant improvement?
If so, what?
There was a common sequence to nearly every teaching session observed: the teacher settled the children down; explained the tasks; allocated children to groups; interacted with one or more groups while they worked; initiated finishing off or tidying up.
Whole-class sessions were very rare, though many sessions had a whole-class element, usually at the beginning and/or end.
Within this basic framework the amount of time allocated to each stage varied considerably.
Thus the time spent on the settling-down and clearing-up stages varied from 7 to 45 per cent of the total session, and the introductory stage varied similarly, largely because some teachers treated it as a purely administrative matter to be dealt with as succinctly as possible, while others incorporated it into the session as the whole-class teaching in an arrangement otherwise dominated by group work.
Three examples, taken from our eleventh report, show something of the variation.
A class of thirty-eight 5- and 6-year-olds:
teacher settles class down after playtime;
allocates tasks;
works with language group;
gives a task to an unsupervised number group and asks the nursery nurse who should be with them how long she will be;
returns to work with language group;
monitors jigsaw group;
gives new task to computer group whose supervising nursery nurse has given them a task which is too difficult;
works with writing group whose teacher has been called away;
supervises change over of free-choice activities and then monitors maths group and two language groups;
supervises tidying up;
children sit and sing in the book corner;
teacher tells a story;
informal activities (e.g.clapping a rhythm).
A class of twenty-nine 8- and 9-year-olds:
teacher talks with class about a Victorian penny brought in by a child, and about penny-farthing bicycles;
sorts out group choices for the afternoon session;
allocates tasks for current session;
works with maths group;
monitors the work of all groups and responds to individuals seeking help;
supervises tidying up.
A class of thirty-six 7- to 8-year-olds
teacher takes register and then describes and allocates tasks;
monitors the work of all groups and deals with individuals who seek help;
works with language group;
works with science group;
monitors work of language and maths groups;
gives new task to maths group;
works with science group and deals with individuals seeking help.
As Bennett (1978, 1987) points out, one of the most important determinants of pupils' learning is simply the amount of time they spend in it.
In a class where almost half the time is spent on administrative matters, the time left over for active engagement in learning tasks is severely curtailed.
Though some of the foregoing indicates diversity, the questions they raise are common to all teachers:
How can the time children spend in classrooms most effectively be used?
How far is the fairly tow proportion of time spent on task in some classrooms attributable to factors unique to those classrooms — the teacher's mode of organization, the quality and appropriateness of the learning tasks he/she devises, the personalities of the children and adults present, and so on?
How far is it attributable to more generally prevailing patterns of teaching and classroom organization in primary schools, including those commended by Leeds LEA?
We believe that our evidence suggests that the latter is indeed a critical factor.
What can be learned from the differential figures for particular groups of children — boys and girls; older and younger children; those rated by their teachers as of average, above average and Below average ability or attainment?
How far are such differences inevitable?
How far are they a consequence of the teacher's assumptions about and expectations of the children in question?
Do the figures on the impact of increasing the number of adults in classrooms challenge the conventional assumption that the more adults there are, the better?
Do the figures suggest that there is an optimum size for groups?
More generally we might ask the following:
What is the best way to introduce and allocate learning tasks?
How can the time and opportunities for children to engage in these tasks be maximized?
What kinds of classroom environment will most support children's learning?
What kinds of task is it most appropriate for groups to undertake?
How can we achieve the best possible match not only between learner and task but also between task and classroom setting?
The curriculum
In Chapter 3 we outlined the findings on curriculum in practice as they emerged from the quantitative data.
We do not propose to repeat this material here.
However, the questions and issues this material raises about the way primary classrooms are organized are worth presenting as an extension of those above.
Is the balance of time between the various parts of the curriculum appropriate?
Where teachers have sought to accommodate the subject requirements of the National Curriculum, have they achieved a truer balance than that shown by our figures, or has the result been an imbalance even more marked than that which obtained previously?
If it is indeed the case that time is used least economically in those subjects to which most time is allocated (see Table 4.1), should not schools, LEAs (and indeed the NCC and DES) took afresh at their assumptions about how much time these subjects (that is, the National Curriculum core subjects) really need?
We found that regardless of the subject labels adopted, the curriculum in practice consisted of a further and perhaps more influential ‘core’ of ten generic activities (writing, using apparatus, reading, listening, drawing or painting, collaboration, movement, talking to the teacher, construction, talking to the class — see Table 3.1).
While there is some inconsistency within and between classrooms where subject labels and subject relationships are concerned, there is rather less inconsistency in this ‘alternative curriculum’, and for children it has a much more profound impact than the labels teachers use.
In raising questions about curriculum content and balance, therefore, the balance and disposition of these generic activities must be looked at as searchingly as the balance of subject time.
Indeed, it is very clear from our studies that to define curriculum balance solely in terms of subject time allocations is both superficial and misplaced.
Yet this is precisely how the problem tends to be approached by official bodies.
Balance, in our alternative sense, needs to be tackled in two ways.
One is to appraise the overall mix of generic activities undertaken by children during, say, a typical day or week.
The other is to examine the mix within each curriculum area or subject.
Our figures suggest that many of the subjects were neither what their proponents claimed, nor what their nature demanded that they should be.
Particular concern is merited over the dominance of writing, especially where this is a tow-level, time-filling activity; over the general failure to exploit the potential of collaborative activity — especially since every one of the sixty classrooms we visited in the classroom practice study used a grouping system of some kind; and over the limited opportunities given to children for work-related talk of a challenging kind.
This point is all the more necessary in view of our finding that collaborative, interactive tasks kept children's attention more effectively than solitary tasks yet solitary tasks predominated.
This does not mean that there is no place for the latter.
Rather, we might infer first that the potential of collaborative tasks needs to be more fully exploited; second, that the conditions in which children are expected to undertake solitary tasks may frequently be inappropriate.
Indeed, common sense must tell us that there is something paradoxical about setting up primary classrooms in which ‘busyness’, diversity, movement and activity are counted as virtues if within these classrooms children are mainly engaged in solitary activities requiring concentration.
But then, common sense is usually one of ideology's earliest  casualties , in education as in politics.
Teacher-pupil interaction
Teachers spent a very high proportion of their time in class interacting with pupils.
The type and frequency of their interactions are summarized in Table 4.3.
Work and associated routine interactions accounted for nearly two-thirds of the total.
Disciplinary interactions were comparatively rare because experienced primary teachers, particularly of younger children, have a repertoire of ‘oblique’ disciplinary strategies which avoid direct confrontation except in extreme cases (King 1978).
Control tends to be exercised by means of work and monitoring interactions.
Table 4.3 Type and frequency of teacher-pupil interaction (based on systematic observation of teachers)
Although there were large differences between classes, in general individual children (as in other studies, notably Galton et al .
1980) were involved in very few interactions with their teachers.
Table 4.4 clearly shows that in spite of all the additional resources of PNP, and in spite of the fact that, on average, their teachers were involved in more than three teacher-pupil interactions every minute, individual children took part in only eleven teacher-pupil interactions per hour, of which fewer than half were task-related: indeed in some classes the mean hourly rate of individual pupils' task-related interactions with their teachers was as tow as two, and in no class was it higher than eleven.
Table 4.4 Rate of each type of teacher-pupil interaction (based on systematic observation of teachers and pupils separately)
These overall figures conceal considerable variation between classes, as the comparison of ten sample schools in Table 4.5 shows.
The figures raise important issues.
For instance, the considerable differences in the number of interactions (compare, for example , the pseudonymous Claybourn and Greystock) is partly a function of their length: a relatively tow number of interactions does not indicate prolonged periods of silence, and most teachers were interacting with children most of the time.
Fewer interactions, therefore, indicate more sustained conversations between teachers and their pupils.
A very high interaction rate indicates a succession of extremely short interactions, characteristically in the context of brief and necessarily somewhat superficial monitorings of individuals and groups.
The two styles are — or should be — a conscious response to the question of whether the brief monitoring of many or even all the children in a class is more effective in promoting learning than more sustained interactions with a smaller proportion.
The question, however, may be about control as much as learning.
Engaging in sustained interactions with a relatively small proportion of the class presupposes that the remainder are willing and able to work with little attention.
Conversely, a very high rate of short interactions may sometimes reflect a poor level of control or a lack of structure in the tasks set.
Having said that, it is important to add that interaction rate is also related to children's age: older children are usually expected to sustain concentration for longer periods than younger children.
Table 4.5 Rate of each type of teacher-pupil interaction in ten schools (based on systematic observation of teachers)
Another matter raised by these figures is that of the proportion of different kinds of interaction.
Again, these vary considerably from one classroom to another.
The challenge, clearly, is to reduce the proportion of ‘routine’ and ‘disciplinary’interactions and increase the proportion concerned with work.
A high proportion of disciplinary interactions may reflect (as in the case of Deacondale) a lack of ‘oblique’ disciplinary strategies and a tendency to adopt a more confrontational style; and a high proportion of routine interactions may stem from an excessively complex organization or an inability to engage in depth with the content of the tasks given to one's pupils.
Teachers, therefore, need to took both at the frequency and the proportion of their interactions in considering how to make the best use of the strictly limited time available for interacting with each of their pupils.
This brings us to the more important underlying issue, that of the quality of teacher-pupil interaction, as revealed by the transcript data.
Though questioning was a prominent mode of teacher discourse, the full potential of questioning as a teaching strategy was not always exploited.
Thus, questions might feature as little more than conversational or rhetorical devices; they might be more token than genuine; they might be predominantly closed; and they might lack cognitive challenge.
Moreover, in some classrooms where teachers asked many questions, their pupils were able to ask relatively few, and having done so they might risk having their questions blocked or marginalized.
Teachers were clearly conscious of the pressure of time and the need to cover the ground intended.
Yet the urge to press on, paradoxically, could lead to questioning becoming not more but less effective and therefore a somewhat inefficient use of the time available.
Report 11 (Alexander and Willcocks 1992) contains a large number of  annotated examples from our considerable body of transcript material: they repay close analysis.
A common tendency, reflecting perhaps a consciousness of the taboo on didacticism which has been such a strong feature of recent primary education, was for some teachers to ask questions rather than make statements or give instructions.
In some circumstances this remained true even in straightforward administrative interactions where strings of questions about what was going to happen next sometimes led to complicated and unproductive guessing games, and where a simple clear statement would have saved a great deal of time.
Teachers tried to strike a reasonable balance between the challenges they were setting and the skills of their pupils.
Their ability to motivate children was heavily dependent upon the precision of this balance since tasks which are too difficult invariably generate frustration or anxiety while those which are too easy soon lead to boredom and a general sense of purposelessness.
It is not always easy to balance challenges and skills even when working with a single child on a relatively straightforward task; for these class teachers working with mixed ability groups in settings where the normal practice was for several different tasks in different curriculum areas to be undertaken simultaneously, an adequate balance between challenges and skills throughout the group had to remain an aspiration rather than an achievement.
Some children experienced the balance for some of the time; others inevitably did not.
Frequently, strategies were adopted which camouflaged the intractability of this particular problem.
A common device was to ask large numbers of token questions (or pseudo-questions) which gave the illusion of educational dialogue without making any demands at all on the children's skills.
The imposition of a small amount of easy work was another popular strategy, particularly in situations where children were offered some degree of choice of activity.
This reduction of demand to a tow level maximized the number of children who could proceed without assistance, and offered at least the illusion of motivation through enjoyment.
There was a reluctance among some teachers to say openly that a particular answer to a question was wrong.
Incorrect answers were sometimes ignored; more often they were praised as if they were right, and then ignored.
Conversely, correct answers were sometimes treated as if they were incorrect.
The problem here was that genuine open dialogue is unpredictable and can lead anywhere; it is not consistent with the pursuit of a detailed prearranged plan of work, yet it is widely accepted as an appropriate medium for teaching.
Consequently, the fate of children's contributions sometimes had less to do with their quality than with their ability to sustain the teacher's pre-existing intentions for the session as a whole.
Teachers showed a great deal of skill in dealing with the many interruptions of the classroom day, generally managing to neutralize them either by simply refusing to be distracted by them, or by transmuting them into a part of the teaching session.
More damaging to the continuity of sessions were the frequent occasions when teachers interrupted themselves, either because they did not have a very  clear idea of what they were trying to say, or because their organizational structure was so complicated that they were trying to do too many things at once.
The problem of time in primary classrooms does not arise solely from external pressures.
It may in part be a function of the teacher's own practices, and when this is so an analysis of his or her use of time, from the broad organizational strategies right down to the minutiae of moment-to-moment interactions with the children, could help both in creating more time and in making for a more effective and efficient context for learning.
The patterns of interaction explored and illustrated in detail in our eleventh report and briefly summarized here raise important issues for teachers, heads and advisory staff:
Is the balance of questions and other kinds of utterance in primary classrooms right?
Should we not be more discriminating in our use of questions, statements and instructions, being prepared to tell or instruct if the occasion warrants?
What can be done to shift from pseudo-questions to those which genuinely invite an answer?
What can be done to shift from closed questions to those which encourage children to reflect and solve problems rather than recall tow-level information?
Should children themselves be asking more of the questions?
What are the contexts in which it is most appropriate to adopt a questioning stance?
When is it appropriate to tell rather than ask?
How can we strike the right balance between steering discussion down a prescribed path and recognizing that apparently divergent responses may contain considerable learning potential?
How can we learn to listen to children as well as get them to listen to us?
How can we encourage them to talk and listen to each other?
How can we make our use of praise discriminating and therefore meaningful, rather than profligate or ritualized?
How can we balance praise and encouragement with clear and useful feedback?
How can we use classroom dialogue to promote genuine learning and understanding?
In the context of these questions the rarity of genuinely collaborative group work is unfortunate.
It is educational in itself, encouraging the kinds of interaction in which effective learning is grounded.
It promotes self-monitoring by encouraging children to use the group as well as the teacher as their point of reference.
It shifts interaction between pupils away from casual social conversation in the direction of discussion about the task in hand, and in doing so it reduces the amount of time spent by the teacher on matters of routine.
Although most teachers would recognize the desirability of appraising their classroom practice in terms of questions like those listed above, the difficulty of applying such a process to one's own discourse should not be underestimated.
In the 1984 study by Bennett et al .,
teachers thought that their learning tasks were  considerably more challenging than they were.
In the hitherto unpublished Leeds University evaluation of the 1991 Key Stage One National Curriculum Assessment, teachers rated the tasks they gave to children as rather more challenging than did observers, and were rather more generous than the observers in their estimates both of the frequency of open questions and of the opportunities they gave pupils to volunteer opinions.
On the other hand, observers felt that teachers were needlessly pessimistic about the clarity of their explanations.
Self-monitoring in a busy classroom is not easy, yet the need for training in the skills of classroom discourse is evident; as part of that training the trainee or serving teacher needs to be able to objectify his or her modes of discourse in order to begin to improve them.
Video and audio recording are helpful in this matter, and the particular use of radio microphones in the Leeds study — less obtrusive and yet more effective than conventional microphones — deserves to be developed.
However, issues like those listed above can only begin to be seriously addressed if more fundamental assumptions about primary practice are challenged at the same time.
We have indicated that the unthinking and undiscriminating use of questions — often closed or low-level — may reflect what we term a ‘taboo on didacticism’, a sense that children at all costs must not be told.
The result, as the transcripts and analysis in Report 11 show, can be a charade of pseudo-enquiry which fools nobody, least of all the children, but which wastes a great deal of time.
Similarly, the indiscriminate and thus unhelpful use of praise — rather than more judicious and exact feedback — may stem from a laudable concern that children should be encouraged and supported in their learning.
Yet in the end this too can be counterproductive, with children becoming confused or cynical in the face of what they may begin to see as so much mere noise.
Teachers' interactions with individual children — as is clear from figures in Report 11 and from other research (notably Galton et al .
1980; Bennett et al .
1984; Mortimore et al .
1988; Galton 1989)— are rarer than they may realize.
Such interactions must never be other than supportive; yet they must also carry as much potency as possible for moving children's learning forward.
However, behind the tendencies we have charted lurks a more intractable problem, that of curriculum expertise.
There may on occasions be sound educational reasons for adopting a style of interaction in which unfocused questions predominate.
Equally, the strategy may serve as another of the various ‘camouflaging’ devices we have identified; in this case what remains disguised is the extent to which a class teacher's limited grasp of specialist subject matter may make unavailable the options of adopting a more focused and challenging mode of questioning, or making judicious use of a didactic mode.
The same difficulty may discourage a teacher from permitting the children to ask too many questions themselves.
To confine the interaction to what is known is the safest course, and there are limits to the number of times a teacher can reply — as primary teachers are encouraged to —‘I don't know, but let's find out, shall we?’ without straining their credibility and frustrating their pupils.
This particular problem emerged most tellingly in the context of our studies of  TTT.
Here, some teachers found themselves, often for the first time in their careers, with the opportunity to engage in depth with a small number of individuals, yet were not always able fully to exploit the possibilities because sustained questioning and discussion at that level required them to have a clear framework of the kinds of question they wished to promote and a grasp of the ways a sequence of such questions related to the wider map of the curriculum area in which a particular learning task was located.
One of the preconditions for productive teacher-pupil interaction, therefore, must be curriculum mastery on the part of the teacher: keeping one step (or one SOA) ahead of the children is not enough.
The matter bears as much on assessment as on learning, and indeed the two are intimately connected.
Accurate diagnosis and assessment require two kinds of professional knowledge: knowledge of the child, and knowledge of the aspect of the curriculum in which evidence about the child's capacities and progress is sought.
To form judgements about a child we need evidence.
Asking questions is one of the most powerful tools at the teacher's disposal for establishing the nature and extent of a child's understanding; providing feedback is a necessary way of registering whether the understanding is correct or complete.
Both questions and feedback have a prospective as well as a retrospective function: they enable the child to build on present understanding and to move forward into new areas of learning.
The urge to question and praise are but two of many possible examples of commitments which are deeply embedded in the conventional wisdom about what constitutes ‘good practice’ in primary education.
Despite the growing weight of conceptual and empirical evidence (Dearden 1968, 1976; Bennett 1976; Bennett et al .
1984; Galton et al .
1980; Galton and Simon 1980; Galton 1989; Alexander 1984; DES 1978b, 1982, 1983, 1985; Mortimore et al .
1988; Tizard et al .
1988, etc.), there was a tendency to acquiesce in this conventional wisdom and all that went with it: the reduction of what ought to be a complex and multi-faceted debate to the simple adversarialism of ‘formal’ versus ‘informal’, ‘didactic’versus ‘exploratory’, teacher as ‘instructor’versus teacher as ‘facilitator’, rote learning versus ‘discovery’, ‘subjects’versus ‘integration’, class teaching versus group work, ‘traditional’versus ‘progressive’, ‘bad practice’versus ‘good’.
This primitive style of discourse, in which complex issues are reduced to simple polarities, was a powerful and persistent feature of English primary education at the start of PNP.
Even now, the National Curriculum notwithstanding, it still provides the basic framework for much professional discussion, and the culture of some schools makes the entertaining of alternatives difficult.
The need for a review of teaching strategies in the light of the National Curriculum requirements is evident.
However, the vocabulary for such a review will need to be more subtle and precise, and much less polarized, than that which has dominated discussion of such matters in primary education for the last two decades or so (Alexander 1984, 1989, 1991).
At the same time, we may have to accept that the National Curriculum finally forces us to address the question of how far the polarization of the discourse, and  the adopting of classroom strategies which celebrate something called ‘process’ at the expense of content, may both stem in part from a posture of defensiveness in the face of the problem of the primary class teacher's curriculum knowledge.
(This hypothesis is explored more fully in Alexander 1984: 74–5.)
In turn, to open up these issues to honest and realistic scrutiny must entail our preparedness to challenge the ultimate article of faith in primary education: the inviolability of the class-teacher system.
TEACHERS TEACHING TOGETHER
Before PNP, Leeds primary schools were staffed on the conventional basis of a head plus a teacher for each registration group, and in the national league table many Leeds primary classes were very large.
Enhanced staffing under PNP gave schools two broad possibilities: to continue the traditional arrangement of one teacher per class, but with smaller classes; or to maintain class sizes but have more than one teacher working in some of them.
Advisory staff encouraged the later, using labels like ‘support teacher’, ‘collaborative teaching’ and ‘working alongside’and arguing in courses and documentation that enhanced staffing used in this way would enable the central goal of PNP — to meet the needs of each and every child — to be met.
Schools responded variously, some taking up the opportunity, or challenge, of collaborative teaching while others seized the chance to reduce class sizes, for decades a source of frustration and complaint in the primary profession.
In this section we summarize our findings on what we termed ‘Teachers Teaching Together’ or TTT — a label we introduced as being as neutral as possible and free of the particular value-orientations of ‘team’or ‘collaborative’teaching.
This label allowed us to start from the simple proposition that in some classrooms more than one teacher was present and to explore without preconception what they were doing.
Others adopted the term, sometimes using it more prescriptively than we had intended.
Our original analysis, outlined in the fourth report, showed that TTT involved four main dimensions or areas of decision-making:
Participants (who the collaborating teachers are);
Purposes of the collaboration;
Collaborative style of the teachers concerned;
Pupil organization (the ways pupils worked with each teacher).
Our fieldwork revealed a number of emerging possibilities, practices and issues in respect of each of these.
Participants
Most collaborations involved the class teacher and one other: a PNP appointee (coordinator or Scale I/MPG teacher) or an existing colleague released from his/her own class duties by PNP staffing.
A great deal hung on the relationship participants were able to establish, and in this any status differential could prove problematic.
Traditionally, primary class teachers attach much importance to having ‘their’ class, and notions of territory, ownership and autonomy are deeply embedded in professional consciousness.
TTT could threaten these, especially if the visiting teacher had higher status than the class teacher.
The issue called for a great deal of understanding on both sides, which inevitably in many cases could not be guaranteed.
Yet at the same time the question of who was in charge had to be addressed, in the interests of effective planning and action, and to avoid any later confusion.
Both partners could find the situation difficult, for different reasons.
For the class teacher the problem was one of territory and ownership.
For the visiting teacher it was one of access.
Purposes.
Three main purposes for TTT emerged:
special educational needs;
curriculum enhancement;
professional development.
Given the strong emphasis on children with special educational needs during the early days of PNP it was not surprising that many collaborations concentrated their attention on these children.
However, there was a clear distinction between those schools which used TTT to achieve greater integration of SEN children into a class, and those in which there was segregation , with one or other of the participating teachers adopting the traditional ‘remedial group’ model of SEN provision.
By ‘curriculum enhancement’ we initially meant the use of TTT to spread the specialist curriculum expertise of individual members of staff, along the lines commended by HMI since 1978 (DES 1978b, House of Commons 1986).
Our later fieldwork showed three variants of curriculum enhancement (discussed in more detail in Chapter 3):shared delivery of the whole curriculum (the use of specialist expertise across the school in pursuit of whole-school curriculum policies),curriculum intensification (support for specific groups of children in particular areas of the curriculum) and curriculum invigoration (meeting the subject needs of particular teachers on an ad hoc basis).
The boundary between curriculum enhancement and the third TTT purpose, professional development, is not clear-cut: curriculum enhancement necessarily involves professional development but TTT of this kind acquires the latter label when its purposes are quite explicitly directed at improving teacher competence.
Moreover, the focus for the professional development purpose of TTT can be aspects of teaching other than curriculum expertise and delivery.
However, making the intention explicit meant that the dynamics of collaboration had to be handled very carefully.
With the goal of curriculum enhancement it was possible for a junior member of staff with specific subject expertise to support a senior colleague without such expertise; but when the goal was professional  development it required a clear status differential between senior partner as trainer or consultant and junior partner as trainee or client.
Yet even in these cases the situation could be an awkward one: senior partners needed both credibility and backing from the head; they also needed tact and skill in the development enterprise, and such attributes are not an automatic concomitant of experience; and client teachers needed to be able to accept that their practice needed such attention.
Collaborative style
There were two main forms that TTT collaborations could take in the classroom:working alongside and withdrawal .
The first was the advisory team's preference when the Authority introduced enhanced staffing as a strategy, while the second, being the traditional way of using extra pairs of hands in most contexts other than nursery, was the initial preference of many schools.
Clearly, it is far less problematic for the teachers involved if they each take full responsibility for separate groups of children and work independently — especially when their independence is underlined by physical separateness.
Moreover, there is no doubt that in large classes this practice can ease the burden on the class teacher.
But the strategy of working alongside is more likely to bring about significant change in professional thinking and classroom practice, because the partners have no alternative but to confront questions of planning and organization, and hence to explore each other 's ideas.
However, we came across many examples of teachers who had failed to tackle the imperative of genuinely shared planning ostensibly working alongside each other in pursuit of shared goals.
As a result the climate of collaboration could be full of unresolved questions and tensions, children could be confused about what was going on and the potential of the collaboration could be subverted.
In some of these cases the collaborative style was really withdrawal, and such was the tension and confusion generated by the participants claiming to be working together but not really doing so, that it would have been better to drop the pretence and designate the practice withdrawal.
The prerequisite for successful collaboration, therefore, was shared planning ; the precondition for such planning to be coherent was shared values .
In turn, both of these required that the participants were open and honest in presenting and discussing their individual value-positions on matters of curriculum and classroom organization.
Pupil organization
There were three patterns of pupil organization:
equal division;
no division;
small group/rest of class.
Where the class was equally divided, two mini-classes were in effect created, each teacher taking responsibility for one of them.
Where there was no division, one or both teachers started the session off, then both moved freely round the whole class.
In the third case, one teacher took responsibility for the majority, while the other looked after a small group, or even an individual.
The latter was particularly favoured as a strategy for dealing with children with special needs.
It is our contention that each of these dimensions — participants, purposes, collaborative style and pupil organization — is intrinsic to TTT, wherever it takes place.
Moreover, the dimensions can be variously combined, producing a wide range of ways of exploiting the potential of TTT.
We also believe that the dimensions constitute an essential discussion agenda for the teachers concerned.
Both parties need to be absolutely clear about the purposes of the collaboration; they need to resolve matters of leadership, status and responsibility; they need to plan together in order to sort out these matters and practical questions to do with who is responsible for what activities and which children.
Only then will the potential of TTT be fully realized.
As PNP progressed, we came across many examples of collaborations which were clearly working well and which had liberated staff to work in new ways, to increase their understanding and skill, and to attend more closely to the needs of particular groups and individuals.
We were also aware that ‘TTT’ began to be in danger of becoming yet another over-used and under-defined primary slogan and all kinds of claims were being made for its educational efficacy for children simply because of the novelty, stimulus and enjoyment which it could give to their teachers .
Such self-indulgence needs to be guarded against what is pleasurable for teachers is not necessarily beneficial to children.
TTT at best is a complex and sophisticated way of working.
When the participants fail to address the agenda referred to above, it may do more harm than good.
Flooding schools with teachers in itself solves nothing, and may merely disrupt effective solo teaching.
Indeed, as our data on adult-pupil ratios showed, increasing the number of adults in a classroom can sometimes detrimentally affect children's task-related behaviour.
TTT has considerable potential, but it is not a panacea.
CONCLUSION: THE PROFESSIONAL CONTEXT OF CLASSROOM PRACTICE
The Authority recognized that classroom practice would not improve without a considerable investment in INSET and in professional support at both LEA and school level.
In this chapter and others, we describe and comment on the strategies for professional development adopted and/or commended, ranging from day-to-day collaboration in the classroom, as discussed above, to whole-school strategies such as those explored in Chapters 3 and 6, and LEA courses and the work of advisers which we consider in Chapter 7.
In this final section of the present chapter we pull together some important issues relating to the context within which the LEA sought to improve the classroom practice of its primary teachers.
Versions of ‘good practice'
As we have shown, the prevailing model of ‘good practice’ was in certain important respects incomplete.
In focusing on the physical and organizational features of the ‘quality learning environment’ it neglected the necessary questions about the purposes and content of primary education on which decisions about layout, organization, grouping and so on should be contingent.
Equally serious was its neglect of the issue of children's learning.
It should go without saying that questions about the purposes and character of children's learning are of fundamental importance not just to teachers but also to those who undertake the task of constructing the policies and strategies through which teachers' ideas and practices are shaped.
To neglect these questions and concentrate instead on the ‘environment’ of learning, however important that might be, is to risk encouraging the belief that teachers are judged and advanced on the basis of how their classrooms took rather than how and what their pupils learn; consequently, some may feel that it is strategically sensible to concentrate on surface at the expense of substance.
The implied agenda is in any event back-to-front.
Questions about purposes, content and learning are logically prior to questions about layout and organization: the latter should be set up to implement goals set out on the basis of attention to the former.
Learning is the end, organization the means.
Teaching strategies and classroom organization should never be viewed as ends in themselves.
There was an even more profound sense in which the prevailing version of good practice was deficient.
Nowhere in our considerable quantity of data is there any sense that the notion of ‘good practice’ was presented to teachers as problematic.
Nowhere were teachers invited to note that ‘good’ implies questions and judgements of value , and that the whole issue of good practice might raise controversial yet essential questions about the claims made for particular approaches, the arguments and evidence for and against them, the educational values they represented, or the practical problems of implementing them.
Instead, despite the ostensible commitment to ‘flexibility’ there was apparently just one version of good practice, presented as a package of recommendations and principles and exemplified in the model classroom.
This was viewed by teachers as having the force of policy and therefore being not open to challenge.
Further, it has to be asked whether in any event layout, display, grouping and organization are proper subjects for central policy or prescription.
Clearly, an LEA has an obligation in the words of a recent Audit Commission report (Audit Commission 1989a) to ‘articulate a vision of what the education service is trying to achieve’ and to ‘support schools and help them to fulfil this vision’, but it could be argued that the most appropriate focus for such a vision, necessarily generalized because of the range of institutional contexts and pupil needs involved, should be on identifying broad goals and the kinds of learning which schools might seek to promote.
It might also be suggested that for officers of an LEA to concentrate time and resources on prescribing how the physical arrangements of  classrooms should be attended to represents a rather demeaning view of teachers and heads, whose proper concern such matters undoubtedly are.
Responding to officially commended versions of ‘good practice'
Many teachers had difficulty accommodating what they thought others expected to see in their classrooms, partly because they were frequently unclear about what was expected, and partly because of practical and personal difficulties.
Some ignored the recommendations; others implemented them wholeheartedly; others changed — as they were implicitly invited to do — the surface of their practice without engaging with deeper issues about what purposes such practice might serve.
For many, the sense of having to adopt a preferred version of practice accentuated the dilemmas which are always part of everyday teaching.
Our reports provide many examples; for the present we note three which were both prominent and recurrent In these cases the pressures and dilemmas could not only prove intractable but might also have adverse consequences for the children.
The first example is the view that it is good primary practice to have children working in groups.
For some teachers, problems arose when they sought to reconcile this expectation with their simultaneous sense of obligation to monitor, diagnose, assess and interact at the level of the individual child.
In this case a solution was at hand, although it helped the teacher rather more than the children: it was to neglect those children working in curriculum areas perceived to be relatively unimportant (such as art and topic work), to devise for them low-level activities which could be tackled with minimal teacher intervention, and to focus attention on those children who demanded it.
The strategy was deliberate, and indeed was often referred to as focused, or unequal, investment.
Yet as we noted in our tenth report: ‘The price that some children may pay for demanding little of the teacher may be that they are given work which demands little of them’(Alexander et al .
1989: 284).
The second example, a frequent concomitant of the first, is the notion that it is good primary practice to have the different groups pursuing different areas of the curriculum at any one time, because only thus can the goals of ‘seamlessness’ and ‘flexibility’in curriculum and learning be achieved.
For some teachers not only was this difficult to plan and implement as an organizational strategy per se , but the increased demands imposed on them by the strategy meant that their opportunities for systematic and sustained monitoring of children's progress were further reduced, while at the same time the increased levels of movement and disturbance in the classroom might adversely affect children's concentration and time on task.
The third example is the view that it is good primary practice to adopt a predominantly ‘enquiry’ or ‘exploratory’mode of teacher-pupil interaction and to couple this with plenty of encouragement and support for children's responses.
We discussed in Report 11 the way this can be taken to excess by those teachers  who couch the majority of their utterances in the form of questions, even when statements or instructions are more appropriate, and how such questioning can then become further debased by being low-level or closed.
We also showed how the indiscriminate use of praise is a poor substitute for positive and specific feedback.
We believe that many teachers who adopt such modes of interaction, though they do so partly as a matter of habit, are also responding to what they feel is expected of them.
Though they might thereby earn their spurs as ‘good practitioners’, their children may gain rather less than if they had experienced a more varied and exact mode of discourse.
These are just three examples.
Our reports contain many others.
The general principle they all provoke is this: all teaching involves dilemmas which arise when teachers seek to reconcile the various circumstances, contingencies and expectations of which the job, by its nature, is constituted (Berlak and Berlak 1981; Nias 1989; Alexander 1988, 1989).
No approach to professional support and development, still less an account of ‘good practice’, can afford not to identify and confront these.
Yet many teachers clearly feel that to admit to facing dilemmas is somehow an admission of weakness, and that at all costs a front of professional equanimity and consensus must be maintained in respect of the validity and practical viability of mainstream primary orthodoxies.
In suppressing their dilemmas and in failing to challenge the orthodoxies they help neither themselves nor the children they teach.
Lest we be misinterpreted on this matter, we are not advocating the abolition of grouping or the withdrawal of encouragement.
Far from it: encouragement is essential and grouping, appropriately used, is a highly effective classroom strategy.
We are arguing, on the basis of what actually happens in classrooms, that a purist adherence to any methodological orthodoxy can generate considerable problems, that these need to be addressed openly, and that in any event the notion that the act of teaching can be made the subject of procedural mandates is suspect and unrealistic.
Strategies for improving practice
Leeds LEA sought to improve classroom practice by a combination of two main strategies:
enhanced staffing, and the exploitation of its potential to encourage classroom-based professional development;
the work of the advisory service in general, and of adviser-led INSET in particular .
Schools recognized the potential of these strategies, and our discussions elsewhere of PNP coordinators and TTT explore some of the possibilities and problems of having staff work together with the improvement of classroom practice in view.
However, in this chapter we have identified certain reservations about the models of teaching commended during the period under discussion, and to the  extent that teachers felt obliged to implement these the effectiveness of enhanced staffing must have been blunted.
A strategy for improving teaching has not one but two components: not only must there be an effective means for helping teachers to change their practice along the lines required, but the preferred approaches to teaching must be coherent, defensible and demonstrably capable of securing a quality of learning superior to that available previously.
On this latter aspect, regardless of the successes claimed for enhanced staffing, we are less sanguine.
Three fundamental changes are called for in this regard.
First, it is clear that the way classroom practice is defined and talked about must change.
The quasi-consensus of ‘good primary practice’ must be replaced by a mode of professional discourse in which the difficulties of determining what practice is good must be addressed.
The focus of discussion must be greatly extended to take in more issues to do with learning and with educational purposes and content.
The day-to-day challenges and dilemmas of practitioners must be explored much more openly and honestly.
Moreover, and this concerns policy-makers at least as much as teachers themselves, where certain dilemmas remain unresolvable because they are rooted not so much in particular classroom strategies as the inbuilt limitations of the generalist class teacher system, the professional, political and resource implications must be squarely faced.
Second, there needs to be a substantial shift in primary education from judgements of quality based on visual cues to one based on engagement with what and how children learn.
What we called in our tenth report ‘the inviolability of practice’, or the tendency to skirt round the issues at the heart of education, needs to be breached.
Such a shift needs to take place in two contexts — one, as we have said, is professional discourse; the other is the strategies adopted by those responsible for promoting and encouraging teachers' development.
Finally, the idea that an LEA — let alone a national government — can be the sole definer, arbiter and guardian of good practice must be abandoned.
The assumption is offensive to teachers; it encourages professional dependency; it discourages professional autonomy and self-motivated development; and it is in any case empirically unsustainable.
These have far-reaching implications, especially for the strategies and styles adopted by advisory staff and heads, and for the ways class teachers view themselves as professionals.
They are particularly important — and problematic at a time when government policy seems to be introducing a serious tension into the local administration of the education service.
On the one hand, advisory roles are shifting more towards inspection and quality control, and the accountability of advisers and inspectors to their employing LEAs is being more firmly underscored (Audit Commission 1989b).
On the other hand, schools are being encouraged in a much greater degree of financial and professional self-determination.
At the same time, the rhetoric of ‘partnership’ has never been stronger: used by policy-makers it seeks to soften the blow of centralization; used by the professionals it smacks of a desperate clinging to more liberal values.
These matters will not be easily resolved.
Links with parents and the community
At the time of our third report, in May 1987, the LEA had no written policy on home-school links, and no officer carried overall responsibility in this area.
It is fair to add that Leeds does not seem to have been unique in this respect: reporting on an inspection carried out in ‘ethnically diverse areas within three LEAs’(including five Leeds Phase 1 PNP schools) in March 1988, HMI remarked that ‘none of the three LEAs had specific policies for parent school liaison’(DES 1988a).
However, the HMI report sampled only three LEAs, and we are aware of others which have been considerably more proactive and inventive in the area of home-school links.
Frequently, such LEAs operate at two levels simultaneously: at the school level fostering and encouraging changes in attitude and practice, while at LEA level opening up direct two-way communication with parents through a variety of channels.
By the end of the project we could report that there had been some changes and developments in practice.
Many of them were initiated independently by the schools, and some were a direct consequence of national legislation, but the Authority's own profile in this area continued to be remarkably restrained.
There was still no official home-school links policy document to which interested parties might turn for clear and authoritative guidance.
However, in April 1989 an advisory teacher attached to the Primary Division was given responsibility for ‘parents and community’ along with her existing workload.
At an in-service course which she led three months later it was proposed and agreed that a working party should be set up to produce a draft policy for links with parents and the community.
Nine more months passed before the group convened.
It consisted of the advisory teacher, an educational psychologist and sixteen of the teachers who had been at the course.
At the time of going to press the working party's document is still awaited.
In view of the level at which responsibility for parents and the community was allocated, the pace at which action was taken, the apparently arbitrary way in which membership of the working party was decided and the omission from its membership of key figures in the area of home-school links, it must be assumed that the formulation of an LEA policy in this area was a matter to which the Authority attached a rather low priority during this period.
The situation contrasted sharply with the high profile initiatives taken in relation to the other three PNP aims.
PRACTICE
Our third report outlined a number of schemes and initiatives which were intended to further the general aim of closer links with parents and the community: the appointment of a team of home-school liaison assistants (later redesignated home-school liaison officers); the Portage scheme, described in more detail below; in-service support courses; and a wide range of everyday practice, including a great diversity of activities (forty-seven in all) which are listed in Table 5.1.
Table 5.1 Strategies for home-school links in thirty Leeds primary schools
The report also examined the very real difficulties which sometimes beset home-school links, suggesting that a clash of basic objectives between teachers and parents may sometimes lead to a confrontation between widely differing models of home-school links.
We identified four pairs of complementary roles commonly adopted by teachers and parents in their encounters with each other:
consultant and client;
bureaucrat and claimant;
equal partners;
casual acquaintances.
Problems arise when there is a mismatch between the models adopted by the teacher and the parent — when, for example, one wants to make a complaint while the other wants to give advice.
With only four models in operation (and of course in reality there are many more) this kind of mismatch can take no fewer than twelve possible forms.
When any one of them occurs, the teacher and the parent are likely to experience each other 's behaviour as inappropriate and hence strange and uncooperative, and both may leave the encounter bewildered and disappointed.
Through comparison with an earlier survey undertaken by Leeds LEA itself, it was possible to report:
that most of the present range of home-school links was already to be found in local primary schools well before PNP, and that activity in this field since 1985 has involved the further development and dissemination of existing practice rather than the devising of innovative techniques.
Even so, PNP has clearly brought along with it a few entirely new initiatives.
The 1985 study reports no examples of parents teaching their children at home under the guidance of a teacher; no activity packs for use at the time of the children's first admission to school; no parents helping in the classroom with music, and no home-school liaison assistants or secondary/junior/infant liaison teachers.
(PRINDEP 1987a 9–11)
The questionnaire sent to all primary heads in July 1989 revealed that the combined resources of PNP were thought to have had far less impact on home-school links than on any of the programme's other objectives.
Few heads had allocated any of their extra capitation to the development of productive links with parents and the community, while nearly all of them considered that such PNP resources as the Authority's advisory and support staff, the INSET programme and even the refurbishment of their own schools had made little or no impact on home-school links, however effective they may have been in furthering the programme's other objectives.
Only enhanced staffing and, in particular, the PNP coordinators were thought to have made a slight to moderate impact.
By far the most widespread activity of PNP staff in the general area of home-school links involved reading or other language work with parents and their children.
Number work was also common, as were programmes of home visiting and initiatives involving the parents of children with special educational needs.
In all, well over sixty different specific activities were listed by heads in this context, including cooking for special occasions, a paired play project with a neighbouring special school, and the development of links with local elderly people.
The Education Acts of the 1980s greatly increased the responsibilities and powers of school governors, including parent governors.
In response to the introduction of the local management of schools the LEA organized a series of measures to train and inform governors on such topics as the appointment of staff, provision for children with special educational needs, and the formulation of school policy on discipline, equal opportunities, child protection and a number of other matters.
The Governors' Unit serviced by the Education Department also produced a news-sheet which contained updates on government and LEA reports and initiatives, and offered lists of issues for consideration.
The 1980s legislation also gave parents the legal right to be informed about, and be involved in, certain aspects of school life.
In the Summer Term of 1989 the LEA published and distributed a short booklet (Leeds City Council 1989e) which was ‘intended to help parents to appreciate what constitutes the best primary school practice and also to highlight aspects of education that the  Authority wishes to promote’.
Home-school links did not feature prominently in this booklet although its content clearly implied that the Authority wished to:
provide parents with basic information about its schools;
suggest the kinds of questions they should be asking about their children's education;
encourage them to participate in their children's early reading experiences;
urge them to seek regular discussions about their children's progress;
help them to find their way around school buildings.
At the time of going press, primary and middle schools are being reorganized.
As part of this procedure the Authority has been involved in meetings with parents and governors of the schools concerned.
Home-school liaison officers
The setting up, training and work practices of the home-school liaison team were described at length in our third report.
There we noted that:
as a matter of policy, all ten of the home-school liaison assistants are themselves members of ethnic minority groups.
The reasoning behind this is clear.
Any minority group is likely to include a substantial number of people who feel the need of…help and reassurance,…and many members of ethnic minorities suffer an additional persistent burden of racial discrimination which may well cause them to wonder what hope they could ever have of a fair hearing from a representative of the culture which treats them in this way…
Yet of course each of the schools in which the assistants work has pupils of many different ethnic origins, and in practice no single head has expressed any other intention than that assistants should work with families from all parts of the local community.
(PRINDEP 1987a: 17)
After HMI's inspection in March 1988, a set of guidelines about the use and deployment of home-school liaison officers was produced by the LEA and distributed to the heads of primary schools concerned.
In May 1988, the team of home-school liaison officers was augmented by two additional members and the LEA applied to the Home Office for funding for three more posts under Section 11 of the Local Government Act of 1966.
March 1989 saw the formal appointment of a coordinator for home-school liaison officers and bilingual support assistants, who was to be responsible to ‘the appropriate adviser in the Primary Division’ and whose job description listed eight major duties including close liaison with the schools involved in the two projects, cooperation with heads to provide a positive and coherent service, and attendance at appropriate working parties and committees ‘as agreed with the Primary Adviser’.
Contact with the advisory teacher who was subsequently (April 1989) given responsibility for parents and the community was not written into the job description.
In keeping with the exclusive emphasis on racial and multicultural matters in the job descriptions, the entire team of officers and their coordinator were all members of ethnic minority communities.
Portage
Portage is a method of working with pre-school children whose development is delayed: parents teach their children at home under the guidance of a Portage worker who visits the family once a week.
The worker also attends weekly meetings with a supervisor who provides help and support, records details of the teaching programmes, writes reports, and helps the family with problems involving contact with other agencies.
The Leeds Portage Scheme serviced twenty families across the city.
It was set up under Educational Support Grant funding in 1986, but was financed by the City Council when the grant expired in April 1989.
It was not part of the Primary Needs Programme but the method was advocated through PNP INSET.
Early Education Support Agency
A broadly similar philosophy underlay the work of the Early Education Support Agency (EESA).
Again, this was not a PNP initiative but is reported here because it concerned parents, children and schools and gives an example of the practice from which the LEA's unwritten policy on home-school links has to be inferred.
It was set up in September 1987 under the Department of Education Special Services Division, and its brief was threefold:
to find out the needs of parents of children under five and work with them to help facilitate those needs,…to help parents help their children acquire useful skills and act as a bridge between home and school,…and to increase a shared community spirit and foster an attitude of sharing and support between parents and other parents in the local neighbourhood, alongside the paid professionals and voluntary agencies.
(Leeds City Council 1987b)
The EESA team consisted of the educational psychologist who originally proposed that the agency should be set up, a supervisor, and eight workers who were selected for such qualities as their apparent ability to empathize with their clients without seeming patronizing, and to deal with difficult situations.
After the initial training of staff, and discussion with other agencies, EESA's work began with a pilot project in two inner-city areas.
The success of the pilot project led to a decision in principle that EESA should extend its activities throughout the city.
In September 1989, with the existing funding and personnel, five school groups were set up, one in each inner area of the city, while the original groups still met and were run by parents with minimal support from the EESA workers.
By this time the formally stated aims of EESA were:
To support children, parents and teachers to enable children to start at the same starting line.
To help children to happily acquire useful skills in order that they might take full advantage of nursery provision and formal schooling when that time begins.
To help raise parental esteem so that they become equal partners in this process; and so that young children are able to see their parents as problem solving, confident role models.
(Leeds City Council 1989b: 4)
Primary Needs Programme INSET
Our analysis in Chapter 7 will show that the LEA's programme of in-service training was much more concerned with the other objectives of PNP than with home-school links.
We know also that according to the Authority's primary heads, PNP INSET made no impact on their practice in this area.
Nevertheless, there were some INSET initiatives in this area, and in particular the Special Services Division organized and ran a small number of very ambitious courses.
Firmly based in the educational and psychological literature and on research findings on home-school links, these courses involved detailed planning, comprehensive support material, built-in evaluation techniques and follow-up meetings.
It must be emphasized, however, that whether the criterion be the number of courses or the number of teacher-days devoted to this topic, the development of productive links with parents and the community did not account for more than a one-hundredth part of the Authority's in-service programme during the evaluation period.
CONCLUSION
This brief chapter has included details of the major LEA and school initiatives in the home-school field between the start of PNP in 1985 and the end of our fieldwork in 1990.
At that point (and indeed at the time of writing, in 1991) the Home-School Working Group was still in existence, and still apparently moving towards the eventual drafting of a policy document.
Although individual schools reported some degree of increased activity in this area, facilitated by extra staff, it was clear that except in certain well-known cases, home-school links was not a PNP priority.
Those schools who changed their outlook and practice in respect of relationships with parents and the community did so for their own reasons and in response to their own sense of priorities and needs.
Home-school links was the forgotten PNP aim.
The fact that by 1991 the situation had begun to change more generally was due less to Authority initiatives — which remained on a relatively small scale — than to a combination of  growing commitment at school level and the legislative requirements in respect of school governing bodies and the provision of information to parents about curriculum and assessment.
It could be argued that home-school links is precisely the kind of issue where a generalized LEA policy is least appropriate, since the chemistry of relationships between each school's staff and its parents is a unique and subtle matter, hardly conducive to centrally determined procedures.
Equally, it could be argued that the promotion of a sense of community, of which the primary school is a vital part, can only be achieved by local commitment and action.
In a fundamental sense this is true.
Each of the schools we visited pursued the matter differently, and in some the quality of relationships established with parents and the community was impressive, the more so for being the result of long and painstaking work by heads and teachers, often encountering frustrations and setbacks on the way to success.
Yet questions remain about those many schools still locked in the traditional relationship of ‘casual acquaintances’ or ‘bureaucrat and claimant’discussed earlier.
In these schools, while national legislation will nudge staff to introduce procedures for involving and informing parents where this is required by law, it will not encourage them to go beyond such procedures to establish the kinds of voluntary open dialogue and day-to-day collaboration which can do so much to enhance the quality of a child's education.
We believe that an LEA has an important role to play here.
Indeed, there is something distinctly paradoxical about the Leeds stance on this particular aspect of PNP in comparison with the others.
For while it was happy for the advisory team to devise policies which went into considerable detail about aspects of classroom practice which are surely for schools and teachers to determine, it remained relatively aloof from one area of school life — home-school links-where policy might usefully and helpfully have stipulated not just goals and commitments but also a range of procedures from which schools could choose.
The LEA, then, appears to have been interventive on matters which schools themselves ought to have dealt with, and laissez-faire on other matters in which it had a wholly legitimate interest.
Managing reform within the school
Our discussion in the previous four chapters has focused in turn on the substance and implementation of each of the aims of the Primary Needs Programme as set out by Leeds LEA in 1985 and as reinforced in numerous contexts subsequently.
Although management as such did not feature in these aims, the Authority perceived from the outset that their successful implementation would depend as much on schools' internal management styles and strategies as on external guidance, advice and support.
Accordingly, the PNP resource package included not merely extra staff of varying levels of experience and seniority, but also a particular category of extra staff — the PNP coordinator — appointed to a specific managerial role.
Within each school, PNP coordinators were to be the LEA's main agent for interpreting, explaining and implementing the goals of the programme.
They therefore featured prominently in our evaluation of PNP.
However, PNP coordinators could achieve little in isolation.
They were introduced into established professional cultures, dominated — as are all primary schools — by the personality and outlook of the head.
They had to work alongside deputy heads and postholders who also had managerial responsibilities, some of which overlapped considerably with their own.
Each school had its own unique circumstances, its particular history, strengths and weaknesses.
Managing PNP in the school, therefore, could never be a one-person affair.
This presented us with a problem.
Our task was to evaluate PNP.
We recognized PNP's central managerial dimension — the coordinator role — and included that in our programme.
Yet we also recognized that the success of PNP in general, and the coordinator in particular , depended vitally on aspects of the professional workings of schools which PNP addressed neither explicitly nor implicitly, and which were therefore not really within our evaluation brief.
Moreover, we had neither the resources nor the time to undertake a comprehensive anatomy of primary school management and professional relationships along the lines pursued, for example, by Nias et al .
(1989).
Consequently, we took a middle course.
We made PNP coordinators the object of a detailed study, but in addition we gathered data on the managerial and professional contexts within which coordinators and other PNP appointees worked, so that we could identify those contextual factors which bore most  heavily on how, and with what success, schools implemented the programme's goals.
ENHANCED STAFFING AND THE MANAGEMENT OF CHANGE
Table 1.1 (see Chapter 1) lists in full the various categories of PNP appointment and the numbers in each category, year by year.
The staggered introduction of Phases 2 and 3 means that years and phases do not correspond, but it is evident that there were considerable differences in the overall numbers of extra teaching staff allocated to each phase.
The 71 Phase I schools shared 178 extra staff some gaining a substantial complement — with the allocation averaging 2.5 per school.
In the larger proportion of Phase I schools there were two appointees, one coordinator and one Scale I teacher, although many schools had considerably larger PNP enhancements — up to 7.5 in two schools, or a staff increase of 38 per cent.
In contrast, the PNP enhancements for Phases 2 and 3 were 96.5 and 92 (full-time equivalents), producing an average enhancement per school of 1.7 in Phase 2 and 0.9 in Phase 3.
The disparity between PNP phases was accentuated by two factors.
One was that in many Phase 3 schools with fewer than 150 pupils on roll the allocation was only 0.5, giving them a much smaller range of support and development possibilities than was open to those schools with a full-time enhancement.
The second was the level of seniority at which appointments were made.
The 1985–6 Phase 1 initial staffing profile shows a balance of senior and junior appointees — 53 coordinators and 60 Scale 1 teachers.
This represents a senior/junior staffing enhancement ratio, in percentage terms, of 47:53.
By Phase 3, the balance had shifted to a preponderance of main professional grade teachers (11:89), and while in Phases I and 2 PNP coordinators were created from the PNP staffing enhancement, most Phase 3 schools had to appoint coordinators from their existing staff.
All these discrepancies, of course, were deliberate.
PNP was a programme explicitly grounded in a philosophy of positive discrimination in favour of the schools with the greatest social and educational needs, as represented by free school meals and low reading scores.
Assuming these measures to be fairly reliable indicators of the needs in question, the differential allocation of staffing was appropriate and just.
However, while the LEA maintained, as was its obligation, a global view of primary schools' needs, heads and teachers in individual schools were less likely to do so.
For them it was a matter of how many extra staff they received in comparison with a school down the road, and judged in these terms the disparities aroused great resentment, especially among Phase 3 heads.
The issue which these allocations does raise, however, is whether the level of Phase 3 resourcing was too low to have any significant impact.
Primary schools are very tightly staffed, to the extent — as the 1986 Parliamentary Select Committee Report recognized — that an enhancement of less than one teacher above establishment can generally achieve relatively little (House of Commons 1986).
Once the enhancement is one full-time teacher or more, then a whole range of  managerial roles and strategies becomes available because it is possible to combine full-time class  responsibility — which many heads see as vital to the integrity and continuity of children's education — with substantial cross-school management, development and support.
When the appointment is of someone who is experienced and well-qualified in both teaching and professional leadership, as all coordinators were required to be, the potential of enhancement is even greater.
All PNP appointees had job specifications — a welcome and important innovation.
Scale 1/MPG appointees were recruited to a fairly open brief, which set out a number of options for negotiation between appointee and head: taking a class, releasing a teaching head, releasing other staff, working alongside colleagues in a ‘support’ role, facilitating and/or organizing school visits, covering for colleagues, and so on.
Probationers were expected to teach a class full-time, in order to meet DES requirements.
Among the many statements about the character of PNP which were issued, orally and in writing, by officers and advisers in the early days of the Programme, two points were particularly forcibly expressed.
One was that PNP appointees were ‘real’ teachers, not supplies or ancillaries, and were to be treated as such, even though their roles might be more diverse than the traditional anchor of class-teaching.
The other was that in defining individual teachers' roles, schools were asked to recognize the importance of job-satisfaction.
Clearly, the Authority perceived a risk that junior PNP appointees might be exploited or marginalized, and took steps to prevent this.
What, then, did the very large number of Scale l/MPG teachers (some 267 overall, or 68 per cent of the teachers appointed under PNP) actually do?
Our annual surveys yielded a range of roles and activities.
Table 6.1 shows the distribution of PNP Scale l/MPG roles revealed by the survey of all schools over the period 1986–9.
It should be noted that the percentage column in the table sums to considerably more than one hundred because most staff in this category combined more than one role.
Typically, those (the majority) who did not have a full-time class teaching responsibility, might ‘float’ and cover for an absent colleague one day, act in a support TTT capacity the next, and so on.
The average number of such combined roles, across all three phases and over the four years in question, was just over three.
There were, however, significant differences between PNP phases in how such staff were used.
Generally, there was more diversity of role in Phase 1 than later phases — not least, presumably, because the higher staffing complement allowed this.
Perhaps more significant is the fact that SEN-related roles were more prominent in Phase 1 schools than in Phase 3, and using extra staff to cover for others was a more common use in Phase 3 than in Phase 1.
This tends to bear out the point raised above about the level of Phase 3 staffing.
With an average staffing enhancement in Phase 3 schools of 0.9, and with the majority of appointments made at MPG level, many such teachers found the developmental aspects of their job specifications constantly subverted by the need to cover for colleagues.
Disentangling Phase 3 heads' analysis of their use of PNP staff from their collective sense of outrage at the phasing policy is difficult.
Again and again in   the responses to our 1989 survey of all heads, those in Phase 3 schools commented negatively on their PNP staffing: that it had little impact; that it even exacerbated their previous staffing problems; that it was too little too late; that the LEA did not understand the problems which their schools were trying to tackle.
Positive responses, very much in the minority in Phase 3, therefore, focused mainly on the way PNP appointees freed heads and senior staff for managerial tasks and facilitated classroom collaborative activities, especially TTT.
Table 6.1 PNP Scale 1/MPG roles, 1986–9
In contrast, Phase 1 heads, and to a considerable extent Phase 2 heads also, listed gains such as enhanced management, TTT, curriculum review and development, staff development, and others to do with the quality of professional life in the school: improved morale; increased enthusiasm and vitality; the sharing of ideas and expertise; and the collective appraisal of alternative practices.
(It should be noted that the Phase 3 heads' comments came from a group whose schools had only recently been brought into PNP and that expressions of dissatisfaction were also voiced at equivalent points in Phases 1 and 2.
However, these were rarely as vehement or focused as those of their Phase 3 colleagues.)
In the period leading up to and immediately following the introduction of the National Curriculum, such qualitative gains were in themselves an essential resource.
Where schools, aided by PNP resourcing, had lifted their professional climate and decision-making processes out of the slough of low morale, crisis management and paternalism, they were able to confront the next wave of change constructively and with confidence, having the will, expertise and procedures to tackle the very difficult questions about curriculum and assessment which the 1988 Act provoked.
This transformation of professional climate may prove to be one of the most important legacies of The Primary Needs Programme.
Although the perception that Phase 3 schools were under-resourced was widespread, the effectiveness of the PNP staffing enhancement was certainly not  a consequence of numbers alone, any more than it is when schools are staffed at the conventional establishment figure.
We came across many cases of schools using minimal resourcing to maximum effect; and of schools with a substantial PNP staff enhancement manifestly failing to take advantage of what that enhancement could offer.
Many of these problems centred on the way schools deployed their PNP coordinators (see pp. 102–8), but Scale 1/MPG staff could also find themselves marginalized or used as supply teachers or even ancillaries in the very way the Authority had warned against.
Moreover, given the fact that classes have always been much larger in primary schools than elsewhere, and that primary teachers have persistently urged the need to improve pupil-teacher ratios, it is not surprising that many heads saw the opportunities afforded by PNP only in terms of smaller classes.
For schools to exploit fully the potential of enhanced staffing after a century of working on the basis of n class teachers plus the head, they needed the imagination to conceive of alternatives; a shift in attitudes away from the entrenched belief in the inviolability and supremacy of the traditional twin roles of head and class teacher; and the will to enact such alternatives and live with the discomfort which the changing of professional roles inevitably generates.
In some schools these attributes were in short supply, and the PNP staffing enhancement was largely wasted.
This problem, too, is still with us: radical changes in professional culture and structure cannot be achieved overnight.
Although advisory staff delivered warnings on this matter, they were not always followed through into the PNP INSET programme.
PNP staff attending these courses complained of being told what to do but not how to do it, and of receiving dismissive or baffled responses to their anxieties about coping with colleagues who were reluctant or unable to accommodate to new ways of working.
There was also a critical gap in the INSET programme where heads were concerned.
Heads' support was cited as the most important factor in the assimilation and success of PNP staff, yet the need to explore with heads, thoroughly and openly, the implications and potential of enhanced staffing, was not addressed at all in the early days of PNP.
The Authority responded to our interim statements on this matter and increased its INSET commitment to management issues and leadership roles (including that of the head) as PNP progressed.
However, as our reference above to the power of historical habit and precedent indicates, this is a long-term challenge, demanding radical change in the way schools conceive of management and the deployment of staff.
MANAGING CHANGE: THE PNP COORDINATOR
PNP coordinators were perceived and presented as the managerial linchpin of the Primary Needs Programme.
The role was an innovative one, and its initial scope was set out in the 1985 job specification (Leeds City Council 1985c).
It included working with colleagues and support agencies to further the four PNP aims, a particular brief for special needs provision, and a further injunction to work alongside other teachers to fulfil this brief.
The 1985 specification's emphasis on special needs was consonant with the mixed origins of PNP, and it reinforced initial — and persisting — confusion about whether PNP was a special needs programme or something else.
The specification was also very comprehensive, and the 1987 version added the significant message that heads and coordinators should select from and adapt the list rather than seek to implement it in its entirety.
In the same year, and in response to these and other difficulties — several of them identified by our project's fifth interim report — the Authority circulated Guidelines for Headteachers in the Use of PNP Staff (Leeds City Council 1987c).
This document made it clear that the responsibility for determining coordinators' roles rested with the heads, who were encouraged to choose from the 1985 specification provided by the Authority.
However, the document also emphasized that heads' room for manoeuvre was not unlimited, and that coordinators should be part of a senior management team which would determine and implement school policy.
Further, it identified three main ways in which coordinators could expect to contribute to the school's teaching programme:
taking responsibility for a class;
working alongside other teachers;
helping provide non-contact time by covering for colleagues.
In the event, a considerable diversity of roles emerged.
On the basis of our initial fieldwork, we were able in our fifth report to group these under five main headings:
special educational needs;
curriculum development;
staff development;
home-school links;
whole-class responsibility.
Further, the curriculum development role had four main versions:
curriculum manager;
curriculum consultant;
curriculum enhancer;
curriculum facilitator.
These latter four roles are defined and discussed in some detail in Chapter 3, and are therefore not elaborated here.
The annual questionnaire returns from PNP coordinators confirmed the validity of our initial framework, provided that‘staff development’ now subsumes TTT and the release of colleagues, and that ‘home-school links’includes working with outside agencies as well as parents.
With this proviso, the framework represented, in 1990 as in 1987, the main areas of school life in which PNP coordinators were deployed.
In addition, we can now indicate, in Table 6.2, the frequency of each role over the whole evaluation period.
Of course, these are not necessarily discrete categories: for example , curriculum development and staff  development are intertwined.
But the categories and frequencies provide a useful commentary on the ways schools chose to implement the main managerial aspect of PNP policy, as contained in the various documents and courses relating to the coordinator role.
Within these overall figures there were significant phase differences.
Special educational needs was always a much more prominent aspect of the work of Phase 1 coordinators than of those in Phases 2 or 3, and for the first three years of PNP SEN was the dominant coordinator task in Phase 1.
In contrast, the Phase 2 list was consistently headed by staff development and support, particularly TTT.
There were also important changes over time.
Coordinators' involvement in special needs declined while their full-time class teaching commitments increased, as did their participation in school management, especially curriculum development.
TTT, carefully nurtured in the early days of PNP — especially after our fourth report had provided both a label and a framework for its development — became less prominent as coordinators returned from a collaborative to a solo teaching role.
Thus, where the first coordinators fulfilled a brief dominated by special needs, with curriculum development and TTT level-pegging a little way behind, they and their successors in 1989 were as likely to be concerned with curriculum management and teaching, in collaboration or alone.
Our 1985–6 pilot study suggested that coordinators were having to take on more roles than they could cope with.
This was confirmed in the 1987 study and was acknowledged by the Authority, as we have seen.
Thereafter, the average number of roles (regrouped from the full list of ten above) was between three and four per coordinator, diminishing slightly towards the end of the evaluation period.
The growth in curriculum-related roles is particularly significant.
It predated the arrival of the National Curriculum, but was without doubt given a considerable boost by the publication of the government's initial National Curriculum   proposals in 1987, and the Education Reform Bill and Act, both in 1988.
Our data show the generalized and somewhat ambivalent role of PNP coordinator being translated, by 1988–9, into that of curriculum coordinator.
(For an extended discussion of curriculum coordination and management, see Chapter 3.)
Table 6.2 Coordinators' roles, 1986–9
Judging the impact of PNP coordinators in absolute terms is as problematic as judging the impact of the Programme as a whole.
Coordinators themselves, in the annual surveys, had no such doubts about the main gains at least.
Their league table is headed by improved attitudes ,increased staffing and staff development ; but there was little consensus about the rest.
Widespread agreement (in order of frequency):
improved attitudes;
increased staffing;
staff development.
No clear agreement (in order of frequency):
curriculum change;
collaborative teaching;
better management;
release of staff;
more individual and group work;
improved SEN provision;
more parental involvement.
Heads were asked to rate coordinators' impact on their schools' pursuit of the four PNP aims.
Their response was broadly in line with the frequency of the various roles listed above.
It should be noted, however, that heads were on the whole reluctant to ascribe much more than moderate success to their coordinators in respect of any of these aims.
On the other hand, coordinators were seen as more effective than most other PNP resources.
Coordinators' unanimity about attitude change in their schools is significant for two reasons.
First, because it is evident that many of the problems which the Authority identified in 1985 when it established PNP were centred as much on professional attitudes as professional expertise — attitudes to children, to curriculum, to teaching methods, to parents, to ethnic minority groups, to gender issues — and indeed we have picked up and reported the resilience of many of the attitudes which the Authority sought to change.
Second, coordinators as a group were acutely conscious of the way their own success depended in large part upon how they and the practices they were promoting were regarded by existing staff in the schools where they were placed.
However, ‘improved attitudes’ is both elusive as a claim and difficult in practice to demonstrate.
It is also possible that in some cases ‘improved attitudes’ is another way of saying that nothing of substance was achieved.
In our fifth report we identified three main areas within which attitude and related attributes like personal manner and professional style were critically important for coordinators' success:
the influence of the head;
the attitude of other staff;
the persona and style of the coordinator.
As far as heads were concerned, coordinators needed from them a properly negotiated version of the Authority's job specification, support for the difficult tasks they were required to undertake, and a preparedness to include them within the team of senior staff involved in the development of policy.
All too often these prerequisites were withheld, especially but not exclusively in the early stages of the Programme.
Equally influential for most coordinators were the attitudes of other staff.
There was an initial suspicion among teachers at all levels, including some heads, that coordinators were agents of the LEA, charged with identifying and reporting on inappropriate practice.
As the Programme became established, and as coordinators became a part of the staff team, they were increasingly judged on the practice they delivered rather than the power they seemed to represent.
Coordinators themselves were to a greater or lesser extent sensitive to these anxieties: some fuelled them while others quickly or painstakingly dispelled them.
But the job was rarely easy, especially where support from the head was withheld or accorded only grudgingly.
Coordinators had to acquire skills in leadership and in handling people and ideas which the majority of them had not developed in their previous jobs.
They felt that the Authority provided too little support here at first, although curriculum leadership courses introduced in the later stages of the ‘Programme provided some help subsequently.
As coordinators’ roles shifted towards curriculum responsibility, so curriculum expertise itself became a further factor in their success, to be added to the three other factors discussed above.
Coordinators operated, as we have seen, in five broad areas — special needs, curriculum development, staff development, home-school links and whole-class teaching.
The first four of these were generally school-wide roles, and three broad styles of implementing these emerged:
Whole-school manager involved at a senior level in school policy and decision-making.
Enactor of policy developed by others.
Facilitator to other staff to enable them to undertake  initiatives .
.
These styles represent different levels of power, authority and influence within a school, and therefore different possibilities for action.
All coordinators, as we have seen, worked to the same basic job specification, adapted to meet the circumstances of their school.
Whatever version of this specification was negotiated, they needed appropriate authority and resources, and access to the decision-making process, to carry it out.
Their chances of success were far less where they were relegated to the position of enactor or mere facilitator , as some were.
The tasks identified for coordinators by the Authority could not be carried out with anything less than enactor status.
The discrepancy between job-specification and  status became acute for some coordinators, and remained a problem in some schools, not just for coordinators but also for many other staff with significant cross-school managerial responsibilities.
Again, the remedy is largely in the hands of the head.
In our fifth report we compared the Leeds conception of PNP coordinator with other versions: the role of SEN coordinator which emerged after the 1981 Education Act, and that of curriculum coordinator, first tentatively identified by Plowden (CACE 1967), then developed in the 1970s and 1980s by HMI and others (DES 1978b, House of Commons 1986, Campbell 1985, Taylor 1986).
The Leeds role was initially, and to some extent remained, broader than either of these, though it tended to become less and less distinguishable from that of curriculum leader.
In addition, it lost its uniqueness and force as a result of two developments.
One was the extension of school-based curriculum leadership roles across a much wider range of curriculum areas than was covered in the mid-1980s (see Chapter 3): in this sense, nearly every teacher is a curriculum leader (or even a coordinator) now.
The other development was budgetary delegation to schools (LMS) under the 1988 Education Reform Act (DES 1988b, 1991d), which appeared to reduce the scope for enhanced staffing, despite the Secretary of State's approval of PNP-style weightings for social disadvantage, ethnic minority groups, special needs, and small schools in the Leeds LMS formula (Leeds City Council 1989c).
However, the idea of a free-wheeling change-agent and catalyst in each school remains a powerful one.
It is dependent not so much on the generous staffing levels of PNP Phase 1 (though that obviously helped a great deal) as on a combination of a degree of staffing flexibility and a basic preparedness to accept that this kind of role is important and needs to be built into a school's staffing arrangements under whatever label is deemed appropriate.
There is no reason why schools should not include within their plans for the 1990s the full range of managerial and support roles which emerged from PNP during the 1980s.
If it is now less likely, because of LMS, that one member of staff can combine several of these roles, it is certainly practicable for them to be spread across the staff as a whole, or at least its more experienced and talented members.
The most unsatisfactory outcome of LMS in this context would be if schools felt obliged to return to the traditional concept, so inimical to professional and curricular development, of there being just two professional roles in primary schools, those of class teacher and head, each confined to and jealously defending his or her territory.
The residual force of this traditional view was one of the main reasons why PNP coordinators so often encountered anxiety and resistance.
As we noted in our fifth report:
The idea of a coordinator…signals the limits to the generalist class teacher's whole curriculum/whole child capacities.
It denotes different levels in the staff hierarchy.
It overlaps (and perhaps threatens) the head's role as traditionally defined.
And it raises questions about what, once the division of labour  between head and coordinator is determined, there is left for the deputy head to do…
Beyond innocent labels like ‘coordinator’ and the comfortable language of ‘working alongside’are some tough realities.
(Alexander et al .
1989: 188–9)
The PNP coordinator idea, whatever its problems and imperfections in practice, represents a vision of professional collaboration, development and decision making which schools can ill afford to abandon, least of all in the era of the National Curriculum.
MANAGEMENT STRUCTURES
Notwithstanding the above, some schools persisted with, or only cosmetically adapted, their existing management structures.
Overall, however, our studies showed schools tending to cluster towards the following main types:
Type 1 :‘My School/My Class' .
The classic division of labour between a head and class teachers, each with clearly defined roles and ‘zones of influence’.
In this situation, the role of the deputy head might be undefined or non-existent, except in a symbolic sense.
Type 1 structures were commoner, for obvious reasons, in small schools than large, though there were examples of large schools persisting with this model despite the arrival of coordinators.
In such cases the tensions were greater than in the smaller schools.
Type 2 :Head, Deputy and Class Teacher .
Still a two-tier structure, but with three rather than two basic roles.
Here that of the deputy was clearly defined, and entailed engagement with policy, management and development rather than merely covering in the event of the head's absence.
Type 3 :Senior Management Team .
With the arrival or designation of the PNP coordinator, some heads constituted the three senior posts as a senior management team, meeting regularly to review and agree policy.
Type 4 :Embryonic Departmentalism .
As the focus of concern shifted towards curriculum matters, and as HMI, DES and others argued with increasing insistence that each area of the curriculum should be led by a staff member with appropriate expertise, so designated curriculum leaders assumed greater importance in the overall management structure.
However, the structure remained essentially two-tier, with curriculum leaders not involved in major policy matters.
Type 5 :Three-Tier .
Whereas Types 1–4, are all variants of the basic two-tier model of primary school management, in this type the coordinator and curriculum leaders represent a significant and formally recognized additional layer in the management structure, running their own meetings and development programmes, reporting back to the head and the staff as a whole, and contributing in a distinctive way to overall school policy.
Type 6 :Management Matrix .
In larger primary schools, the roles of head, deputy, coordinator and curriculum leader might be complemented by those of year leader, head of infants/juniors, and indeed by other posts of responsibility.
Where the year-group was large, year leadership became a post of some importance, counterbalancing the cross-school role of curriculum leader, and introducing potential tensions over who was responsible for what.
These were resolved by the formal recognition that the structure was no longer one of layers or levels, but a curriculum/year-group matrix , requiring close collaboration between the parties and the involvement of all of them in policy discussions.
A number of points should be made about this typology.
First, like all others, it represents general tendencies rather than exact categories.
Second, although there is a clear relationship between school size and management structure there is limited scope for extended curriculum leadership roles, let alone year-group responsibilities, in smaller schools — the relationship is not inevitable.
Some medium-sized schools had shifted to a three-tier model, while some large schools were still operating a rather unsatisfactory and somewhat stressed version of Type 2 or even Type 1.
Generally, however, by the end of the period in question, larger schools tended towards Types 4, 5 and 6.
Third, as we monitored our representative sample of schools over a three year period, we could perceive some of them undergoing a process of structural transition, shifting away from the simple two-tier model towards departmentalism and/or a matrix structure.
Finally, although we have represented the senior management team as a particular type or stage, the emergence of a senior team within schools was a more general characteristic of the PNP period.
The arrival and ambivalent status of the coordinator forced many heads to took afresh at structures and decision-making, to delegate more extensively than hitherto, and to establish more regular consultation procedures than the traditional combination of informal encounters and unstructured or semi-structured staff meetings.
DEPUTY HEADS
The role of deputy head did not always feature in this process of management review.
When we surveyed deputy heads towards the end of the evaluation period, we found a somewhat surprising proportion — over half of those surveyed — without job specifications.
Since they were working with coordinators whose jobs were — at LEA insistence — properly specified, their anomalous position in the school could be severely aggravated by PNP.
It seems not unreasonable to argue that in a modern primary school all staff, and especially those with formal responsibilities of any kind over and above the class-teacher role, should have clear and properly negotiated job specifications.
Deputy heads undertook very diverse responsibilities.
Every one of those surveyed had a class, though some were released from part of their teaching duties to undertake other activities.
In order of frequency, deputy heads' responsibilities were as follows:
class teaching;
curriculum leadership;
general managerial responsibilities, delegated by the head;
staff development and staff pastoral support.
These four were particularly prominent.
Some way behind was a more random and idiosyncratic collection of responsibilities, again listed here in order of frequency:
taking assemblies;
staff-head liaison;
pastoral care;
discipline;
buildings;
home-school;
library;
odd jobs — tuck shop, festivals, etc.
It should be noted that just as all deputies combined a school-wide responsibility with teaching a class, so most combined a major school-wide responsibility from the first list above with one or more of those from the second list.
However, there were some whose role appeared to involve, apart from class teaching and standing in when the head was absent, no more than relatively low-level jobs like reporting on leaking gutters or running a tuck shop.
Although the latter cases are probably a diminishing minority, especially now that budgetary delegation under LMS has made it essential that heads in their turn delegate a greater proportion of their managerial functions to senior staff, our studies indicate a more general need for primary schools to continue to review the role of deputy headship, to define more exactly the range of tasks it is appropriate for someone at that level of seniority to undertake, and to ensure that all deputy heads have appropriate job specifications.
DECISION-MAKING
To some extent, management structure and decision-making are directly related.
A head develops a particular structure in the light of the decisions which have to be made and the people he/she believes should be involved in making them.
The traditional ‘My School/My Class’ model (Alexander 1984: 161–8) is based on the assumption that there are two sorts of decision: about the school as a whole its goals and ethos, its children, its staff and its curriculum — and about the translation of these whole-school decisions into day-to-day teaching.
The head deals with the first, class teachers with the second, and there is little blurring at the edges.
In the Three Tier model, the head acknowledges that there is a substantial field of decision-making to do with the content and development of specific aspects of the curriculum which requires the expertise and time of others.
In the Management Matrix model there is an even broader conception of the range of decisions calling for specialization and delegation.
There are three inevitable consequences of these very different approaches.
One is that the further from a Type 1 structure a school is, the greater the need for communication and coordination in decision-making.
The second is that while all primary school decision-making is dependent upon both formal and informal relations and contacts, the more complex structures require a much greater expenditure of time on formal decision-making processes; at the same time, there is greater risk of divisiveness if groups and individuals feel that they are being excluded from the formal processes or that the latter are less important than informal, behind-closed-doors negotiations.
The third consequence is that while in Type 1 structures leadership is synonymous with headship, in the more complex structures leadership is shared among several people.
The development of PNP is in part a story of growing sophistication over such matters in Leeds primary schools.
As schools shifted generally from a dependence on informal contacts to role specialization, delegation, and a greater investment in formal procedures, so they were forced to acquire the vocabulary and skills which formal decision-making dictates.
The formalization of decision-making could have adverse side effects.
Coherence in policy could become less easy to achieve where its components were fragmented among different groups and individuals.
Sub-groups could become oppositional rather than cooperative.
Consensus could not be guaranteed where particular groups had had little or nothing to do with a particular policy.
The more effectively managed schools understood these problems and sought to ensure that sub-groups and delegated roles and responsibilities remained part of a wider collegial culture in which all participated, and within which divergences of opinion were openly explored.
However, these processes — central though they were to the success of PNP were at first given little attention in the LEA's in-service support programme.
Coordinators had their own courses and conferences from the outset but courses for curriculum leaders started rather later in the programme, as did management courses for heads.
Such courses were initially based on the notion of management as something one person does to others; but the management of a school, it is now generally acknowledged, is a process in which all members of the school's staff are, in different ways, engaged: it is a multi-directional process.
All staff, not just the ‘managers’, need skills if they are to participate successfully in delegated or collegial management and decision-making, since every person in such contexts has a managerial role of some kind.
Even the newly arrived probationer needs managerial skills — for working with colleagues and participating constructively in meetings, for example.
Management, then, has become a whole-school process, and it should be approached as such in any INSET and support programmes organized by the Authority or its schools.
This view was endorsed in the School Management Task Force report (DES 1990f), and by 1991 Leeds LEA had a policy and programme for management training (Leeds City Council 1991 a) which sought to address the management needs of all staff — heads, deputies, staff tutors, INSET coordinators, curriculum coordinators and probationers.
Some of this activity focused on what were termed ‘generic’ management issues and skills.
However, the need for whole-school approaches to management is only part of the problem.
It is also essential, as Alexander (1984) emphasizes, to avoid the historic tendency for management training to concentrate on how schools should be run while neglecting the purposes they serve.
Shipman puts the point uncompromisingly:
Learning is the business of schools.
It should be the priority for school management.
Yet it is usually ignored in school management training.
Means have got confused with ends.
(Shipman 1990: v)
More generally, bearing in mind some of this book's observations about the thinking behind the Primary Needs Programme:
Specialisation, consultancy and the streamlining of headship may produce greater efficiency, but in respect of what?
Ideas imposed more effectively on children and teachers than in the 1960s, but which remain, as ideas, as ill-conceived as ever?
Primary education certainly needs to review its professional procedures, but far more pressing is the need to review the ideas which such procedures seek to implement.
(Alexander 1984: 209)
As governors, heads and teachers become increasingly enmeshed in the complexities of managing resources under LMS (Audit Commission 1991) it is important that they are able to keep the management of learning as their central objective.
LEAs can offer schools significant support in maintaining the balance, and can provide appropriate frameworks to encourage this.
One such might be the school development plan, now a statutory requirement.
In Leeds, the LEA's current framework (Leeds City Council 1991b) might usefully be monitored and modified where appropriate — with this issue of balance firmly in mind.
THE HEAD
Notwithstanding the current shift to collegial and whole-school management, the head remains pivotal to the successful management of a primary school.
Yet though Leeds LEA understood this from the outset, its approach to heads seems to have been curiously negative.
As we saw in Chapter 1, it was believed in the early 1980s that much primary classroom practice in Leeds was outdated, uninspiring or downright bad; that heads bore much of the responsibility for this state of affairs; and, therefore, that the same heads could not be expected to put matters right.
In evolving PNP policy, therefore, officers consulted no more than a few carefully chosen heads, leaving the rest ignorant and deeply suspicious of what was going on.
A new role was then established, that of coordinator, which bypassed the head and was intended to carry the new vision of good practice directly from Merrion House (the Education Department's offices) to the classroom.
Such an approach was bound to backfire.
Not only were many primary heads suspicious of and unclear about PNP, but the PNP experience provided  further fuel for those who felt that Leeds was an authority which treated its heads badly, neither consulting nor supporting them.
Relations between schools and the Authority deteriorated seriously as a result.
All this is now history, and the Authority, to its credit, has done much to try to repair the damage done during this period.
However, in the present context it is important to make two points of continuing concern.
First, though heads are indeed crucial to the character of a school and the quality of the education it provides, they can never be held entirely to blame if these prove unsatisfactory.
The policies pursued by Leeds LEA before 1985 — lower than average per capita spending on primary education, higher than average pupil-teacher ratios, a stagnant staffing profile exacerbated by the ring-fence policy on new appointments, little investment in advisory support — played their own part in producing the conditions of which the LEA itself suddenly became so critical.
Second, the way heads responded to PNP, and with varying degrees of success exploited its opportunities and resources for the children's benefit, must be set firmly against this background.
A number of factors emerged from our studies as bearing particularly significantly on how heads managed PNP, and these we now outline.
It is a basic tenet of primary headship that each school should have a distinct ‘ethos’, ‘philosophy’ or set of beliefs and aims to guide and inform its policies and practices.
Traditionally, determining this philosophy has been the head's prerogative, and few have contested this.
While the 1988 Act requires a greater involvement of governors in such matters, the head's role in shaping the professional and educational culture remains critical, and certainly this was the expectation during the period of PNP.
We gained ready access to heads' thinking on such matters, especially in the sample schools.
The recurrent theme was ‘informality’ or ‘progressivism’: the same value-orientation which they saw the Authority itself espousing as the touchstone for good practice.
However, despite the apparent consensus, there were notable differences in style, presentation and treatment where these values were concerned.
Purists and sceptics .
While some heads subscribed wholeheartedly to progressive orthodoxies, others were more doubtful or circumspect.
Where the former used the full vocabulary of informality, and seemed unprepared or unable to accommodate the possibility that alternative viewpoints might exist, the latter were more aware of the limitations of progressivism, both as an idea and as a basis for practice.
The influence of context .
While some heads saw progressivism as providing a basic recipe for primary practice in any context, others admitted to having their ‘philosophy’ shaped more by the particular social and cultural circumstances within which they worked, especially the backgrounds of the children and the attitudes and expectations of their parents.
Such realities, as pressing for some heads in the suburbs as in the inner city, presented an agenda which primary orthodoxies addressed only partly, if at all.
The influence of other ideas .
Similarly, some heads sought to accommodate to their ‘core’ philosophy ideas and concerns from other sources — their reading, their membership of award-bearing courses, their out-of-school reference and membership groups, their professional and social networks.
Such sources were, to them, more significant than those within the Authority, and often provided a more neutral and open context for sharing and debating ideas.
Rhetoric and reality .
The mismatch between a head's espoused values and what was actually going on in the classroom could be startling — and indeed is a recurrent theme in several of our interim reports, notably 10 and 11.
As a general rule, the more purist and dogmatic the value-orientation of the head, the bigger the discrepancy with observed practice.
In these cases, a school's philosophy acquired a life of its own: paraded for governors, advisers, parents and visitors, reflected superficially in those aspects of practice like display and decor that such outsiders tended immediately to note, but seldom followed through.
These differences were only partly about value-orientations as such.
Some heads were temperamentally and intellectually less inclined than others to perceive education in terms of grand statements and ringing slogans.
On the other hand, a gap or mismatch between rhetoric and reality might reflect a gulf between head and staff, and indeed the discrepancies were most marked in schools where heads were relatively isolated, where communication was poor, and where class teachers were not involved in policy matters.
Thus there was an intimate connection between heads' philosophies and their views of their role, and between these and school management.
Heads perceived their roles in different ways.
Of the many perceptions apparent in our data, four seemed particularly prominent.
Head as ‘boss' , controlling — benignly or otherwise, but at any rate firmly — the character and direction of the school and its staff.
Decision-making tended to centre on the issuing of directives and instructions.
Head as chief teacher , believing, and demonstrating, that the teaching function of a school is pre-eminent and that the head must play the leading part, by action and example, in advancing it.
Head as managing director .
Where the ‘boss’ tended to be autocratic or paternalistic/maternalistic, the ‘managing director’was more likely to be bureaucratic, delegating specialist roles and responsibilities and instituting formal procedures for decision-making.
Head as team leader .
Here there was less social distance between head and staff, though the head accepted the main responsibility for initiating and leading.
At the same time, the leadership roles and potential of other staff were valued and developed, and decision-making tended to be collective.
Heads adopting a ‘chief teacher’ or ‘team leader’role tended to be more visible and accessible to staff, especially in respect of their need for support and advice on everyday teaching problems: their physical base was the classroom as much  as, or more than, the office.
Heads adopting a ‘managing director’ or ‘boss’role were more likely to be office-based and thus to run the risk of appearing remote from everyday classroom concerns, especially in larger schools.
However, ‘bosses’ were less prone to such detachment than ‘managing directors’, since they tended to place a high value on knowing, and hence controlling, all aspects of school life.
To achieve this they needed to keep in touch with the classroom directly rather than through intermediaries.
They might spend much time, therefore, patrolling their school and its classrooms, talking with children and offering comment to teachers.
However, it should also be pointed out that the ‘boss’ view of headship manifested itself in a continuum of behaviour ranging from the clubbable to the autocratic or even tyrannical, with various shades of paternalism/maternalism in between.
This issue bears importantly on that of the degree of fit between a school's stated philosophy and its observable classroom practice, as discussed above.
The closer a head is to the classroom and the challenges confronting class teachers, the greater his or her opportunities for evolving policies which reconcile ideals with practical circumstances.
The more extreme flights of rhetoric we encountered were almost always associated with managerial detachment from the classroom.
The shift towards greater delegation, role specialization and collective decision-making in primary schools, and the emergence of what we have termed departmental, three-tier and matrix management structures, appears to be an inevitable and necessary consequence of the growing complexity of the work of primary schools and the diminishing currency of the ‘jack of all trades’ view of the class teacher's and head's roles.
However, if staff are to remain in touch with each other, and the head is to remain in touch with all staff, close attention needs to be paid to communication, and to ensuring that managerial procedures like school philosophies and policy statements remain rooted in day-to-day needs and realities rather than take on a life of their own.
Thus, formal procedures are not so much an alternative as an adjunct to the informal collaboration which is such an important feature of the best primary schools; and the part played by the head in securing the most productive mix of formal procedure and informal consultation/collaboration remains central.
We noted earlier the need for investment in support for heads and in management training, while acknowledging the Authority's recent (that is, post-PNP) initiatives in respect of the latter (Leeds City Council 1991a).
We also argued that training should focus on management as a collective, whole school enterprise rather than on the role of the manager alone.
Our fieldwork pointed up two further areas of concern, both of which need close and urgent attention in programmes of professional development for heads.
The first is staff relationships.
Our survey and interview data revealed a small number of heads who appeared to have difficulty in dealing with their colleagues as people.
Some treated their staff in a high-handed and tyrannical way.
Some were less overtly overbearing, but no less effective in undermining their colleagues' confidence.
Rather different were those heads who avoided not only  confrontation but also contact, taking refuge in their office and resorting to memoranda rather than face-to-face encounters.
In between were those heads who dealt much more effectively and constructively with some staff than with others.
In such cases, as in all human relationships, the presence or absence of personal rapport was a critical element.
Equally, some heads were struggling to deal with colleagues who were challenging by any standards — individuals who were combative, touchy, recalcitrant, bitter, lazy or in any of a variety of other ways uncooperative.
The roots of such personal antipathies are notoriously difficult to disentangle, but their effect on a school's professional climate can be deeply damaging.
The second area of concern is professional knowledge.
A few heads with whom we came into contact seemed alarmingly out of touch with recent developments in primary education.
They showed little awareness of, or interest in, HMI surveys and official reports, let alone other published research and writing on primary education.
Their grasp of LEA and national policies bearing directly on the task of headship was at best tenuous.
Frequently they took refuge in platitudes and rhetoric, delivering as unassailable truths ideas which are elsewhere accepted as very much open to debate.
About ideas and practices other than their own they tended to be contemptuous, dismissive or hostile; usually such attitudes were grounded in ignorance of, rather than engagement with, the ideas in question.
Their lack of commitment to extending their own professional knowledge and understanding, and their rampant anti-intellectualism, tended to infect the whole professional climate of their schools, depriving them of the spark of lively discussion about issues which is essential to educational progress, and dampening the enthusiasms of those staff who were otherwise inclined.
Such a stance, it has also to be said, was sharply at odds with the educational aims to which their schools were purportedly committed, with their emphasis on engendering open, questioning minds, a love of reading and so on, a contradiction of which such heads seemed unaware.
These two concerns — staff relationships and heads' professional knowledge are vital ingredients in effective school management and in the head's professional credibility.
That being so, they should feature prominently both in the selection process for headship and in subsequent management support and training.
However, since management courses tend to concentrate on basic tasks and procedures, there is a risk that the much larger matters signalled here will be treated rudimentarily at best.
The LEA will need to look at other routes as well.
It will also need to be aware that concerns such as these expose a major limitation of the school-controlled model of INSET which Leeds, in common with other LEAs, has adopted, and which is reinforced by current government funding arrangements and LMS.
In a school having the professional climate characterized above, the capacity — let alone the will — to identify INSET needs with accuracy and honesty will simply not exist, and a self-generated INSET programme may well merely reinforce a school in its inadequacies.
For this reason, LEAs must always maintain a major stake in INSET and professional development, above all where heads are concerned.
CONCLUSION
We noted at the start of this chapter that our study of school management was not intended to be comprehensive: our concern was the management of PNP rather than that of every aspect of a school's professional work.
To this end, we devoted particular attention to the contribution of PNP enhanced staffing, to the work undertaken by support staff and PNP coordinators, and to the contexts within which such staff were working.
However, we showed that the contribution which PNP appointees were able to make was inseparable from the wider management structures within which they were located, and in particular that the head played a key role in facilitating and supporting their endeavours.
It is a truism that every school is unique.
However, it is also the case that schools have a lot in common.
Our evaluation identified some of these shared features, and showed how primary schools tended to cluster towards a number of broad types in respect of certain issues bearing on the management of PNP: for example, the roles undertaken by support staff and coordinators, and by deputy heads; the managerial styles of senior staff; the management structures which framed the defining and implementing of school policy; the policies themselves; heads' stances on the ideas and practices which have constituted mainstream primary thinking since Plowden; and heads' leadership styles.
Like other studies (for example DES 1977, 1987; Rutter et al .
1979, Mortimore et al .
1988; Nias et al .
1989), ours identified or underlined some of the main factors in effective school management: the style and quality of the head's leadership; the intellectual and professional climate of the school; The explication of the management roles of staff with posts of responsibility curriculum leaders, year leaders, coordinators and deputy heads; the importance of formal structures and mechanisms for decision-making; the need to strike an appropriate balance between such formal structures and informal processes; and the importance of involving all staff in decision-making.
Such issues are likely to be important in any primary school, anywhere.
However, there were others, more distinctively local in their orientation: the gradual demise of the traditional two-tier model of primary school management and its replacement by three-tier and matrix models; the desirability of building on the diversification of staff management roles which PNP has produced, avoiding any contraction of such roles as a consequence of LMS; the need to acknowledge the pivotal role, for good or ill, played by primary heads, and to work with and through rather than round or against them; the need to expand the focus of management training courses to encompass the roles and needs of all staff (not just those of the ‘managers’ as conventionally defined), to locate management strategies in whole-school analysis, and generally to broaden the concept of ‘management’which currently informs such courses; the importance of training, support and INSET for heads, and of ensuring that these give close attention to the broader aspects of the expertise needed for headship, such as professional knowledge and personal relationships as well as the more obvious tasks, roles and strategies.
The recurrent factor in this analysis has been the inseparability of primary school and classroom practice from the policy, resourcing, support and guidance provided by the LEA.
These are the concern of our next chapter.
Our evaluation of PNP caught schools during a period of transition, from laissez-faire to the much greater LEA intervention that PNP signalled, and from a largely local orientation to one framed by national policies and directives.
For all concerned, the agenda is now substantially different from 1985, or even 1989.
For primary class teachers, the National Curriculum and assessment provide the overwhelming preoccupation.
Alongside these, heads contend with school development plans, changing relationships with parents and governors, and the pressures and constraints of budgetary delegation under LMS.
They find their thinking and decision-making dominated by market and resource considerations which in their scale and complexity are a long way indeed from the traditional concept of primary headship (Audit Commission 1991).
By 1991, Leeds LEA had set up services and procedures to guide and support schools in these novel areas of activity, and there was no shortage of advice from other sources.
However, even when the agenda is clarified and the tasks are clear, choices still remain at school level as to how the agenda and tasks should be managed.
In this matter the PNP experience is of considerable relevance.
The items on the agenda may change, but the questions about strategies, roles and procedures remain the same.
Supporting reform: the role of the LEA
During the 1980s, Leeds LEA set itself the task of reforming an entire local system of primary education.
It diagnosed the main weaknesses in the schools it had inherited from earlier decades and set out its alternative vision, a Primary Needs Programme intended to meet children's needs by transforming schools into exemplars of ‘good primary practice’.
The LEA then identified the resource needs of the system as a whole and voted the additional resources to meet them, determining precisely which schools would receive what level and kind of additional resources, and when.
It set up mechanisms for coordinating, controlling and servicing the new programme, and expanded its advisory and support staff to ensure that such mechanisms would be effective.
It determined the job specifications of the 530 teachers and other staff appointed to the programme, and officers themselves were involved in many of these appointments.
It also devised a substantial programme of centralized in-service support for such appointees in order to ensure the successful dissemination of the various strands of the LEA's version of good practice.
Finally, the LEA agreed procedures for monitoring and reviewing the entire programme, and this included an invitation to the University of Leeds to undertake an independent evaluation.
This gives some measure of the boldness and scale of the programme.
It also indicates how interventionist it was, especially by comparison with the practices of some other LEAs.
In the present chapter we consider some of the main issues of policy and strategy which the Leeds approach raises: the way PNP policy was formulated and communicated; the substance and interpretation of the policy; and the LEA's own strategies for implementing the policy — as opposed to those adopted in the schools which have been considered in previous chapters — with particular reference to the INSET programme.
PNP POLICY: FORMULATION AND COMMUNICATION
All LEAs have a statutory duty to have policies on the various aspects of the education service for which they are responsible.
Leeds LEA took this duty very seriously, especially in respect of primary education.
However, on matters of substance and strategy LEAs retain discretion.
From the various strategies  available, Leeds LEA opted for the one which was simplest to enact quickly but was also most likely to provoke adverse reaction — namely, a centralized approach involving minimal consultation with those most affected.
As a result, while the Authority can justifiably take much of the credit for the transformation of certain aspects of primary education in Leeds which PNP began to yield, it may also need to accept responsibility for some of PNP's manifest weaknesses.
The advantages of a centralized policy are the speed and scale of reform it allows; the disadvantages, particularly in a complex arena like education, are the resistance and disaffection it may generate, and the inevitability that the practice which emerges will be rather different from that intended because those at the receiving end may have insufficient understanding or commitment to secure its implementation.
The experience of PNP, as recorded in our eleven interim reports and the previous six chapters, suggests that the extent of LEA centralization over PNP was excessive, and that in certain crucial respects it was counter-productive.
There are important lessons here both for future policy formulation and for the way an LEA's officers work.
The lessons apply as much to the policies and strategies of central government as they do to LEAs.
The resentment and resistance generated in the schools by the way PNP was developed and implemented was a prominent theme in our early data, and in some schools it persisted until our last major data-gathering exercises: the 1989 questionnaires sent to primary heads, coordinators and advisory staff, and the 1990 home-school links follow-up study.
Our subsequent contacts with school staff in the city indicated that the legacy was a powerful and often negative one, and that it continued to be reinforced because despite a general loosening of LEA control and a government-sponsored shift to a greater measure of school self-determination, the Authority was perceived by schools as continuing to present itself as the main definer and arbiter of good practice.
What made this situation peculiarly problematic for primary teachers was their sense that the firm stance on good practice taken by the Authority's advisory staff was inseparable from the part they played both in the formal processes of promotion and appointment and in the many informal and subtle ways whereby individual teachers were encouraged and advanced — or discouraged and held back.
In any field of employment a successful application depends to some degree on the applicant's being seen to say and do what is expected during the selection process, and to this extent conventional selection methods can always be faulted for the way they may presume that words uttered on a form or in an interview are reliable indicators of future performance.
This much is commonplace.
However, the situation in Leeds was felt to reach deeper than this, and there were few other issues on which our questionnaires, interviews and observation between 1986 and 1990 yielded such widespread agreement or such strong expressions of anxiety, cynicism or disaffection.
Many teachers and heads felt that getting on in the primary sector required verbal and practical allegiance to certain quite specific canons of ‘good primary practice’, and that anything less, let alone any  open challenging of the orthodoxies in question, could damage their professional prospects.
Moreover, this normative process was felt to operate at several levels, from appointments, promotions and other career aspirations to the much more subtle everyday processes whereby individuals come to acquire a sense of their professional worth from the comments and valuations of ‘significant others’ advisers, advisory teachers and heads in particular.
The fact that heads and teachers of very differing professional styles and values were working in Leeds throughout this period demonstrates, of course, that other factors were at work and that the wilder accusations of patronage which came our way needed to be treated with considerable caution.
Clearly, the service was by no means monolithic.
On the other hand, there are different levels and degrees of both conformity and dissent, and in a context where prevailing versions of good practice tended to emphasize the visual and organizational, a strategic surface conformity allowed the more subtle and perhaps significant aspects of practice to be retained and underlying attitudes and assumptions to persist.
It is likely that these findings will be strongly disputed in some quarters: understandably, because no individual or organization wishes to be depicted in terms other than those of the most scrupulous integrity and open-mindedness where such matters are concerned.
However, as with some other issues we have explored, the problem here is centrally one of perception .
If people believe something to be true, then its consequences are the same, whether or not it is actually true.
In the present case, the perception seems to have adversely affected both the quality and climate of professional discourse and the credibility of structures, procedures and people at LEA and school level.
In any event, we have stressed that the perceptions relate as much or more to the informal context within which teachers and advisory staff work as to formal procedures.
It is a relatively straightforward matter to sort out guidelines for the conduct of the latter; much more difficult to control the character of the former.
Moreover, agents of the process may be genuinely unaware of what they are doing for as long as they see good professional practice as unitary, consensual and unproblematic.
For if there really is only one version of good primary practice then it becomes obvious that everyone should subscribe to it.
However, since it is to be hoped that the essentially problematic and contestable nature of good primary practice has by now been adequately demonstrated, the state of affairs described here must give rise to some concern.
We recognize that the shift in the balance of power in appointment matters from LEAs to governing bodies may seem of itself to resolve this issue.
It does not proposals currently under discussion make it clear that advisory influence on individual careers will remain highly significant (Leeds City Council 1991c).
However, the issues here will now need to be considered by governing bodies as well as advisory staff.
It is vital that the teaching profession has full confidence in the processes of career development and advancement.
The statutory responsibilities of LEAs and governing bodies in respect of quality control should be exercised with due acknowledgement of teachers' special knowledge and  skills and their freedom and right as professionals to adopt those strategies which build on their personal strengths and reflect the unique circumstances of each school and classroom.
PNP POLICY: SUBSTANCE
The four key focuses of PNP, each discussed in detail in Chapters 2–5, were:
children's needs;
the curriculum;
teaching strategies and classroom organization;
links between home, school and community.
There is little doubt that these are proper, necessary and central focuses for educational policy and practice.
Each of them, however, raises certain basic requirements of a conceptual and empirical kind.
The conceptual requirements are to be clear and exact in our use of these and subsidiary terms, and to confront and seek to resolve the many and often contentious value issues which each of them raises.
The empirical requirement is to seek, evaluate and make explicit the evidence upon which claims for particular ideas and practices advocated as policy are based.
(We develop this argument, and an analysis of the ‘good primary practice’ problem, in Chapter 11.)
In formulating and presenting the various PNP policies, neither of these basic requirements appears to have been even entertained.
Schools were expected to make sense of ideas which had not always been thought through fully, and to implement practices whose justification frequently consisted of little more than unsubstantiated assertion.
The force of such ideas and practices lay partly in their ‘progressive’ origins, which few teachers would be prepared to gainsay; and partly in the authority of those who devised and presented them, whom few would dare to contradict.
It should be added that the absence of proper justification of the ideas and practices underpinning major aspects of the education experienced by primary school pupils is not unique to Leeds.
On the contrary, it is an extremely common condition in post-war English primary education, and the agents of PNP policy in Leeds were merely conforming to the general tendency.
There is, however, no good reason why Leeds or any LEA should follow this particular trend.
The only proper way to arrive at sustainable definitions of good educational practice is by sharing and analysing ideas and values, marshalling and examining evidence, and applying both processes to the task of formulating principles.
Arguments and evidence for and against particular propositions are now abundantly available, both from the growing body of research and analytic study in primary education and from the cumulative experience of teachers.
Published analysis and research are already in the public domain and are liberally referred to in this report.
Teachers' experience, which is at least as valuable a source of insight, is also readily accessible, but only if those responsible for policy are prepared to acknowledge its validity and are willing to make efforts to  bring teachers into the debate.
The shift is necessary, but it requires a fundamental readjustment in the relationship between the Authority and its schools, and between officers, advisers, heads and teachers.
The adjustment needed is towards a partnership of fellow professionals rather than a hierarchy of expert superordinates and inexpert subordinates.
Questions about the characteristics of LEA thinking on aspects of primary practice are inseparable from questions about its focus .
In one sense, the concentration on needs, curriculum, teaching strategies and home-school links is suitably comprehensive: it appears to encompass all the main elements of educational practice.
However, our interim reports and previous chapters have shown major omissions and distortions within each of these elements.
Here are some examples.
The needs policy was generally more concerned with children's problems than with their potential, and it totally omitted certain kinds of needs and therefore certain kinds of children, despite its claim to be comprehensive.
With the exception of children with special educational needs, the approach to needs was uneven and sometimes weak in the vital areas of diagnosis, assessment and provision.
(See Chapter 2.)
The approach to curriculum was strong on rhetoric about the whole, but weak on detail about specifics.
Such specifics appeared to receive attention in a fairly random way, and there were notable omissions from the specifics attended to.
Among these, the omission of aspects of language was particularly serious.
(See Chapter 3.)
The proper concern with curriculum breadth and balance could be subverted at three levels: the Authority, the school, and the classroom.
At Authority level, the INSET programme, as later sections of this chapter will show, attended to some areas at the expense of others.
At school level, the programmes and strategies for curriculum review, management and development, and the staffing of curriculum leadership posts, could sometimes reinforce such discrepancies.
At classroom level, the attention on some areas of the curriculum could sometimes be achieved only by the deliberate neglect of others, the reasons having to do partly with teachers' attempts to conform to other advisory expectations: those relating to classroom organization.
Moreover, at this level, PRINDEP's analysis of the generic activities of which all curriculum practice is constituted showed the considerable imbalance discussed in detail in Chapters 3 and 4.
The commended approach to teaching strategies was highly partisan in respect of the particular kinds of practice which were endorsed.
Moreover, it tended to present a view of practice as constituted largely of issues to do with the visual appearance of classrooms and matters of organization relating to children's grouping.
There was a general neglect of the teacher-pupil and pupil-pupil interactions on which learning depends, and indeed of learning as such; the message appeared to be that if the ‘environment of learning’ was correctly established, learning, and appropriate learning at that, would follow.
Coupled with the neglect of diagnosis and assessment in the ‘needs’ part of the programme, this constituted an approach to children's learning which was too generalized and unfocused to have any significant impact.
(See Chapter 4.)
The policy on home-school links was never properly defined, despite its prominence in the programme's initial aims.
(See Chapter 5.)
The lessons for the future are clear.
First, the Authority's approach to each of the elements of practice central to PNP — needs, curriculum, teaching strategies and home-school — can now be strengthened and extended in the light of the material presented in our twelve reports; each of these elements, though specific to PNP, is also a perennial concern in education and the issues therefore remain important.
Second, the formulation of the Authority's educational policies and programmes, especially those which teachers are expected to translate into day-to-day practice, should from now on be grounded in prior consultation with teachers and others, together with analysis of relevant conceptual and empirical research, and those devising such policies and programmes should be able to justify them in terms of the considerations which this process will reveal.
PNP POLICY: IMPLEMENTATION
The main strategies for implementing PNP policy can be divided into two groups, LEA-based and school-based:
LEA-based strategies:
the day-to-day work of advisory and PNP support staff;
the administrative service of the Education Department;
the Authority's centrally mounted in-service courses;
the work of the Primary Schools Centre.
School-based strategies:
enhanced staffing under PNP;
the PNP coordinator;
extra capitation;
refurbishment.
The various school-based strategies have been considered in Chapters 2–6.
In the present chapter we consider aspects of the LEA-based strategies in greater detail.
Advisory staff
The LEA judged the role of the advisory staff to be pivotal to its attempts to improve the quality of primary education in Leeds.
Though not part of the Primary Needs Programme, the parallel expansion of the advisory service needs to be noted in this context, since members of the service became the Authority's chief agents in PNP's interpretation and implementation.
Before 1985, there were few specialist primary advisers; the LEA then started to rapidly expand the service, the exercise coinciding with restructuring of the administration as a whole.
The result, by 1988, was a separate Department of Primary Education with seven advisers, eight advisory teachers, various support staff based in Merrion House, at the Primary Schools Centre or elsewhere, and an administrative officer and clerks, all headed by a Director of Primary Education.
This  was another powerful signal that primary education had ceased to be the Cinderella of the education service in Leeds.
After the 1988 Education Reform Act, the primary team expanded further to accommodate the additional responsibilities placed on LEAs by the Act.
Because the advisory service was so deeply enmeshed in PNP, it is difficult to divorce its contribution from the many aspects and contexts of the programme which are discussed elsewhere in this report.
However, certain general observations are merited.
Advisory staff were tireless in their advocacy of PNP and in their efforts to secure its effective implementation.
A careful division of labour within the team sought to ensure that most aspects of the programme (with notable omissions referred to in previous chapters) would be effectively managed.
Though subject to shared procedures, each member of the advisory team worked in a different way, modifying formal responsibility in the light of individual personality and experience.
Thus, though our surveys document a generalized view of the service as being at best only moderately effective, heads and teachers viewed individual members of the advisory team very differently, being unstinting in their praise of some, rather less so of others.
The advisory attributes to which teachers responded most positively were: ready availability, especially in a crisis; visibility, especially in the classroom; credibility at both classroom and managerial levels; preparedness to give a clear lead coupled with a willingness to listen and acknowledge that the schools, too, had expertise; a combination of authoritativeness with humility; an open, friendly and supportive manner.
It goes without saying that the attributes which most antagonized teachers were the opposite of these, especially in the context of the perceptions about the need to conform referred to earlier.
One of the main difficulties for the advisory team was the way, particularly following the Education Department's reorganization, they had to combine their advisory role with considerable administrative responsibilities, both for ‘their’ schools and across the system as a whole.
All members of the central team at Merrion House (the Education Department's offices) were severely stretched in terms of both time and the range of roles they were expected to encompass, and it was therefore inevitable that some aspects of their job could be successfully accomplished only at the expense of others.
The need to retain the primacy of the professional advisory function is surely paramount, and the Authority might well wish to find ways of reducing the administrative burden on advisory staff.
These matters ought to be included in the 1991 advisory restructuring exercise (Leeds City Council 1991c).
The physical conditions in which Merrion House members of the advisory team had to work were, and at the time of going to press remain, grossly inadequate.
They shared a cramped open-plan area in which they were disposed rather in the manner of a traditional typing pool.
There was no privacy for the interviews and telephone conversations of a sensitive kind which are part and parcel of an adviser's job.
When most or all of the team were present, noise levels and constant interruptions effectively frustrated work which needed sustained  thinking.
Clerical and administrative backup were provided at only a modest level.
The fact that the conditions outlined here seem to be all too common in LEAs nationally (Audit Commission 1989b) does not diminish the need to do something about them.
The upgrading of the working environment of advisory staff must be treated as a priority.
Administration
As we have noted above, the administrative arm of PNP acquired a poor image.
This judgement — as with that of the advisory service — can be accounted for partly in terms of the traditional antagonism of schools to ‘the office’ which pervades many LEAs.
Such antagonism is often almost unthinking, is frequently unmerited, and seems in any event a necessary device whereby the professional culture of a school sustains itself.
An LEA, then, fulfils a scapegoat function — as, indeed, do other contingent groups like teacher educators and HMI.
However, in our many interviews with teachers and heads in individual schools, this generalized view was sometimes fleshed out by reference to specific instances and frustrations, of which the most common were the following: the difficulty of obtaining vital information; the persistent unavailability of individuals who possessed such information; the lack of departmental awareness about who was responsible for what; the classic ‘doctor's receptionist’ tendency among clerical staff to prevent heads from gaining access to advisory staff and other officers; the Byzantine complexity of the departmental arrangements at Merrion House; the lack of reciprocity in information flow: schools felt that Merrion House tended to bombard them with directives and requests, many of them urgent, yet was unwilling to reciprocate by supplying the schools with what they, often equally urgently, required; and the failure of Merrion House officers and staff to answer letters.
Our final questionnaire to all Leeds primary heads asked,inter alia , for ratings of the effectiveness of the LEA's various mechanisms for supporting its primary schools: the administration at Merrion House; communication and consultation between the LEA and its schools; the work of the advisory service.
In view of the points above, it is hardly surprising that none of these was rated as more than moderately effective, and only the advisory staff were rated as significantly better than ineffective.
On this there was general agreement between the three PNP Phases, with a tendency for Phase 2 schools to be most satisfied and Phase 3 least.
The PNP in-service support programme
This section reverts to a finer level of detail because it includes hitherto unpublished material.
We discussed the Authority's INSET provision briefly in Report 1, then in Report 6 we explored the style and initial impact of courses and the assumptions about professional development which they reflected.
The present section is more concerned with the facts and figures of PNP INSET between  1985 and 1989.
Its basis is systematic monitoring of the full complement of courses over this period, and its direct evaluation of some twenty-five of them.
Centrally provided INSET was an essential and substantial part of the Primary Needs Programme.
Most courses were mounted at the Primary Schools Centre, also a PNP innovation.
In the early days of the programme, these courses all bore the label ‘PNP’ and many were for PNP staff only.
As the programme expanded, the courses lost their specificity of content and audience and became largely indistinguishable from the rest of the Authority's central INSET programme for primary schools.
However, it is important to note that PNP provided the resources and framework for the considerable expansion and diversification of such courses between 1985 and 1990: it was not so much that PNP was submerged as that PNP and primary provision became synonymous.
The messages of the new courses were clearly rooted in PNP.
In the analysis which follows, we have concentrated on courses mounted at the Primary Schools Centre.
The general diversification of INSET in the later stages of PNP came too late for us to include it in our programme, and in any case our resources were already fully stretched.
However, it is important to list these alternative modes and thus acknowledge the variety of provision in the Authority.
They included, in addition to the extensive programme at the Primary Schools Centre: programmed school-based INSET; INSET supported by the Authority but provided by external agents; INSET related to school reviews; and the expanding school-led INSET initiative.
The programme at the Primary Schools Centre remained by far the largest part of the Authority's central INSET commitment during the evaluation period and an important medium for the transmission of advisory views on good practice.
During the first four years of PNP, the Authority appears to have mounted no fewer than 376 primary in-service courses at the Primary Centre.
The courses covered a very wide range in both style and content.
In style they ranged from formal talks to intensive workshops and such innovative features as the model classroom to which course participants were invited to return with interested colleagues by appointment to discuss its features with an advisory teacher.
A detailed discussion of the implications of the different course styles can be found in our sixth report.
The variation in content was enormous, although for the purposes of this analysis the course topics have necessarily been grouped into rather broad categories.
In descending order of frequency:
31 per cent of the courses dealt with specific individual areas of the curriculum;
18 per cent were concerned with social issues, covering such topics as race, gender, drugs and child abuse;
16 per cent were dedicated to specific professional roles such as those of PNP coordinators, probationers or permanent supply teachers;
12 per cent were concerned with the introduction of the national curriculum;
8 per cent dealt with issues of classroom management, including teaching strategies, children's behaviour, and so on;
8 per cent covered such whole-school issues as management and curriculum leadership;
6 per cent dealt with special educational needs;
a nominal 0 per cent(in fact a quarter of 1 per cent , or one course out of the total of 376) was concerned with home-school links.
It would be dangerous to assume that this balance of topics necessarily reflects the Authority's PNP priorities very accurately.
Courses vary a great deal in both their length and the number of people who attend them, and it would clearly be unjustified to assume that a single course on one topic was outweighed by, say, five courses on another if the single course involved fifty teachers in a full day's attendance each week for a term, while each of the five other courses lasted only a couple of hours and catered for half a dozen teachers.
For a closer indication of the Authority's priorities, we have therefore incorporated the length of each course and the number of participating teachers into an index of teacher-days : for example, a three-day course for eight teachers would involve twenty-four teacher-days (3 × 8 = 24), while a half-day course for seventeen teachers would involve eight and a half teacher-days (3 × 8 = 24).
We took half a day as the minimum duration for a course, recording that amount of time even for courses which, for example, took place after school hours.
Figure 7.1 shows the allocation of time (measured in teacher-days) to each of the course themes listed earlier.
It is immediately clear that some topics received considerably more, or less, attention than would be suggested by the number of courses allocated to them.
Thus, although material tailored to specific professional roles was delivered in only 16 per cent of courses, it accounted for well over a quarter of all the teacher-days devoted to primary INSET, a proportion of time exactly equal to that spent on all individual areas of the curriculum together.
Social issues, which between them were the subject of almost a fifth of the courses, accounted for only 9 per cent of the total number of teacher-days: they tended to be short, workshop-style courses with few participants.
At the other extreme, special educational needs — with only a third as many courses as social issues — accounted for slightly more teacher-days, although still only 11 per cent of the total time.
The National Curriculum, as well as specific curriculum areas, received slightly fewer teacher-days than would be suggested by the number of courses allocated to them.
Home-school links, the promotion of which was originally considered important enough to make it one of the four original aims of PNP, accounted for only one teacher-day in every hundred devoted to primary INSET.
The curriculum areas accorded the greatest number of teacher-days were maths, English and science, with English accounting for more than twice as many as science, and these two areas between them taking up about as many teacher-days as maths on its own.
A number of other areas of the curriculum — art and craft, PE, music, CDT, computers, dance and so on— were given comparatively   little time, amounting to the same number of teacher-days between them as were spent on science alone.
Figure 7.1 Primary INSET: allocation of time lo course themes, 1985–9
With the passage of time there were changes in both the overall amount of INSET provision at the Primary Centre and in its priority areas.
The 9,714 teacher-days spent in this way during the school year 1988–9 (a threefold increase since 1985–6) reflect a very substantial investment of human and material resources, although it should be added that with about 2,400 primary teachers in the Authority the figures represent a rise from an average of only just over one day's provision per teacher in 1985–6 to about four days' provision in 1988–9.
The major areas of increased provision during the four years are illustrated in Figure 7.2.
From the beginning of PNP, the recruitment of new staff, often with new and untested areas of responsibility, demanded intensive in-service provision tailored to specific roles.
Even in the first year, when fewer than a third of Leeds primary schools were involved in PNP, this requirement accounted for 760 teacher-days; but from year to year, as more and more schools became involved and as roles proliferated, the investment of time increased until in the fourth year it stood at 2,035 teacher-days.
In-service provision relating to special educational needs, though involving a much more modest investment of time throughout, showed a steady and regular increase from year to year.
Figure 7.2 Primary INSET: major increases in provision, 1985–9
During the first three years, very little time was spent on such whole-school issues as management and curriculum leadership, but in 1988 an apparent change of priorities led to a dramatic increase in provision in this area from an average of 102 teacher-days a year to a somewhat startling 1,280.
If to these one adds other emerging initiatives in management INSET — the management training programme now firmly in place (Leeds City Council 1991a), school-led INSET, and external management courses supported by the LEA — then the massive scale of provision for management training by the 1990s becomes very clear.
The impending introduction of the National Curriculum imposed a new demand towards the end of the four-year period, and during the final year 1,813 teacher-days were spent preparing teachers for their new responsibilities.
Within the area of curriculum-specific courses at the Primary Centre there were some marked changes of priority during the four years, and these are illustrated in Figure 7.3.
The graph shows how mathematics courses followed an alternating on-off pattern in which a year of massive time investment in courses was followed by a comparatively quiet year.
During the first three years an average of well under 200 teacher-days a year were spent on English courses, a surprisingly modest allocation of time in view of the status of English as a core curriculum area.
as if to make up for this, in the fourth year the number of teacher-days shot up to 1,254, an amount of time exceeded only by courses devoted to specific professional roles.
No courses at all were devoted to science during the first two   years.
The third year saw a major initiative in this area, involving 545 teacher-days, while in the fourth year there was something of a reversal as the amount of time was cut back by well over a half.
Finally, though the rest of the curriculum was allocated well under 100 teacher-days during the first three years, there was a substantial rise during the fourth year.
Figure 7.3 Primary INSET: changing curriculum priorities, 1985–9
In view of the fact that INSET was only one integral aspect of a very large and complex package of PNP resources, it is difficult to pinpoint its unique effect on daily practice in the Authority, although this is precisely the task we undertook in relation to one major series of courses for our sixth and tenth reports.
We found that in the long term a little under a third of the participating teachers had been significantly influenced by what they had heard and seen and had made major changes in their classroom practice as a result.
Others had made more superficial changes.
To augment this kind of study, in the summer of 1989 we asked all Leeds primary heads to rate the overall effectiveness of the PNP INSET provision in relation to each of the four PNP aims.
At best the programme was rated no more than moderately effective, being considered completely ineffective in respect of home-school links.
In general our direct evaluation of the sample of courses referred to here showed that a course's effectiveness is closely bound up with the nature and substance of the messages being conveyed.
Any tendency to diffuseness or  ambiguity led to a wide range of interpretations and allowed teachers and heads to assert in good faith, whatever the nature of their practice, that they were implementing the LEA's policies and principles.
They were able to do this partly because some of the messages were generalized enough to allow virtually any interpretation, and partly because messages sometimes combined minute practical detail with broad general principle, allowing teachers to feel they were taking a step in the right direction by changing the surface appearance of their practice without altering its substance.
Change at deeper than surface level was maximized as a result of those courses whose messages about practice were clear, unambiguous and precise as to both their substance and their status (as policy, recommendation, suggestion or option).
The effectiveness of courses was also heavily dependent on the degree of consistency and general agreement between the advisers, heads and coordinators who each had a role in the improvement of practice and who each brought their separate influence to bear on the teachers who attended the courses.
Where these agents of change were in accord with each other, and where some at least of them were directly engaged in the deeper levels of the everyday classroom practice of the teachers concerned, significant change tended to follow.
During the later stages of the Primary Needs Programme, as we have noted, the Authority started to introduce school-led INSET, first on an experimental basis to some 30 per cent of primary schools, then across the sector as a whole.
Since this initiative was financially and administratively separate from PNP, we cannot comment on it here.
However, it should be noted that the demands of the National Curriculum, assessment and LMS have been such as to require the Authority to maintain at least as high a centralized INSET profile as previously, and present provision retains, alongside the new agenda of concerns dictated by the 1988 Education Reform Act (ERA), many of the courses and themes established during the PNP period.
Moreover, as we argued earlier, the circumstances of particular schools are such as to make it imperative that LEAs maintain a significant stake in centralized INSET.
Schools without the quality of leadership or the collective capacity or will to identify and meet their professional development needs are by no means uncommon, and they will always form a problematic minority in any LEA's provision.
The current ideology of devolution may favour letting such schools, along with all the others, sort out their own affairs, but that is hardly fair to their teachers, still less to their pupils.
For as long as the Authority retains its commitment to centralized INSET, therefore, the points we raised in our sixth report about the style of such courses remain relevant.
There we identified and discussed in detail a number of factors critical to the quality and impact of any such course: the clarity and appropriateness of the messages conveyed; the degree of match between messages as intended and as received; the appropriateness of the methods used to convey the messages in question.
We also identified three key questions which need to be addressed as part of the process of devising such courses:
General or specific target?
The more precisely a target audience is defined, and the more homogeneous it is, the greater a course's potential for an extended impact.
Who defines teachers' professional needs?
Such needs can be defined by others (advisory staff or heads, for example), by teachers themselves, or through a process of discussion and negotiation.
Professional training or professional self-development?
An in-service activity can be conceived as something one person does to another, with the assumption that change is most effectively produced from outside; or as a process in which teachers are centrally involved in analysing their own situation and needs and working out the best ways of tackling these.
We showed how although such questions allowed a wide range of possible approaches to INSET, even within the context of a central provision, and despite the market research which preceded the drawing up of each year's programme, the Authority tended towards a particular combination of imprecise targeting, top-down views of teachers' needs, and external agents adopting training or instructing roles.
It could be argued that centralized INSET has this character of necessity, and that the other possibilities can be achieved through school-based INSET.
Our knowledge of approaches to INSET offered by a variety of providing bodies other LEAs, higher education institutions and so on— shows that the style and quality of INSET have less to do with where they take place than with how those involved stand in relation to questions such as those above, not to mention fundamental prerequisites like their professional knowledge and skill.
In this sense, therefore, the now fashionable polarization of school-led and agency-provided INSET is misplaced and misleading.
There is no guarantee at all that the former, simply by taking place in a teacher's place of work, will somehow be more relevant or valuable than the latter (a point made over a decade ago Alexander 1980 — in the context of a previous incarnation of current debates).
We argue therefore, now as in our sixth report, that among the critical requirements in an INSET programme are the following: the diversity of teachers' needs must be acknowledged and addressed; teachers themselves must be central to the process of defining their needs; and to meet diverse needs there must be diverse INSET programmes: not just as to their content and level , but also in their style and venue .
A mixed economy of school-led, LEA provided, and independent agency provided would seem to be the minimum requirement .
It is clear that the Authority adjusted its approach to INSET quite considerably after the early days of PNP and in the light of our sixth report and feedback from schools.
More courses and activities were targeted on specific groups; more attention was paid to consumer opinion; and there was greater diversity within the system as a whole.
Preserving such diversity in the context of diminishing INSET budgets and the trend to school-led INSET is going to become increasingly difficult, but since it is very much in the interests of the professional health of the teaching force it must remain a priority.
CONCLUSION
This chapter has made a number of points about the way in which PNP policy was formulated and communicated; about the means and manner of its interpretation; its substance; and the strategies adopted to secure its implementation.
We have acknowledged the vital, substantial and positive role played by the LEA in all these matters.
However, we have also drawn attention to some less satisfactory features, several of them fundamental.
Among these was the basic stance adopted by the LEA towards its primary heads and teachers, as demonstrated in numerous aspects of the Primary Needs Programme.
The shift we commend — from a stance which teachers view as authoritarian and bureaucratic to one founded on professional partnership — is not only preferable in terms of the quality of relationships within the Authority, but is also far more likely to deliver the very improvements in professional practice for which the Primary Needs Programme was established.
In this and other chapters we have discussed the various LEA-based and school-based strategies devised to secure the implementation of PNP.
In our tenth report (Alexander et al .
1989: 289–90) we acknowledged that these ought to have been an ‘irresistible combination’; yet too often they failed to deliver their potential because of a lack of linkage between the key elements, particularly between advisory staff, heads, PNP coordinators and class teachers.
It must be clear that improved liaison between these parties will help, but this is only part of the requirement.
If the basic relationship between LEA and schools is divisive, liaison will remain frustrated by problems of power, status and value.
For effective linkage to be achieved between the various elements in the Authority's policies for educational reform, relationships as well as procedures must change.
Throughout the present chapter, and indeed elsewhere in this report, we have intimated that policies too must come in for scrutiny.
We have raised many questions about the particular package of policies, recommendations, messages and specifications through which the Authority sought to implement its vision of primary education.
However, beyond the question of the character, quality and impact of such particular ideas are two more fundamental questions about LEA policy in general: how should it be arrived at, and on what should it focus?
Is it really appropriate for policy to deal with such matters as classroom display, layout, grouping and teaching methods, to take four by now familiar examples?
Should an LEA be telling teachers how to teach?
Or should policy concentrate more on clarifying the goals and outcomes of learning , and on providing the kind of support which will enable schools to identify for themselves the best possible ways of achieving such goals and outcomes?
It could be argued that Leeds LEA sought and expected consensus on aspects of primary education (such as classroom practice) where consensus is neither possible nor appropriate, while at the same time neglecting those other aspects (such as the curriculum and home-school links) where consensus was both desirable and possible.
Just as there are many ways of organizing and running an effective school, so  there are many ways of running an LEA.
It was not part of our brief to undertake a comparative study of policy, strategy and professional roles and relationships in different LEAs, but we strongly commend the study as an adjunct to the appraisal of Authority practices to which Leeds committed itself in response to the recommendations in our final report.
Those undertaking it will encounter an extent of diversity which they may find surprising, as well as numerous examples of local authority practice in which members, officers and advisers have successfully managed to reconcile their statutory responsibilities with a commitment to genuine partnership with teachers and parents.
We note that at the time of going to press a restructuring of the advisory service is under consideration (Leeds City Council 1991c).
The draft proposals tend to emphasize advisory structures and roles .
We believe that the Authority should also consider, in the light of our report, the focus and style of advisory activity, especially in respect of the day-to-day work of primary teachers and heads.
In the light of the foregoing, it is worth recalling the six tasks commended by the Audit Commission (1989a) for post-ERA LEAs.
These include:
leadership and the articulation of an educational vision;
partnership and support;
planning;
provision of information;
regulation and quality control;
channelling funds.
The PNP experience suggests that several of these will need careful thought.
LEA leadership is vital, but we have raised questions about the form it might take and the aspects of education with which it should be concerned.
Leadership, of course, should be confused neither with autocracy nor omniscience.
Partnership should be genuine, rather than paternalism in disguise.
As the Audit Commission notes: ‘Schools will need support in the new environment.
That support should not maintain institutions in a client or subservient role.
Rather it should be designed to assist them to achieve autonomy’(Audit Commission 1989a).
The provision of information presupposes a two-way exchange both as a concomitant of genuine partnership and in order that LEA decisions and information are grounded in an exact and sympathetic understanding of schools' situations and needs.
Finally, quality control: it is a complex, sophisticated and highly responsible enterprise, demanding knowledge and skills which cannot be presumed and therefore require proper training, together with a full and open debate with those whose work is under review about the criteria whereby quality is to be judged.
Without such a debate, as the PNP experience has amply demonstrated, an LEA's judgements of quality will certainly not lack power: but they may well lack legitimacy.
Summary of main findings
In this chapter we compress into summary form the main findings and issues discussed so far.
With a few minor amendments (such as the deletion of paragraph numbers and cross-references to the relevant numbered paragraphs in earlier chapters) they are presented as they appeared in the final report.
AIMS OF PNP
The four aims of the Primary Needs Programme were appropriately focused — on children's needs, teaching strategies, the curriculum and links between school and home — but they were too generalized to provide a secure base-line for a substantial programme of financial investment and structural change.
However, the statement of aims was but one of a large number of written and oral policy statements about primary education which the Authority issued between 1985 and 1990.
Some of these, too, suffered from problems of ambiguity and opaqueness.
Moreover, heads and teachers were often expected to adopt ideas and practices on the basis of belief and exhortation rather than argument and evidence.
This approach does little to help teachers cut through the educational rhetoric and sort out those practices which are most productive in terms of the quality of children's learning.
PHASES OF PNP
There were 71 mainly inner-city schools in PNP Phase 1, 56 schools in Phase 2, with the remaining 103 schools being in Phase 3.
Given PNP's commitment to positive discrimination in favour of children and schools with particular needs, the phasing system for introducing schools to the  programme was, by and large, appropriate and equitable.
There were of course anomalies, but some would have occurred whatever mechanisms for resource allocation had been adopted.
RESOURCES FOR PNP
The Authority allocated £13.75 million pounds to PNP over the four years 1985–9.
Most of this money (£11.25 million) was spent on the main strategy of  enhanced staffing, with over 500 additional appointments made during this period.
The remainder was divided between increased capitation for all schools, refurbishment of some twenty-five of them, and in-service support.
The Phase 1 schools had the largest share of these resources.
CHILDREN'S NEEDS
The main aim of PNP was ‘to meet the identified needs of all children, and in particular those experiencing learning difficulties’.
The intention was to address the needs of the majority of children through a combination of the ‘broadly-based curriculum’ and ‘flexible teaching strategies’, and to use additional programmes and resources to cater for certain specific categories of need.
These included special educational needs, ethnic minority and multicultural needs, equal opportunity and gender-related needs, and social and/or material disadvantage.
We identified four features essential to a properly founded needs policy or programme: a clear definition of the categories of needs in question; procedures for the identification of children within each category; means for the diagnosis of the precise needs of each child so identified; and appropriate educational and curricular provision to meet these needs.
The four categories of need chosen by the Authority varied considerably in the extent to which they met these conditions, at both LEA and school level.
Needs policy in general, despite its centrality to PNP, evolved piecemeal with some parts not fully thought through.
In terms of resourcing, comprehensiveness of focus and perceived impact, the most extensive and successful part of the needs programme was that designed for children with special educational needs, with well-thought-out and systematic procedures for identification and diagnosis, highly regarded INSET courses, and initially generous provision through a combination of enhanced staffing and central support.
However, the provision was concentrated mainly in Phase 1 schools, and in the later stages of PNP even these schools claimed to be encountering increased difficulty in sustaining their earlier staffing commitments in this area.
Despite the integrative intentions of recent legislation, the Authority continued its administrative separation of special educational needs from primary education.
This generated confusion in policy and a certain lack of coherence in practice, which the Authority sought to address in its 1990 advisory restructuring.
The Authority displayed a clear commitment to meeting the needs of children from ethnic minority groups, to combating racism, and to extending multicultural understanding.
This commitment was backed by a range of resources, facilities and support staff.
Nevertheless, and notwithstanding the generally good quality of what was provided by the LEA, the actual scale of professional support remained inadequate to the task.
Provision was patchy, and professional attitudes ranged from a sensitive understanding of the issues to the blandly ignorant.
Some staff failed to distinguish between ethnic minority and multicultural needs, and as a result refused to acknowledge their obligations in respect of the latter.
There is much work to be done here.
Professional attitudes and perceptions need to change, and professional knowledge and understanding about societal and cultural matters, as well as about strategies for multicultural education, need to be increased.
Equal opportunities and gender were given a high profile in Authority policy, but again the situation on the ground was uneven and in some cases inadequate.
For too many teachers, gender was not taken seriously as an issue.
The problem was exacerbated by the way gender inequality was often built into school management structures, and to some extent into the curriculum.
Provision was sparse, and often tokenistic.
LEA support for developing professional understanding of gender issues was qualitatively good but quantitatively inadequate.
However, there were notable exceptions to these trends at the level of individual schools and classrooms.
The larger part of PNP resourcing was concentrated on schools where significant proportions of children were experiencing social and/or material disadvantage.
Beyond this, policy offered little.
There was no guidance on provision other than the commitments to improving the visual environment and offering a broad curriculum and flexible teaching.
While context was attended to, therefore,curriculum content was largely ignored, and especially those basic areas of the curriculum like reading which are so critical to the improvement of children's educational and career prospects.
There was a tendency to acquiesce in low expectations of disadvantaged children and to define their needs in emotional rather than educational terms.
Of all aspects of PNP, this one raises the most serious questions about value for money.
At the same time, and regardless of the lack of other than financial support from the Authority, certain schools were tirelessly and effectively tackling the needs of these children in the comprehensive way required.
There was no policy for other categories of need.
A particularly notable omission was children of high ability, the more serious in view of the widespread evidence nationally that such children underachieve in primary schools, partly because too little is expected of them.
The lack of Authority policy was frequently mirrored at school level.
Overall, thinking on children's needs, despite its commendable focus on specific categories, was incomplete.
It tended too often to falter on the issue of provision, and it seriously underestimated the extent to which professional attitudes and understanding are vital factors in the improvement of practice.
More fundamentally, it was grounded in a deficit view of needs.
That is to say, it tended to focus on what children cannot do rather than what they can do, and in (rightly) attending to their problems it underplayed or ignored their potential .
Such an approach can encourage low expectations and a failure to attend properly to the needs of children other than those with ‘problems’.
In this respect, despite the main PNP goal, the PNP was not really about the needs of all children.
Policy and provision were less well-developed in the areas of diagnosis, assessment and curriculum — in other words, the precise points where a policy has its greatest potential to affect the individual child.
There is a cycle of low expectations and  unchallenging curriculum experiences here, which the Authority itself could help to break — not least by retaining a significant stake in centralized INSET.
At the same time all concerned should look carefully for ways of meeting the needs of all children, as well as those minorities for which the Authority demonstrated a proper and necessary concern.
We add that this agenda is no less important in the context of the National Curriculum and mandatory assessment: although these seek to raise expectations and improve standards, of themselves they will achieve little unless professional attitudes, knowledge and skill are also attended to.
THE CURRICULUM
Authority policy on the curriculum was contained in various documents.
Regrettably, like some of its other statements on primary education, many of these were strong on values and assertion but weak on substance and justification.
They thus combined, in a frustrating way, a lack of precision and argument with an expectation that they would become the mandatory cornerstones of classroom practice.
More successful in terms of their perceived impact on teachers and children were those programmes associated with certain specific subject initiatives such as PrIME and ESG science.
The Authority's curriculum policies produced various responses from heads and teachers.
While some were happy to espouse them without question, others were more critical, the more so because of the Authority's failure to consult any but a small number of heads about their content.
But the main problem was that the PNP plank of the ‘broadly-based curriculum’ turned out to be fairly meaningless.
At the same time, PRINDEP data repeatedly showed that the curriculum in action in many schools and classrooms was not, by any of the possible definitions of the phrase, broadly based.
The Authority's lead on matters concerning the character, range and balance of the primary curriculum as a whole, therefore, was inadequate.
Schools exploited PNP resources in a variety of ways for reviewing, developing and managing the curriculum.
PNP coordinators played a prominent part, whether as managers ,consultants ,enhancers or facilitators .
Schools made constructive use of the potential of enhanced staffing to secure a collaborative approach to curriculum development in the classroom through teachers teaching together (TTT).
The data show a wide range of strategies overall, and we would trust that more of these could enter the management vocabulary of more schools.
In some, the potential of TTT was wasted because support teachers were marginalized; in others, highly experienced and qualified coordinators had to be content with a merely facilitating role.
The processes of curriculum review at school level took various forms.
Less variable was the tendency to concentrate on reviewing and developing some subjects while neglecting others.
The list tended to be dominated by mathematics and language, with science occupying an increasingly important place over the evaluation period.
The review process was buttressed by PNP INSET and  Development Fund support for the subjects chosen.
The neglect of many other curriculum areas was a persistent problem, the more serious in view of the close correspondence between review and development on the one hand and the quality of curriculum provision in the classroom on the other.
Certain subjects now in the National Curriculum — notably art, history and geography — were, and remain, particularly vulnerable.
We accept that curriculum review and development, and indeed INSET, may have to be selective.
However, care should be taken to construct a cycle of attention which eventually includes all aspects of the curriculum.
Without this, as has happened in Leeds, certain subjects are perennial losers, and the principles of curricular balance and entitlement are seriously compromised.
There was a significant relationship between curriculum leadership, staff status and gender, and this reinforced discrepancies in the review process and could convey inappropriate messages to staff and children alike.
Schools need to be constantly alert to this problem.
Overall, schools used a wide range of strategies for curriculum review and development.
These can usefully be viewed as a repertoire from which schools taking a more restricted approach to review could learn a great deal.
In particular, we commend attention to the potential (and challenges) of staff meetings.
They are a common ingredient in the review and development process, but were handled with widely varying degrees of competence.
One area in which the advisory team made its views on curriculum clear was the way classrooms should be physically disposed to deliver curriculum breadth and flexibility.
Some teachers adopted the recommended practices; some found difficulty in doing so; others rejected them.
However, while the advisory team's views had the undoubted consequence of making many Leeds primary classrooms seem busier and more attractive, the beneficial consequences for children's learning were less clear; and for some teachers, the claim of ‘flexibility’ had exactly the opposite effect, strait-jacketing them into practices to which they had no real commitment and which they had difficulty in managing.
We commend close attention to the way time is used in the curriculum.
At one level we discovered time being spent on different curriculum areas in similar proportions to those recorded by HMI and by other research projects.
However, we also found an inverse relationship between time and efficiency: time was sometimes used least effectively in those subjects to which most time was allocated.
We also noted a tendency for some teachers to create time to monitor children's learning in prioritized areas like mathematics and language by treating other areas as time fillers.
Such findings have serious implications for curriculum planning and provision: children are entitled to a curriculum which is consistent in its quality across all subjects, not just those accorded most time.
Moreover, the findings challenge conventional assumptions about the amounts of time the different subjects should be allocated.
Given the time constraints to which primary teachers have felt increasingly subjected since the introduction of the National Curriculum, this set of issues deserves very careful attention.
We uncovered four quite distinct ways in which the curriculum in practice was  defined and delivered: first, as areas or subjects (mathematics, language, and so on); second, as organizational strategies (topic work, thematic enquiry, ‘choosing’, etc.); third, as generic activities (reading, writing, collaboration, construction, drawing/painting etc.); fourth, as a combination of two or more of these.
We found the idea of generic activities to be particularly potent as a tool for describing and evaluating curriculum practice.
Regardless of subject labels, children's curriculum experiences tended to be dominated by writing, with reading, using task-specific apparatus, and listening to the teacher also prominent; collaborative activity and talking — with the teacher or with other pupils — were a long way behind.
Some of these discrepancies were related to children's age, gender and perceived ability.
This alternative analysis reveals a pervasive imbalance in children's curriculum experiences and conflicts sharply with primary rhetoric.
In this and other respects, the principle of the ‘broadly-based curriculum’ appeared not to be reflected in practice.
At each level of the system we found claims to breadth and balance undermined by countervailing policies and practices: by Authority special projects favouring some areas at the expense of others; in central INSET provision; in PNP development fund allocations; in the distribution of posts of responsibility in schools; in school-based INSET; in the status of postholders and the time they had to undertake their curriculum leadership responsibilities; in the areas of the curriculum subjected to review and development; in teacher expertise; and above all in the quality of children's classroom experiences.
In the end, curriculum breadth and balance are less about time allocation than the diversity and challenge of what the child encounters.
Moreover, if the goals of breadth and balance are to be achieved in the classroom they must be pursued at every other level of the system as well.
We undertook a comparative study of five areas of the curriculum — English, mathematics, science, humanities/environmental studies and art — and while acknowledging the many examples of stimulating and challenging practice, noted problems of imbalance in each of them.
The National Curriculum may introduce a greater degree of consistency in respect of subject content, but quality in the way such content is treated will only be achieved if the anomalies at the various levels — LEA support, school curriculum management and development, classroom provision — are attended to.
The case of English, on which we assembled data relating to talking, listening and reading, was particularly disturbing.
Classroom talk, despite the apparent conversational liveliness of many classrooms, could be shown on closer examination to be somewhat impoverished and unchallenging, with a general tendency to discourage children from asking their own questions and thinking things out for themselves, and a lack of informative feedback.
Our analysis of reading scores at 7+ and 9+ from 1983–91 showed no evidence that the injection of extra staff and money into Leeds primary schools, especially those in the inner city, had had a positive impact on children's reading ability, at least as measured by the Authority's tests.
On the contrary, scores showed a very slight decline towards the end of the evaluation period, especially in the inner-city schools  where PNP resources were concentrated.
However, the situation in Leeds needs to be looked at in a national as well as in a local context.
We have recommended that the Authority continues to monitor reading standards across the city but that the screening function of its traditional tests be taken over by National Curriculum Assessment at the end of Key Stage One.
It is also clear that reading must be accorded high priority in inner-city schools and that teachers in those schools need support in this endeavour.
However, we have also stressed that any decline in reading standards in the inner city must be set firmly within the context of the political and economic circumstances which lead to poverty and social dislocation.
Teachers and schools, however well resourced and staffed, can only do so much to counter the effects of social disadvantage, and it is too easy to use them as scapegoats for the failure of political and economic policy.
Nevertheless, the reading scores analysis does raise important questions about the PNP strategy in general.
It seems probable that if the programme had addressed the curriculum in a more direct and sharply focused way, concentrating attention and resources on particular curriculum areas at a time, then the impact on the quality of children's curriculum experiences, and hence on their learning, would have been much greater.
In any event, though teachers continued to give reading their attention throughout the PNP period, it received very little attention in the Authority's INSET and support programmes.
The PRINDEP evaluation highlighted the primary curriculum as an area needing attention at three levels: Authority policy, school management and classroom practice.
The National Curriculum will undoubtedly change matters to some degree at each of these levels, and indeed the situation in 1991 is already very different from that of 1985–9, but the National Curriculum cannot of itself provide the understanding, skills and commitments which are needed to prevent the weaknesses and inconsistencies we have identified from reappearing in another guise.
In place of vague ideological statements and piecemeal policies the primary sector now needs a substantial programme of professional development and support aimed at enhancing the curriculum expertise of all its primary staff, and targeted in the first instance on those aspects of the curriculum where studies like this have identified the greatest problems.
TEACHING STRATEGIES
The Authority rightly identified teachers' classroom practice as a critical factor in children's learning and gave it considerable prominence in documents, courses and the day-to-day work of its advisory staff in schools.
The messages thus transmitted were more precise and sharply focused than those on curriculum.
The general conception of ‘good primary practice’ was a consistent one, with the generation of a ‘quality learning environment’accorded high priority.
Given the strongly visual and organizational emphasis, the impact in classrooms was readily apparent, and the Authority and schools can take considerable  credit for a general improvement in the physical circumstances in which primary children and teachers work.
However, we expressed certain reservations about the prevailing approach.
Though ostensibly child-centred, it paid rather more attention to teachers and classrooms than to children's learning.
It presumed that the particular classroom layouts and patterns of organization commended would promote children's learning more effectively than any others.
It made much of ‘flexibility’ but in a way which implied that only certain versions of flexibility were permitted, and it failed to treat the notion of ‘good practice’as the problematic issue it manifestly is.
That being so, teachers felt themselves to be under pressure to adopt practices whose efficacy we have shown to be debatable.
The most notable examples were grouping, the practice of having a multiple curriculum focus in teaching sessions, with different groups working in different curriculum areas, and the kinds of teacher-pupil interaction associated with a commitment to discovery learning.
The complex patterns of classroom organization associated with the versions of good practice commended in Leeds require considerable skill on the part of the teacher.
They make adequate monitoring of children's learning a particularly demanding task and children themselves may find that such arrangements reduce their opportunities for the quiet, concentrated study required by the reading and writing activities which dominate their curriculum.
School and advisory staff need to look very closely at the balance of benefits and costs, for both children and teachers, in the teaching strategies and patterns of classroom organization which have been so strongly promoted in recent years.
We found the issue of time to be revealing and important.
While children were spending time on task and on different curriculum areas in similar proportions to those identified in other studies, it was also clear that such figures are by no means inevitable or appropriate.
Although the time a child spends on task relates to many factors, including some beyond the teacher's control, the organizational complexity obtaining in many primary  classrooms would seem to play a significant part.
This underlines our sense that it is a grave mistake to pursue the notion of teaching strategies as somehow disconnected from children's learning on the one hand, and from teachers' intentions and attributes on the other.
There are important issues here.
Similarly, our analysis of how time was used across the curriculum provoked further challenges to conventional assumptions: that the way to do a subject justice is to give it more time; and that ‘balance’ is about the proportions of time given to the various subjects.
We found it far more instructive to analyse balance in terms of the cross-curricular ‘generic activities’ of reading, writing, listening, drawing/painting, collaboration and so on which are a universal feature of primary classroom life, regardless of the curriculum labels used.
We identified, and questioned, the apparent imbalance in such generic activities.
We argued for much greater prominence to be given to the potential of genuine pupil-pupil collaboration, and less to low-level writing, reading and drawing tasks.
We noted the mismatch between the mainly solitary activities children were undertaking  and the gregarious settings in which they were often expected to undertake them.
It would seem to be a basic condition of effective classroom practice that the setting in which children work should be consistent with and supportive of the particular learning tasks they are given.
The quantitative and qualitative analyses of teacher-pupil interaction showed how vital a part it can play in children's learning, yet how easy it is to waste the very limited time teachers have to interact with each child.
We argued for a more discriminating balance of questions, statements and instructions; for fewer pseudo-questions and more questions of a kind which encourage children to reason and speculate; for more opportunities for children themselves to ask their own questions and have these addressed; for oral feedback to children which without being negative is more exact and informative than mere praise; for both questioning and feedback to strike a balance between the retrospective function of assessing and responding to what has been learned so far, and the prospective function of taking the child's learning forward; and for much more use to be made of structured pupil-pupil interaction both as a learning tool and as a means of helping teachers to function in a more considered manner and therefore more effectively.
It is essential that all these issues be addressed openly, free from ideology and rhetoric and from the sense, powerfully conveyed by respondents, that pedagogical orthodoxies must not be challenged.
The questions are clear: what kinds of learning should primary schools seek to promote, and what are the most effective ways of achieving them?
It is here — with learning and educational outcomes rather than the ‘learning environment’— that policy and planning for classroom practice should start.
Enhanced staffing under PNP enabled schools to break away from the tradition of one teacher per class and experiment with various forms of classroom-based professional collaboration.
This proved to be one of the most significant aspects of PNP, and one which had, and has, considerable potential.
We identified four essential dimensions of such collaborations, which we — and subsequently others — termed TTT (teachers teaching together): purposes, participants, collaborative style and pupil organization.
Applied to the practices emerging in the period 1985–9, this framework yielded a variety of ways in which TTT can help both children and teachers, and a diversity of forms that such collaborations can take.
However, we also identified problems that needed to be resolved: purposes have to be crystal clear; matters of status, leadership and the division of responsibility have to be negotiated; and all such collaborations have to be jointly planned.
We therefore cautioned against seeing TTT as a panacea.
If not properly thought through and implemented, it can be disruptive, disorganized and fraught with tensions between the teachers concerned — and therefore considerably less beneficial to children than the solo teaching it replaces.
Since teachers were the main resource in PNP, it is teaching — and hence learning — which should have benefited most from the Council's initiatives.
There is little doubt that changes in teaching took place.
However, the  possibilities and limits of improvement were determined by a number of factors: existing classroom expertise, individual school and classroom circumstances, professional attitudes and commitments; and, framing all of these, the quality of the thinking which informed the appraisal of existing practice and the exploration of alternatives.
In these respects, too, there was much variation between schools.
However, the lead given by the Authority in this regard was not a strong one.
In an LEA where schools are encouraged to resolve these matters for themselves and in their own ways, the character of official thinking about classroom practice is not particularly important.
But Leeds neither was nor is such an LEA, at least where its primary schools are concerned.
The models of teaching it commended were expected to be influential, and the Authority saw itself as having a duty to provide a clear lead on the direction and character of primary classroom practice.
We have identified both strengths and achievements where classroom practice is concerned, particularly in the transformation of the physical settings in which teaching and learning take place, and the exploitation of the potential of classroom-based professional collaboration.
However, if the Authority is to continue to seek to influence day-to-day classroom practice to this degree (and this itself is a proposition which must now be questioned) then certain fundamental changes are called for.
Thus, ‘good primary practice’ must cease to be presented as an uncontentious absolute.
Good practice is conceptually and empirically problematic, and ought to be treated as such.
It is inappropriate to act as though consensus exists (or should exist) over good practice, and doubly inappropriate to expect conformity to a particular version of it.
Much more account should be taken of the individual teacher in discussing classroom practice; the notion that a ‘practice’ can exist independently of the practitioner and can be imposed without regard for the individual's personality, intentions and preferences is both professionally demeaning and impractical.
Teaching needs to be discussed in a much more rounded and comprehensive way, with far less emphasis on surface aspects like display and resources; far more emphasis should be placed on the character of the minute-to-minute encounters which children have with teachers and each other, on the precise nature and purposes of the tasks they are given and The activities they undertake, and on the relationship of these and other aspects of the practice of teaching to learning.
Classroom organization and teaching strategies need to be seen as a means to  an end, not as ends in themselves, and to allow this shift the ends or purposes need to be discussed and clarified.
The dilemmas and compromises which are inherent to the task of teaching need to be honestly identified and openly confronted.
Above all, the notion that the LEA can be the sole definer, arbiter and guardian of good classroom practice must be abandoned.
Expertise in such matters is as likely to be found in schools as in the LEA; but in any event good practice is defined and achieved dialectically and empirically, not by decree.
LINKS WITH PARENTS AND THE COMMUNITY
Although the fostering of links between schools, parents and the community was one of the main aims of PNP, it received notably less attention than the other three.
There was no clear policy on this matter, only a series of apparently unrelated initiatives.
By the end of PNP, despite PRINDEP findings and recommendations on this matter, policy was still awaited.
We found the lack of apparent commitment to this aim at Authority level reflected in the deployment of PNP resources.
There was virtually no INSET, and schools felt that PNP resourcing had very little impact on what they did in the home-school area.
Nevertheless, our surveys showed schools undertaking a wide range of activities in pursuit of home-school rapport and cooperation, particularly where younger children were concerned, and many schools went well beyond the obvious activities like information exchange, open days and social events to pursue more adventurous and long-term programmes.
By the end of PNP, parent-teacher liaison had a higher profile, but this was mainly due to the need to meet the requirements of the 1988 Education Act and to undertake consultations over school reorganization.
There were three specific initiatives: home-school liaison officers, Portage, and the Early Education Support Agency.
Of these, only the first was part of PNP and it proved to be the most problematic, partly for administrative reasons and partly because of the delicacy of the issues of culture and status which it raised.
In any case, the HSLO initiative was on a very small scale.
Nevertheless, in so far as it addressed the complex issue of home-school relationships in multi-ethnic contexts, it was an important initiative which deserves to be extended in some form.
The absence of policy and the paucity of central support and initiatives meant that the majority of schools devised their own home-school policies, strategies and roles.
Some exploited PNP resources, especially enhanced staffing, for this purpose.
But how they acted, and with what effect, depended mainly on the attitudes and commitments of heads.
This is not to say that practice was unsatisfactory: rather that it was highly variable and that it mostly had little to do with PNP, despite the Authority's intentions and despite its being written into the job specifications of PNP appointees.
We have to conclude that home-school links was the forgotten PNP aim.
Yet, paradoxically, the quality and character of the relationships which are forged between a school, its parents and its immediate community seem a much more appropriate focus for LEA policy than, say, the fine detail of classroom practice.
The whole structure and ambience of local government are community-centred: the electoral ward system produces elected community representatives on councils; elected members seek to respond to community needs and views and to safeguard community interests; and councils have a generous array of other policies which engage directly with the quality of life which communities experience.
Schools, and especially primary schools, have always been regarded as  essential to a concept of a complete community, and many schools have taken their responsibilities and opportunities in this regard very seriously.
It might also be argued that despite recent legislation (some would say because of it) parent-teacher relations are still too often fraught with fear, suspicion and misunderstanding; that there is still too much teacher stereotyping of ‘good’ and ‘bad’homes and parents; and that many parents still lack power in relation to their parental rights and responsibilities.
The Authority missed the opportunity to use PNP resources to bring about change here: it needs now to explore other avenues.
As with classroom practice, it can learn much by attending to the best of what is taking place in its schools.
MANAGING PNP IN THE SCHOOL
The Authority recognized that the effective management of PNP ideas and resources within each school was critical to the Programme's success.
Its main lever for change was enhanced staffing, and in particular the role of PNP coordinator.
The phase disparities in enhanced staffing were deliberate — the Programme was one of positive discrimination in favour of children and schools with the greatest needs.
However, the low enhancement in Phase 3 raised the more general question of minimum effective levels.
Though any help is better than none, it is only when the enhancement is one extra teacher or more that schools really acquire the flexibility in staffing that they need if they are to carry through major reforms in curriculum and classroom practice.
Most Phase 3 schools received enhancement well below this level.
Moreover, the lack of seniority of most Phase 3 appointees further reduced their potential to generate change.
At the other end of the scale, some Phase 1 schools were flooded with PNP staff yet scarcely knew how to employ them.
It may well have been a more sensible policy, therefore, to make the Phase 1/3 disparity less extreme, and to use the resources to ensure that all schools were staffed on the 1986 Select Committee recommended basis of n registration groups plus one, with further pro rata adjustments for school size and specific challenges like those of the inner city.
The current LMS formula should be kept under review with these issues in mind.
We identified a wide range of roles undertaken by PNP Scale 1/MPG staff, with releasing class teachers and TTT most prominent.
Because class size has always been a cause for complaint in primary schools, some heads used their staffing enhancement to create smaller classes.
Such reductions might be marginal and therefore the enhancement tended to have less impact than when it was used for cross-school initiatives.
However, many staff deployed in the latter way encountered problems in working with colleagues.
The Authority appeared to have underestimated these in its programme of INSET and support.
Nevertheless, in many schools enhanced staffing stirred up traditional structures and assumptions to produce a more open and reflective professional climate.
The key role of PNP coordinator was applied to a variety of tasks, of which  staff development, curriculum development and special needs were pre-eminent over the evaluation period as a whole.
The initially strong emphasis on special educational needs (and the attendant confusion over whether PNP was a special or general needs programme) gave way to a concentration on curriculum development, mainly in response to the shifting national agenda.
Coordinators were initially expected to do far too much.
Their success depended on a sensible and achievable role being negotiated with their heads, on heads' support, staff attitudes and their own skills.
They were sometimes denied the authority necessary for the fulfilment of their expected role, and it was critically important that they were seen as part of a school's management team rather than being relegated to the position of mere facilitator.
Thus empowered, they could achieve a great deal, particularly in the areas of curriculum development and staff support.
Though LMS is widely felt to have reduced the scope for staffing enhancement in primary schools, we believe it to be essential that schools retain the broader managerial repertoire which PNP has encouraged.
Under PNP, schools have been able to break away from the traditional conception of primary school professional life centring on just two roles: those of head and class teacher.
Although one person may not be able to combine the range of roles and tasks in the way that some coordinators have, it is perfectly possible to spread these across the staff as a whole and thus maintain the momentum of innovation and support.
The PNP coordinator idea, whatever its problems and imperfections in practice, represents a vision of professional collaboration, development and decision-making which primary schools can ill-afford to abandon, least of all in the era of the National Curriculum.
New staff roles dictate new management structures.
We identified six main types or clusters, and noted the way that recent changes under PNP and ERA have encouraged a shift, particularly in larger schools, towards three-tier and matrix management structures.
While each school must evolve its own way of working, it is clear that the traditional two-tier model has limited capacity to cope with change on the scale now being experienced.
The role of deputy head was all too often a marginal one.
All deputy heads need a clear job specification and a place in school development and decision-making commensurate with their experience and seniority.
Change challenges a school's capacities for receiving ideas, reviewing practices, and making decisions.
During the PNP period, many Leeds primary schools acquired greater sophistication in such matters, and both understood and exploited delegated responsibilities and collegial action.
Initially, they found their way by trial and error, as LEA support was concentrated elsewhere.
Subsequently, the level of Authority investment in management training expanded considerably.
However, it is important to note and counter the limitations of mainstream approaches to management training, with their top-down assumptions, their tendency to exclude all but the head and senior staff, and their focus on strategies at the expense of educational purposes.
Management has become an whole-school process, entailing that every member of staff has a managerial role of  some kind, and it should be approached as such in any INSET or support programmes.
The exclusion of many heads from the development of PNP, and the attempt to use PNP coordinators to carry the Authority's versions of good practice directly from Merrion House to the classroom, had unfortunate consequences for both the success of the programme and school-LEA relationships.
Heads responded to advisory views of good practice in different ways, ranging from unthinking conformity to outright rejection.
Such variation reflects as much on the Authority's style and the quality of its thinking as it does on the heads, and there is a clear need for much greater dialogue between the two levels.
However, it is encouraging to note the recent evidence of greater consultation between school and Authority staff and the increased participation of teachers in Authority working parties.
Equally important was dialogue on matters of purpose and policy within each school, especially between head and staff.
Without such dialogue, and the associated openness in management and decision-making, there could be a substantial gap between a school's espoused philosophy and its classroom practice.
Heads' realization of the headship role tended to fall into four main types.
The more successful heads were those who remained in close touch with classroom realities and teachers' everyday concerns, who valued and developed individual staff potential, and encouraged collective decision-making.
However, while current challenges facing primary schools demand greater delegation and role specialization than hitherto, it is essential that schools avoid the trap of over-bureaucratization, and that they seek to retain and nurture the close informal collaboration which has always been an essential ingredient in effective school management.
We expressed concern about the poor quality of head-staff relationships in some schools, admittedly not always the fault of the head but often a consequence of an indefensible degree of autocratic behaviour.
Equally, we noted some heads' resistance to developing their own professional understanding and their failure to engage with current educational issues.
Such characteristics could have a corrosive and debilitating effect on the entire staff of a school to the obvious detriment of children as well as teachers.
In such circumstances, the currently fashionable notion of ‘closed-circuit’ school-led INSET has certain limitations.
The Authority needs to retain a significant stake in INSET run by itself and other institutions in order to prevent schools from simply recycling and reinforcing their own inadequacies.
SUPPORTING REFORM: THE ROLE OF THE LEA
PNP was an ambitious programme of reform, conceived on a large scale.
The LEA's role in the Programme was an interventionist rather than a facilitating one: it devised PNP's goals and strategy, and sought closely to influence and control the Programme's implementation.
The success of PNP at school and classroom level, therefore, is closely related to the role adopted by the LEA.
It would seem that in some respects the Programme, and indeed wider aspects of the Authority's approach to primary education, were centralized to an excessive degree and that this generated reactions from heads and teachers which were both powerful and counterproductive.
Much of their concern centred on what they saw as the imposition from above of particular versions of ‘good primary practice’ and the relationship between teachers' allegiance to these and their career prospects.
The matter is a complex and delicate one, yet of all the findings from this evaluation it is one of the most pervasive and consistent, recurring in questionnaire responses and interviews, and validated by extensive observation.
It also has serious implications for the professional health of the Authority and its schools, since the belief that getting on is merely a matter of saying and doing what significant others wish to hear and see produces not just disaffection and cynicism but also unthinking conformity and the loss of The professional analysis and debate which are essential to educational progress.
PNP policy was embedded in the broader framework of Authority-thinking about children's needs, the curriculum, teaching strategies, classroom practice, school management and home-school relationships.
These ideas had, and were intended to have, considerable influence at school and classroom levels.
Because of this, they needed to be firmly grounded in careful analysis of the issues, and justified in terms of a coherent value-position, argument and evidence.
These basic requirements were not often met, and teachers were confronted with, and expected to adopt, ideas which might be little more than expressions of officially endorsed belief.
Those constructing future policies and principles should strive to make them exemplary in this regard, not least because of the encouragement this will give to schools to be rigorous in their own thinking.
The particular themes of PNP needs, curriculum, teaching strategies, home and school — remain areas of central concern, and about each of them there is now a substantial body of conceptual and empirical material to be tapped, some of it in the twelve PRINDEP reports.
In any event, the experience of PNP raises important questions about the proper focus of an LEA's policies.
We showed how in certain areas — for example home-school links, the curriculum, and whole-school management — clear policies can be appropriate and helpful; and how in other areas — notably classroom practice — advisory staff seemed eager to prescribe in some detail how teachers should organize their classrooms and manage their teaching, a focus for policy and action at that level which seemed rather less appropriate.
It would seem more apposite for the Authority to concentrate on identifying the goals and aspirations of the service, on raising teachers' educational sights and their expectations of children as high as possible, and on providing the opportunities and facilities for teachers to explore, debate and develop their own ways of achieving such goals, aspirations and expectations.
In the devising and implementing of PNP the Authority's advisory service was pivotal; it did much to raise the profile of primary education in Leeds, and to secure development on a number of significant fronts.
Collectively, however, the  service was not well regarded in the schools since it was seen to be enact many of the tendencies referred to earlier.
Yet individually, advisers and advisory teachers earned considerable respect for the extent and quality of support they provided.
The workloads of advisory staff, and the physical circumstances in which they work at Merrion House, are unsatisfactory and should be reviewed.
The Authority's administrative services at Merrion House acquired a poor reputation, and efforts should be made to make them more accessible and responsive.
The Authority mounted a substantial in-service programme in support of PNP, which later merged with its general primary INSET programme.
The range in content and style of these courses was considerable, and over the PNP period they focused on many aspects of the curriculum, on social issues, professional roles, classroom management, curriculum development and school management, and on specific areas of child need.
This report has analysed the programme of courses mounted at the Primary Schools Centre, and the teacher-days spent on them.
The Centre, developed as part of PNP, made a significant and welcome contribution to professional development in the Authority.
Other INSET initiatives, particularly school-led INSET and management training, were being developed towards the end of the evaluation period but they were beyond the reach of PRINDEP's time and resources.
The success of these courses in influencing the quality of school and classroom practice depended on a number of factors, some of them — like the receptiveness of teachers attending them and the willingness of schools to encourage and accommodate change — beyond the control of the course providers.
At the same time, there were two recurrent factors within providers' control: the clarity and appropriateness of the messages being conveyed, and the appropriateness of the methods used to convey them.
Unfortunately, certain courses were characterized by diffuse or ambiguous messages, or by the tendency to unsubstantiated assertion and prescription referred to earlier.
Our study raised wider questions about INSET, and about professional development in general.
We argued that the critical requirements in an INSET programme are that the very diverse needs of different teachers be recognized and addressed, that teachers themselves be central to the process of defining their needs, and that diverse needs be met by diverse provision, in respect of not just content and level but also style and venue.
The move to school-led INSET, in Leeds as elsewhere, has the potential to meet the first two of these requirements, but not necessarily the third.
Accordingly, and referring to earlier anxieties about ‘closed-circuit’ professional development, we expressed certain reservations about the tendency of LEAs, with government encouragement, to put all their eggs in the basket of school-led INSET.
Our analysis of the professional climate and management structures of primary schools suggests that such an approach would do more harm than good in some schools, and that it is therefore essential that a mixed economy for INSET be maintained, a minimum combination being provided by the school, the LEA, and independent agencies.
The Authority devised a number of strategies for implementing PNP at both  school and LEA levels.
The key components were, at LEA level, the work of advisory staff, centralized INSET, and central administrative support; and at school level, enhanced staffing, the coordinator role, extra capitation and refurbishment.
It is clear that enhanced staffing proved to be the single most potent strategy in the Programme, though it was not without its problems, and the potential of some PNP appointments was frustrated by attitudes and decisions at the school level.
Two other points are also clear however: first that heads ought also to have featured explicitly in the strategy from the outset, since their role proved to be critical; second, that there was a serious lack of linkage between the strategy's various components, particularly where advisory staff, heads, PNP coordinators and class teachers were concerned.
By treating each of these as a separate constituency, rather than as a team, the Authority exacerbated the problems of communication, understanding and relationship referred to earlier, and reduced the Programme's impact.
Although we have raised questions about the Authority's role in PNP, nothing can detract from the vision of increased educational opportunity and improved practice which PNP represented.
However, because the success of a policy depends so heavily on the way it is devised and implemented, and because the experience of PNP raises such serious questions about the Authority's role in this regard, it is clear that a review of Authority practices and procedures, as they affect primary education in the city, is now merited.
The current restructuring of the advisory service provides a timely opportunity to address some of these issues.