

MOLOCH
‘And he dreamed, and behold a ladder set up on the earth, and the top of it reached to heaven: and behold the angels of God ascending and descending on it.’
Genesis, chapter 28, verse 12
Jesus Garcia de Soto y Delporto stared through the transparent Lift wall with a puzzled expression.
His face cloud; first with alarm and then fear.
The stars were moving.
Even as he shouted for attention, Jesus had picked a target star and was tracking its apparent movement around the Lift.
Within seconds, it was halfway between him and the place where the other five members of B shift were grouped together, discussing procedure and checking through stacks of domestic stores for Moloch Base.
Jesus pushed himself off and floated rapidly around the Lift, bringing himself expertly to a stop less than a metre from the slight form of Christine LaFayette.
‘Christine,’ he said urgently, ‘get everyone into their spacesuits.’
‘What?’
‘For God's sake, do it now!
The Lift is spinning.’
‘He's right, get moving!’
That was the newcomer.
Ace?
Was that her name?
She seemed to have a sensible head on her shoulders.
While the others stood and gawped, she had already pushed herself over to the storage lockers and was busy tossing the flimsy emergency spacesuits over.
Jesus caught one and popped the seals.
‘All right, move it!’
Christine shouted.
‘I don't know how strong the Bridge is, but it can't be designed to absorb this much stress.’
‘How far have we turned?’
Ace asked.
‘Thirty degrees at a guess, but fast; my reference star  has already gone behind the filament engagement assembly.’
‘The what?’
He pointed to the central area of the torus, where the otherwise transparent wall was a translucent pink.
‘The area where the Bridge passes through the Lift.’
Over on one side, Lars Ulrich blinked his fashionably painted eyelids whilst he calculated moments of inertia and angular velocities on the wax tablet he always carried with him.
‘Thirty degrees of rotation in — one minute, you say?
Is angular velocity of….’
The tall mathematician's thin face creased with surprise.
‘Hell on ice, we should be flying through walls by now.’
‘Suit up first.
Talk later.’
That was Ace again.
She certainly didn't waste words.
Even though she'd stopped to hand out the suits, she was still first into hers.
‘Somebody check me.’
Jesus inspected her seals.
‘Tight.’
Ace checked his in turn and then moved on to the other team members.
‘Okay.
Jesus, you'll do.
Lars, fine.
Christine, check your left elbow seal.
Kosi, Yukio, you're both okay.
Right everyone; latch your helmets back and don't switch to internal power until you have to.
We're still spinning, but the integrity of the Lift seems to be intact for the moment.
Jesus, how far round are we?’
‘Coming up on one full revolution, Ace.
No sign of slowing, either.’
‘Right.
You've got observation duty.
Sing out every revolution.
Yukio, alert Belial Base of our situation.
Christine — how much do you know about the Bridge?
Can you estimate how many turns it could take before it snaps?’
As Yukio Nakaguchi murmured in the background, Christine said, ‘Ace, I'm sorry, I don't know.
Tech studies aren't my speciality.
I'm a psychologist.’
‘Fine.
Is there anyone here from Technical?’
Kosiana Kistasami nodded inside her suit.
A fringe of hair plaited with tiny Belial clay beads bobbed gently in the reduced gravity, obscuring her dark skin and brooding  eyes.
‘The problem is, Ace, that nobody really knows.
We've spent years examining the Bridge systems, but for all the good it's done us we might have been blowing bubbles.
We do know the Bridge is made from an extruded monofilament of trisilicate which has been woven into a tube, but as to its strength — well, theoretically it shouldn't even exist.
It should have collapsed under its own weight before it was even anchored.’
Ace frowned.
‘So much for Technical.’
She seemed to be lost in memories of her own for a moment.
‘Second revolution starting now.’
The Lift shuddered.
‘Helmets down.’
There were five clicks followed by the rising hum of internal systems powering up.
‘Um….
I think I, may have a problem here,’ Yukio said with a panicky laugh.
Jesus realized Yukio's problem straight away.
Rebelling against the bland uniformity of the base, and to the amusement of many of his colleagues, Yukio had grown a bushy, spade-shaped beard in emulation of his cricketing hero, W. G. Grace.
And he couldn't close his helmet over it.
Ace said without a pause, ‘Christine, help Yukio get his helmet latched.
Kosi, Lars, go round the Lift.
Check the integrity.
Take stress meters with you.
Don't dawdle — but I want a thorough check.’
‘Third revolution starting now,’ Jesus chipped in as the technicians moved to obey Ace's instruction.
He felt his heart thumping inside his chest.
How could Ace stay so calm?
As far as he knew, she had received no training for this type of situation.
Nonetheless, she seemed to be coping with it the best of all of them.
as cold as ice-water.
‘Any sign of slowing yet?’
‘Sorry, no.’
Jesus could hear faint noises through his spacesuit's external pickups.
The structure of the Lift was creaking and the Bridge twanged like an overstretched wire.
‘Ace!
We have trouble now!’
That was Lars, his accent thickening with the fear which now drove them all.
Ace was already moving in his direction.
Jesus blinked and recovered the target star.
No — it was….
Damn.
Where the hell was it?
Lucifer's atmospheric corona was blotting out the stars again, and voices were babbling in his ears.
‘— this is really embarrassing —’
‘— just latch your helmet, Yukio.
Everything'll be fine as long as you just —’
‘— I'm getting a stress factor you wouldn't believe, here.
The internal wall.
The external wall.
Everydamnwhere —’
‘— you check again, is good idea.
Perhaps the meters, they lose calibration —’
‘— it's the damn wall we're losing —’
‘— I want everyone in the centre of the chamber —’
‘— fiddling with my helmet!
I'm sure if I just —’
’— we're losing it, we're definitely —’
’— I think I've got it.
I think I can —’
Jesus didn't have time to blink.
The wall tore open, rips spreading around the torus as the air rushed outwards.
Yukio gave a choking scream as the pressure within his suit forced his helmet back up over the latches.
The scream didn't last long in the newly formed vacuum.
Christine gave a yell of surprise as a spray of blood erupted from Yukio's eyes, ears and mouth.
Crystallizing in the sudden deadly cold, it engulfed her helmet in a spray of pink ice.
She staggered backwards, straight into the whipsawing edge of the monofilament shield, gasping with surprise and pain when the molecule-thin blade sliced through the toughened material of her spacesuit, neatly removing the arm she had automatically put out to protect herself.
The arm drifted free, trailing ribbons of freezing blood and sinew.
The sudden vacuum pulled Jesus towards the ragged-edged hole and expelled him along with a mess of loose trash, a hailstorm of frozen blood and Christine's arm.
He was tumbling so fast that the stars became blurred circles of light around him.
A lump of frozen vapour and blood bumped momentarily against his visor before drifting off into the darkness.
He recognized the spade-shaped mass of black hair projecting from the lump and began to scream.
‘Jesus, shut up!
I know you're drifting.
You'll be okay.
I need to think.’
‘Christ, what about Yukio?
And Christine….
Her arm —’
‘Forget about Yukio.
And don't worry about Christine.
Just get yourself under control and get back here now.’
Jesus took a deep breath.
He felt like he was going to be sick.
He chinned a switch and felt the autodoc press a needle pad against his neck.
His stomach settled immediately.
‘On my way.’
‘Wicked.
See you in a minute.’
Jesus chinned in the onboard systems.
‘Spacesuit twelve: activate memory guidance.
Return to source using minimum fuel trajectory.’
There was a momentary hesitation before the spacesuit confirmed his instruction.
A gentle pressure in the small of his back told him that the thruster pack had fired.
The stars began to slow from their wild dervish dance to a stately waltz.
Then he was facing the Bridge.
‘Ace, are you reading me?’
‘Loud and clear.
Turn your gain down a bit— or stop shouting.’
Jesus adjusted a control.
‘I can see both ways along the Bridge.’
‘What's the damage?’
‘Difficult to tell.
Both ends appear to be fixed, but it's vibrating like a violin string.’
‘How bad?’
‘Ace, I'm half a kilometre away.
If I can see the movement, it's got to be bad, right?’
Ace swore.
‘And that's not all,’ he added.
‘It looks from here like there are some frayed areas on the Bridge where fragments  from the Lift sliced across it.
They could rip at any time.
The Bridge could unravel like an old pullover.’
Ace swore again.
Jesus wondered where she'd learned words like that.
‘Can you see the Lift?’ she said eventually.
His gaze travelled along the length of the Bridge.
The Lift was a small doughnut with the Bridge threading through the hole.
A cloud of debris surrounded it.
‘Looks okay.
You're tilted slightly, and spinning, but you're still attached.
How's everyone there?
Is Christine —?’
‘No.
The suit sealed off her arm.
She lost a fair bit of blood, but the autodoc is medicating her now.
If we're lucky, she'll make it.’
‘Yukio wasn't lucky, was he?’
‘Yukio was a bloody idiot.’
‘Christ, what a mess.
What do you think happened?’
‘How the hell do I know?
Now get a move on.
We still don't know if it's over yet.’
‘Right.’
It would take several minutes at least to get back to the Bridge.
With nothing to do in the meantime, Jesus tried to maintain a rational equilibrium by observing his surroundings.
The observations might come in useful later.
If there was a later.
Below the rotating Lift, the hot glare of Lucifer's atmosphere, backlit by the sun, formed a corona around the lower moon.
According to Tiw, the journey down to Moloch should have taken slightly less than two hours.
During the course of that time, the light from Lucifer's atmosphere would have grown in strength until it blotted out the stars and enveloped both Bridge and Lift in a flaming glare.
Then they would have entered the conical shadow cast by the moon, and the stars would have become visible again for a brief time before the Lift sank beneath the surface itself and came to a standstill, its massive kinetic energy somehow conducted away from the lower terminus and stored in a way that  Alex Bannen would have killed to learn.
A beep somewhere behind his head told Jesus that he was nearing the Bridge.
Twenty-five metres away, he disengaged the autoreturn sequence and navigated himself to a point level with the outside rim of the rotating Lift.
The jagged hole through which he'd been propelled some minutes before now rushed past his face once every minute or so.
The ragged edges of the hole glinted sharply, and Jesus knew that any failed attempt to enter the Lift would be likely to result in his being sliced to ribbons within a matter of seconds.
He had neither the fuel nor the skill to match the rotational speed of the vehicle.
Yet what other choices did he have?
He called Ace and explained the situation.
‘I'm not a spaceman, Ace.
Got any ideas?’
He could see a figure within the Lift detach itself from the group and glance quickly in his direction.
‘Yeah.
The Lift's wide, so the angular velocity is higher on the outside.
Jet up over the top and attach your safety line to the Bridge, then abseil across the top of the Lift when you've matched spin.
When you get to the hole, we'll grab you and haul you in.’
‘Won't work, Ace.
The Bridge is smooth, nothing to attach to.
And it's too wide to loop the line around; I won't have enough slack left to lower myself to the hole.’
Jesus sucked in a deep breath.
‘There's only one thing for it.
I'm just going to have to try a perpendicular approach and hope I can time my arrival to a point when the hole is passing in front of me.’
A new voice said, ‘You could try an approach tangential to the curve of the Lift.
That way it might be easier to match relative velocities for a few seconds.
Thing is, if you miss….’
‘I risk drifting off into space.
Thanks Kosi.
I'll stick with the perpendicular approach.’
Ace spoke again.
‘All right.
Give us a moment to clear a space for you and then pick your own time.
We'll keep our fingers crossed.’
‘Thanks.’
‘See you in a minute.’
I hope so.
Jesus quickly gave the suit what he hoped were precise instructions, waiting until he was sure of the hole's period of rotation before whispering, ‘Activate command sequence….
Now.’
There was a familiar pressure on his back.
The Lift began to speed towards him until he was only twenty metres away.
Fifteen.
The hole vanished around the arc of the vehicle.
Ten metres.
Five.
The wall was rushing by in front of him now, glassy and smooth, offering no grip should he miss his intended target.
Four metres.
The hole was nowhere in — wait a minute!
There it was!
Jesus grimaced.
The hole was moving too slowly.
He wasn't going to make it.
Three metres.
Two metres.
‘Sorry Ace.
I don't think I'm going to…’
There was a sudden bang as he crashed against the Lift, and a scraping sensation as he began to roll along the surface.
Billowing sheets of material ballooned out to meet him: the edges of the hole, deceptively soft looking but with lethal edges.
The Lift spun beneath him like a sickening carousel ride.
The red glare from Lucifer seemed to engulf him, and the combined effects of yaw and pitch on his inner ear overcame the antinausea medication.
When he had finished vomiting, Jesus realized there was a firm pressure on his arms and legs.
Ace, Kosi and Lars were holding him down.
‘I reckon we can let him go now.
How do you feel?’
Ace asked.
‘Embarrassed.
And sticky.’
Lars and Kosi laughed.
Ace did not.
Jesus sat up.
The interior of the Lift, even in this  wrecked condition, had never looked so good.
‘Thought was a goner.
How'd I get in here?’
Lars pointed down at Jesus's legs.
He followed the mathematician's gesture and saw that his legs were completely tangled in a flapping web of cloth.
‘Ace, she breaks open one of the store's canisters.
It is full of bedsheets, yes?
She makes net, reels you in like big fish.’
He glanced sideways at Ace.
‘That is right?
You say fish, yes?’
Jesus shook his head in amazement.
‘But what about he monofilament I saw?
Surely it would have torn the sheets to pieces, synthetic or otherwise?’
‘Naw.
Kosi here showed us how to grab the edges of the hole with equipment clamps and fold them so the material wasn't dangerous.
What you saw wasn't the monofilament, it was the sheets.’
Jesus smiled gratefully.
‘You managed to organize all this in the few minutes I was out there?
I'm impressed.’
‘Minutes?’
Ace laughed outright.
‘You were out there over an hour, mate.
We thought you'd got bored with our company.’
Jesus shook his head tiredly.
As the others began to discuss survival options, Jesus found his mind drifting.
Adrenalin withdrawal made him introspective and sleepy.
He turned over and tried to relax, but found himself looking downward through the metal grille which the Eden team had welded across the curved Lift surfaces as a floor, wondering what kind of anatomy would have been suited to use the original surface.
It was crazy.
There were no constants.
Or rather, he only constant was…well,change .
Jesus shook his head.
The aliens, whoever they'd been, were dead and gone, a million years or more.
They were history, and he doubted he would ever truly know them.
The thought saddened him.
They must have been such wonderful beings, and now even the legacy of their environment was being rewritten by the humans, changed with every curved floor covered by a flat grille, every piece of art ripped from the walls and studied out of context, every subtle  nuance of space filled with metal and plastic, neural net cabinets, stores, machinery, even people.
Jesus felt a gentle sense of irony steal over him.
They'd come here to learn, but it seemed all they would ever learn was how to alter that which they had no possibility of understanding into something so familiar there was no point in their understanding it.
A familiar voice came over the suit's comm-system.
‘Feel cold.
Arm hurts.’
Ace said, ‘I know, Christine.’
She switched channels and continued, ‘Lars, could you administer another tranquillizer for me?’
‘No problem.’
The mathematician propelled himself towards the prone figure some yards away.
Ace turned her attention to Jesus.
‘I've tried to communicate with Belial Base.
I don't know whether they're receiving or not, but I'm getting nothing back.
We're on our own.
Both Kosi and Lars figure that we're a lot closer to Moloch than to Belial, but we're going to have to get there under our own steam.
You're the environment specialist.
I need an idea from you.
One that'll save our lives.
You up for it, or what?’
Jesus began to untangle his legs.
His mind was whirling.
Ace was right.
They had to do something, but what?
If they stayed where they were they were dead for certain.
Before he could reply, Lars called for attention and he followed Ace and Kosi across to Christine's recumbent body.
Lars was kneeling beside her, cradling the psychologist's truncated left arm in his suit gauntlets.
He lifted up his hand.
Tiny ruby globules were frozen to it.
Blood.
‘Her suit integrity is breached, Ace.
A slow leak, but the pressure, it drops.
She could lose the rest of her arm.’
‘I told her to check that seal.’
Ace sounded furious.
‘You also told her to help Yukio, if I recall.’
Ace nodded guiltily.
‘Kosi, you're right.
It's my fault.
I should have checked her suit again.
Damn!’
She thought for a moment.
‘See if you can patch it, Lars.’
Ace turned to Jesus.
‘Got anything for me yet?’
‘I've got one idea, but you're not going to like it.’
Inside her helmet, Ace's head tilted curiously.
‘We go down the inside of the Bridge,’ he continued.
‘You're right, I don't like it.
How do we get in?’
‘The Bridge is woven from a monofilament thread.
All we have to do is force the weave apart.’
‘And how do we get out when we reach Moloch?’
Jesus shrugged.
‘I've no idea.’
Ace considered.
‘It's got to be better than trying to abseil down the outside.
Okay.
We'll go for it.
Let's see if we can widen the hole enough to get Christine through.’
It took thirty minutes for them to locate a frayed section of the Bridge; force its weave apart with clamps and keep the gap open with plastic crates.
The Lift continued to oscillate as it rotated, swaying with the movement of the Bridge.
Jesus stared around the chamber.
Building up to the big one, he thought.
He was developing a peculiar feeling in the pit of his stomach; a feeling beyond sickness, beyond shock.
Ace would have known the feeling.
It was called determination.
When the hole was big enough, Jesus stepped through and switched on his spacesuit lights.
The interior space was about three metres across, a pastel yellow in colour, tubular and bulked out with strange-looking machinery which was attached to the crosshatched ‘walls’.
Jesus shone his light ‘down’ the shaft, thankful, for once, for the lack of gravity.
His light glinted on a surface that swayed and twisted sickeningly into the distance.
It was like looking down the eye of a hurricane.
‘How's it look?’
‘Like something out of The Wizard of Oz .’
‘What?’
‘I said —’
There was a particularly violent jolt.
More pieces of the machinery began to break away to join the expanding cloud of trash already in evidence inside the Bridge.
A chunk of blood drifted in front of his visor.
He batted it  away impatiently, not even pausing to consider how quickly he'd adjusted to Yukio's death.
‘I said it's looking better every minute.’
‘I hope you're right.’
Lars and Kosi carefully manoeuvred Christine through the gap.
Ace followed them in.
‘Don't suppose you ever heard a story called Jack and the Beanstalk ?’
‘This would be soyabeans, yes?’
Ace sighed.
‘Forget it.’
In complete silence, the interior of the Bridge began to rock again.
He gripped the side of a curved triangular plate which was fitted to the wall, and began to manoeuvre himself further into the shaft.
One corner came loose in his hands.
‘Don't rush me.
I think I can see electrical equipment in here, bigger than anything I've ever seen before.
We're going to have to be careful.’
‘We haven't got time to be careful.’
Ace squeezed past Kosi and Lars.
‘Give Christine to me and follow me down.’
Ace took the psychologist from her two bearers and clamped her suit arms to the unconscious woman's shoulders.
Then she took a quick sighting down the shaft and launched herself into space.
Her lights dwindled rapidly in the distance.
‘Ace, be careful!’ he said.
Was there a measure of excitement in her reply?
‘Careful or dead, at least it's my choice!’
Kosi and Lars exchanged brief looks and then launched themselves after the girl.
Jesus shrugged.
It was one way of getting down, he supposed.
He was about to push off when the Bridge rocked again; a much stronger oscillation this time.
He thrust his helmet back through the gap one last time.
The Lift was finally coming apart in curlicues of alien material and clouds of human-made debris.
There would be a brief but spectacular meteor shower in Lucifer's upper atmosphere tonight, he thought, wondering if those on  Belial would watch and think of them, as he had thought of Paula Engado when she'd become a shooting star.
As the walls of the Bridge rippled, he pulled himself back inside.
‘Instruction,’ he said to the suitbrain, ‘forward thrust full.’
The head-up display died.
‘Instruction —’ he said again, but it was too late.
The walls closed on him like a vice.
Jesus screamed with pain and surprise.
His limbs bent and snapped, his helmet cracked open and there was a stinging pain in his eyes.
He tried to close them but the eyelids were frozen in place, unable to move.
They were still open when he died.
Alex Bannen was crying.
Piper had never seen him look so vulnerable.
His cheeks glistened with tears and his hand hovered over the head of the thing he had called his son.
Behind him the Mushroom Farm was ablaze.
Great arcs of energy flashed from cap to cap whilst thunderclaps pumped air through the forest of glittering stems.
A haze of water vapour hung overhead and dripped from the underside of the mushrooms, making the ground slippery and treacherous to walk on.
Piper had to fight to maintain her balance as the chamber shook.
The Doctor and Bernice were stumbling between the mushrooms of twisted metal, with the Doctor talking nineteen to the dozen and gesturing wildly with his still furled umbrella.
Piper managed to catch Bernice's eye, but the archaeologist only shrugged helplessly.
Piper turned to where Bannen was clutching the slender trunk of a tall mushroom to keep his balance.
The wind whipped droplets of condensation into his face, where they mingled with his tears.
Bloody idiot, she thought savagely.
What the hell did he think he was doing?
‘Come on, Alex.
Stop messing with things you don't understand.
Leave that to the Doctor before you screw things up even….’
Her voice trailed off as she noticed the boy watching her with grey, expressionless eyes.
Bannen's son?
Perhaps, but it hadn't taken her long to work out what the boy really was.
‘It wasn't meant to be like this.’
Bannen's face was slack.
‘Yeah, well, that's as may be,’ she said, unsure how to treat this new, defenceless Bannen.
‘Come on, let's go.’
There was a slight cough beside them.
Piper turned, and found the Doctor standing at her shoulder.
She hadn't heard him approach.
From the expression on Bannen's face, neither had he.
The Doctor began to speak, in a voice so quiet Piper wondered how she could hear his words above the storm.
‘A great many years from now, in another universe, a man in a mirror told me to do nothing.
‘It is done,’ he said.’
Piper suddenly had the crazy idea that all the Doctor's masks had been stripped away, leaving him with no more armour than the truth.
She shivered.
‘It's very hard for me to do nothing,’ he added softly.
‘I — rebel against it.
But there are times when nothing is simply the best thing to do.’
‘What does he mean, Dad?’
Bannen didn't seem to hear the voice of his ‘son’.
The Doctor glanced at the simularity.
He crouched down so that his head was level with the boy's face, and smiled reassuringly.
He seemed to have no trouble in accepting the presence of the child.
‘My friend Bernice and I have been trying to work out how to stabilize the moons,’ he said.
‘This room is obviously the key element in an important system of controls.
The controls were disturbed, and now we have to put them right.’
‘Or your other friends will die.’
The Doctor nodded solemnly.
The boy turned to his ‘father’.
‘Dad.
Dad!’
Bannen did not respond.
Piper scowled.
‘It's useless.
If Christine had used her eyes and spotted Bannen's instability she could've prevented all this.
He's good for nothing but trouble now.’
She looked at the Doctor, but he appeared not to be listening.
‘Perhaps nothing is all we need from him, or from anyone,’ he said at last, and smiled triumphantly.
‘Do what?’
Piper said.
‘Feedback!
The ability of a system to monitor its output and correct for mistakes.
That's what I'm waiting for.’
‘You think,’ said a hesitant voice, ‘that everything might be all right?’
The Doctor turned to where Alex Bannen was crouching and looking over at them.
‘No,’ he said sternly.
‘Entropy demands that everything will not be all right, but sometimes we can rage against the dying of the light.’
A sudden, eerie flash illuminated the cavern.
The pillar that marked where the Pit passed through the Farm had begun to glow.
Bands of yellow light rose and fell across its surface; diaphanous spokes rotating about rose-hued hubs intermeshed with each other, beautiful reflections of a deeper order within.
A deep chime filled the chamber with rolling echoes.
‘It is done,’ the Doctor whispered.
Piper drew in a relieved breath as the wind fell.
The deep rumbling beneath their feet abruptly stopped, and the electrical discharges faded away.
The blanket of fog above their heads began to disperse, sparkling the mushroom-shaped domes with soft diamonds of moisture.
In the upper part of the chamber, a rainbow glimmered.
From Bishop's ship, moored close to the Bridge, the scale of the disaster was apparent.
The Adjudicator had discarded his heavy black robes and ridiculous collar, and was slumped in his padded control seat wearing just boxer shorts, socks and electrostatic sock-suspenders.
His feet were resting comfortably on the ship's control panel.
As he watched the events occurring between the two moons, he blew on a plastic beaker of fragrant Arcturan tea.
Ripples were travelling up and down the Bridge, but the anchors remained firm.
The amplitude of the vibration even seemed to be reducing slightly, although the movement was still sickeningly massive.
Staring for too long at the simularity made him feel dizzy.
He tried a sip of tea and winced as the hot liquid scalded his tongue.
Somewhere up there the Lift was disintegrating.
Bishop was glad it was too small to see: it made suppressing the imagined screams of the people inside that much easier.
The ship's neural net interrupted his second sip of tea.
‘You have a call, Trau Bishop.’
Muttering darkly beneath his breath, Bishop set down the beaker and dived for his robes.
He wondered who was calling — Miles, perhaps, or that little clown the Doctor.
They had already tried to get him to mount a rescue mission using his ship.
He had explained that the amount of paperwork involved made it impracticable, but he was sure they hadn't believed him.
When the picture of the Bridge disintegrated to reveal the stern visage of Bronwen ap Bryn, Adjudicator in Extremis, he was shocked.
The last he had heard she had returned to Ponten VI — the planet which had been ceded to the Guild of Adjudicators in perpetuity by a wary but appreciative Earth Central — but that was too far away for anything but the so-called pigeon post; recorded messages dumped into a hyperdrone and aimed at the recipient's projected location.
If Bryn was calling ‘live’, she had to be nearby.
Even so, the tachyon signal was so faint that the neural net was having problems extrapolating a recognizable picture.
The face of the Adjudicator in Extremis seemed to be composed of flat green slabs.
Fuzzy highlights delineated her features and her mouth lagged behind her words.
Superimposed upon her face, flickering digits recorded the cost of the call.
Typically, that part of the transmission seemed unaffected by the disruption.
Bryn's mouth worked silently.
More than a second out of synch, a blast of static shot through the protesting audio system.
Bishop winced.
‘Your pardon, Extremis.
I was not expecting a personal visit.’
‘I'll not…sagree w…at.
I was in…vicinity on…cial business and….
Your repor…o far is…nconclusive.’
‘There have been some — some additional problems.’
A flexing of the green planes making up Bryn's face could have been interpreted as a smile.
Or a frown.
With her, the two were practically interchangeable.
‘Problems are your job, Adjudicator.’
Funny how the software let that one through unaffected.
‘Flattered as I am by your confidence, Extremis, I'm afraid the situation is getting complicated.’
The green slab representing Bryn's left eyebrow slipped upwards questioningly.
Or perhaps it was a system glitch.
Bishop hesitated before going on.
‘There has been another death — an apparent suicide — and indications of sabotage on a grand scale.
Additionally, there are discrepancies in the Base personnel records, involving three extra people.’
‘…tra peop ….’
Bishop took a deep breath.
‘I feel that the proceedings here may escalate seriously if a careful check is not kept on the situation.
For this reason, I would like to request the presence of another Adjudicator.’
Bryn's mouth worked silently for a few seconds.
‘…te out of…e questio…m afraid.’
‘But why?’
‘You a…ware of…e galact…ituation?’
‘The planetary attacks?
I thought they were isolated incidents.’
Perhaps through some fluke in the software, perhaps because of some local fluctuation in signal strength, the face of the Adjudicator in Extremis suddenly ballooned out to its full, impressive girth.
Her voice regained its usual baritone boom.
‘We have lost fifteen colony worlds in three weeks, Adjudicator.
Azure, Qartopholos, Sifranos — ecologies devastated, entire populations wiped out — and we have absolutely no idea who's responsible!
The Interstellar Taskforce is on continual stand-by alert.
I am on a,’ her pause was not due to a transmission fault, ‘fact-finding tour of the outlying regions, and took the opportunity to contact you directly.
All currently  unassigned Adjudicators are working full-time following up leads, but frankly, the Guild does not look even remotely good.
Besides,’ her pudgy eyes suddenly narrowed and she ran a hand across her tattooed scalp, ‘there are moves afoot which I am not at liberty to discuss.
You may be receiving help soon from an unexpected source.’
‘But Extremis, if you would only see the logic —’
‘Adjudicator Bishop, I need hardly remind you that so far your case list borders upon the ludicrous: one accident, possibly murder; one suicide, possibly murder; one disaster, possibly mass murder.
No evidence and a baseful of suspects.
This is how careers end, Adjudicator: not with a bang, but with a whimper.’
‘But —’
Bryn's face bulged and seethed in unlikely places as the signal began to corrupt again.
Her eyes flickered sideways to read the digital cost display’…. m afraid your budget…an no longer.
…ustain the price of…is transmission,’ the Extremis said.
‘…uggest you…eep a tight watch on furth…penditure.’
The picture flickered back into sync one more time before fading.
‘I also recommend you wear your robes the right way round, Adjudicator; it's so much better for public relations.’
The transmission faded and he frowned, casting his mind back over the conversation.
How did she know that people had died on the Bridge? he wondered.
All I did was mention sabotage.
as if he didn't have enough to worry about.
He sighed in frustration and reached for his tea.
It was cold.
It was cold in the crew room on Moloch Base.
Jesus Delporto's dying scream had followed Ace all the way to the lower moon, down the violently oscillating length of the Bridge, past bizarre machinery which seethed with naked power, and through the gap she had torched in the base of the column; it followed her as eager hands pulled her from the writhing Bridge, stripped away her suit and placed her with the others in the medical  unit; followed her into sleep, forced a path into her dreams, drove her screaming and unrested into wakefulness.
One more failure on her part; one more life lost; one more friend pulled away by the black tide.
She tried to use Spacefleet hypno-techniques to block the remorse, but either they weren't that good or she hadn't learned them well enough.
Ace glared at her face in the mirror.
She poked a finger into the luggage beneath her eyes, stretching the skin, trying to make it look young again.
All her life she'd striven to be older, more mature, to experience more of what the universe had to offer.
Now, here she was, with her life's dream in the palm of her hand, trying to turn back the clock.
She shook her head as a short, unexpectedly bitter laugh bubbled up from her chest.
She stifled the sound as the crew room door opened and Kosi walked in.
Her hand hesitated by Ace's shoulder.
Ace was thankful the touch was not completed.
She felt vulnerable enough already.
‘Come back to the operations room, Ace.
Get your mind off it, all right?’
‘Yeah, right.’
Ace followed Kosi from the room.
‘Ta.’
The Ops Room on the lower moon was a twin to Belial's; a spacious, split-level hemisphere with a profusion of glimmering instrumentation, manned by serious-looking technicians, surrounding the towering bulk of a MultiCray Neural Net.
Floor to ceiling simularity windows displayed the incredible landscape beyond the base, giving Ace the impression that the Operations Room was actually outdoors.
Only the absence of wind marred the illusion.
She exchanged a few words with the shift supervisor, a dour Scot named Rachel McBride, and was told a message had been sent to Belial confirming their arrival and condition.
Ace thanked the woman and then moved restlessly across to the windows, drawn by the view.
Whereas Belial Base had been built on the outer surface of a solid moon, Moloch Base was inside a hollow one; a miracle of planetary engineering which, after five years, still had Bannen and his team groping in the dark for answers to questions they didn't even know how to formulate.
The ground of this bizarre world rose gradually in all directions, curving overhead until it was lost above the clouds.
Vegetation ran riot.
Duty teams maintained a neat lawn surrounding the base but, beyond the perimeter, a lush pink jungle rose in fantastic profusion towards the flat glare of a pale, artificial ‘sun’ whose energy was provided by the same mysterious means as powered the Bridge and the Lift.
Translucent shapes undulated through the jungle, glimmering in the sunlight: the only life the Lucifer System had so far offered up for study.
Ace felt her pulse racing at the sight.
She grinned: all the shit in the world could not blow away the simple wonder of this pastoral scene.
‘Horrible, isn't it?’
Kosi had moved up beside her after checking in with the duty manager.
‘All that space.’
Ace turned in surprise.
‘You're not agoraphobic are you?’
‘So what if I am?’
Kosi replied a little defensively.
‘All that open ground.
No factories.
No living towers.
And those horrible white things floating up there, just waiting to fall down and smother us.
Ugh!’
Kosi shivered, seemingly unable to understand why Ace giggled softly.
‘I can't understand you people,’ Ace confided.
‘All this space-cadet, sense-of-wonder stuff, and you're happier with four blank walls around you.’
‘You forget,’ said a voice behind her.
‘We have been here for five years.
Our sense of wonder has passed.
Our sense of boredom has set in — with a vengeance.’
Lars Ulrich smiled as Ace turned, and continued, ‘Christine will be fine.
Minus an arm, but fine.
There is no infection.
Space, it may be cold, but it is clean, at least.’
It's not space you've got to worry about, Ace thought, it's the people in it.
She said nothing, but instead left the two young people by the window and moved back to the duty manager's desk.
‘I just wanted to say thanks for pulling us out of there.’
‘No problem.’
Rachel McBride smiled.
‘Alex Bannen would've had a screaming fit if we'd left you to mess up his precious Bridge; God alone knows what Tiw would've done.’
‘Given you a lecture on the sound of one hand clapping, I expect.’
‘Aye — clapping against the side of my head, I've no doubt!’
Both women laughed.
McBride had a pretty laugh, Ace noticed.
A laugh it felt good to join in with.
‘Have they told you what goes on down here, then?’
Ace shook her head.
‘Nope.’
McBride shrugged.
‘There's the brass for you.’
She called to a white-haired technician, ‘Chas, do us a favour will you?
Keep an eye on this lot and shout if anything weird pops up.’
She turned back to Ace.
‘Come on then.
I'll give you the tour.’
‘Oh,’ she said, as she led the way from the room, ‘I've been meaning to ask you.
What happened to Sam Russell?
He was supposed to be down here on the second part of a double shift.
When he didn't turn up, I assumed he'd overslept, but when he didn't radio through to apologize….’
Kosi and Lars turned from the window to watch Ace and McBride leave the Operations Room.
‘What do you reckon, then?
Ace?
She's fine, I reckon.’
‘That's not what I meant.’
‘You ask odd question.
Ace, she saves Christine's life.
Would have saved Yukio and Jesus too if not for bad luck.’
‘Yeah, I know.
But she makes me uneasy.
She always looks….
I dunno, ready for a fight.’
Lars tapped his fingers reflexively against his wax tablet, a sure sign he was thinking carefully about what Kosi had said.
‘I think you make big refinery out of small process.
Ace, she's fine.
Fine person.’
‘Then how come when we pulled her from her suit I  found a folder full of Alex Bannen's notes stashed away inside the sleeve?’
The Atmospheric Vehicle Research Laboratory was a large, irregular enclosure filled with machinery of human design.
In the centre of the room a large, asymmetric pod was suspended over an engineering pit.
The pod was four metres in height, with a single hatch and an exoskeleton which supported various instrument modules and waldo limbs.
Ace touched the gleaming metal sides of the starpod.
White alloy, highly polished, threw back the glare of multiple floodlights into her narrowed eyes.
‘So this was what Paula was working on.
An excursion module.’
McBride nodded.
‘The girl was positive she could contact the Angels if only she could get deep enough into Lucifer's atmosphere.
The ordinary starsuits are pretty handy bits of gear, especially compared with the emergency spacesuits you used in the Lift, but the pod was designed to go deeper still.
Thousands of kilometres, in fact.
God only knows why she didn't wait until it was ready, rather than rely on a starsuit.’
Ace ran a finger lightly across the saddle for the instrument packs.
‘Thousands?
Just how deep is the atmosphere, anyway?’
McBride shrugged.
She walked across the semicircular pod bay towards the monitor station, sealed behind a transparent partition.
‘Actually, it's difficult to say.
Deep down the heat and pressure are so great that even hydrogen is a metallic liquid.’
Ace followed McBride into the monitor station.
‘So it's hard to tell where the atmosphere ends and the planet itself begins.’
McBride nodded.
‘Hence the size of the instrument array.
There's an ocean of liquid zelanite alloy down there, you know, floating in the sky: big as a normal planet.’
McBride shook her head.
‘The damn thing's a bag of mysteries and no mistake.’
Ace skipped her fingers lightly across the tops of the consoles.
She could see from the screen displays how the systems were designed to function.
‘Nice system.
Did Paula design it herself?’
‘She specified the high-level design.
Yukio wrote the software.’
‘And now he's dead.’
Ace frowned.
‘Just like Paula.’
‘You have a theory?’
‘Naw, not really.
It's just — well, it's just that if whatever killed Paula was a software virus rather than an accident, then someone would have had to infect the suitbrain.
That would implicate one of the system engineers — someone like Yukio.
The incident on the Bridge might have been a clumsy attempt by a third party to bump off the middle man.’
‘Unless the same virus which attacked Paula's starsuit attacked Belial's neural net as well.’
‘You're forgetting — the Bridge functions are not controlled by human technology.
The original, alien systems whatever that might be, is still running them.’
McBride huffed softly in acquiescence.
‘Ever thought about becoming an Adjudicator?’
Ace grinned.
‘I'd look like the flying nun.’
She studied the rest of the monitor station.
The back wall was lined with storage cabinets.
‘What's in there?’ she asked.
‘Paula's research files.
Simularities, mainly.
Oh, and her diary as well.
Why, do you want to take a look?’
‘Do I ever.’
Ace opened the first cabinet, scanned the hundred or so labels quickly, selected the most recent crystal and fed it into a reader.
She blinked her contact lenses into place and began to watch the file.
‘I think you might want to check this out,’ Chas said.
Kosi left her plastic beaker of tea steaming gently on the nearest flat surface while she and Lars headed for the centre of the room.
The elderly Chas Varley was peering in some confusion at an arc of screens which pulsed with read-outs and rippling waveforms.
‘What's up?’ she asked.
‘You tell me, lass.’
Chas fine-tuned a few controls.
‘I've never seen anything remotely like it.’
‘Is software virus, maybe?’
Lars asked.
‘Yeah,’ Kosi said, ‘there seems to be a lot of it going around.’
Chas shook his head.
‘No, look.
It's a steady pattern.
Not one of Lucifer's though.’
Kosi thought for a moment.
‘Could it be the Angels, trying to talk to us at last?’
Before Chas could reply, Ace burst in from the main access corridor.
McBride followed more slowly, wearing a worried frown.
‘Oh, Rachel, I was just about to call you,’ Chas said.
‘The fifty-metre array is picking up an odd waveform.
I've run a library comparison but none of the eigenvalues match with anything we've seen before.
Do you recognize it?’
Before Rachel could reply, Ace walked quickly past them to the communications terminal.
‘I have to talk to the Doctor,’ she snapped angrily.
On Belial Base, Bernice and Cheryl walked back into the Operations Room, and into the middle of a furious argument.
At Miles's request, the two women had taken Alex Bannen and his son back to his quarters.
He had curled up on to his bed at the first opportunity and fallen fast asleep.
His son had just stood there, staring at them, until they left.
They had returned to the Operations Room, where Bernice was surprised to hear Ace's voice — as far as anyone knew she was recovering with the rest of her party on Moloch — and even more surprised to hear it raised in anger and directed at — of all people — the Doctor.
‘You didn't have to lie to me, Professor.’
‘Ace, I don't understand —’
‘Oh shut up!
You make me sick.
You understand everything.
And you use everyone, for whatever little scheme  takes your fancy.
Remember Jan, do you, back on Heaven?
Remember what you did to him?’
‘But that was different —’
‘What about this, then, eh?’
Ace tried to thrust a ghostly neural net crystal underneath the Doctor's nose and only succeeded in pushing it out of the image field.
‘Don't try to deny it.
I don't know why you didn't erase it after her death.
Never had a chance, I suppose.
But you didn't expect me to go rummaging around in Paula's diary, did you?’
‘Ace, if you'd only let me explain!
I thought we were friends —’
‘Some friends you grow out of,Doctor .’
A sudden bang and a gabble of panicky voices distracted Ace's attention.
She looked sideways.
There were a few more garbled words, part of an argument, then a loud noise and a scream.
Something sprayed across Ace's face.
‘What the hell —’ she said, disbelievingly.
She tried to blink the red mist from her eyes, failed, and toppled backwards out of the image field.
Static.
Bernice gaped.
The Operations Room was engulfed by sudden chaos.
Miles was mumbling to himself.
Technicians were frantically operating systems.
Piper was yelling, ‘I couldn't give a toss for the time-lag on the frequency search-and-lock processor, just re-establish the bloody link!
Cheryl, help him will you.
Or take over, I don't care which.’
She turned to the shivering Administrator.
‘Miles, your daughter's spirit is not walking the base, and none of us are going with her to the afterlife.
Now for God's sake pull yourself together.
We need you here.’
Miles blinked.
‘Of course.
Sorry.’
‘I should think so too.’
Only the Doctor had not moved, through all this confusion.
Cheryl said, ‘I have a transmission.’
‘From Moloch?’
‘No.
From Adjudicator Bishop's spaceship.’
‘Get rid of him.’
‘Sorry; he's on priority override.’
Piper threw up her hands.
‘Put him on then.’
A representation of the Adjudicator blinked into life on one side of the room.
‘I've been monitoring the transmission from Moloch.’
‘Ace is in trouble,’ the Doctor said.
‘I have to go down there.’
‘We'll go together, Doctor.
I think the case may be breaking at last.’
‘I'm coming too,’ a voice piped beside Bernice.
It was Cheryl.
‘Sam's down there.’
The Adjudicator's image hesitated momentarily, then nodded.
‘Very well.
Trau Engado, I will be requiring your presence as well.
We leave immediately.’
Bernice sealed her starsuit helmet and stepped from the Adjudicator's spaceship on to Moloch's Bridge terminal.
She found herself standing on top of a translucent bubble set in Moloch's ice-bound landscape, close to one side of a bowl-shaped depression some fifty metres across.
High above them, the base of the Bridge passed through a cone of semi-transparent cables, which were anchored all around the edge of the depression, before continuing downwards to merge smoothly with the bubble itself.
Following the thread of light upwards into the darkness, Bernice found that the curves and kinks which had been so obvious from the surface of Belial had straightened out a little more.
The system was definitely coming back under proper control.
She began walking towards the depression, as four suited figures followed her from the ship, still arguing about the paperwork.
—‘Look at the Bridge,’ she said over the commlink.
‘It's self-repairing all right.’
‘It had to be,’ the Doctor replied.
‘Such a complex system, left to run for millennia, without the simplest  form of housekeeping?
No.
The only answer was an active control system.’
‘But where does the energy come from?’
Miles obviously had a command override.
He had been listening in.
‘Isn't it obvious?’ the Doctor said, not at all discomfited.
‘If it were obvious, we wouldn't have been here for five years trying to find it, and Paula would still be….
Would still be….’
‘Look around you.’
‘At what?’
Bernice asked.
‘At nothing.
At everything.’
Shrugging, Bernice followed the Doctor's instructions.
At first the glare from Lucifer — extending beyond Moloch's ice-locked horizon, and reflecting from Belial high above — turned the depths of space into a flat black backdrop that could just as well have been suspended a few feet in front of her eyes.
She sighed, squinted, and still saw nothing.
After a few moments, she realized that if she half closed the filters across the starsuit helmet she could cut out at least some of the light.
Within a few seconds, her eyes had compensated, and she could see what the Doctor meant.
Space was alive with ghostly curtains of light.
Pale violet in colour, they waved gently in some invisible wind.
Stars glinted through their folds.
Wherever she looked, there was faint colour and slow movement.
‘It's beautiful,’ Miles whispered.
‘Commonplace,’ Bernice said.
‘Charged particles interacting with the magnetic field of Lucifer.
You find aurorae around most planets.’
‘Quite right,’ the Doctor's voice crackled in her helmet.
Bernice could see him raise a bulky suited arm and gesture grandly at the surroundings.
‘But the Lucifer system is unusual in many respects.
The parent star is a red giant nearing the end of its life, and as it runs the gamut of fusion reactions, exhausting one element after another, the spectrum of particles it emits becomes exotic.
As the particles catch Lucifer's magnetic field, it is extended into  space like a fishing net caught by the tide.
And drifting through that net are two little fishes named Belial and Moloch, feeding off the rich plankton of energy.’
There was a long moment of silence.
‘Do you know what you're saying?’
Miles said, awestruck.
‘Occasionally,’ the Doctor replied.
Cheryl said slowly, ‘Are you trying to tell us that something, either here or on Belial, is extracting the energy from the variations in magnetic potential that the moons are passing through?’
‘Quite so.’
Bernice could hear the smugness in the Doctor's voice.
‘It's the Bridge.
It's got to be.’
Miles's voice was hushed, and Bernice saw his helmet tilt as he craned his neck upwards to look at the Bridge.
‘But the power….
Incredible!
It's hardly feasible that they….
And the storage problems!’
From the way his voice grew alternately loud and quiet, Bernice could tell that he was shaking his head.
‘Why didn't we realize?’
‘Like the purloined letter,’ said the Doctor smugly, ‘it was too obvious to see.’
Bernice followed his gaze upwards as Cheryl began to speak.
‘Yes,’ she said softly.
‘Yes, it would make sense.
The Lift moves up and down the Bridge, reacting to the stimulus of local magnetic field strength, riding the isogonal contours and providing information to the feedback mechanisms which direct its movement.
That explains the apparent randomness of its motion.
We were wrong.
It's not a transport system at all; it's a whomping great accumulator!’
Miles's voice was bitter with self-reproach.
‘All the power we could ever have wanted, and it's been right under my nose for years.’
‘You couldn't use it on Earth, of course,’ the Doctor said.
‘There's a huge difference between the magnetic fields, for a start, and the radiation from Lucifer's sun is quite, quite different.’
‘But it would have made all the difference to Project  Eden,’ Cheryl muttered.
‘Like your party trick with the neutrino collectors and the hymetusite: we couldn't have scaled it up enough to solve Earth's energy shortfall, but it could have supported us here whilst we searched for the long-term solution — the high-mass elements in Lucifer's core.’
Bernice had reached the apex of the terminal dome by now.
She moved through the conical root-system of cables which formed the Bridge's anchor, down towards the centre of the depression, and waited for the others to catch up.
As she waited, she began to study the anchor cables around her.
She looked upwards, trying to visualize how the Lift would be able to move past the point where they connected to the Bridge.
Before she got very far with her thoughts, she realized the cables were moving, rising past her….
No!
They weren't moving, she realized in sudden alarm, it was her: she was sinking.
She tried to take a step, but the suit wouldn't respond to her commands.
She looked down at her feet, and felt her blood run cold.
They weren't there.
She had sunk up to her ankles in the translucent bubble.
Even as she watched, the gooey material oozed up to her knees.
She tried to struggle, but she was held fast.
Thick fingers of the viscous substance were reaching up from the surface towards her starsuit's hips.
‘All aboard that's getting aboard,’ the Doctor said with relish.
‘This is supposed to happen?’
‘This, unless I'm very much mistaken, is the airlock.’
‘Well, that's original, to say the least.’
As the terminal surface moved past her helmet, she thought she could see a fine structure to it, a lattice of irregular cells which pulsed and churned while she watched.
Then darkness enfolded her, and she found herself standing on a solid surface in a shadowed room, staring upwards at the underside of the dimple with a strange sense of having been reborn.
Over to one side, the stalk of the Bridge penetrated  the soft surface and, in a network of roots and capillaries, grew into the floor.
There was a ragged hole in the side nearest her; she assumed this was where Ace and her companions had escaped from inside the hollow shaft.
Watching in fascination, she saw that the material was gradually reforming.
The surface above her bulged out into a number of large teardrop shapes which hung above her for a moment, trembling slightly, before depositing the Doctor, Miles, Cheryl and Bishop beside her.
She assumed that the Lift, under normal conditions, would have arrived in the terminal the same way.
The Doctor began to clamber out of his suit, peering around at his immediate surroundings.
‘This is all quite fascinating,’ he said, drawing his umbrella from his starsuit and using it to point at the terminal entrance.
‘Moloch's Pit should be this way.’
He set off at a brisk walk.
Bernice ran to catch up with him.
‘How could you know where the Pit was if you've never been here before?’ she asked curiously.
The Doctor didn't answer.
Bringing up the rear, Bishop frowned thoughtfully.
‘An interesting point, Krau Summerfield,’ he said mildly, to himself.
Ten minutes later, they had passed through the kilometre-thick crust of the moon via Moloch's Pit, and were moving once more into the human-designed areas of the base.
At the door to the Operations Room, the Doctor paused briefly and sniffed.
‘Hmm,’ he said, as the door slid open and he led the way inside.
‘Ionization.
That's odd.’
He took another sniff, wrinkling his nose with distaste.
‘What do we know that produces a smell like that?’
Bernice grinned.
‘Alex Bannen?’
The Doctor tut-tutted sternly; nobody smiled.
‘Electrical activity.’
Cheryl crossed the patchy carpet to the nearest window and began to study the landscape depicted on it.
The Doctor nodded thoughtfully.
He made a swift circuit  of the room, studying the read-outs of each station, pausing only once, to run his fingers across the MultiCray input terminal.
‘What are you doing to the neural net, Doctor?’
Bishop said sharply.
‘Checking to see how much damage has been done to it,’ the Doctor said with some irritation.
‘Damage?’
The Doctor tapped the side of his nose.
‘Electrical activity, remember?’
He indicated a diagnostic panel, where several red lights had begun to blink in confirmation of his words.
Information began scrolling across a virtual screen beside the Doctor's head.
Cheryl moved impatiently.
‘I've had just about all I can take of this mucking about.
If you want me, I'll be looking for Sam.’
She began to walk towards the door, but the Doctor stopped her with a look.
‘According to the roster, your husband was due here but never turned up,’ he said sternly.
‘That's ridiculous!’
Cheryl exclaimed in a voice that was far too loud.
‘This is a bloody nightmare.
Where are all the people?’
The Doctor had bent to examine something he had seen on the dappled carpet beside the communications terminal.
He stood almost immediately, and only Bernice noticed that, by aiming a bony finger at the floor, he was covering the fact that he'd pocketed something.
She moved closer to see what he was pointing at.
The patterns on the floor weren't part of the design of the carpet.
They were patches of blood.
When the Doctor spoke, his voice was dark and foreboding.
‘There's only one thing to do.’
Cheryl's voice was tense.
‘We'll have to search for them.’
The Doctor nodded.
‘Cheryl, I wonder if you would be so kind as to cast a professional eye over the experimental laboratories for me.’
Her voice was flat and harsh.
‘Am I looking for anything in particular?’
The Doctor was vague.
‘Oh, not really.
Anything unusual will do.
You could check on the medlab, too, if you wouldn't mind.
Bernice, I'd like you to check the grounds for signs of activity.
Trau Engado, I suggest you and Trau Bishop work back through the base, up the Pit and into the Bridge terminal.
I understand Paula had a laboratory there; that'll need to be checked.
I'll stay here and coordinate the search.
We'll all meet back here in precisely — oh, a couple of hours.’
He thought for a moment before adding dryly, ‘So long as that's all right with you, Adjudicator?’
Bishop said evenly, ‘I notice that this particular search pattern leaves you alone here, and free to —’
‘Steal the silverware?’
The Doctor raised an enquiring eyebrow.
Bishop said nothing.
The Doctor gestured towards the centre of the room.
‘Someone has obviously interfered with the neural net.
That means the security simulators are off-line.
If you know anything about how to repair a MultiCray, you are more than welcome to stay and help me.
Otherwise, you  can stay and make tea.
Arcturan, Lapsang Souchong or Earl Grey will be perfectly acceptable.
Such a civilized drink.’
Bishop did not rise to the bait.
‘Perhaps I should go with one of the ladies,’ he said.
‘After all, there may be danger.’
‘That's quite all right,’ Bernice said, frowning.
‘When you've drunk the crew of a Grinch pirate skiff under the table, there's precious little you can't do.
Besides, I think Miles has already made up his mind.’
While they had been talking, the Administrator had slipped quietly from the room.
Bernice shivered.
When they'd first arrived at the Base, she had quite liked the old Administrator, but since Paula's death he'd changed.
There was something disturbing about the way he'd just — well, just left — without saying anything.
What was he up to?
‘Well,’ the Doctor said briskly, ‘what are we waiting for?
We've all got plenty to do.
Let's get on and do it.’
Miles Engado, impatient at his slow progress through the Pit, padded softly along the track which spiralled from the Bridge terminus, through Moloch's kilometre-thick shell, to the research centre.
The sound of his footsteps was absorbed efficiently by the etched walls and curved pathway.
That left a lot of silence to fill, and Miles filled it with fear and guilt.
And with confusion.
The fear and the guilt were his own, but the confusion — that was a different matter.
It had originated from elsewhere, and infected him as surely as any virus.
Less than two days since Paula's death, and already her spirit was demanding the companionship of others on its journey.
How many would lose their lives to his daughter's marauding unrest, he wondered guiltily, and at whose door would the fault ultimately lie?
Miles felt the confusion in his mind grow into a relentless horror.
He was eighty-seven.
A man still in his prime.
A man of his century.
How could he believe, really believe , that this  primal stuff and nonsense, this superstition, could affect the day-to-day operation of the most important scientific expedition of its time?
Miles groaned inwardly, knowing instinctively that the how and the why of a thing were almost irrelevant when placed against the fact.
The fact was that he, the main proponent of the scientific method, was becoming increasingly frightened by a superstition society had considered dead before he was born.
The fact was he felt like a child again, powerless against forces he could not understand — let alone control.
With an effort, Miles shook off the lethargy that had been creeping over him since Paula's death, blinding him to his duties and responsibilities.
He'd made his decision.
Now it was time to carry it out.
The Doctor checked to make sure the Operations Room was properly deserted before inputting a simple command into the MultiCray.
Immediately, the blinking red lights on the diagnostic panel were replaced by steady green indicators.
The system was back on line.
For a moment, the Doctor toyed lightly with the simularity crystal he had found while looking at the blood on the floor.
He fed the crystal into a reader and watched with interest as the file scrolled up.
He kept one eye on the entrances to the Operations Room.
He knew Bishop was lurking around somewhere, but the Adjudicator presented no danger he couldn't anticipate.
Unlike Ace, apparently.
Oh well.
It was a simple enough matter to
‘Yes, I would have started with the simularity records as well.’
Bishop.
The Doctor smoothly keyed in a new sequence of commands.
‘Nice idea,’ he muttered off-handedly.
‘Shame about the software.’
‘The files are corrupt?’
Bishop asked.
‘Completely.’
‘Inconvenient, to say the least.’
‘Undoubtedly.’
‘Your recommendation?’
‘Tricky.’
‘But you do have one.’
‘Possibly.’
Bishop clasped his hands together and steepled his fingers.
When he spoke, his voice was completely without inflection.
‘It may interest you to know that I, too, am developing a theory, Doctor.
One in which your own involvement plays a significant part.’
The Doctor smiled engagingly.
‘You know, I was rather afraid you were going to say something like that.’
He turned and left the Operations Room.
Bernice lifted her face to the warming rays of an impossible sun, and wondered at the beauty and mystery of the universe.
Out on the fringes of the Vartaq Veil, looking for traces of her lost father, she had been part of a team excavating a Dyson sphere constructed around a white dwarf star.
Built from the debris of planets, moons and comets, the sphere had originally been designed to completely enclose its star, collecting all the energy it gave out rather than letting the vast majority of it escape away into space.
Like most engineering projects, it may have looked good on paper, but in practice it was another thing entirely.
Tidal stress and gravitational asymmetries had pulled the sphere out of shape.
Newtonian mechanics had done the rest.
By the time Bernice and her colleagues had arrived, it had degenerated into a series of unconnected fragments which drifted apart over thousands of years, gradually leaking their atmospheres into the vacuum.
The builders, overcome by the tragic outcome of their vast conception, had devolved into a shelled race who spent their nomadic existence migrating from one fragment of the sphere to another, living in the ruins of their once great cities and seeing the cosmos as a gigantic jigsaw puzzle being slowly assembled by God.
It was a funny old universe.
Bernice looked around.
Beautiful though the interior of the lower moon was, there was also something disturbing about it.
Perhaps it was the way the horizon curved upwards on all sides, like a bowl, or the way gravity worked when there shouldn't have been any.
Perhaps it was the way the translucent ‘grass’ seemed to develop an immediate and lasting attachment to anything or anyone that walked across it.
But she didn't think so.
Ordinarily she would have relished the variety which the creators of Moloch had offered up for her pleasure without a qualm or a second thought, but this time something was getting to her, making her nervous.
Itchy….
Oh.
It was the Veil.
Moloch reminded her of the Vartaq Veil.
Not the precise pattern of plants and trees beyond the human enclave, nor the affectionate grass, nor even the strange and delightful animal life — if it was animal life which peered from the undergrowth at the human installations with delicate curiosity.
No.
It was the quiet.
And a sense of history gone terribly wrong.
She shivered, despite the heat.
A wafer thin translucent something undulated through the air towards her, chuckling gently to itself in a liquid voice.
She put out a hand, and the thing wrapped itself around her arm, warm and dry and tingling — and Bernice was suddenly struck by a question so obvious it stunned her.
If the builders of this artificial paradise had not been around for several millennia — as Alex Bannen seemed to think — how come the flora and fauna hadn't run riot and completely ruined the environment?
Bernice ran the fingers of her free hand through her thickly beaded dreadlocks as she tried to think.
She was no naturalist, but it seemed to her that every living thing around her was controlled in some way, by some — force: prevented from over-breeding, over-growing.
In some way patterned.
She had a sudden feeling that if she could  only work out how the ecology of Moloch ticked, she would have a vital clue, if not to discovering Ace's whereabouts, then at least to getting a handle on the vanished aliens.
With any luck, the rest of the puzzle — the missing personnel, the mystery of the Angels and, not least of all, the rapidly sliding situation on the Base itself — might follow on from that.
Bernice shook loose the amiable scrap of nothing and watched as it fluttered away, lost in moments in the gentle glow of Moloch's endless day.
She rubbed her arm.
The skin tingled.
Cheryl palmed the access lock on the medlab door and the hatch rolled open.
She moved cautiously into the room.
‘Hello?
Christine?’
There was a sudden movement behind a bank of filing cabinets.
Cheryl sucked in an alarmed breath.
‘Sam?’
‘I'm afraid not.’
The Doctor.
‘Go away,’ she snapped.
‘I could do that,’ he said, emerging from behind the cabinets.
‘But I wouldn't be taking the problem with me, would I?’
‘Who says I want you to!’
Cheryl croaked out the words before lapsing into another long silence.
‘Why don't you tell me about it?
I guarantee it'll help.’
‘You wouldn't understand.
You're just a —’
‘Just a man?
Isn't that expression out of date yet?’
‘I was going to say….
Oh hell.
I don't know what I was going to say.’
‘That's good.
Now we can start fresh, with no preconceptions.’
The Doctor sat on one of the medlab's empty diagnostic beds, and drew his legs up into the lotus position.
‘I'm not ready to talk yet.
If you had any degree of sensitivity you'd be able to see that.’
Angrily.
Cheryl turned and left the room.
After a moment's thought, the Doctor followed her.
Miles re-entered the Bridge terminus.
The floor of the chamber was obscured by a silver mist that had risen since their arrival.
Tiny clouds swirled about his legs as he walked.
On impulse, he reached out and passed his hand through the vapour.
The silvery substance clung to his skin, looking like tiny beads of mercury, as slippery as graphite between his fingers.
Miles flicked his hand absently.
The stuff relinquished its grip upon him readily enough, drifting away to join the main mass of the stuff as it clustered around the end of the Bridge, where some kind of subtle activity seemed to be taking place.
Miles looked closer, his confusion momentarily overcome by curiosity.
The hole through which the survivors of B Shift had left the Bridge was knitting back together like cloth, the weave forming as the bulk of the mist reduced.
High above Miles's head, beyond the terminus bubble, the Bridge itself was trembling; it was becoming more difficult to see, as if something were being called into shape around the central shaft.
Miles blinked.
Something was forming around the Bridge: a new Lift.
Miles felt suddenly weary.
It was time to carry out his decision.
He walked through the Bridge terminus to the Atmospheric Vehicle Research Laboratory: the room where Paula had spent most of her working time.
The starpod, her creation, hung suspended in the engineering pit.
He looked around the room where she had spent much of the last few years.
So stark.
So cold.
He crossed to the open storage cabinets and ran his fingers along the rows of simularity crystals; her files, her notes, her diary.
Her life.
His fingers paused over one that was simply labelled ‘Dad’.
He pulled it out and looked at it blankly, then slipped it into his pocket.
Miles crossed decisively to the starpod, unsealed the  hatch and swung himself into the cabin, smiling as it snuggled shut behind him with a soft pneumatic wheeze.
He took one of the two pilot seats and began to strap himself in.
Activated by his body heat, the onboard systems began to power up.
A representation of the Laboratory sprang into life around him, fed into his modified cornea by low power laser beams.
Other sensors synched in with other senses.
He could see in a three hundred and sixty degree sphere via the pod sensor modules, just as he could feel the ambient temperature, and even smell the lubricant that someone had carelessly leaked on to the floor.
He moved his arm into a myo-feedback harness; a mechanical specimen grip unfolded and flexed in time with his movements.
He was the pod.
With a spoken command, he operated the control which would open the roof of the AVR Lab, allowing the pod access to free space.
Bishop pulled the crystal that the Doctor had left in the simularity reader free and turned it over and over in his hands.
He reached beneath his robes and pulled free the personal reader he'd brought from his ship.
Slipping the crystal into the device, Bishop watched as the file read up, observing the contents with great interest.
Evidence.
Suppressed evidence, no less.
He attached a judicial password to the file, saved it, pocketed both crystal and reader, and began to think hard about the information he'd discovered.
It could be the reason for everything.
Perhaps he was not as far short of solving this case as he had supposed.
Trying to avoid the undulants' over-affectionate advances, Bernice moved deeper into the jungle.
The ‘trees’ put her in mind of the Bridge: nests of translucent pink roots which burst from the powdery soil and curved upwards into single trunks which soared above  her head and fanned out again into an inverted cone of branches.
Put a beachball at both ends and the comparison would be perfect.
A faint breeze caressed the back of her neck.
She turned, and gasped.
A wave of movement was sweeping across the forest.
As it reached each tree in turn, the tree gracefully bent over, curving its trunk so that both roots and branches touched the ground.
The branches burrowed into the soil; the roots relinquished their grip.
The tree straightened, upside down, a perfect mirror image of itself.
‘Wow,’ she breathed.
When, after a few moments, no further miracles were forthcoming, she moved on.
As she walked, her mind was still puzzling over the mystery of Moloch's peculiar ecology.
She was sure there was a pattern there somewhere, a pattern which included the missing personnel, the carefully planted flora, the tingling undulant, everyth—
Hang on a minute.
Undulants?
Tingling undulants?
Bernice thought hard.
The Doctor had mentioned ionization when they'd first entered the Operations Room; ionization caused by electrical activity.
And the undulants displayed a conspicuous electric field whenever they moved; she'd felt it as static whenever they touched-her.
Bernice sucked in a deep breath, searching for a tell-tale smell — and there it was!
The faintest hint of….
Of
Her thoughts suddenly interrupted, Bernice gave a cry of surprise and horror.
On the ground in front of her was a motionless human hand.
Bernice swallowed hard.
The hand was connected to an arm, which vanished into the nearby undergrowth.
Bernice hesitated.
Skeletons in tombs and ancient embalmed bodies were one thing; this was entirely another.
She took her hip flask from her coveralls and emptied it in one long gulp.
Alcohol doped with various smart  chemicals stung her throat.
She looked down again.
The hand was still there.
The grass around it seemed to beckon her on.
Taking a deep breath, she forced apart the translucent boughs and peered through.
Jammed into the undergrowth were a number of dead bodies.
Ace's blood-soaked jacket lay on top of the pile.
Miles gazed out into space through the circular hatch in the roof of the chamber.
From somewhere beyond the artificial horizon, the Bridge arced up and away into the darkness, the lower part of its immense length in shadow, the upper glinting with fiery reflections from Lucifer's atmospheric corona.
Miles used his connection with the starpod to dim the chamber lights, and the stars sprang into sharp relief.
He wondered where Sol was.
He was an administrator, not an astronomer, and that question had always floored him.
Was Sol even visible from here?
He was damned if he knew.
Miles powered up the starpod's sensor arrays, enhancing his own senses and sending them arcing out into space in search of the planet of his birth.
Paula would have a companion on her journey to the afterlife.
He just wanted to say goodbye first.
To take one last look at the electronic signature which marked out his birthplace from the countless other star systems he could see.
To imagine for the last time the forests and oceans, green and alive, the way they'd always been in historical dramas.
The way they'd always been for his people: the fishers, the hunters.
There was a shadow.
Something vast and artificial.
Something…
…slipped through the ether and smashed into his mind.
Miles screamed and fell into an unforgiving darkness filled with endless pain and memories.
Piper O'Rourke looked up from the shift supervisor's desk as a dishevelled and embarrassed Alex Bannen  walked into the Belial Base Operations Room, followed by his son.
‘Sleep well, Alex?’
‘No.’
The physicist was clutching a plastic beaker from which he drank greedily.
‘That won't do you any good, you know.’
Alex's face assumed a shallow, humourless grin.
‘It's tea.’
Piper raised one eyebrow in a surprised apology.
‘Er how's….’
There was an awkward pause.
‘I'm sorry, I don't know his name.’
Bannen set down the beaker.
‘Mark.
Come in here.
I want you to meet a,’ he hesitated, ‘a colleague.’
There were hesitant footsteps.
Piper got up from her seat.
‘Hello, Mark.
I'm Piper.
We met before.’
The child's gaze was as piercing and intelligent as she remembered.
‘You're the woman who hates my dad.’
Piper closed her eyes.
And opened them sharply at an insistent, warning buzz from her duty station.
‘What's that?’
Bannen's son moved to examine readouts.
Perceptive, she thought.
But then, he would be.
‘I owe you an apology, Alex.’
‘Yeah.
Me too.’
He hesitated.
‘Sorry.’
‘Alex, what I need more than an apology is an explanation.’
He had the grace to look discomfited.
‘I would have thought it was all round Belial by now.’
‘We've had too much else to worry about.’
‘He's not real, you know.’
‘I know.
There's no way you could have kept him hidden for this long, and Moshe-Rabaan would have noticed any excess oxygen usage, so he's a simularity, right?’
‘Right.’
‘Why?’
Her voice softened.
‘Why not apply for real children?’
‘I did,’ he said levelly.
‘I had a son.
He died.’
Silence.
‘He died?’
Bannen rested his head in his hands.
Mark just looked on dispassionately.
‘Yeah.
I was married.
Her name was Sonia.
She was good.
A good person.
She wanted a child, so we signed up for the eugenics lottery.
We were both in the upper IQ bracket; we could've used channels, pulled strings, bypassed the system.
But she wanted to do it properly.
Be honest.’
His shoulders gave a little heave.
‘We got lucky.’
‘So what happened?’
‘Remember when America's economy collapsed, back in forty-six?’
Bannen's voice was so quiet that Piper had to strain to hear it.
‘I was teaching at MexTech at the time.
I was on campus when the food riots hit full swing.
Made it to the spaceport on a student bus.
Last suborbital off the ground.
I saw her in the crowd outside the ship as they sealed the lock.’
Bannen tried to take his son's hand, but his fingers passed right through the simularity field.
‘Saw them both.’
Piper felt something cold clench in her chest.
‘What — what happened?’
He looked up with bleak, pain-scarred eyes.
‘There were ten million people and no food,’ he whispered.
What do you think happened?’
Piper swallowed, her mouth suddenly dry.
Bannen said something in such a quiet voice she missed his words.
‘Pardon?’
‘I said, I could have gone back.
For Sonia and Mark.
I could have gone back for them.’
Piper found herself unable to meet the physicist's gaze.
‘I could have gone back.’
Bishop was collecting the shattered fragments of an observation drone for later analysis when the klaxons began.
The sound was a sharp, painful call to action.
Swiftly, Bishop accessed the neural net and locked down the source of the alert.
The Atmospheric Vehicle Research chamber.
Bishop activated a commdesk and punched in the requisite code.
A virtual screen lit up, immediately in front of his face.
The picture it showed appeared normal; then Bishop realized the dome of the chamber was open to free space.
Apparently there was some kind of unscheduled launch in progress, an experiment under preprogrammed control.
Bishop sighed.
So much to do already, and now this.
He left the Operations Room and was running up the Pit transport belt when Cheryl Russell swung in from a side corridor and very nearly cannoned into him.
‘That's an experimental research warning,’ she cried.
‘What's going on?’
Bishop studied her face for a brief second.
He noted the tear tracks for later consideration.
‘Stop gathering wool,’ she snapped.
‘Someone's triggered the alarm.
It could be an emergency!’
‘The neural net identified the AVR chamber as the source of the alert.’
‘Well, come on then!’
The main base entrance rolled shut behind Bernice, replacing the constant pinkish daylight of Moloch with the flat white glare of artificial light.
Catching sight of the back of Bishop's robes vanishing along the corridor leading to the Pit, Bernice began to follow automatically, but a firm pressure on her arm prevented her from continuing.
Her forward movement abruptly halted, Bernice threw the Doctor a cool glance.
Apologetically, he removed his hand.
He waved his umbrella in a distracted manner.
‘Operations Room,’ he said vaguely.
‘Why?’
The Doctor's eyes suddenly focused.
‘There's something I have to show you.’
The control room was exactly as she had left it.
In a  beaker at one of the duty stations cold tea rippled in time with the siren.
Bernice perched on the edge of the shift supervisor's desk, watching as the Doctor strode quickly to the neural net cabinets and began to access a series of subsystems.
He looked puzzled, then worried.
He thumped the desk with an uncharacteristic display of temper.
‘It's gone!’
He quickly searched all his pockets.
‘How could I have been so stupid?’
‘It's Ace, isn't it?’
The Doctor sighed deeply, withdrawing his hands from his pockets.
‘Well?’
He looked away.
‘There are some things I need to know.
I would ask her myself but —’
Bernice's eyes narrowed as she deliberately missed the point.
‘But she doesn't trust you any more.’
‘That's right.’
‘So what do you want to know?’
‘I've hurt her, Bernice.
I keep hurting her.
With the best of intentions, but still the pain exists.
The mistrust.
The feeling of betrayal.’
The Doctor looked away from Bernice for a moment, and she could have sworn it was with genuine remorse.
‘You're human.
Tell me how I can make it up to her.’
‘I'm sorry.’
Bernice quickly unrolled the bundle she'd been carrying beneath her arm and thrust Ace's blood-soaked jacket into the Doctor's hands.
‘I think it may be too late for words.’
Cheryl slapped home a series of circuit breakers mounted on a plinth beside the AVR chamber monitor station.
Immediately, she felt the floor vibrate as the dome rumbled shut, sealing the chamber.
Air pumped in as the warning sirens died away.
She waited impatiently as the pressure equalized inside the dome, finally punching an override and unsealing the lock early.
She pounded into the frost-rimed chamber, breath freezing in front of her face, checking each possible  place of concealment for a figure, dreading what she might find.
There was nothing.
She turned her attention to the starpod.
If someone were still alive, that was where they'd be.
A moment behind her, Bishop entered the chamber, robes a-flap.
He watched as she unsealed the lock on the starpod.
Ice cracked away from the hatch at a pressure from inside.
Cheryl let out an involuntary gasp of surprise as a limp body fell clear of the vehicle to lie still upon the chamber floor in a slurry of melting ice.
Miles Engado.
Bishop carefully watched as first bitter disappointment and then professional concern chased startled horror from the woman's face.
Despite everything, had Cheryl expected to find her husband there?
Bernice and the Doctor entered the monitor room in time to help Cheryl stretch Miles out on the floor next to an open medkit, while Bishop probed intently into the racks of recording systems.
Bernice quickly moved the medkit to Cheryl's side.
‘What happened to him?’
‘I've no idea.’
Cheryl passed a diagnostic wand across the Administrator's head and torso.
‘According to this, he's in second-level unconsciousness.
I found him hooked up to the interactive software in the starpod.
Heaven alone knows what he was doing in there.’
She prepared an injector pad.
‘Thinking of Paula maybe.’
The Doctor moved across to where Bishop was still methodically accessing the gallery records.
‘Find anything interesting?’
Bishop kept his face carefully neutral.
‘All systems are off line.
Diagnostics report what can only be described as an — invasion.
The software is corrupt and will need to be rebooted.
All records of the last fifteen minutes have been erased.’
The Doctor leaned on his umbrella, his face assuming an expression of innocent concentration.
‘Sounds familiar, doesn't it?’
His voice hardened.
‘Someone's covering up a trail.’
‘I would have to agree.’
‘The question is, who?’
The Doctor allowed his eyes to fall to those of Miles Engado, as they moved spasmodically behind closed lids.
Remembering.
Bishop noted the direction of the Doctor's gaze, and his eyes narrowed as he regarded the Administrator's disturbed expression.
He would know what had happened to the software, and why.
Bishop felt the slight weight of a simularity crystal in the pocket of his robe and allowed himself an inward smile.
Despite all prevarication, the evidence was building.
Soon a solution would be found.
And justice would be served.
‘Adjudicator?’
Bishop looked at the Doctor.
‘There's something you ought to know.’
Two hours later, Piper  O'Rourke , Alex Bannen and a medical team were waiting as the Adjudicator's ship locked home against the Belial Bridge terminus.
Alex fidgeted impatiently as Miles was brought forth on a stretcher, ignoring the welfare of the Base Coordinator completely.
There were more important things he needed to find out; things only the Doctor could tell him.
He moved forward importantly, pushing past Bernice and Cheryl as if they did not exist.
‘Doctor — I must talk to you.
Was there any record concerning the structure of the Bridge's interior?’
‘No, Alex, we didn't find Ace or Christine.
But thank you for asking,’ Bernice muttered angrily.
Alex glared at Bernice.
‘You're a scientist.
You should understand that knowledge takes precedence over corpses.
In my opinion, it may be the only way to prevent more deaths.’
With cold and deliberate fury, Bernice began to explain to the scientist exactly what she thought of his ‘opinion’.
The Doctor interrupted her gently.
‘I'm afraid Trau Bannen is right, Bernice.’
Bernice threw the Doctor a disgusted look.
Bannen leaned attentively towards the Doctor and they began to speak in low voices.
Bernice suddenly found she badly needed a drink, but her hip flask was empty.
She began to make her way towards the entrance to the Pit.
The sound of someone's throat being cleared as a preliminary to speaking aloud caused her to stop.
‘If I could have your attention, please.’
Bernice turned; Bishop had laid claim to an area of floor.
Cheryl and Piper, the Doctor, Alex, and the medical team all stopped talking.
Bishop continued, ‘I would like to take this opportunity to inform you all that the judicial process requested by Miles Engado regarding the death of his daughter has now reached a conclusion.
That conclusion is that Paula Engado was murdered.’
There was a hushed whisper of horror from the listening personnel.
Bernice felt a sick feeling begin to develop in her stomach.
The feeling intensified as Bishop concluded his short speech in even, measured tones.
‘I have in my possession a simularity file which clearly establishes the guilt of the murderer.
It is now my duty to pass sentence.’
As Bernice watched, horrified, Bishop produced a large handgun from beneath his robes and aimed it squarely at the Doctor's head.
A security drone circled like a fat, lazy insect in front of the door to the Conference Room.
‘It's all right,’ Bernice said to it, raising her hands in surrender.
‘I have permission.
Signed, sealed and in triplicate.
‘Temporary Authorisation, Prisoner, For The Visit Of’, Guild of Adjudicators form one nine five three slash three.’
The drone orbited mindlessly.
‘Come on, Bishop, I know you're watching me.’
The door remained shut.
Bernice reached into a pocket of her waistcoat and took out a grimy piece of paper: a bar receipt from some long-forgotten dive on a far away planet.
‘I have in my hand,’ she said ominously, ‘a ‘Gratuitous Acts of Vandalism, Drones, To Be Performed On’, Bernice Summerfield form zero zero zero.’
She paused.
‘Slash zero.’
She crossed her arms confidently.
After a moment, the door slid open.
Bernice grinned as she walked into the Conference Room.
Applied psychology: there was no beating it.
The Doctor was hovering above the conference table in the classic lotus position.
His hands rested, palms up, on his knees.
Another drone orbited the room near the ceiling.
The sudden breeze introduced through the open door disturbed the orbit of the drone and sent the Doctor drifting slowly backwards.
His eyes opened in alarm, but before he could say anything his concentration lapsed and he dropped like a stone, vanishing behind the far end of  the table.
There was a loud thud, and a torrent of abuse in an obscure Venusian dialect.
The drone buzzed curiously across the room and vanished behind the table, making its own checks on the Doctor's health.
Bernice didn't know whether to laugh or cry, so she settled for sarcasm.
‘Aren't Time Lords supposed to be above that sort of language?’
‘It was a Venusian lullaby,’ the Doctor said, clambering up from behind the table and cramming his hat back on to his head.
The drone was orbiting his head like a dizziness star in an ancient cartoon.
He glared at the offending object angrily.
‘I find it useful to recite calming verse in moments of great stress.’
‘Calming verse?
Klokeda partha mennin klatch ?
You've got to be joking!
It's one of the most bawdy rhymes in the known universe.’
‘Venusian is a language, as dead as dead can be’,’ the Doctor quoted with great dignity.
‘If I say it's a lullaby, then it's a lullaby.’
‘Oh yes?
And who was it who decoded the Mk'kur'qa Inscriptions, then?
Who worked out the structure of the language from first principles, then?
Who is arguably the foremost galactic authority on the Venusian race?’
‘Not you, surely?’
Bernice shrugged.
‘Well, actually, no.
But I met him once.’
The Doctor grinned, and so did she.
‘I tell you,’ she continued, ‘the bit that I could never figure out was that ablark, araan, aroon refrain.
What was that all about?’
‘Ah,’ the Doctor sighed, nodding wisely.
‘It's to do with the number of limbs they had.
More opportunities.’
He rolled the word around in his mouth, savouring it.
‘And shunna teerenatch ?’
He shuddered.
‘Don't ask.’
She gazed at the small, gaudily dressed figure; the clown, the madman, the genius.
‘You know so much, don't you.’
‘Too much,’ he replied softly.
‘Far too much.’
Her gaze hardened.
‘Sometimes I hate you for it,’ she said, more harshly, perhaps, than she had intended.
‘I've spent years reconstructing, integrating, analysing and just plain digging through mud; cataloguing alien ruins square centimetre by square centimetre and sticking together the pieces of damaged artifacts to form implausible shapes.
Then you come along, and you tell me not only who made it but what his name was, how many eggs he laid and the colour of his tentacles.
Archaeology is my life, Doctor.
And you've made archaeology worthless to me.’
The Doctor thought for a moment.
‘Have I?’
‘Yes!
It's as if I've wasted my life searching for something that was never lost in the first place.
What's the point?’
‘Did you enjoy yourself?’ he asked.
She smiled wistfully, remembering old friends, good times.
‘Wouldn't have missed a second of it.’
‘There you are then.’
He looked away, and shrugged.
‘I collect pins.
Where's the point in that, if you'll forgive the pun?
But I enjoy it.
I'm fulfilled by it.
Too many people spend too much time looking for a reason, and fail to take advantage of the simple pleasures that life offers.’
Bernice ran her fingers along the table top.
No dust.
This room had no secrets to hide.
‘You know the worst thing about being here?’
The Doctor perched on the edge of the table, took his hat off and batted the buzzing drone away into a distant corner.
Persistently, the device moved back towards them.
The Doctor smiled at it, waited for it to approach — then whipped his hat through the air and down on to the table, neatly trapping the drone beneath it.
‘I think so,’ he said seriously, and for a moment his expression assumed the full weight of his nine-hundred-odd years.
‘It's knowing, isn't it?
Knowing what's ahead.’
‘The curse of being a time travelling archaeologist.’
Bernice looked away.
‘How many years of peace have they got left?’
‘Probably less than you think.’
The Doctor glanced  sideways at his hat.
It was sidling towards the edge of the table.
He reached out with his umbrella and hooked the hat back.
An indignant buzzing sound came from beneath it.
‘The lights are going out all over the galaxy,’ he said softly.
‘They shall not see them lit again in their lifetimes.’
He looked over at Bernice.
‘Have you seen the news from the latest pigeon post?’
Bernice nodded.
‘It's like seeing a snowball start to roll down a mountain.
You know at the bottom it's going to be avalanche time.
And the latest message pod was more than six months late, by all accounts.’
She looked down at the diminutive Time Lord, her eyes full of quiet sympathy.
‘I learned to live with it,’ he said, in reply to her unspoken question.
‘I deal with today's problems today.
Tomorrow's problems I solve yesterday.’
‘But what about the problems here — the sabotage, the murders?’
‘Unrelated,’ the Doctor said, once more reaching for his hat.
He flipped it over, allowing the drone to escape.
It immediately flew across the room, maintaining a wary distance.
The Doctor reversed his hat, flipped it back along the length of his arm and perched it nonchalantly on his head.
‘This is a purely human evil.
And talking of which, what's been happening in the world at large since my incarceration in this impromptu dungeon?’
‘Where do you want me to start?’
‘Ace,’ he said quietly.
‘Start with Ace.’
Bernice sighed.
‘Doctor, you have to understand.
The conditions of the….’
She swallowed.
‘Piecing the bodies together is going to be a full-time job for some poor bastard.
At the moment they've found…
Kosi, and…
Chas Varley's arm.
They recognized it by his ring.
But the rest are too badly burned or in too many pieces to identify without DNA tests, and that'll take time.
Judging by the reconstruction work, there is considerable evidence of small arms fire: flamers, needlers and the like.’
She paused.
‘But there's also evidence that some of them just — exploded from inside.’
‘And what's Trau Bishop doing about it?’
‘He's locked away in Miles's office, scanning every simularity he can find with your face in it.
I don't know what he's got on you, but it must be good.
He's setting up a drumhead court-martial for tomorrow.’
‘Followed, no doubt, by summary execution.’
The Doctor cast a dark glance up at the innocently circling drone.
Bernice tried to read his expression, but it was untranslatable.
But she had to know.
‘Cheryl's nearly hysterical,’ she offered, with carefully calculated innocence.
‘There's no sign of Sam anywhere.’
The Doctor wasn't going for the bait.
‘Rumour Control has it,’ she added, ‘that he's either an undiscovered victim or your accomplice.
Craig Richards is running a sweepstake on it.’
‘What are the odds on me?’
‘Favourite for a short trial and a quick death,’ Bernice said, and immediately wished she hadn't.
‘There's something else, isn't there?’
She sighed.
‘I could be imagining it, but….
Well, people seem to be turning against us.
Nobody's saying anything, not to my face anyway, but there's something about the way they move, and the way conversations change tack when I walk into rooms.
It's very subtle, but there's an undercurrent of distrust that wasn't there yesterday.’
He gazed up at her with eyes much, much older than his face.
‘It's you, isn't it?’ she said, with sudden realization.
‘Wherever we land, people accept us.
I've always wondered why, just like I've always wondered how we can always understand what everyone says, no matter what language they're speaking.
And now you're out of the way, whatever spell you've put on them is fading.’
He just smiled sadly.
‘And do you do the same to Ace and me?
Do you blind us to your faults?’
‘Et tu ?’ he quoted softly.
‘You said something, didn't you?’
‘About what, Bernice?’
‘About what I told you.
Cheryl and Paula.’
The Doctor adjusted the brim of his hat to shadow his eyes.
‘Of course not,’ he said, but she didn't believe him.
Rabbi Shmuel Zehavi was leaving Miles Engado's quarters as Piper arrived.
‘How is he?’ she asked.
The wiry psychologist shook his head, almost dislodging his embroidered skullcap in the process.
‘Oy!’ he exclaimed.
‘That meshuggener !
He's already broken three appointments to see me.
‘Pressure of work,’ he says, as that's an adequate excuse.
I've tried to tell him that the last thing Project Eden needs is an Administrator who's crazy as a dakkabug, but will he listen to me?’
Before per could enquire further about Miles's odd behaviour, Zehavi moved rapidly away down the corridor, muttering angrily to himself.
More worried now than she liked to admit, Piper extended her search for the Base Administrator to the refectory.
The Bridge disaster, along with the subsequent events on Moloch, had thrown Piper's carefully calculated schedules into complete disarray.
Members of all three shifts were milling about the circular room: repeating rumours, distorting facts and generally hyping themselves up.
Piper spotted Alex Bannen and his son sitting in the centre of the refectory.
The table before them was loaded down with jellies and ice cream.
Unbelievable, she thought.
For years he keeps the kid hidden away like the greatest secret in the galaxy, and now he's showing him off for everybody to see.
And then she saw Miles.
He was sitting alone, off to one side, watching a historical simularity, shipped in on the last supply drone, that vas playing in the centre of the room.
She walked over and joined him at the table.
‘Miles?’
He didn't react.
‘Miles!
I've been worried.’
His gaze flickered over her, then back to the simularity.
‘You know the Doctor was arrested for Paula's murder while you were unconscious?’ she said, trying to provoke a reaction.
‘That charlatan?’
His lip curled slightly.
‘He deserves to die.’
Piper looked away for a moment.
‘I must know what happened to you down there on Moloch.
Cheryl's been saying some odd things.
Bishop's not saying anything, and as for Bernice and the Doctor —’
‘The Doctor again.
Always the Doctor.
I've been suspicious of him since he first arrived.’
Piper frowned, trying to remember exactly how the Doctor and his friends had arrived on the base.
She pulled her thoughts back to the present with an effort as Miles stood.
‘No wait — don't go!’
Wearily, Miles sat down again.
‘Tell me about it, Miles.
I have to know.’
There was a long pause.
‘I was in the pod.
Paula's starpod.
It was all powered-up and ready to go.
I…
I just wanted to look at the Earth.
Well — Sol, anyway.
If the instruments could pick it up from here.
I was looking for it.
I saw something.
A waveform….
Then there was just pain.
Endless pain.
And,’ he hesitated.
Piper nodded eagerly.
‘Yes?’
‘And — I woke up here, in the medlab.
Zehavi wanted to analyse my brain, but I'm fine.
I keep telling him that.
I'm fine.’
‘I know,’ she said.
‘I wish everyone would just leave me alone!’
His voice softened.
‘Except you, Piper.
You care.
And….’
He stood again.
‘There's something I need to show you.’
Some kind of historical simularity was coming to an end as Bernice entered the crowded refectory, passing Miles Engado and Piper O'Rourke as she did so.
She watched, fascinated, as the beautiful computer expert destroyed hideous alien invaders and claimed the handsome young museum curator as her own.
As the end credits rolled and the title came up, she realized that it was a dramatized retelling of the Martian invasion of Earth circa 2090.
She would never have guessed it from the wildly anachronistic costumes.
She smiled, remembering.
She had made her reputation excavating the abandoned Ice Warrior citadels on Mars…at was many years ago in her own personal time-scale, many years in the future of the era she was in.
It was also first time she had been back to Earth since being drafted into Spacefleet, escaping, and running for the stars in a clapped-out old trading ship owned by a clapped-out old trader.
Climbing painfully up monolithic shafts of blue crystal.
Making love with Tim in the vaulted egg chambers.
Finding carded shells stacked up with piles of Ice Marshal helmets, their glistening wetware implants still intact.
The temptation to don one, to experience Martian life firsthand, almost overpowering…
She shook herself, and walked on.
Her visit to the Doctor seemed to have stirred up old memories, like sediment at the bottom of a pond.
Cheryl Russell was seated on the far side of the refectory, watching the simularity.
Although the credits had finished, and the picture had been replaced by a robotic continuity announcer, Cheryl's expression had not changed.
‘Fancy a drink?’
Bernice stopped by Cheryl's table and held out her refilled flask.
‘Thanks,’ Cheryl said, and to Bernice's amazement, drained the entire flask without stopping for breath.
‘Cheryl, there's something I ought to tell you.’
‘I've lost them both,’ Cheryl said, without intonation.
‘I tried to talk to you the night before last, but —’
‘First Paula and then Sam.’
It was as if she wasn't listening.
‘Look, I think I owe —’
‘You told someone, didn't you?’
‘Oh Cheryl, I didn't mean to.’
Bernice hung her head.
God, she thought, how did it ever come to this?
‘Sam found out that I was seeing Paula.
He never said anything, but I knew that he knew, because he was nicer to me than he had ever been before.
Then Paula died, and Sam disappeared, and I can't find him on Belial, and I can't find him on Moloch, and part of me is frightened that he might be dead, and part of me is frightened that he's not.’
She lowered her gaze to the plate of food she had ordered a while ago.
She toyed with it with her fork, pushing it slowly around the plate, swirling it into patterns.
Without raising her eyes, Cheryl whispered, ‘You were the only one….’
In the background, a news simularity presenter was wittering on.
Bernice tried to focus her mind on the report, which featured outbreaks of a mystery virus that had wiped out millions in the barrios of  Brasilia , Los Angeles and Tycho City.
She had almost succeeded, when Cheryl looked up from her food.
Bernice found herself unable to look away, inexorably drawn to the guilt and sadness she saw in Cheryl's face, and which she blamed herself for.
‘The only one who knew we were sleeping together,’ Cheryl continued, ‘and —’
‘Cheryl, I'm sorry!
I didn't mean to walk in on you.
‘I keep wondering why I did it,’ Cheryl said, as if Bernice hadn't spoken.
‘It's not as if I don't love Sam, because I do.
I love him like nothing else in my life, but Paula and I had been together when we were all planning Project Eden, before I even met Sam, and I loved her too, and somehow I just couldn't stop seeing her….’
The news broadcast had moved on to other matters now; the loss of contact between Earth Central and a Space Fleet flotilla which had been on its way to intercept a supposed alien fleet near Epsilon Eridani.
Bernice  remembered her conversation with the Doctor, and shivered.
History ought to stay where it belongs, she thought: in the past.
‘Cheryl,’ she said carefully, ‘when I walked in on you and Paula Engado, I was — surprised.
I wanted to talk to someone about it.
But I swear, I only mentioned it to one person, and he's the most trustworthy person I've ever met.
He wouldn't have told anybody.
Not Sam, or anyone.’
‘Who was that?’
Cheryl asked, uninterestedly.
‘The Doctor,’ Bernice said.
Cheryl looked at her for the first time.
‘I should have guessed,’ she said bitterly.
‘You're in it together, aren't you?
I don't know how you all managed to worm your way into our confidence, but someone's already taken care of one of your friends, and the other will be lucky if he lives until his trial.’
‘What?
Cheryl, what do you —’
But Cheryl did not reply.
She stalked off, leaving Bernice shaken and alone.
As Miles opened the door to his office, Piper could see Adjudicator Bishop sitting at Miles's desk.
A simularity of the Doctor sat above Miles's desk, strobing slowly in extreme close-up.
Bishop's hand flicked the surface of the desk, blanking the picture.
‘Can I help you?’
‘I was hoping to be able to use my office,’ Miles said slowly.
‘That won't be possible.
I'll be needing it for the rest of the day,’ Bishop said.
‘Guild of Adjudicators business.
Perhaps another office?’
‘Use mine,’ Piper said, pulling Miles away before he said something she might regret.
Miles was silent as he followed Piper to the Technical Support area.
He walked so slowly that Piper had to stop every few seconds and wait for him to catch up.
When they arrived, he hesitated on the threshold, waiting for her to lead the way.
‘Tea?’ she said.
‘Synthetic, or the real stuff?’
‘Need you ask?’
She placed scoops of tea essence into a couple of beakers and added water from the reconstituter.
She could see him out of the comer of her eye, removing a crystal from his pocket and placing it in her desk reader.
By the time she turned around, Paula Engado was frozen in space like a china figurine.
A wave of guilt washed over her and receded, leaving her feeling slightly sick.
‘Like a ghost,’ Piper said.
‘Pardon?’
‘Paula.
She haunts this Base like a ghost.’
Miles winced, and Piper suddenly realized what she had said.
‘I didn't mean….
Not literally, Miles!
For heaven's sake, it was a metaphor.’
‘Of course.’
He paused, and passed a shaky hand across his face.
Piper watched as he typed instructions into the desk.
‘It was with her diary, down in the AVR lab on Moloch,’ Miles said, a slight catch in his voice.
He hit <RETURN> and the tiny figure in the simularity began to move.
Paula ran a hand through her hair, and took a deep breath.
Her heart was pounding, and she felt sick.
Okay, she thought, here goes….
‘Dad,’ she said, ‘if you're watching this, then I'm dead.’
The palms of her hands were sweating, and she wiped them against the legs of her tunic.
‘I need to be alone for a while, and there's nowhere  here on Belial or Moloch where that can be true for any length of time.
Whatever I do, I seem to hurt someone.
I've had a talk with….’
She hesitated, wondering whether to name the person, but decided on the spur of the moment against it.
Dad would only blame them for what she was doing.
‘Well, with a friend.
And I think I can see things a bit more clearly now.
I'm going down into Lucifer's atmosphere in a starsuit.
I know it's risky — a lot more risky than if I waited for Yukio to finish programming the starpod — but I just need to get away for a while, by myself, and think.
If I'm lucky then I'll be back with some decent results before anyone knows that I'm gone.
If I'm really lucky then I'll come back with a tame, talkative Angel for you.
If my luck has run out….
Well, I'm going to leave this simularity in the starpod for you.
I know you'll find it.’
She slipped one hand into a pocket, and scratched her nose with the other.
So far, so good, she thought.
‘There's something I need to say to you, Dad, and I'll never have the courage to do it face to face.
When….’
The words seemed to catch in her throat.
Every time she thought about her mother, the tears were there.
It was like the pain from an old wound, so familiar that she never noticed it until she deliberately picked at the scar.
‘When Mum finally….
When she….
You just locked yourself up tight and never talked about her again.’
The tears were coming; she could feel them.
‘And I wanted so hard for you to love me.
I worked my guts out getting my Doctorate, so that I could be a member of Project Eden and be with you.
But it was like you never noticed me.’
Warmth on her cheek, and the muscles at the corners of her mouth were clenching, dragging her lower lip downwards.
‘You never noticed me.
Dad, I'm sorry.
I know you and Piper are — are more than friends, but please Dad, don't — don't marry her.
It wouldn't be fair.
It wouldn't be fair to Mum.
And it wouldn't be fair to Piper, because I know how much you still love Mum, even though you never say so.’
It was no good.
She was losing it.
She had to cut it  short now and just leave, otherwise she wouldn't have the courage to do it.
‘Goodbye, Dad,’ she sobbed.
‘If I'm lucky, you'll never have to watch this.
I love you, remember that.
I love you….’
She stabbed at the recorder controls, though her eyes were blurred with tears and she couldn't even see them.
<STOP>
<END>
Miles fumbled for the right controls, and eventually stopped the simularity.
His eyes glittered with unshed tears.
‘Piper, I'm sorry,’ he choked, and reached out for her.
‘Thanks, Miles.
You really know how to inspire confidence in a woman.’
She turned and walked away.
‘No, wait!
You don't understand.
That's what Paula thought, not what I —’
It was too late.
He was talking to a closed door.
Bernice knocked at Miles Engado's door.
There was no answer, but then, she wasn't expecting any.
She had seen the Adjudicator leave a few minutes before.
The door wasn't locked, and the simularity crystal was still in the desk reader.
Whatever evidence Bishop had on the Doctor, she had to check it out.
And then….
Well, all archaeologists were thieves, of a sort.
She pressed <RUN>, glad now that she kept forgetting to take her simularity contact lenses out.
Two heads appeared in mid-air: the Doctor's and Paula Engado's.
Judging by the settings, the scene was being told from Paula's point of view.
As the conversation replayed, Bernice felt herself go cold.
‘Did Cheryl really say that?’
Paula's voice was shrill, disbelieving.
‘She loves me, but she can't leave Sam?’
‘That's what she told me.’
The Doctor's voice was harsh.
‘It's all so stupid!’
Paula said, on the verge of tears.
‘It doesn't matter what you think,’ the Doctor sneered.
‘It's Cheryl's feelings that count.’
A sudden hatred of Sam Russell welled up within Paula.
‘I know how Sam is going to feel,’ she hissed.
‘Don't be stupid.’
‘You're right,’ she sighed.
‘It's Cheryl's decision.
I can't argue with that.’
‘And are you still going down in the starsuit?’
Paula gazed into the Doctor's bleak eyes.
What is there left here for me? she thought.
I might as well end the pain now.
He nodded, as if he could read her thoughts, and moved to leave.
‘I might not be coming back,’ she said.
He nodded, and left.
‘Damning, isn't it,’ said a voice from the doorway as the scene cut off.
Bernice looked up.
Bishop was watching her.
‘Superficially,’ she admitted.
‘It's Paula's own simularity diary.
It was still recording when the Doctor walked into the lab on Moloch.
It looks to me as if the Doctor manipulated Paula Engado's feelings with a faked message from her adulterous lover Cheryl Russell to the effect that Cheryl wouldn't leave her husband, Sam.
The Doctor suggested a method of suicide.
Paula, distraught, took his advice.
Some time later, Krau Ace discovered the crystal and accused the Doctor of manipulating Paula's suicide.
The Doctor arranged for Ace, and all potential witnesses on Moloch, to die.
Am I missing any salient events?’
‘The death of the Energy Policeman, Moshe-Rabaan,— and the disappearance of Sam Russell?’
Bernice replied snappily.
‘Oh, Krau Rabaan controlled the security drones.
Perhaps the Doctor suspected she too might have evidence against him, and killed her.
Sam….
Well, a cuckolded husband — I'm sure I can fit him in somewhere.’
‘A trifle thin.’
‘It's all I need.’
Bernice thought quickly, trying to remember her history.
Like lag-ships and vargol generators, simularities had died out pretty quickly in historical terms.
The fad hadn't lasted to her time, but she still remembered articles in the learned techno-archaeology journals.
‘These simularities, they can be set to interpret body language and voice inflection, can't they?’
‘That's their main function,’ he said, inclining his head.
‘The neural net records all details of a scene — body posture, words, tone of voice, movement — and when the scene is replayed it enhances certain features to make the record less ambiguous.’
‘Enhances?’
Bernice was on to something.
Bishop didn't seem discomfited.
‘Yes.
For instance, if somebody shows evidence of being tense whilst being questioned, that can be emphasized in order to make their behaviour clearer.’
‘But any characteristic can be enhanced.’
‘In theory, yes.’
Somewhere at the back of her mind, it occurred to Bernice that Bishop was giving her an awful lot of rope.
‘May I try an experiment?’ she asked.
Bishop gestured to the table.
‘But I do have copies of the simularity,’ he warned.
Bernice tried to recall the initial lessons that Cheryl had given her, soon after the TARDIS had landed on Belial.
Her fingers danced over the keyboard, uncertain at first, then more sure.
‘Let's try it from a different perspective,’ she said, and pressed <RUN> again.
‘Did Cheryl really say that she loves me?’
Paula asked ecstatically.
The Doctor nodded.
‘But she can't leave Sam,’ she said, hoping that the Doctor would contradict her.
It was all too good to be true.
‘That's what she told me.’
He smiled conspiratorially.
‘It's all so stupid,’ Paula said, and giggled.
‘It doesn't matter what you think,’ the Doctor chided gently.
‘It's Cheryl's feelings that count.’
‘I know how Sam is going to feel,’ she said wistfully.
‘Don't,’ said the Doctor, and shook his head.
Paula searched his eyes for an answer.
‘Be stupid!’ he encouraged, and smiled.
‘You're right.’
She smiled back.
‘It's Cheryl's decision.
I can't argue with that.’
‘And are you still going down in the starsuit?’
She remembered the smoothness of Cheryl's skin, the fullness of her lips.
‘I might not be,’ she said.
He got up, startling her.
There was something about his presence that made her feel calm and peaceful.
‘Coming back?’ she asked, as he raised his hat.
He nodded, and left.
‘You see,’ Bernice said triumphantly.
‘Same words, different meanings.
The Doctor could be innocent!’
‘I know,’ Bishop said.
‘I've run fifteen variations of that conversation, and every one has come up with different motivations for the Doctor.
Either the software is playing up, or your friend is the most complex character I have ever had the pleasure of arresting.’
‘In that case —’
The floor shook with a distant explosion.
Klaxons began to wail.
‘Bloody hell!
What was that?’
‘The Conference Room.’
Bishop's voice was so calm Bernice wanted to scream.
‘Oh Christ.
The Doctor!’
Bernice left the office at a dead run.
By the time she reached the Conference Room, the air was filled with the smell of burning, more even than the atmosphere recyclers could deal with.
The corridor was filled with people, some wielding fire extinguishers, others rushing medkits through the smoke.
Bernice pushed her way through the confused mass of people, looking for Miles or Piper.
Neither was in plain sight.
The Russian botanist Anushkia  Smyslov seemed to be in charge, directing people to clear twisted metal beams from the corridor and check the Base's integrity with air-pressure sensors.
‘Doctor Smyslov, what's happened?
Have you seen the Doctor?
He was in the Conference Room.’
The big Russian shook her head with a marked lack of sympathy.
‘Sensors have confirmed the Conference Room is open to space.
Unless your friend can breathe vacuum, he's dead.
’ She pushed past Bernice.
‘Now if you'll excuse me, I do have a job to do.’
Miles Engado faced west along the bay and watched the sun sinking past the village into a golden haze of spray.
Soon it would be time for the ceremony to begin: for him to walk into the darkened woods and connect his mind to that of the Whale.
To pray for the great creature's cooperation in tomorrow's activity.
The season of the hunt had come again to the people of the North Water.
He walked along the beach, past rows of low cedar huts, his bare feet kicking at the surf which swept in from the north, enjoying the cool water and the tickling sensation of sand being swept between his toes and around his ankles.
Other men of the village were beaching their canoes even as he watched, pulling ashore the dead seals which would ultimately become floats to slow the Whale in the hunt.
Children combed the shoreline for strong shells which the women would sharpen and affix to spears twice the height of a man.
The spears would serve to fish and hunt with, as well as defend the village against competing tribes.
Miles offered up a silent prayer as he walked.
He was lucky to have been born in this particular tribe.
The ocean provided a bountiful supply of fresh food and, together with the forests inland, provided all the raw materials necessary to reap the harvest, as well as jealously guard it.
Miles thought back to his first season as a hunter.
He remembered the heat of the sun on his back, and the way the cold water cleaved at the touch of the canoe, as it was propelled forward in search of prey by the hunters.
He remembered squinting eagerly to catch sight of the basking seals, content and sleepy in the afternoon sunshine, and pointing with excitement when he did.
The other men in the canoe had laughed at his impatience and berated him for pointing.
Everyone knew that to point at the seals was taboo.
Miles had hung his head in shame.
He'd had no wish to wake the seal's and drive them away.
His friend Okawi had signalled to the other canoes by gently shaking his thumb in the direction of the sleeping animals.
Paddles had dipped silently into the water; the canoes sped closer, but the seals had awoken suddenly, and swum away.
Just three seals had been killed that day, when more than twenty were needed; and only one cleanly, by a single spear-thrust from Okawi.
Later, Miles had carved the dead seals' faces on the two killing clubs to honour the animals' sacrifice.
He had never shown impatience or eagerness again.
Miles smiled.
He had been little more than a boy then.
Now he was a man, Chief of his village.
It was his responsibility to convince the Whale to cooperate in the hunt, so the people of the village might be fed and clothed for another season.
He watched as the women of the village — his new wife, Beruna, among them — rushed down to the waterline in their reed skirts.
There they would gut the seals and render their oil, which they would later store in the stomachs and bladders of sea lions.
Moving closer, Miles watched as strips of blubber were placed along with heated stones into canoes filled with water.
The oil floated to the surface and was skimmed away to be used later as a food dip.
He moved slowly along the beach.
Preparations for the hunt seemed to be going well.
Okawi had prepared the hunting canoes and was now praying over their steep sides.
Beruna glared as he walked past to join Okawi, her hands full of seal blubber, a bone knife beside her on the sand.
He knew she was angry with him for allowing their daughter to join the hunt, traditionally something only a  select few men were allowed the honour of, but she would see his way soon enough.
Paula had proved to him she was as able a fisherwoman as any of the men.
And he was Chief, after all.
Perhaps it was time for tradition to change just a little.
He smiled back at Beruna, trying to silently communicate how proud he was, of both her and Paula, but her eyes fell angrily to her work.
Miles looked up.
The topmost edge of the sun was about to dip beyond the North Water.
The sky was cloudless and glowing.
Tomorrow the hunt would begin.
Even now Miles could feel the great Whale approaching, assured of its destiny, its place in the scheme of life.
It was time to pray.
Leaving Okawi and Beruna, Miles turned away from the village and padded silently across the beach to the tree line.
Beyond the first line of trees the forest was shrouded in darkness.
Only the topmost branches were still gilded by daylight, the illuminated areas shrinking as the sun dropped below the misty horizon.
Miles stepped across the threshold and into a different world.
The thunder of the surf became a muted whisper, driven into silence by the rustling of branches and the innumerable calls of night animals, bats and insects.
His feet, still speckled with sand, moved confidently through the undergrowth.
He made no sound: he was one with the land.
Above him, the trees became black silhouettes against a midnight blue sky.
Stars shone thinly.
Miles walked on into the night, to a special place, a secret place, that only he knew.
His praying pool.
There he slipped soundlessly into the cold black water and remained submerged, except for his face, floating easily as the night deepened.
As he swam he dreamed the Whale calm, asking the great creature politely for its cooperation in garnering that which his village needed.
He remembered the words of his grandfather, so many years ago:
‘The Whale always gives our people something.
The Whale always helps someone who needs him.
When you are in the forest, take water at every creek.
Blow it and  start praying while spraying mist from your mouth.
In this way will you grow closer to the Whale.
In this way will it do what you ask of it.’
In his mind the Whale drifted closer through the piebald darkness, and sang:
I have come to see how your house is.
Is it prepared for large crowds?
At the touch of these words, Miles felt calmness leave him.
He knew doubt.
‘Large crowds?’
His grandfather had never mentioned these words.
No Whale in previous seasons had sung these words.
‘Is your house prepared for large crowds?’
Disturbed, Miles swam slowly to the edge of the pool and climbed out of the water.
He stood shivering in the cold air, no longer one with the land, his eyes dim and sightless, his ears blocked to the night sounds, and tried to think.
His house?
Miles moved back through the forest, back towards the beach.
Fires loomed in the night, driving back the darkness.
He moved to his hut.
Beruna.
She was wise.
She would know what his vision meant.
He stooped to enter the hut — and paused.
There were sounds coming from inside.
His wife.
And another.
Another!
Angrily, Miles stepped into the hut.
Beruna stood to face him, blocking his view into the hut.
‘You should not be here.
You should be praying to the Whale.
Without prayers, the Whale will not cooperate in the hunt and the village will starve for lack of food and oil to trade.’
‘I!’
Miles felt a fury boil up within him.
‘I should not be here?
What, then, of this other, skulking in the shadows like a crab?’
Miles moved to pull his wife aside.
Before he could touch her, the concealed figure rose.
‘I am no crab, Miles Engado,’ said Okawi.
‘As you are no Chief, any longer.
Any man who allows his daughter to hunt with warriors does not deserve to lead the tribe.’
‘We will see this tested tomorrow, in the hunt.’
Miles turned and left the hut.
The pursuit began as the sun rose across the bay.
Strong, silent paddling brought three canoes close to the great Whale.
The canoes were loaded with sealskin floats.
Miles stood at one prow, Okawi at another.
Cedar harpoons were clutched in their hands, anchored to the floats by long coils of rope made from cedar bark.
The water was choppy.
Hatred showed in Miles's face.
Jealousy glittered in Okawi's eyes.
The hunters paddling each canoe were terrified.
This was not the way a hunt should be.
Each remembered all too clearly Okawi's parting words before they had pushed each canoe clear of the beach:
‘Beruna will not lie still in her hut for you this day, and so the Whale will thrash about.
She will not face inland, and so the Whale will not swim ashore.
Today she is mine.
Today you will catch no Whale, and I will be Chief.’
And of course— there was Paula, gripping her harpoon in the third canoe.
Miles had remained silent as they had paddled out into the water, though his heart was full of anger and grief.
At first sight of the Whale, he had gripped the harpoon tightly, perhaps wishing it was Okawi's neck.
Fear was in him.
Fear, and betrayal.
Yet the Whale must be caught or else the village would know hardship and death.
Ahead, the Whale breached the surface and blew.
A fountain of stinking saltwater erupted into the air.
Great flukes slapped the ocean with a sound like thunder.
Spray drenched the canoes.
Miles signalled, and the hunters drove on.
as if sensing their approach, the Whale turned and headed away from shore.
Okawi stood in his canoe and yelled triumphantly.
‘I am right, Miles Engado!
I am right!’
Miles called to the hunters to increase their speed.
The canoes shot forward, Paula's drawing level with the Whale's head.
Miles watched as she levelled her harpoon and drew back her arm.
With a triumphant yell, she hurled the harpoon.
It sank into the Whale's glistening  skin just behind its head.
The animal thrashed with the sudden pain, and sounded with a great gout of water tinged with blood.
Once again its flukes slapped the water, and this time the effect was disastrous.
A huge wave swamped the canoes, overturning them and tipping the hunters into the foaming water.
Miles found himself in the water, tangled in coils of rope, battered by sealskin floats.
Paula was floating nearby, blood trickling from a rope burn across her shoulders.
Unable to free himself from the tangle of ropes and floats, Miles swam laboriously across to his daughter.
Just as he reached her, the Whale surged upwards again and Miles was caught by the wave.
He could only watch helplessly as Paula was hurled headfirst into the canoe floating nearby.
There was a sickening crunch, and he lost sight of her ill the swell.
He tried to yell instructions, but water smashed into his face, filling his mouth and nose, suffocating and blinding him.
Then the rope tightened around his body, and he felt something pulling him beneath the surface.
The Whale.
He was caught on the harpoon rope.
Water rushed past his face, growing swiftly darker and colder as he was pulled down.
He tugged uselessly at the ropes, but could not free himself.
His knife was gone, swept away in the confusion.
His chest burned savagely as the ropes bit into his skin.
There was a sudden sharp pain in his ears.
He opened his mouth to scream his anger and pain, and the water rushed in, eager to silence him.
His limbs became heavier, until the effort needed to move them was simply too much.
It grew cold and dark as a winter night, and there was no Beruna to hold him, and no daughter to comfort him, only the rope's cruel embrace, and the Whale's anger.
His last sensation was of pressure waves rippling against his body.
The Whale was…
…screaming as he lurched from his bed, his hands  groping for his throat, his chest heaving convulsively as he fought for air.
He fell to the floor, tangled in a single sheet, thrashing in panic.
The Whale!
Okawi!
His wife was….
She was….
Miles became quite still.
His ancestral village and its myths were three hundred years in the past, and the clear, blue waters of the bay were a sludge of industrial effluent through which thrashed the occasional blinded seabird.
His unfaithful wife was nine years dead.
Only Paula was left to him now.
His face fell and he began to sob as he came fully awake and remembered that even that was no longer true.
Bernice scrambled madly through the twisted wreckage as Anushkia Smyslov lost herself in the chaos, shouting orders.
Tears were driven from her eyes by the smoke.
She pushed past Julie Ndobe, grabbing a medkit from the woman's hands, and running further into the smoke, only to fetch up hard against a metal barrier.
‘No!’
Uselessly, she hammered on the pressure door.
‘Somebody help me get the door open!’
A hand fell on her shoulder.
Bernice spun, grabbing for the body at the end of the arm, not caring who it was.
‘You've got to help me!
We can get him out.
He has a respiratory bypass system, we can —’
‘Bernice, it's too late.’
Teal Green grabbed her shoulders and shook her hard.
‘He's gone.
Gone.’
Bernice gazed stupidly at the engineer.
‘Bullshit!
He's alive !’
‘No.’
‘Christ.
Oh, Christ.’
Bernice pulled away from Teal.
‘I've got to get this sorted out.’
‘Where are you going?’
‘Bishop had the whole place monitored.
I'm going to find out how this happened — and who's responsible.’
Bernice rushed off into the smoke.
Teal moved worriedly after her.
Piper O'Rourke stepped out of the murk behind them, wearing a concerned expression.
She turned on her heel and vanished into the murk.
Bishop tried to block the sound of the explosion from his ears, but couldn't.
He tried to imagine what the inside of the Conference Room would look like now, and found he all too easily could.
He sighed, and reached for his tea.
It had all been so simple until now.
As a child he had lain in bed long into the night, plotting his escape from an alcoholic father and a mother who managed not to see the bruises and the tears.
He studied in every spare moment he could find, not because he wanted to but because, in the absence of parents who would pay, he needed to win a scholarship even to get to school.
He got it.
And he fought every moment of his time at school to keep it.
With no family money or family privilege to protect him, he was easy meat, so he learned how to protect himself.
He learned how to talk his way.
out of trouble and, when that didn't work, how to cripple an opponent in the shortest possible time.
He went from school to college, and he graduated top of his class.
A still, small voice inside him murmured ‘this is all too easy’, but offers flooded in from the combines, the multi-nationals, the companies who had profited from the rape of the Earth, and who were now taking their ecological molestation into space.
He had got himself noticed.
But something inside him, some long-ago echo of a boy beaten into insensibility if he cried, said, no, money isn't everything, satisfaction isn't everything, what about justice?
It was a small man in long, black robes who turned Bishop's life around.
He had engaged Bishop in conversation on the travel belts one day, displaying an uncanny knowledge not only of Bishop's life, but also of his innermost thoughts.
Bishop had known what was happening: the Guild of Adjudicators was famed and feared in equal measure amongst the Earth colonies.
Unconstrained by authority, independent of financial influence, they dispensed their own uncompromising brand of justice across  the galaxy.
Their indirect recruiting methods were legendary.
Bishop didn't take much persuading.
After five years intensive training on the secluded world of Ponten VI — a curious mixture of legal precedent and target practice — Bishop was allowed out in the field as squire to a more experienced Adjudicator.
He found that he enjoyed the work.
More than that, he was good at it.
He moved up through the system rapidly enough to make his mark without looking flashy.
Perhaps, on every promotion, a little voice inside his head muttered, ‘Who are you kidding?
You can't possibly do this job,’ but his cases were always brought to a conclusion in the minimum time and, more importantly, with the minimum expense.
He was dedicated.
His social life didn't suffer, because he didn't have a social life.
Sometimes, in the long reaches of the night, the philosophical difference between what was right and what was just bothered him, but a cup of tea and a good night's sleep usually solved that problem
He never thought about his family.
Eventually, more as a matter of course than as a reward, he was made an Adjudicator; judge, jury and executioner, all rolled into one.
He deserved it, there was no doubt about that, but still something inside him whispered, ‘You're heading for a fall.’
From the messy consequences of the Kroagnon affair to the vraxoin raids off Azure, from the Macra case to the Vega debacle, Bishop's record was immaculate.
Not one failure, not one incorrect prosecution, not a hint of doubt anywhere.
Until now.
Bishop listened to the rolling echoes of the explosion which had destroyed the Conference Room die away deep within the base.
He reached for his tea.
‘I made a fresh pot,’ said a soft voice at his elbow.
‘You, Doctor, might very well have destroyed my career.
The Doctor grinned.
‘That'd be a clever trick for someone who's just been blown up.’
Calmly, he took a sip of  tea.
‘Nice.
But it would taste so much better from a Wedgwood pot.’
Bishop sighed impatiently.
The Doctor set down his beaker.
‘Well, Adjudicator.
Are you ready for the moment of truth?’
Bishop nodded.
‘Neural net,’ he said quietly.
‘Access simularity file one.
Location: Conference Room exterior.
Let's see who the murderer really is.’
The lights went out; all power to the neural net was severed.
Teal Green was coughing up a lungful of smoke when the Base was plunged into darkness.
Immediately, a string of curses echoed down the corridor and there was the sound of someone falling over.
Teal felt his way carefully forward.
His foot thumped against something soft in the darkness.
‘Be careful!
That's me you're kicking!’
‘Bernice?’
‘You were expecting the Isley Brothers?’
‘Who?’
‘Grief, help me up will you?
And what's going on?’
‘Power failure.’
‘How can that happen?’
‘It can't.
All systems are independently monitored by the neural net.’
‘Well, I hate to disagree with you, but —’
‘Yeah, right.
Point taken.
Come on.’
‘Where to?’
‘The backup systems should have kicked in by now.
We must be looking at a general systems failure.
If we don't get life support up and running soon, we'll all suffocate.’
‘Wonderful,’ Bernice said dryly.
‘What do we do first?’
‘Finding a torch would be a good trick.’
Teal groped around the corridor wall.
‘There ought to be a — ah!
Here we go.’
A door opened.
From within the room came the sound of a man sobbing.
‘Miles?’
‘Paula?
I'll be with you soon.
I promise.’
Before they could move, someone pushed past them and shambled off down the corridor.
The Doctor pulled a small torch from his pocket and clicked it on.
The beam was more than adequate to illuminate the non-operational neural net systems.
He tapped a key experimentally, but there was no response.
‘Someone has a positively dramatic sense of timing.’
Bishop drained his beaker of tea.
‘Power failure.’
‘Yes, but what caused it?’
‘More sabotage?’
‘Not unless the saboteur planned to take his own life as well.’
‘Or unless —’
‘The saboteur had already worked out an escape route.’
‘There is another possibility.’
The Doctor nodded.
‘Whoever, or whatever, invaded Moloch Base is now attempting a similar takeover here.’
He led the way to the office door.
‘Come along, Adjudicator.
I rather think your services will shortly be needed in the main airlock.
And your gun.’
Alex Bannen swung the beam of his torch wildly around the Operations Room.
‘Piper?
Are you here?
What the hell is going on?
The power's out all over the base, the temperature is dropping, the air's running out and Mark's gone.
He's just — switched off.’
Piper rose from the MultiCray inputting terminal.
‘I'm doing my best to restore emergency power.
Until the backup generators come on line, I can't get enough ergs to run a full check on the main systems.’
Bannen sighed.
‘For God's sake.
Ask a scientist to do a scientist's job — not an overblown plumber's mate.’
He pushed Piper aside and unclipped a service hatch in the main neural net cabinet.
Piper glared angrily at his bulky silhouette.
If she didn't do something now, he was going to screw everything up.
The Doctor rushed down the corridor, his small feet making virtually no sound on the metal grillework.
Puffing hard, Bishop followed close behind.
Either the corridors were empty of people, or the Doctor had managed to follow a less well-travelled route from Miles's office to the main airlock, several levels below.
With no power to drive the klaxons or the air recyclers, the Base was eerily silent.
Only distant clangs and echo-distorted snatches of conversation drifting along the cross-corridors testified to the tremendous effort being put into restarting the systems.
The Doctor slid to a halt at the inner door to the main airlock.
He tapped quickly at the opening mechanism.
The door remained shut.
‘Odd.
The door's been locked with a command level override.’
Bishop frowned in the darkness.
‘Only Miles Engado has that clearance.’
The Doctor cleared his throat.
‘Ahem.
Well, actually….’
He tapped out another rapid series of digits and the lock disengaged.
The Doctor grabbed the manual locking wheel and began to spin it rapidly.
Hydraulic pressure built up slowly until the door wheezed open.
Umbrella held high, the Doctor led the way into the chamber.
There were clanking noises coming from further within.
He shone his torch around the chamber.
‘Miles?
Miles Engado?
We know you're in here….’
There was a hollow clunk, and the rising whine of power.
Ten metres away, lights bloomed in the darkness.
Bishop drew his gun.
‘Miles Engado, I am arresting you for the —’
‘Miles, no!’
The Doctor rushed forward, but was too late to prevent Miles latching down his helmet and powering up the starsuit.
Warning lights flashed on the suit's shoulders as it lumbered slowly to the airlock outer door.
One servo-driven arm reached out to grip the door's locking wheel.
‘Get out!’ the Doctor called, running back towards the inner door.
After a moment's hesitation, Bishop followed.
The locking wheel turned.
The door began to open.
‘All the failsafes are power driven — if we don't get out the whole section will depressurize!’
Air began to whistle out of the airlock.
Together, the Doctor and Bishop scrambled through the inner door against the mounting pressure of air.
The Doctor swung himself round the door and gripped the locking wheel.
The door slid shut as the wheel spun.
The air-scream ceased.
Bishop holstered his gun.
A light bobbed up and down further along the corridor, accompanied by the sound of running footsteps.
Bernice and Teal halted breathlessly beside the Doctor and Bishop.
‘Doctor!
My God, you are alive!’
Bernice said, stunned.
The Doctor found a second to doff his hat.
‘It's Miles, we have to stop him,’ she said.
‘He is responsible for the sabotage on the Base and he has implicated himself by trying to escape,’ Bishop said harshly.
‘No, you don't understand.’
Teal waved-a piece of paper under Bishop's nose.
‘We found this in his quarters.
It's a suicide note.
He's not trying to escape; he's trying to kill himself.’
‘Then who's responsible for all this?’
There was a groan from the darkness, and Alex Bannen stumbled into the splash of light made by the torches.
He raised one hand to the back of his head; his fingers came away stained with blood.
‘Piper.
It's bloody Piper.
She brained me when I tried to reboot the neural net.’
He fell to the floor with a groan, blood pooling around his head.
Kreig was counting her ears again.
‘Thirty-eight,’ Ardamal prompted from the far side of the squalid, duralinium-lined bunkroom.
‘You had thirty eight yesterday morning, and thirty-eight last night.
‘Less there's someone woke up today hard of hearing, there's thirty-eight there now.’
Kreig looked up, an ear held delicately in her hand like some alien flower.
‘You trying to make a point?’ she snarled.
‘Just wondering.’
‘Wondering what?’
‘Why you keep counting.’
‘Case some dumb-ass tries to steal one.’
‘Yeah, stupid of me,’ Ardamal muttered, as Kreig wrapped the ear in soft plastic, placed it gently back in its box, and picked another out.
Dommer had been following the exchange from his bunk, where he was obsessively stripping and reassembling his flamer.
‘How many d'you get in that last action?’ he asked.
His throat had been badly scarred by praxis gas during a bankruptcy action three years ago, and his words came out sounding like fingernails scratching glass.
‘Come on, Dommer,’ Ardamal said.
‘You know her rules.
One every time.
Like a keepsake.
For luck.’
Dommer laughed.
‘Yeah,’ he said.
‘Beats hell out'a crappy tourist gifts.’
His fingers idly stroked the oiled metal of his exposed weapon.
Kreig wasn't listening.
Her deeply lined face was creased into a smile as she gazed at the tiny ear in her hand.
‘Asset-stripping InterSpace Incorporated, back in Tokyo in fifty-six,’ she whispered.
Her face was radiant.
‘Tiny kid, daughter of the Chairman.
We Zed-bombed the barriers and went in with shielded skimmers.
Corporate lawyers went in under our covering fire to deliver the paperwork.’
She turned the ear until Ardamal could see the crust of blood beneath it.
‘They wanted the Chairman's retinal print for the waiver forms,’ she continued.
‘Didn't.say nothing about wanting the rest of him, though.
And I got his kid.’
‘I remember Tokyo,’ said Dommer, and laughed.
‘Had a good time, and Jeez, the bonuses!
Those shares're still paying off better'n the regular paycheck.’
‘I thought you was on the InterSpace payroll back then?’
Ardamal growled.
‘Yeah, but I got head-hunted.
IMC bought out my contract.
I've spent thirty years as a Company Shock Trooper, and IMC's the best thing that ever happened to me.
I mean, take this last action.
Nobody firing back, and we still get a percentage of the profits.
Just a turkey shoot, that's all it was.’
His voice was beginning to grate on Ardamal.
‘Had myself a nice piece of Scottish ass, though,’ Dommer reminisced with a gap-toothed smile.
‘Wildcat, that one.’
He ran a hand over the parallel scratches down his cheek.
‘Had to give her a good talking to.’
He fondled the scorched barrel of the flamer.
‘A good talking to.’
‘No cover,’ Ardamal said, just to shut Dommer up.
‘Be thankful nobody was firing back.
The way the ground just curled up at the edges until you lost sight of it, we couldn't have crept up on a hunk of soya.’
‘Yeah.’
Dommer had reassembled his flamer now, and was checking the calibration on the sights by centring the laser marker on Kreig's temple.
‘That was kinda —’
The alert sirens screamed.
Three sets of boots hit the floor.
‘All crew to stations ,’ the tannoy rasped.
‘Escaped prisoner.
Repeat; escaped prisoner.
Amber alert.
Repeat; amber alert.
Troops one to seventeen adopt search pattern spiral delta.
This is not an exercise.
Repeat; this is not an exercise .’
Ardamal just beat Kreig out of the door, while Dommer was still fumbling with his flamer.
The last thing Ardamal heard as he raced down the corridor was the tinkle of metal parts hitting the floor.
As he leaped for the null-grav shaft, he caught sight of the prisoner thrashing through the air two storeys above.
Her pony-tail was weaving like a snake, and she was still dressed in blood-stained black armour and shiny leggings; the same kit that she had been wearing when Ardamal and his section had dragged her, kicking and screaming, into the IMC executive transporter.
This time she had a gun.
Ardamal twisted lithely, presenting the smallest possible surface area to the woman whilst simultaneously lining up his needler on her left breast.
‘Body shots are best,’ he heard the long-ago voice of Sergeant Cribb saying, back at the IMC training camp, as he demonstrated various weapons and aiming techniques on a row of terrified ElleryCorp prisoners.
‘If you miss the heart, you might still put a hole through something vital.
If you miss the head, you've missed them completely.’
Kreig swam to one side, hugging the walls, boosting her speed with handholds and seams, trying to overtake the woman and pin her between exits.
Textbook stuff.
The woman was drifting upwards now; trying to read exit signs whilst still watching for pursuit.
Klaxons echoed up and down the shaft.
The peculiar properties of air under null-grav conditions added an extra resonance to the noise.
Kreig passed the woman without a sound, without a breeze, climbing like a rocket to Exit 347, where she hung, waiting for the woman and Ardamal to catch up.
Ardamal manoeuvred himself to a position below and slightly behind the woman, hidden by her legs.
As his needler's laser marker passed across her back, he pressed the compensation stud.
Micro-gyros kicked in, stabilizing  the bright dot on the base of her spine.
Somewhere in the back of his mind was the knowledge that Legion wanted the woman kept alive, but the sight of Kreig's ears had given Ardamal a thirst, and he needed to slake it.
The needler felt like it was locked in space.
He took up the trigger pressure.
Body shots are best.
‘Ard’ old buddy, where's the…
Shit!’
Dommer had come flailing into the shaft below Ardamal.
He caught sight of the woman at the same time she heard him.
Her eyes widened.
Dommer swung his flamer up to cover her as she twisted her handgun around.
She hadn't trained in null-grav, that much was obvious.
Her body spun in the opposite direction to her gun as she fired, conserving angular momentum and throwing her aim completely off.
Energy flashed past Ardamal in a long arc of fire, blistering the side of the shaft, missing his face by less than half a metre.
Dommer, chanting some kind of battle hymn, fired.
His incompletely assembled weapon exploded, smothering his head, arms and shoulders in a mass of flames.
Screaming, he cartwheeled into the side of the shaft and rebounded, leaving a smear of grease and soot.
The smell of roasting flesh drifted up the shaft.
Ardamal ignored the distraction and took careful aim again.
The prisoner was trying to stabilize her spin, and failing.
There was no fear in her eyes: only hatred, and the knowledge that she could never, ever die.
He pulled the trigger.
The space where she had been was obliterated in a flash of hard radiation.
When the blaze cleared, there was nothing.
For hours the planet had grown no larger in Miles Engado's faceplate; seeming instead to retreat as he fell towards it.
Lucifer was indifferent to him.
It tolerated his advance, but would make no concessions.
He berated it, screaming out his rage and his fear until his voice was a  croak, and small droplets of sweat and spittle hung about his face.
It made no difference.
Lucifer did not hear him.
Or, if it did, it paid him no heed.
Drained by his ranting and lulled by the way he could float in the starsuit, just touching the padded interior, he drifted into and out of sleep like a man wandering through the rooms of an empty house.
His dreams were short and violent, punctuated by images of a vast, barnacle-encrusted shape which drifted disdainfully away as he swam towards it.
When he finally surfaced, his mouth stale and his eyes hot and gritty, Lucifer's atmosphere had already enfolded him like a shroud.
He twisted his head to look upwards, but Moloch was just a faint disc half hidden by the clouds: a burnished coin beneath polluted water.
He floundered in panic as, for a brief moment, he could not remember why he was there.
He knew that he had written a note explaining everything, but the note was back on Belial and he had forgotten its contents.
Had he said that he was going to his death in Lucifer's inferno?
Had he written about the great hunt, the rites of the warriors?
It was all so far away now.
There was only him, and the clouds, and the hidden face of Lucifer.
He was not falling.
Rather: thin muslin sheets of brown and red were being pulled past his eyes, patterned like the blankets woven by the women, patterned like the rug that hung on the wall in his daughter's room.
Shadows drifted past him like fronds, dappled with refracted sunlight, tied with thin streams of bubbles as he sank slowly into the welcoming depths of the ocean, under the incurious eye of the great Whale….
When he awoke again, it was with a pounding headache.
The starsuit was hotter now; the heat of re-entry and the energy of Lucifer's interior triumphing over the best human life support technology.
His sweat had floated from him whilst he slept, and whilst he fell, overwhelming the humidity regulators, pooling in the extremities of the starsuit and soaking into the padding.
The atmosphere had closed in: now it was as if a clumsy child had finger-painted  amorphous swirls and blobs in dull colours over faceplate.
His thoughts were clearer now.
Perhaps the heat had given his mind the boost it needed to throw off the dream world that had gradually surrounded him since Paula's fall into the maw of the Beast.
He remembered the note.
He remembered writing of Paula's death,— of how he could not live without knowing the truth, and how, if he gave himself into the hands of the great Whale, he knew that he would be reunited with her in death.
He remembered wanting to write a farewell to Piper.
He wondered if he had.
Miles shook his head wearily.
Project Eden had eaten five years of his life, and spat them back at him, empty of meaning.
There had been no contact with the Angels; there would be no power source for Earth.
He had failed his race as he had failed his family.
The indicators were beginning to flicker hesitantly, reminding him of his foolishness.
He was a stupid old man who deserved to die.
Like his wife.
Like his daughter.
He prepared to give himself over to whatever fate Lucifer had in store for him.
And that was why, when Paula's face swam out of the murky clouds and peered incuriously at him, Miles Engado screamed.
The room was warm and inviting, like a gentleman's club, the lounge bar in her local back in Perivale.
It engendered immediate feelings of friendship, of belonging.
For the first time since Heaven, Ace thought of Julian, and the times they had sat in worn green leather armchairs, the hum of traffic from the A40 outside making waves in their glasses, knowing that the barman thought they were underage but also knowing that Ace intimidated him so much that he wouldn't say anything.
This room was like that: oak panelled, plushly carpeted, lined with portraits, slightly musty.
The chandeliers floating near the ceiling were a touch ornate for her taste, but she liked the huge wooden table stacked up with what looked like real fruit.
After so long eating recycled meals on Belial, her salivary glands sprang into life with sharp little pangs of anticipation.
It was entirely inappropriate, but she couldn't help herself.
Moloch seemed so long ago.
And there was something else in the room with her.
She turned slowly, ready for action.
Whatever it was, it vanished as she turned.
She caught sight of a movement out of the corner of her eye, whirled, but was too late to see anything.
She was alone.
Bugger this for a game of soldiers, she thought, and opened her mouth to speak.
‘I must apologize for my staff.
Their actions can be precipitate.’
The voice surprised her.
Or was it voices?
Bass, tenor, alto and soprano; the words seemed to glide up and down the scale from moment to moment with no consistency.
Their direction seemed to change as well.
It was almost as if she was surrounded by a choir, with each person allocated one word, but so well rehearsed that the sentences flowed seamlessly along.
‘Precipitate!’
Ace snarled.
‘Your ‘staff’ killed my friends.
I don't care what fancy words you use, I call it murder!’
She waved her weapon menacingly.
Whatever vanishing act had saved her from the goon with the gun, it had left her armed.
Foolish, very foolish.
There was a laugh from behind her.
Ace snapped around, priming the weapon as she moved.
The laugh curled around her, beginning as a soft chuckle, evolving through a deep guffaw, and ending as a childlike giggle, once more behind her.
Her lips thinned.
Her finger slipped inside the weapon's trigger guard.
‘I'm warning you.
Stop taking the piss.’
‘The Terrestrial sense of humour,’ said the voice.
‘There's nothing quite like it anywhere else in the cosmos.’
Ace frowned.
She'd intended to appear threatening, not amusing.
‘Yes, I'm afraid they're ruined,’ the voice continued, as if engaged in a different conversation.
‘Perhaps you would like to slip into something more comfortable.’
Ace frowned.
What was going on here?
The conversation was hopping all over the place like a dakkabug on a griddle.
‘Albert, the master of witty repartee, says ‘Piss off’,’ she retorted, finally finding a use for the punchline of the worst joke she'd ever been told.
A whiff of burned material caught her attention.
She glanced down, trying to trace the source of the smell, and suddenly noticed that her leggings were scorched and her polycarbide armour was blistered and smoking, its structural integrity ruined.
‘Oh sod,’ she said.
‘I'd just worn them in, as well.’
‘Ah, no, your friends are not dead,’ the voice said.
For a moment, it was a child's voice, just behind her shoulder, but then it was old, and quavery-y, and a million miles away.
‘No, merely anaesthetized.
I have them under medical supervision.’
Ace frowned.
She remembered….
…
A spray of warmth across her face….
A flash of light….
Shadowy figures emerging from a doorway with weapons raised….
Hands grabbing her and pulling her down….
Rachel and Chas sprawled in undignified positions on the floor….
Lars screaming and falling….
A hypogun….
A coldness spreading across her shoulders and racing through her limbs….
The long fall into darkness ….
She supposed it was possible that they weren't all dead.
She suddenly found it much easier to breathe.
There had been too much death already in her life.
She wanted to believe that her friends were still alive.
But — it didn't quite make sense.
The weight hovered over her shoulders, ready to settle.
Her finger tightened on the trigger.
‘Why am I awake and pissed off, then?’ she started to ask, but the voice interrupted her before the ‘awake’was complete.
‘Your constitution is strong, for a human,’ it said.
‘You  fought off the effects of the anaesthetic faster than my medical orderly thought possible.’
It made a strange sort of sense.
She remembered waking up in a long room filled with covered beds; knocking a uniformed man to the ground; taking his gun and running.
She felt disoriented: like Alice in Wonderland, everything seemed to be arse-about-face.
‘All around you,’ said the voice suddenly.
‘Where are you?’
Ace snapped, and stopped, taken aback.
‘No, I can't,’ the voice continued.
‘Can you read my…?’
She bit off the sentence, waiting for the voice to continue.
Not a sound.
She opened her mouth experimentally.
Nothing.
‘If you can't —’ she said quickly, and stopped.
Nothing.
‘— read my mind, then how could you answer my questions before I had a chance to ask them?’ she gabbled, and took a deep breath.
‘How embarrassing,’ the voice said.
‘I appear to be slightly out of synchronization.
My apologies.’
A fleshy black shape swelled up from nothing in front of her.
Thin tendrils spilled from it and trailed to the floor.
Beside her another, squatter, shape appeared, its tendrils quivering restlessly.
Above her head, a pancake-shaped mass of blue flesh slowly spun.
Something moved down by her feet.
She took a quick step backwards.
The thing stayed where it was: a small, grey, pear shape made of some doughy material.
Ace raised her stolen gun, unsure which of the things to aim at.
Her fingers gripped thin air.
The gun had vanished from her hand.
‘Allow me to introduce myself,’ the voice said.
The grey ovoid pulsed in time with the words.
‘My name is Legion, and I am acting captain of the Interstellar Mining Corporation vessel Insider Trading .’
Tendrils from the two black shapes reached out to entwine with each other, pulling their cores closer together until, as Ace watched in amazement, they melded together into a single muscular column of flesh crowned with thorns.
‘Bloody hell,’ she said.
‘Why didn't you say so earlier?
I've been trying to find you for ages.’
They fell together, father and daughter, through the poisonous atmosphere of Lucifer.
Father and daughter and something else.
‘You're alive.’
Miles whispered.
He felt sick with joy.
His tears floated from his eyes and star-splashed perfectly against his faceplate, one by one.
‘You're alive!’
Paula was not the daughter he remembered.
She had undergone a sea-change into something rich and strange down in the depths of Lucifer.
The great Whale had turned its terrible gaze upon her, transfiguring her once-smooth skin into sheets of light which hid deeper firefly gleams, like the Northern Lights back on Earth.
And yet he recognized her.
‘Dad?’
He heard her voice in his head.
‘Dad, you shouldn't have come —’
‘I had to.
The Angels saved you.
They care .
They want to help us.’
‘They didn't save me.’
The pain in her voice cut him deeply.
‘I was dying, and so was one of them….
There was a connection….
Somehow, we drew strength from each other, enough to stave off death for a little while longer.
We joined, but the joining can't last.
Our time has come.
We've been waiting for you.
We had to tell you….’
His throat was tight, and his mouth was twisted out of shape by grief.
‘Tell me what?’
‘To leave.
Get everybody out of Belial and Moloch now, before it's too late.’
‘And walk away from the best chance we've had in years to complete the mission?’
He felt a wave of exasperation rise within him.
‘Don't you understand?
The Project  will finally be able to work!
You can translate for us, human to Angel, Angel to human.
You'll be the saviour of the Earth.’
‘You haven't been listening to us.
We can't save anyone.
We're dying.
We can feel the pull of the core, dragging us down, forcing the last change upon us —’
‘There must be a way you can help us communicate with them.
If there's just one thing you can tell me, one clue to how they think —’
‘You were the same when Mum died,’ she wailed.
‘She wanted to tell you so many things, but you were too busy talking to listen.
She needed to know that you loved her; so you told her all about the new drugs she could get from the Arcturans, or the huge advances in radiation treatment since rho mesons had been discovered.
She didn't want any more pain, she wanted to be held.
You never told her that you loved her .’
‘Do you blame me?
After what she did?’
His voice was quiet and bitter.
Her silence was answer enough.
He closed his eyes for a minute.
When he opened them, he had an audience.
Paula was floating in the centre of a circle of Angels.
They hung before him; swirling, shifting, changing, somehow moving whilst staying perfectly still; their bodies evolving like glowing patterns in a three-dimensional kaleidoscope.
‘They want you to go,’ Paula said without words.
Her voice bubbled and changed like her body.
‘We want you to go.’
‘You don't understand,’ he cried.
‘My whole life has led me to this point.
To here.
You can't tell me it's for nothing.
Nobody can.
I won't hear that!
Paula.
I love you.
I want — need — answers!’
‘I don't have any for you, Dad.
I'm sorry.’
The uniform fitted Ace perfectly.
It wasn't as sophisticated as the one she had worn whilst attached to IMC during the Dalek Wars, three hundred years in the future, but  it brought back memories of belonging, of finally being accepted on her own terms by a group of her peers.
She looked over at the pile of burned clothing she had shed like a snake's skin, and shuddered.
It was a mistake to go back, she thought.
I've outgrown the Doctor now.
He needs me more than I need him.
My future lies elsewhere.
Legion was seated at the head of the table, and to either side of her, and floated up near the ceiling.
One of the black, tendrilled parts of its body was picking apart an orange and ingesting it, segment by segment.
The grey ovoid, some distance away, expanded and contracted in a movement which reminded Ace of nothing so much as chewing, although there was no way that she could see whereby the fruit could have been transmitted from one part of Legion to another.
‘This is probably a stupid question,’ Ace said from her position at the foot of the table, reaching out for another piece of fruit, ‘but are all these bits you, or what?’
‘I see you have noticed a certain peculiarity about my appearance.’
‘No shit?’ she said, straightfaced.
Ace could sense a sudden chilliness in Legion's manner.
The various parts of its body strained towards each other and collected into a hairy spherical fragment balanced on three pipe-cleaner legs at the head of the table.
‘I will not tolerate disrespect!’
‘Sorry, Captain,’ she snapped automatically.
She sat up a little straighter and resolved to regard her host with more of an open mind.
Legion was obviously intelligent, and deserved to be treated as such.
‘Very well,’ Legion continued.
‘I am not human, as you are.’
It paused, obviously expecting some kind of shocked reaction.
Ace nodded, saying nothing.
‘Whereas the lives of humans, and other linear races in the cosmos, are constrained to four dimensions, we are privileged to move through seven.’
‘There aren't seven dimensions,’ Ace exclaimed, and then added, ‘are there?’
‘The space-time continuum has eleven dimensions,’ Legion replied, ‘although four of them are inaccessible.’
‘So, what's it like then, living in seven dimensions?’
She took another bite of fruit.
Legion did not reply.
‘Legion?’
‘Indescribable.’
‘Nice one!’
‘But imagine, if you are able, watching small creatures floating on the surface of a pond.
Imagine that these creatures cannot look up or down, but only across the water itself.
They are not aware of the air, or the depths.
Their world is flat.’
As it talked, Legion's voice changed.
The various elements combined until it seemed to Ace that a choir was whispering to her.
‘You reach down from your exalted position, beyond their understanding, and put your — the things on the ends of your forelimbs….’
‘Fingers.’
‘…fingers into the water.
What do these creatures see?’
After a few seconds, Ace realized that this was not a rhetorical question.
‘Er….
My fingers?’
‘No, because your fingers exist in three dimensions, and they can only perceive two.
They see….’
It paused.
‘How many — fingers — do you possess?’
Ace held up a hand.
‘And is that normal for your species?’
Legion asked.
‘You don't pay much attention to your staff, do you?’
‘I have more important considerations.’
‘Yes.
Five fingers on each hand, if you include the thumbs.’
‘Thumbs?’
‘Never mind.’
‘Then these creatures see five discs suddenly appear in the water.
As far as they are concerned, these discs are five separate entities.
Why should they associate them  with each other?
But if you plunge your hand deeper into the water, up to the — the hinge section….’
‘The wrist.’
‘Up to the wrist, then the creatures who inhabit the surface of the water will see the five discs suddenly merge into one large ellipse.
Do you understand?’
Ace had actually understood some time ago, but if there was one lesson that she would take away gladly from her time with the Doctor, it was that it was better to have people underestimate your abilities than overestimate them.
‘I think so,’ she said cautiously.
‘And if you pick one of these creatures up and place it a little distance away on the surface of the water, all its fellows will see is that it vanished, and reappeared elsewhere.
Neither they, nor it, can see the air through which it moved.
Do you understand?’
‘Uh-huh.’
‘What you see of me,’ and the hairy, three-legged blob standing at the front of the table stretched like hot toffee and broke apart into fifteen warty blue spheres which bounced, very slowly, between the floor and the ceiling, ‘is merely a three-dimensional cross-section of a seven-dimensional shape.
As my body moves in and out of your perception, you see different aspects of it.
Your three-dimensional brain is not capable of appreciating the beauty of my true body.’
Ace was fascinated.
‘So all I can see are your fingers, your toes and your naughty bits?’
The spheres coalesced into a black and vaguely hairy shape that threatened to develop three thin and multi-jointed legs.
Ace was beginning to get the message.
‘I apologize, Captain,’ she said formally.
Best to get on its good side.
‘And so when our conversation was out of sync before —’
‘What you call time is a dimension, like any other,’ Legion said casually.
‘I tend to drift around in it, if I am not concentrating.
Sometimes I answer questions that you  will ask in a while, sometimes I respond to queries from moments ago.
‘Well wicked!’
Ace said.
‘But what are you doing working for IMC?
You could wipe the floor with them.’
‘My race has no interest in power,’ Legion replied haughtily.
‘A mere three dimensions is nothing.
I may as well offer you complete control over the direction east.’
‘But why bother working for a scurvy Earth company, then?’
‘You ask a lot of questions.’
‘You're not wrong.’
‘I am under contract.
Our respective worlds have only recently met.
We have certain technologies that humanity lacks, but we in turn lack — protection.
IMC have offered us weapons in return for specialist help.
I am that specialist.’
‘But what do you need the protection from?’
A shudder seemed to run through the various sections of Legion's disconnected bulk.
‘There are dark forces in the universe before whom we are powerless.
I can say no more.’
Ace thought for a moment.
‘Okay then, what is IMC doing in the Lucifer system?’
‘Ah,’ said Legion, ‘you humans and your obsession with business affairs.
We have come across other species like you — the Cimliss, the Usurians, the Okk.
Always worrying about the indefinable moment.
To put it simply: your Earth Government has declared bankruptcy.
Its affairs, its goods and its chattels have been put in the hands of the receivers.’
Ace pushed aside a feeling of dread.
‘And who are these receivers?’ she asked.
‘Something called the Earth Alliance of Corporations; a collection of the most powerful companies and conglomerates which trade off-Earth.
You may know it better as the Holding Company.’
‘And IMC?’
She already knew the answer.
‘We get the mineral rights,’ Legion said, almost happily, ‘of all subcontracted colonies.
Like Eden.’
The medlab on the IMCV Insider Trading was large, high-tech and as soulless as a plaster saint.
Legion led Ace into it with a certain swagger, if a green balloon trailing pink strands could be said to swagger.
A medical orderly bustled towards them.
He gestured towards the first of a long row of recuperation pods, where Christine LaFayette's face was visible through a clear plastic window.
She looked to Ace like a frozen corpse.
‘Trauma and some tissue damage,’ he said, snapping to attention as Ace peered into the pod.
Ace absentmindedly returned a sketchy salute.
Old habits die hard, she thought.
‘Cost?’
Captain Legion asked in a host of voices.
‘With immediate treatment, plus physiotherapy, psychotherapy and prosthetics, the estimate is thirty thousand adjusted ergs, Captain.’
‘Charge it to my account,’ Legion said.
Ace moved to the next pod, anxious to find her friends from Moloch.
She recognized the face of one of her attackers beneath a layer of blue gel.
His face was burned right down to the bone in places, and one eye had curdled into a white lump.
‘Faulty weapon discharge, Ma'am,’ the orderly explained.
He had obviously mistaken Ace for one of the regular crew, and she did not bother to correct him.
‘Third-degree burns over most of the face and neck.
Seventy per cent flesh reduction on hands and arms.
Left radius and ulna suffered heat recrystallization and associated brittleness.’
‘Cost?’
Legion asked from behind them.
‘The reconstructive surgery is fairly basic.
If standard EB Corporation ocular replacements are used instead of cloned organs the estimate is only nineteen thousand adjusted ergs.’
There was a pause.
‘Too much,’ Legion said.
‘Terminate treatment.’
Ace stepped towards the next pod.
‘No time for that,’ Legion barked, and its tone made Ace automatically stop and stand to attention.
Part of her  was appalled at the ease with which she had slotted straight back into the military lifestyle; part of her welcomed the safety of knowing exactly where she fitted in and what she was supposed to do.
‘You can visit them later,’ Legion said.
‘For now, attend me.’
It moved towards the door, aspect changing moment by moment.
Ace followed, casting a last glance back over her shoulder into the medlab.
When it was clear that IMC's newest recruit would not turn back, a grossly fat woman stepped from a side room.
‘For an alien, Legion certainly knows which buttons to push.’
The orderly shrugged as he went about his task of switching off Company Shock Trooper (Third Class) Jason Curtis Dommer's life support machine.
‘Have you heard the scuttlebut about her?
Apparently, she typed a message into the Belial Base neural net, right where the viruses that Legion's agent planted there would find it and transmit it back here.’
‘A message?’ the woman asked, jowls quivering.
‘Just Legion's name, and the words: ‘We must meet’.’
‘Very cryptic.’
‘Yeah.
Trouble is, Legion's agent spotted it, thought she'd been rumbled, knocked the girl senseless and deleted the message.’
‘So she knew Legion was here?’
The orderly glanced up, his face underlit by the row of tell-tales along Dommer's pod.
‘Yeah, but the word is that she didn't realize IMC sent a whole fleet.
She thought Legion was working alone.
When Dommer and the others burst in, she freaked.
Lucky she's still alive.’
He flicked a last switch, and Jason Dommer slid unknowingly from life into death.
‘Aren't we all?’
Bronwen ap Bryn said, as she stroked her tattooed scalp thoughtfully and turned to leave the sick-bay.
Piper O'Rourke used her hand to shield the beam of her torch as she crept along the darkened corridors of Belial Base towards the main airlock.
The cold light silhouetted the bones of her hand like an X-ray.
Part of her wanted to stop and stare, entranced by the sight: the rest of her screamed silently in the darkness.
She was losing it.
She was losing it .
She stopped and rested her forehead against the cold metal walls of the corridor.
Keep it together, Piper, and you might still get out of this alive.
She lifted a hand to her face and wiped away a greasy sheen of sweat.
Although it was cold and the air was running out, she was burning up.
Burning up.
Paula.
Oh, Christ.
Sucking in a lungful of cold air, Piper moved once more down the corridor.
She only had to make it to the airlock, seal the inner door behind her and wait….
Wait as Paula had waited, as Earth was waiting….
For IMC to help.
Piper stopped, suddenly, twenty metres short of the airlock.
Sounds echoed out of the darkness towards her.
Voices.
‘You don't understand….
He's trying to kill himself!’
‘Then who's responsible for all this?’
‘…
Bloody Piper.
She brained me when I tried to reboot the neural net!’
More voices, speaking in hurried whispers.
Bannen, whom she'd left in the Operations Room, supposedly  wracked with grief over the abrupt crash of the simularity of his son.
Damn his thick skull: she should have splashed his brains across the wall.
Bishop.
Teal.
Bernice.
The Doctor.
But that was impossible!
She'd killed him.
Piper groaned inwardly.
They knew.
They'd tricked her, and they knew.
She'd even given them the evidence herself.
Fool!
Piper ran a hand through her hair.
Her torch flickered across the wall and she switched it off, holding her breath in case someone had noticed the distant gleam of light.
Nothing.
The pitch of the voices did not change.
They didn't know she was there.
There might still be a chance of escape.
As silently as she could, Piper backed away from the airlock, into the darkness.
And a light silhouetted her against the wall.
Her body suddenly became numb.
An icy sensation rushed through her limbs.
Her heart faltered, then resumed its steady rhythm.
She gasped, clutched her chest and sank to the metal grillework which served as the floor of the corridor.
Her head spun and her left arm tingled painfully with pins and needles.
She blinked.
The light was shining in her eyes, swooping towards her.
Something simultaneously velvet and diamond insinuated itself into her body, slipping easily between the molecules of her skin and coalescing within her.
Piper screamed.
The sensation moved around inside her, filling her up, shuffling, searching, passing through to leave her sick and trembling and curiously empty.
The light faded, driven aside by the darkness of the Base.
She heard footsteps: people running towards her, attracted by her scream.
She struggled to her feet, her only thought to avoid discovery, and staggered off into the darkness.
Bernice ran forward into the darkness, her torch beam  bobbing in front of her.
A babble of conversation filled her ears.
‘What was it?
Did you see it?’
‘See what?
I heard a noise, like a whisper —’
‘There was something — a light, shadows —’
‘How can you see shadows?
It's dark!’
‘What the hell — there's someone there!’
‘Hey!
Hey you!’
Teal's hand found her arm.
‘Don't.
Bernice, don't go any further.’
‘But I have to see —’
‘No.’
The Doctor's voice rang out like a ship's bell in the darkness.
‘You don't have to see anything.
Come back here, now.
All of you.’
The running footsteps faltered, slowed, began to return along the corridor.
The Doctor shone his torch on to Bernice as she returned from the darkness.
Her face was flushed with excitement.
‘Did you see it?
What was it?’
Beside her, Teal's voice trembled in the darkness.
‘There was nothing to see.
I only heard….’
He faltered.
‘I only heard….’
The Doctor spoke firmly.
‘Get everyone together.
Anushkia, Julie, Craig….
Get them all and meet me in the Operations Room.
Bernice, Bishop: carry Alex will you.
And mind you go carefully with his head.
We'll need him to get the neural network back on line.’
Without another word, the Doctor strode into the darkness.
Bernice stared distastefully at the physicist, recumbent on the floor.
‘Come on then, Sleeping Beauty.’
Christine LaFayette blinked a layer of viscous blue gel from her eyes and sat up, coughing.
‘Ciel!’
She coughed again, and spat a wad of blue gel to one side.
Her throat stung with the effort.
She tried to massage her neck but her left arm would not move.
She peered down at it, noting that a white smock, like a hospital gown, clothed her from throat to ankles.
Projecting beyond the sleeve, the flesh of her hand was pallid and  sweaty.
It hung uselessly at her side.
She rolled up the sleeve to her elbow, the fingers of her right hand brushing her left forearm as she did so.
She felt nothing.
She pinched herself, but might as well have been pinching the padded plastic of the bed on which she sat for all the sensation she felt.
She rolled her sleeve up further.
Above her elbow, the flesh displayed a normal skin tone.
A razor-sharp line divided the quick from the newly grown.
She pinched herself on her left biceps and yelped with pain.
As the pain subsided, she looked around.
She was sitting on a diagnostic bed in what was obviously a medlab of some kind.
But where?
There was no equipment this sophisticated anywhere on Eden.
Straining, she tried to gather her thoughts.
The last thing she remembered was….
Yukio's face erupting before her, stumbling backwards, a pressure on her elbow.
My arm!
Is that my arm?
Why is it floating in front of And then the pain, and the darkness.
And then here.
Wherever here was.
Feeling her stomach churn with the painful memories, she leaned sideways and was violently sick.
Something metallic slithered from beneath her bed and vacuumed the debris away, before slipping back under the bed and deactivating with a click.
Medical droid.
Not on the Base, then.
Not anywhere on the Base.
Painfully, Christine swung her legs to one side until she was in a sitting position.
Her muscles were a little stiff, but, although she flinched in anticipation, there was no pain.
She glanced down again at her left arm.
Prosthetic?
Cloned?
Easier to believe that it was hers, and there was something wrong with it.
Damn the memories of seeing it floating away in front of her.
Nerve damage, say, or muscle wastage.
Something.
Anything.
She ran her right hand lightly over the rest of her body.
Everything seemed fine.
She took a deep breath.
Time to leave then, and find some answers.
Peering around for a locker where she might find some clothes, she stood.
A medical alarm sounded.
Bernice helped Bishop lay Alex Bannen on the floor beside one of the main Operations Room workstations.
There was a loud clattering and muted conversation as Anushkia Smyslov, Shmuel Zehavi and a morose Cheryl Russell followed them into the room and placed their torches so that the beams played over the domed ceiling, throwing a dim reflected light, like candlelight, back into the room.
Bernice stood.
‘Anyone here got med training?’
Anushkia pushed forward into the circle of torchlight.
‘Yes.
I'll take charge here.
You and Teal go and find Craig Richards and Tiw Heimdall.’
‘I'll find the Doctor,’ Cheryl said dully, as she picked up a torch.
‘Craig's probably checking the power linkages.
God alone knows where we'll find Tiw.’
Bernice nodded.
‘Let's do it.’
Bishop stepped forward as the women left the room;
Anushkia looked up from beside Alex Bannen's prone body.
‘And where are you going?’
‘Orders to the contrary notwithstanding, Krau Smyslov,’ Bishop produced his ubiquitous thin smile, ‘to apprehend the villain of the piece.’
The Doctor ran soundlessly through the darkness.
He had no torch, but darkness did not impede his progress.
In the back of his mind he knew the air in the Base was getting staler as the crisis progressed, but he couldn't afford to worry about that now.
More urgent was the need to find out why Piper had felt it necessary to shut down the neural net like this.
Only then could he decide if it was safe to reboot the system.
His foot touched a black rubberized cylinder, and he stopped his headlong dash instantly.
He bent to examine the device.
A torch.
Piper's?
Pocketing it, he moved on.
Behind him, unnoticed, faint beams of light shimmered  softly, and without apparent source, across the corridor walls.
‘Atten- shun .’
Six pairs of polycarbide-armoured boots slapped the IMC executive transporter bay deckplates at the Staff Sergeant's command.
Six high-power weapons chunked as they were slung across six heavily muscled male and female shoulders.
Silence hung in the air.
‘Squad Number One: prepare for executive transporter embarkation.
You know the drill, now let's move!
Point!’
Sharon Kreig and Jay Ardamal double-timed it up the footramp and into the waiting executive transporter.
By twos the rest of their squad followed, stowing their gear as the Staff Sergeant followed them in.
A coiling black ribbon writhed into being and floated in mid-air next to the Sergeant's head.
‘You have the paperwork?’
‘Affirmative, Legion.’
‘Good.’
The black ribbon gathered itself into a knot, turned inside out and was gone.
The osmotic field opened and the executive transporter lifted gracefully into space.
Craig Richards finished his torchlit check of the power control systems and slammed the access hatch shut with an angry growl.
Ergs were there aplenty: they just weren't being channelled anywhere.
That meant the control circuits were down, and that meant a whole new set of checks was going to have to be made.
What really cheesed him off, though, was the fact that the food reconstituters were down as well.
He could really have done with a steaming hot beaker of
He paused, his thought uncompleted.
From deeper within the Power Bay came a sound.
He frowned.
The sub-standard systems Earth Central had seen fit to install in the Base made some weird noises at the best of times, but this….
This was unlike anything he'd ever heard  before.
Craig scratched his head.
‘Hello?
Anushkia?
Who's there?
Zehavi, are you sleepwalking again?
Come on, stop playing silly buggers, you're putting the wind right up me.’
The sound came nearer, resolving into a kind of low whispering.
Flickering beams of dim light came with it, caressing the machinery which shielded their source from direct view.
The light moved like smoke, or heavy gas not in straight lines, but floating ribbons….
Or tentacles.
Craig reached into his pocket and caressed his lucky deck of cards, then felt around with his other hand and picked up a flat toolcase made of heavy-duty plastic.
It wasn't much of a weapon but
‘Craig!
Craig Richards!
Are you in here?’
The voice came from outside.
Slipping the toolcase into his overalls, Craig backed away from the strange phenomenon.
‘Damn right I am.
And I'm coming out now.’
Without taking his eyes off the stacks of machinery which shielded the glimmer from direct sight, Craig walked quickly backwards until he felt the entrance hatch to the Power Bay thump into his shoulder.
He jumped as a voice beside him said, ‘Leave this lot, will you?
The Doctor wants everyone back in Operations, pronto.’
Craig turned to face Bernice and Teal.
‘I can handle that,’ he whispered fervently as he pushed past them and rushed off up the corridor.
Bernice glanced at Teal.
‘What do you suppose is biting his arse?’
The engineer shrugged.
‘Your guess is as good as mine.’
He gazed into the Power Bay.
Apart from the light from Craig's torch, still propped where he had left it against the main power conduits, the chamber was dark and empty.
Christine stared in fascination at the being that had appeared in the medlab before her.
‘You have the paperwork?’
‘Paperwork?’
‘My name is Legion.’
‘What paperwork?
Who — what — are you?’
There was a pause.
‘I am the captain of Interstellar Mining Corporation vessel Insider Trading .’
‘IMC!’
‘Good.’
There was another pause.
The black construct before her split, spun into a thin loop, fleshed into a globe, flipped inside out to reveal a hovering pink mass, which detached itself from the main bulk and drifted some distance away.
The black elements passed through one another and recombined.
Christine stood.
She said firmly, ‘Well, thank you, Captain, for being so informative.
May I have my clothes back now?’
‘Of course.
I would not want to return you to your female progenitor in what, from my briefings on human culture, I perceive to be an indecorous condition.’
Christine's face hardened.
‘My mother!’
‘Is responsible for IMC's presence here.
Yes.’
It wasn't Piper O'Rourke but Tiw Heimdall that Bishop found on his excursion through the Base.
The little man was standing in the middle of the Bridge terminus, head cocked to one side as if he could hear something, fists clenched at his sides.
Bishop stopped a few steps into the chamber.
Tiw didn't move.
‘Trau Heimdall.’
Tiw's head turned slowly.
He smiled thinly at Bishop.
Something glittered with a golden sheen between his lips.
‘Something comes, Adjudicator.
My teeth — they tingle.’
Despite himself, Bishop shivered when he heard the flat intonation of Tiw Heimdall's voice.
He moved carefully into the chamber, glancing around at the curved walls, and the curtains of rock beyond.
He drew his gun, letting it guide his eyes around the rest of the chamber.
‘I can smell it.’
‘What, Trau Heimdall?’
‘Something….
Something….’
Satisfied the chamber was empty apart from himself and Tiw, Bishop holstered his gun.
‘Trau Heimdall, we must leave here immed….’
His voice died away.
‘Who said that?’
‘I said nothing.’
Bishop drew his gun.
‘Can you hear anything?’
‘Smell something, I can.
Like grass growing in the meadows, like thunderclouds gathering in the sky in the days before the weather control —’
‘Come on.
We're leaving.’
‘I think I will stay.’
‘No!’
Bishop turned to face Tiw Heimdall.
There was a dim light behind him, writhing slowly in the air.
Bishop levelled his gun, but Tiw prevented him from getting a clear view of the target.
‘Trau Heimdall.
Move aside!’
Tiw slowly turned to face the phenomenon.
‘Be not scared.’
‘Move aside!’
‘I will not.’
Scowling, Bishop leapt forward and grabbed Tiw around the waist with one hand.
Without holstering his gun, or taking his eyes off the glimmering phenomenon, Bishop dragged the little man from the chamber and threw him bodily into the Pit.
The light grew closer.
Without even pausing to catch his breath, an ever more difficult prospect in the thinning atmosphere, Bishop dived in after him.
Christine stared down at the executive transporter bay from an observation gallery thirty metres above the floor.
Below her, technicians were preparing a long-range executive transporter for launch.
Across the far side of the bay, a shimmering window of electric blue in the wall looked like an upended lake.
‘What is that?’ she asked.
Beside her hovered Legion, in a multiplicity of bodies, all of which somehow gave the impression of looking directly at her.
‘An osmotic field,’ it replied, basso and treble in harmony.
‘It keeps the air in and the vacuum out.
I'm told that humans prefer it that way.’
‘And IMC market it?
I'm impressed.
Technology has moved on since we left Earth.’
‘IMC want to market it,’ Legion corrected.
‘My people lease the rights to IMC for a substantial sum.
One of the many dimensional technologies that IMC court us for.’
Christine's gaze travelled downwards to where the slabsided long-range executive transporter was being refitted and refuelled.
‘There's no way I'm going anywhere in that shuttle.
If my mother wants me off the Project, she can damn well go through channels and see how far it gets her.’
‘But, Krau LaFayette, your female progenitor has gone through channels.
With Earth in receivership, control of Project Eden transfers to the Earth Alliance of Corporations.
Being head of the Board of Directors, as well as a major stockholder in said company, your female progenitor has complete control over mission profile and personnel.’
‘I don't believe it.
We've been out here too long and risked too much for Earth Central to give up on us now.’
‘Earth Central no longer exists.
My brief is to reorganize the Project along more efficient and profitable lines.
Prompt action is required to salvage what might otherwise turn into a most embarrassing financial debacle.’
‘Action?
What action?
And what about the people?’
There was a momentary pause.
‘In light of the current financial situation, all employment contracts have been terminated.’
‘What about the Project?
You can't ship us all home now!’
‘You are correct.
Sufficient funding for transport of non-essential personnel does not exist.’
Christine gaped.
‘What do you —’
‘Please excuse me.
There are things I must attend to.’
A uniformed officer walked along the gallery towards them.
His face was pocked with scars from one of the many auto-immune diseases that were still rife on Earth.
‘Staff Officer Atrimonides will make sure every comfort is provided for your journey home.’
Legion wrapped itself into five separate knots and shrank to nothing.
Piper O'Rourke sank to the floor, her chest heaving, unable to draw breath.
The air.
The air was going.
That was it, then.
It had all been for nothing; the fear, the guilt, the deaths….
All for nothing.
She slipped sideways and felt a familiar coaming beneath her hand.
The airlock!
She had come full circle.
Dragging herself to her feet, Piper stumbled across the threshold of the chamber.
All she had to do now was
‘Piper O'Rourke.
I know you're in there.’
The Doctor.
‘You can stop running now.
I'm nine hundred and forty-three, and that's far too old to be chasing around like a S'ss'arian gyeet.’
‘What!’
Despite herself, Piper yelped with surprise.
‘You're never-’ She stopped, abruptly aware that the Doctor was trying to gain her confidence.
The Doctor's face appeared from the darkness, smiling.
‘Do you mind if I sit down?
Ahh.
That's better.’
He shook his head.
‘Why did you do it, Piper?’
Piper fought to get her breathing under control.
She looked into the Doctor's eyes, noticing that they glowed faintly, as if gathering and enhancing the available light.
‘Why should I tell you anything?
Bishop's going to kill me anyway.’
‘I'm not here to judge you, Piper.
But can you tell me a reason why everyone else on the Base must die to protect your secret?’
‘No.
Nobody should have died.
Nobody!’
She took a deep breath and began to speak.
Christine watched as flight technicians finished preparing the executive transporter for launch.
Atrimonides gestured with his gun, indicating that she should precede him from the gallery.
‘What if I don't want to go?’
‘As it happens, Ma'am, you do have a choice.
You can either walk, or we can freeze you where you stand and ship you back in a refrigerator.’
‘Charming.’
‘Efficient.’
Christine glared at the man.
She opened the pressure door and moved into the executive transporter bay control room, a semicircular chamber filled with operations and monitoring equipment.
Christine looked around.
IMC employees — risk analysts and financial assessors like clones in their sharp plastic business suits and laced necklines — moved busily from one station to another, checking systems as the time for launch approached.
One balanced a beaker of steaming coffee on a nearby terminal before moving on bearing a full tray.
Christine acted without thinking.
Scooping the cup from the workstation with her good hand, she whirled around and flung its contents into Atrimonides' face.
He screamed and clawed at his eyes.
Christine made a grab for his gun as it spun away, but only succeeded in pushing it into a console, where its trigger caught on the comer.
A searing beam of high-energy protons blistered the air.
Something on the other side of the room exploded, and kept on exploding.
Christine didn't wait to see what damage she'd caused.
She headed for the door at a dead run, her new arm thumping uselessly against various items of furniture.
Teal saw torch beams bobbing towards him from a side corridor and grabbed Bernice's arm.
Seconds later, Bishop and Tiw Heimdall came into view.
‘Picks me up!
Like a piece of luggage, he picks me up and throws me, he does,throws me down the Pit!’
Teal  and Bernice exchanged grins.
‘Teal, you tell him.
I'm important, me.
I should not be thrown around like luggage!’
‘Okay, Bishop.
What have you been doing with Tiw?’
The Adjudicator did not smile.
‘I saw it again.
We both did.
The light.
He wanted to stay.’
Teal's smile faded.
‘Are you sure?’
Bishop crossed his arms.
‘As an Adjudicator, I am a trained, completely impartial, observer.’
‘Yes, and I'm a Martian Queen,’ Bernice snorted.
‘We'd better get back to the Operations Room.’
Spinning on her heel, she led the way back along the corridor.
Christine ran.
Somewhere behind her, Atrimonides was screaming in pain above a babble of voices.
‘— this mess cleared —’
’— wait a minute, can you smell —’
’— Earth Mother preserve us!
We've got a fire —’
’— an extinguisher!
Somebody get —’
’— no good, I can't hold them —’
’— what?
How many systems?
Bloody —’
Christine slapped her palm against the lockplate of the door.
Behind her, Atrimonides lurched clear of a rising pall of smoke.
She dashed clear of the control room and on to the second half of the observation gallery, thirty metres above the main executive transporter bay.
Sirens blared across the chamber.
Technicians dropped their tools and ran for the interior of the ship.
The control room door slammed shut behind Atrimonides as he ran on to the gallery and hurled himself at Christine.
His face was blistered from the hot coffee and one eye was closed.
The other glared malevolently.
Christine turned to run, but there was a muffled thud in the control room.
The observation windows blew out in a shower of glass.
The shock rocked the gallery and sent her sprawling back into Atrimonides.
There was another concussion.
Atrimonides snarled.
Christine fought for her balance as he grasped her with  hooked fingers.
The guard rail twisted beneath her hands, and they fell backwards into empty space.
Cheryl moved towards the airlock.
She stood at the door, the Doctor's name poised on her lips, but just before she called out, something made her hesitate.
There were soft voices coming from inside.
The Doctor…and Piper!
She crept closer, straining to hear what was being said.
’— and the Project had been going for so long, you see.
So long, with no results.
The situation on Earth was desperate, we all knew that.
We had to succeed.’
The Doctor's voice said, ‘And so you infected the starsuits with a software virus.’
‘That's right.’
Was that a note of desperation in Piper's voice?
‘Earth needed results and we couldn't get them.
IMC could, but there was no legal way to transfer information — so they gave me a virus and I implanted it into the starsuits.
The virus travelled into the neural net during a regular systems update and began to transmit information to IMC.
To facilitate their takeover.’
The Doctor sighed.
‘But the virus was cheap.
Cheap and nasty, like everything about IMC.
It caused system malfunctions.
Suit malfunctions.’
Cheryl felt a cold fist clench around her heart.
‘Like the one that killed Paula.’
‘Yes.
But I-’
‘You bitch!
It was you all the time.
You killed her!’
Cheryl ran into the airlock chamber and grabbed Piper by the throat, jerking the woman harshly to her feet.
The Doctor stood as well.
‘Cheryl, please, I hardly think this is the right moment for-’
‘Shut up!’
Her eyes narrowed and she drew back her fist.
‘I'm going to kill her!’
She slammed her clenched fist into Piper's face.
Time seemed to slow down as Christine fell into the executive transporter bay.
She could see a row of tiny faces gaping from the balcony before being engulfed by a huge sheet of flame.
The smell of Atrimonides' burning  face and hair was thick in her nostrils.
She gagged.
And then the floor of the bay was rushing up towards them.
Atrimonides was grabbing wildly at her, desperately flailing his hands and feet, and Cheryl realized he was trying to use her as a reaction mass to slow his own fall.
Unaware that she was screaming, Christine reached towards his face with her one good arm and hooked her fingers into the burns which crusted his cheek.
He screamed and jerked.
Christine whirled out of control.
There was another explosion.
Christine felt her stomach lurch as the executive transporter bay gravity generator fluctuated, flinging her and Atrimonides into a spiralling loop, then failed completely, leaving her weightless.
Foam began to spread through the air as the fire-fighting systems reacted automatically to the emergency.
Half blinded by the foam, Christine scrambled for something to grab on to to break her fall.
Bernice, Bishop and Tiw Heimdall entered the Operations Room.
Julie Ndobe, Shmuel Zehavi and Teal Green were talking in low voices.
Craig Richards was standing alone, some distance away.
Anushkia Smyslov had bandaged Alex Bannen's head, and the physicist was propped in a sitting position against a workstation.
He looked up eagerly as Bernice walked over to him.
‘How are you feeling?’
‘Well enough to reboot this pile of rust.’
Anushkia said, ‘I've told you, Alex.
Not until the Doctor says.
We still don't know why Piper crashed the system.
Until we do, it would be foolhardy to even consider —’
She stopped.
‘Did anyone hear-’
There was an explosion of light.
Someone was yelling, but Christine couldn't make out the words.
The executive transporter bay was a chaos of foam and whirling shapes which might or might not have been armed troopers.
A fist lashed out at her from the  whiteness.
Christine gasped.
Her lungs burned as she inhaled foam; she vomited.
Small-arms fire scorched a web of gaps through the foam.
‘Who's the idiot still firing?
Huang?
If that executive transporter goes up, I'll personally eat your kidneys, capishe  ?
Now get her!’
Atrimonides.
Something huge and black loomed out of the mist of foam.
Christine slammed shoulders first into one of the slab-like metal sides of a long-range executive transporter.
She gasped.
Her head banged against the surface.
Momentum carried her down the hull into the deadspace between the executive transporter and the bay wall.
She shook her head to clear it.
The foam was not so dense down here, and the recyclers were beginning to suck away what little there was.
‘Get her!’
Atrimonides swung into sight followed by a group of troopers.
Strings of bloody vomit drooled from his mouth, a legacy of prolonged foam inhalation.
But as the gauntleted hands of the first trooper made a grab for her hair, Christine felt an empty sensation in the pit of her stomach.
The executive transporter seemed to be pressing against her back.
It was moving!
Face twisted with rage, Cheryl drew back her fist and threw another punch.
Blood burst from Piper's nose.
She fell back against one of the emergency spacesuit lockers, and the unpowered door flipped open at the touch of her body.
Cheryl stepped forward to deliver another blow — just in time to catch the dead body of her husband as it fell from the locker.
The slab side of the executive transporter loomed like a cliff out of the white fog, getting larger by the second as the shock wave from the explosions which had set it adrift  in the first place propelled it nearer and nearer the executive transporter bay wall.
The troopers were scattering away from Christine, thrashing through the foam, well aware that although the executive transporter had no weight, it still had mass, and hence momentum.
A lot of momentum.
Enough to squash Christine, and anyone else in the vicinity, against the wall like bugs.
She glanced quickly from side to side.
There was a lot of transporter, and she was half way along it: too far in either direction to make it to safety.
She glanced up; no chance there, either: a loading gantry projected from the wall above her head.
It was already buckling as the executive transporter moved remorselessly nearer.
She scanned its side, looking for something — anything — that might help her survive the impact.
All she could see before a whirling storm of foam obscured everything were attitude control thrusters, IMC logos and refuelling ports.
Cheryl clutched hopelessly at Sam Russell's body and burst into tears.
She nestled his mottled face in the curve of her shoulder, stroked his cold hair, felt the awful grating of the bones in his neck.
Her eyes were cold when she lifted them to Piper's face.
‘The suit malfunctioned!’
Piper cried.
‘I didn't know!
I found him here on the floor with his neck broken.
I didn't kill him!’
Cheryl let Sam's body slump gracelessly to the floor and moved towards Piper, hands outstretched.
The executive transporter was six metres away.
One group of troopers had tangled together in their panic, still in the executive transporter's path.
Fights were breaking out as the knot of flailing bodies rotated gently in mid-air.
Five metres.
Christine could now make out charred patches of hull and the seams where metal plates had been hyperglued together.
Four metres.
Klaxons hooted.
Sparks from the balcony drifted through the foam, becoming soggy bits of black carbon which mixed with it, looking like dirty snow.
Voices screamed.
Three metres.
Two indistinct figures had broken away from the struggling mass and were desperately flailing towards Christine and the safe area at the other end of the executive transporter.
‘ACCESS HATCH’, she read embossed into a transparent panel, and, in smaller letters underneath, ‘IN EMERGENCY, ENTER CODE 398.’
A small keypad sat smugly beneath the panel.
Two metres.
One.
The troopers were screaming.
She flipped the panel up and keyed in the code, banging her elbow against the wall as the executive transporter pressed close.
The word ‘ERROR’ scrolled up in glowing virtual letters on the metal panel beside the keypad.
Bernice's torch flickered and died.
People scrambled away from the centre of the Operations Room in panic.
A nimbus of light had collected there, spinning gently.
A low whispering sound echoed around the room.
‘What the hell —’ she said.
Thin air gathered itself around the light, thickening.
A shape was forming there, something….
Something….
Someone screamed.
Bernice felt something, some force, move through her, penetrating her skin as though it were ether.
A yell of surprise was wrenched out of her.
The sensation passed, leaving her nauseous and curiously empty….
In the centre of the room, the light gathered into a curling ribbon and solidified, erupted into a rippling curtain of sparkles.
‘Is that….
Paula ?’ someone said.
There was a smell, like summer, like —
A final flash of light and the phenomenon was gone.
In its place stood Miles Engado.
Christine had to bend her arm down by her side to get her fingers to connect with the keys.
Because of her awkward position, she was forced to use the prosthetic arm (the fake one, she kept thinking), and the fingers were dull and leaden.
The sudden pressure of cold metal against her nose forced her to turn her head sideways until she couldn't see the keys any more.
She prayed, and fumbled the code in.
A hand clutched at her shoulder, then moved to circle her neck with killing force.
A burned face loomed out of the greyness.
Atrimonides.
Sweat stood out on his brow, fury was bright in his one good eye.
The fingers tightened their grip.
Unable to bring her hands up to defend herself, Christine began to choke.
‘Christ.
Sam.
Sam!
Oh, Christ.
Piper, you bitch.’
Cheryl threw another punch.
She laughed hysterically as Piper grunted with pain and fell to the deck.
Cheryl knelt beside the sobbing woman, drew back her fist and prepared to follow up her blow with another.
The Doctor casually took her wrist in his hand and held her motionless, without the slightest effort.
‘That'll be quite enough of that, thank you very much.’
‘You don't understand.
She killed Paula.
I loved her and I loved Sam and that bitch killed them both!’
Piper was cowering abjectly against the far wall, her face streaming with tears.
The Doctor turned furiously to Cheryl, and was about to speak when there was a grating clunk from the outer airlock door.
He paused, his words unspoken.
Cheryl wiped tears of her own from her face.
All three looked at the door.
There was a moment's silence.
With a tremendous crash, the centre of the door exploded inwards.
Seven figures in military uniforms strode through the clouds of smoke and across the rubble into the chamber.
A short figure in a sergeant's uniform and full battle helmet stepped forward, gun raised.
The figure kicked aside Sam Russell's dead body without a second glance, like so much extra trash.
‘Project Eden is now in receivership.
All employment contracts are terminated.
I have a warrant granting all property and chattels, in full, in situ , to IMC.’
The Doctor's eyes widened at the sound of the voice, and at the face revealed as the sergeant raised her helmet.
‘Full cooperation is advised,’ Ace said tersely, and fired a blast from her weapon into the wall beside the Doctor's head to illustrate her point.
With Atrimonides' fingers biting painfully into her neck, the hatch slid away to reveal blackness.
The executive transporter moved past Christine on all sides.
With a desperate cry she fell forward, into the carpeted interior of the executive transporter's emergency airlock.
The grasping hand at her neck convulsed once, agonizingly, and then relaxed.
The executive transporter boomed like a giant bell as it impacted against the bay wall.
Christine didn't hear the scream.
No longer attached to his body, Atrimonides' hand drifted free of the hatch coaming.
Something red and pulpy squeezed out of the centimetre-wide gap between the executive transporter and the bay wall, forming shivering globules which clung to the wall's hexagonal bracing struts.
As the emergency airlock hatch slid shut, Christine curled up into a floating ball and was violently sick.
DEMOGORGON
Corporations have neither bodies to be punished nor souls to be condemned, they therefore do as they like.
Edward, First Baron Thurlow
As Bernice entered the refectory she almost bumped into the Doctor.
He was standing just inside the doorway, supporting Piper O'Rourke, who was looking old, tired and bruised.
Beside them both, Cheryl Russell was sucking her bloodied knuckles.
Over the Time Lord's shoulder, Bernice saw that the refectory was full.
The entire Project Eden team — or what was left of it — was milling around: cowed, shocked and submissive.
IMC troopers stood along the periphery of the room with raised weapons.
The simularity in the centre of the refectory was even displaying the company logo: the letters IMC in brushed duralinium, curved around a spiral galaxy.
It looked to Bernice like a hand crushing a butterfly.
‘Move it!’
A muscular Company goon in macho combat gear slapped her rump.
She turned and was about to deck him when she realized that his needler was aimed at her stomach.
‘I said move it!’
He grinned.
His teeth were even and white, and Bernice wanted to ram them down his throat.
His chest tag read ‘ARDAMAL’.
Bernice stared him down: memorizing his face and making sure that he knew it.
His smile grew wider.
She stalked off before she said something that he might regret, stepping accidentally on one of the deactivated security drones now littering the Base, and cracking its delicate shell.
Clang.
The massive airtight door to the refectory swung shut.
Silence fell.
People glanced fearfully around at the impassive troops, waiting for the executions to start.
The baleful light from the windows cast trembling shadows  towards the IMC logo.
Somewhere in the background, the food dispenser drifted aimlessly, offering tasty delicacies to uninterested people.
Bernice beckoned the Doctor over.
‘What do you think they're going to do with us?’ she hissed.
‘If they wanted to kill us, they'd have done it already.’
‘Oh yes?’
‘Look at it from their point of view.
Why waste the energy?’
‘We have to do something,’ she urged.
‘I'm open to suggestions.’
‘I thought you were supposed to be the one who always had all the answers.’
He smiled bashfully.
‘A convincing bluff, I'm afraid.’
‘Certainly took me in.’
Bernice glanced around.
‘Oh hell,’ she continued, ‘I'm going to make a break for it.
Can you cause some kind of distraction, Doctor?’
‘Distraction is my middle name.’
‘Yes, one of them,’ Bernice muttered as the Doctor bounded into the centre of the room.
‘Well,’ he announced, ‘no doubt you're all wondering why I called you here.’
All heads turned to watch him as he reached into his pocket and took out three multicoloured balls.
‘You'll like this.’
He began to juggle, making it look as if he was just on the verge of dropping the balls each time he caught them.
‘There is nothing up my sleeves but my arms, there is nothing down my trousers but a ferret.’
People started laughing: nervously at first, and then with real amusement.
A wave of relaxation swept across the room.
Even the troopers seemed to be fascinated as they crowded closer for a better look.
Perhaps their orders didn't cover lunatic Time Lord jugglers.
Bernice took advantage of the show to slide sideways, until she was standing behind Miles, Teal Green and a psychologist named Filo Julee.
A few yards away, the food dispenser's sensor light was on as it scanned the crowd for likely clients.
She looked it over.
It was just about large enough….
‘Hey,’ she whispered.
The food dispenser ignored her.
‘Hey, over here!
Don't you recognize a customer when you see one?’
The machine wafted away from her and attempted to interest a pale Miles Engado in a tofu bar.
The Doctor had four balls in the air now, although nobody could see where the extra one had come from.
He was milking the audience for all he could get: throwing the balls out in every direction and catching them in a windmill of arms.
He was mugging terribly, his rubber features running the gamut of exaggerated emotions from wide-eyed amazement to crumpled despair.
‘Oh, for….’
She tried to catch up with the machine, but she didn't want to attract any undue attention from the IMC troopers, and the thing seemed determined to ignore her.
Christ, she thought savagely, a person could starve to death whilst that thing forces sticky buns on dieters and ham rolls on vegetarians!
Finally, she grabbed hold of the dispenser's cooling fin whilst it was waving a krill doughnut around in a vain attempt to attract custom, pulled it close and, in a casual and unremarkable manner, moved her hand down to the dispenser's access plate and ran her fingers around the seam until she felt a magnetic bolt buzzing beneath her fingers.
The Doctor was standing on one hand now, and juggling five different balls whilst singing a medley of songs by Abba.
Under cover of the racket he was making, and the laughter of his audience, Bernice quickly removed the first four bolts.
The fifth one decided, for some mysterious mechanical reason that only small but vital components are privy to, that it was going to play up.
Bent over at an ungainly angle, trying to wrench the thing free, Bernice was acutely conscious of the picture that she must be making.
The small of her back began to feel warm as she imagined a small bead of laser light centred there, cueing a flamer, or a needler, or a screamer, or anything nasty and permanent.
There!
The bolt came away with a tacky wrenching sensation.
Somebody had probably spilled something on it.
Bernice straightened from her crouch with the five bolts buzzing like bees in her hand, pulled the access plate open and furtively tried to check the space inside the dispenser.
Most of the food seemed already to have been disseminated, and a safety cut-out had switched off the stasis field when she opened the hatch.
Bernice dumped the remaining food on the floor with a few sweeps of her hand and kicked it under the rubber skirts of the machine.
She glanced around with an innocent expression on her face, but all eyes were on the Doctor's antics.
She pulled the shelves out and climbed swiftly inside the food dispenser, jerking the leads from the stasis-field generator and pulling the plate shut after her.
There was something sticky beneath her fingers.
Chocolate?
Machine oil?
Whatever it was, it was just the icing on a whole mountain of complaints.
She was forced to crouch in the bowels of the machine with her knees up around her ears, her elbows jammed against the interior dispensing machinery and her back wedged so tightly against the shelf supports that she was going to come out with her spine looking like a piece of corrugated duralinium.
And the machine did have bowels — she could smell them: a dark, rancid odour comprising the spilled residue of a hundred types of food.
She wanted to be sick, but that would be a bad idea.
A very bad idea.
Paper-thin knives of light penetrated through air vents in the dispenser's casing and drew hot lines across Bernice's face.
Motes of dust sparkled and died as they drifted in and out of the beams.
Bernice wanted to sneeze.
By screwing her eyes up against the glare, she could just about make out what was going on in the refectory.
The Doctor was standing on his head and juggling the balls by knocking them with the soles of his feet whilst gargling ‘The Star-Spangled Banner’.
One of the troopers was passing his helmet around his colleagues, who were putting money into it.
A collection?
Bernice didn't know where the Doctor got his talent from, but if he ever got  tired of fighting ultimate evil, he could make a healthy profit as an intergalactic busker.
Suddenly the balls were gone.
The Doctor stood frozen with his legs waving wildly and a baffled expression on his face.
The laughter swelled, and was supplemented by applause, which died away slowly as the crowd gradually realized that this was not part of the act.
The Doctor clambered petulantly to his feet, with the thunderous expression of a child whose toys have been impounded.
Bernice watched, amazed, as a spiral of pink flesh rotated in the air behind the Doctor.
Six more joined it, slowly screwing out of nothing, until they suddenly stretched together into a tangled web of pulsating tendrils.
Four of the Doctor's five balls appeared in the midst of the fleshy curtain.
Silence.
‘Allow me to introduce myself,’ said a multitude of voices.
‘My name is Legion, and I am your new Managing Director.
Earth Central has ceased to exist.
The Earth Alliance of Corporations now rules your planet.’
‘Didn't your mother ever tell you it was polite to knock?’ the Doctor exclaimed, turning.
‘Assuming you had a mother, of course.’
He reached up, plucked his balls from Legion's body and stashed them inside his capacious pockets.
He frowned, and looked around.
‘One missing.
Ah!’
He stood on the tips of his toes and stretched a hand above his head.
Bernice squinted through the air vents, trying to get a better look.
Hang on a tick, she thought.
That can't be right.
The Doctor's hand appeared to have vanished from the wrist up.
His arm waggled, as if he were groping for something, and then his hand appeared as softly and suddenly as it had vanished: holding the fifth ball.
‘You have knowledge of higher dimensions, I see,’ Legion boomed.
‘A smattering,’ the Doctor said, carefully dusting off his ball.
‘Trau Bishop?’
‘Doctor?’
Bishop detached himself from the watching crowd.
‘Arrest this being.’
‘On what grounds?’
‘Sabotage and murder.’
‘You can prove these allegations?’
Bishop asked levelly.
‘Of course.’
‘Forgive me,’ Legion interrupted, sincerity oozing from each of its voices, ‘but I have only just arrived in this solar system.
I was light years away at the time these alleged crimes took place.
IMC records will prove it.’
‘But the responsibility is yours,’ the Doctor trumpeted.
‘You gave the orders.
You provided the virus which caused the software to crash in Paula Engado's starsuit, resulting in her death in the atmosphere of Lucifer.
That same software caused a rogue malfunction in another starsuit, killing Sam Russell.
Your agent on Belial also murdered Federique Moshe-Rabaan in an attempt to divert Adjudicator Bishop's suspicions: an attempt which would have succeeded had it not been for my,’ and he preened himself, ‘abilities at detection.
That same agent blew up the room I had been in because I was getting too close.
Fortunately, Trau Bishop and I had set that room up as a trap, knowing that your agent wouldn't be able to resist the bait.
But they pulled the plug on the Belial neural net before we could use the security drones to trace their actions, risking the lives of everybody.
Another crime to add to the register.
And it was, of course, your troops who invaded Moloch Base, killing all the people who were there.
Apart from one….’
‘This is pure fabrication,’ Legion protested as the Doctor looked across at one of the troopers, the one in the mirrored visor who had followed him in.
The trooper stepped forward, raising the visor to reveal Ace's face.
The food dispenser seemed to sway around Bernice's body.
Pins and needles tingled in her fingers and toes, creeping along her limbs until she felt as if she were disconnected from the world.
Ace!
She was alive!
And with IMC?
Something in the back of her mind was saying: shock,, you're in shock, Bernice snap out of it, woman, but she tuned it out and just stared at Ace until the world  came back into focus around her and she heard Bishop saying calmly:
‘So, this is the agent IMC planted on Belial.’
‘No,’ the Doctor sighed.
‘Ace is just confused.
Legion's agent is someone else.’
‘Who?’
Bishop asked calmly.
‘I….
I can't say.’
The Doctor's gaze momentarily flickered across the room, but too fast for Bernice to tell who he was looking at.
‘Really?
You surprise me.
Or rather, you don't.
A transparent attempt to protect your former friend.’
‘Permission to speak, Legion,’ Ace said.
‘Permission granted, Staff Sergeant.’
‘The Doctor is lying.’
A murmur ran around the unwilling audience.
‘How so?’
Bishop asked.
‘All of the people from Moloch are still alive.’
‘You have seen them?’
‘Yes.
Well, no…. but I've seen their med pallets.
There was some shooting — some people were injured but the people from Moloch, they're okay, I think….’
To Bernice, Ace seemed to be losing the thread, getting confused but, never the less, she could see the relief in people's faces.
They hadn't wanted to believe that Kosi, Lars, Rachel and the rest were dead.
It was far easier to think that a terrible mistake had been made.
‘It's not true,’ the Doctor protested.
‘We found the bodies.’
‘The bodies were of IMC troops,’ Legion said; softly, loudly, and in tones ranging from baritone to treble.
‘I sent them in to retrieve Christine LaFayette, the female offspring of the woman who now…manages…your Earth.
As Staff Sergeant Ace said, the people on Moloch became violent.
The only deaths were of IMC staff.’
Bernice almost wished she was out there in the refectory so that she could confront Legion.
The alien was lying.
Genetic tests had matched up the body parts on Moloch with everyone who had been there, apart from Ace and Christine.
Damn Miles for wanting the information  suppressed until the crisis was over and the shock could be minimized.
Now, whatever they said, it was too late.
Good news was always more palatable than bad.
Teal, Craig, Tiw — they wanted to believe.
Faith was a powerful drug.
The Doctor knew it too.
Bernice could tell as she glanced over at him.
He seemed to have shrunk inside his clothes.
Legion had outmanoeuvred him.
Getting Ace on his side had helped: the Doctor had an attachment to the woman that went deeper than either of them would admit.
It made Bernice jealous, but she would never let that dictate her behaviour.
Ace had a prior claim on the Doctor's affections.
No matter what he and Bernice had been through, she knew in her heart of hearts that his guilt over what he had done to Ace on Heaven — and before — was a weakness: a button which would always work to throw him off balance when pressed.
Everybody's attention was on the centre of the room, where the IMC logo had been replaced with a densely written virtual document.
‘Study it closely,’ Legion was saying.
‘You will find your terms of redundancy are fair.
You will each receive one month's salary and a reasonable amortization of your pension contributions.
As of this moment, Project Eden is no more.’
Tiw Heimdall stepped forward, his golden teeth glittering.
Before he could say anything, Legion answered his question in a prim falsetto.
‘IMC cannot be held responsible for the fact that your Earth Central contracts failed to guarantee your return journeys.’
‘And what about the return to Earth?’
Tiw asked, trailing off into a mumble as he realized that Legion had anticipated him.
‘However,’ Legion rumbled on, ‘despite the fact that IMC is a mining company, not a people-mover, we may be able to provide some berths.’
‘For a price,’ the Doctor said, scowling.
‘For a reasonable price,’ Legion agreed.
‘Now for the documentation.
Where is Coordinator Engado?’
‘Here….’
Miles staggered forward, with the support of Teal Green and Craig Richards.
He waved them off, and pulled himself upright to face Legion.
His knees looked to Bernice as if they were on the verge of buckling.
‘I believe you'll find everything in order,’ Legion said.
For a moment, the voice echoed inside the dispenser casing, as if somebody were leaning close behind Bernice and whispering in her ear.
She jumped, thinking she had been discovered.
The feeling only lasted a second, but from the way Tanetoa, Belial's Samoan cook, flinched, some thirty feet away, Bernice guessed that Legion's voice was doing a little travelling.
Not that his body was terribly stable.
The pink lacy curtain had been slowly turning green and rolling up into a thin worm, studded with tiny thorns, that hung in mid-air.
Little silver spheres at either end seemed to scan the crowd hungrily.
Miles's eyes were dull.
His body sagged.
A computer crystal had appeared in his hand, and he looked at it in mild bemusement, as if it were a fish, or a coloured party hat.
‘Please scan the document and affix your personal ident code,’ Legion was saying brusquely, his voice faint.
Across the far side of the room, Shmuel Zehavi jumped as if goosed.
Something large and black stepped in front of the air vents.
All Bernice could see was a large utility belt with a screamer pistol in a holster and a row of charge packs.
A huge hand loomed in her field of vision.
Was that the sound of keys being tapped?
Shit!
Some IMC trooper obviously couldn't wait for lunch.
Bernice looked around desperately.
She didn't even know what they had ordered.
She scrabbled around on the floor of the dispenser, frantically trying to find something edible, anything that she had overlooked when she had cleared a space for herself; but it was useless.
‘Come on.
Come on….’ the trooper growled.
A robotic dispenser arm was whirring nervously and  jabbing into Bernice's neck as it tried to locate an item that wasn't there from a shelf that had been removed.
Bernice took a few moments break from her search to reach up and snap it off.
It flexed once or twice in her hand, then died.
She went back to her frantic exploration of the machine's interior.
There!
In the corner.
Some kind of cylindrical container.
Bernice grabbed it and shoved it through the dispensing slot.
‘What the zark!
I didn't order this,’ the trooper grumbled, shoving the container back into the slot.
It split, drenching Bernice with some sticky fruit drink.
With a sinking sensation in her stomach, she heard the trooper's fingers pound the keys again.
She fumbled around her feet again, but there was nothing but crumbs and scraps of wrapper.
‘Oh shit,’ she said, surreptitiously pushing the access hatch open a crack and thrusting her fingers through, hoping nobody would notice.
‘What's wrong with this thing?’ the trooper snarled.
Trickles of sweat dripped from her hair and down her temples, leaving an itchy heat behind them.
Her coveralls were damp, and stuck to her body as she writhed, trying to find something — anything — outside the machine.
Her fingers clutched vainly at empty air.
It was useless.
Her fingers suddenly brushed against a plastic wrapper.
Yes!
It was one of the items she had shoved beneath the machine's rubber skirt to make room.
She quickly pulled it in and shoved it through the slot, hoping it was the right thing.
Or even close.
‘What is the problem with this machine?’
Oh hell, Bernice sighed.
What was happening out there?
Was the trooper's behaviour attracting attention?
She twisted herself and tried to see through the buckled plate again.
Nobody in her line of sight was looking her way, but that didn't mean anything.
‘Hey, popcorn!’ the trooper in front of Bernice's food dispenser said, surprised.
‘I didn't know this thing had popcorn.’
The heavy utility belt vanished from Bernice's field of view, revealing the refectory again.
A wave of relief swept over her, making her nauseous and dizzy.
‘You can't go down to Lucifer,’ Miles said from somewhere in the refectory.
Bernice twisted to see him.
She hadn't been keeping track of the conversation, but he seemed to have pulled himself together over the past few minutes.
‘I'm sorry?’
Legion said.
‘You can't go down to Lucifer.’
Miles's voice was firmer.
‘Trau Engado, IMC can do anything it likes.’
‘No.
You don't understand.
You cannot go down.
You will be prevented.’
‘By whom?’
‘By my daughter,’ Miles announced.
A sound like an electric drill ran round the room.
It was Legion's laugh.
‘Your female offspring?
As I understand it, Trau Engado, she is dead.’
‘No,’ Miles said obstinately.
‘I've seen her.
I've talked with her.
She's alive.’
Bernice could see Legion's body splitting into a firework display of multi-coloured fronds, and slowly drawing together into a hairy black ovoid supported by three pipe-cleaner legs.
The hairs on the ovoid waved gently in a non-existent breeze.
‘I grow tired of the reasonable approach,’ Legion said.
‘The Earth Alliance of Corporations has bought out Earth Central.
There are no limits any more.
No rules.
No regulations.
Nothing about environmental impact, customer care, or good business practices.
IMC have been given a free….’
There was a pause.
Bernice heard Ace murmur something beneath her breath.
‘…hand,’ Legion continued, ‘to exploit all planets colonized, occupied or claimed by Earth for their mineral wealth.
This Project Eden of yours: five years and nothing to show for it.
I personally do not have time for delays  in this operation, and my approach has been ratified at the highest levels.
You, Coordinator Engado, are a hopeless incompetent.
I shall not be requiring your services any longer.
Is there somebody called Bannen here?’
Alex Bannen's footsteps echoed hesitantly through the refectory.
‘Yes, sir?’
‘I am informed that you will be amenable to cooperation.’
Bannen's voice positively glowed with anticipation.
‘Oh yes,’ he said.
‘Oh yes indeed!’
Outside, Adjudicator Bishop cleared his throat.
Events seemed to have overtaken him.
To Bernice, he sounded suspiciously like a man whose job had evaporated, leaving him high and dry.
‘I still have to find my murderer,’ he announced.
‘Well that's easy,’ Bannen said nastily.
‘Arrest Piper O'Rourke.’
There was a silence in the refectory.
‘That is an as-yet unproven accusation,’ Bishop said slowly, ‘albeit with some corroborative substance to it.
I shall require time to develop a case, to amass evidence —’
‘No time,’ Legion said brusquely.
‘IMC is the law here, and the law is death.’
‘Wait,’ Bishop and the Doctor chimed together.
Bernice watched as the Doctor took a step forward and opened his mouth.
Bishop grabbed his collar, hoisted him back and stepped in front of him.
‘I am still an Adjudicator of the Guild of Adjudicators,’ he announced, his voice ringing out around the refectory.
‘And I will have justice done this day!’
To emphasize his point, a massive gun suddenly appeared in his hand.
The troopers, reacting late, made Bishop the focus of their aim.
‘Wrong on three counts,’ said a gruff voice from the door.
Bernice threw her weight against the side of the food dispenser, trying to swivel it discreetly around.
The refectory door was open again, and standing in it, filling it, was the most grotesquely fat woman that Bernice had ever seen.
Her scalp gleamed as if freshly oiled, and  pornographic tattoos seemed to writhe across it with a life of their own.
Her robes were long and black; the points of her collar rose high above her head.
She stepped forward in a manner that was so delicate it was repulsive.
‘The Adjudicators are finished,’ she growled.
‘IMC has ruled the Guild to be an illegal organization.
And there is no justice.’
Bishop seemed to shrink within his robes.
‘Staff Sergeant Ace,’ Legion said.
Its voice seemed to hover over them all.
‘In accordance with IMC regulations, and at the behest of Trau Bannen, Coordinator Designate of Project Eden, take Krau O'Rourke away to somewhere private and have her made redundant.
With prejudice.’
For a long moment, nobody moved.
Finally Ace stepped forward.
She gestured at Piper with her flamer.
‘Come on,’ she snapped.
‘Let's go.’
Silence reigned after they had left.
Nobody but Bernice caught sight of the devastated expression on the Doctor's face.
‘You will all be segregated for the duration of the operation,’ Legion announced to the assembled Project Eden team.
‘To ensure a smooth transition of responsibility.’
Bernice had seen enough.
She tilted her body sideways.
The dispenser hummed as the null-grav units tried to compensate, and the machine juddered to one side.
Slowly, and with much complaining, the food dispenser wandered towards the door.
Piper slid from the Pit and into the transparent dome of the Belial Bridge terminal.
Moloch hung overhead like a small but angry demon.
Behind Moloch, the vast sphere of Lucifer cast a malignant crimson glare.
‘Move,’ Ace snapped behind her.
Piper stepped into the dome.
Ace moved to cover her.
‘Ace,’ Piper said, ‘I've talked to the Doctor.
He said —’
‘Shut up!’
‘What are you doing, Ace?
Don't you know what sort of a creature Legion is?’
‘Well, you should know.’
‘Well, there's nothing more to say, is there?’
Piper took a deep but shaky breath.
‘Are you going to get on with it, or what?’
‘Or what,’ Ace said, and fired.