

6 BOX
PASSWORD!
Try this Belgian game.
Stand in a line, one behind the other, with the Sixer at the back.
The Sixer decides on a three letter word.
She ‘writes’ the first letter with her finger on the back of the girl in front of her.
The letter is passed to the front of the line in this way — each girl writing on the back of the one in front.
The other two letters are passed along one by one by the same method.
The girl at the front of the line has to guess the word — if she can!
If your Six is very good at this, try longer words.
Remember to take turns at the back and the front.
DANISH OPEN SANDWICHES
For a savoury treat, make these special sandwiches.
Ask each Brownie to bring one of the following ingredients to the meeting:
6 medium slices wholemeal bread
4 sliced hardboiled eggs
4 sliced tomatoes
6 thin slices of cheese
A pot of cress
Butter the bread, add the cheese slices and arrange the other ingredients on top.
Make your sandwiches look as attractive as you can and show them to your leaders before you eat them!
FAMOUS LANDMARK
Match the famous landmark with its country.
HI!
Teach yourself to say ‘Hello!’ in some European languages.
You may need an adult to help you with the pronunciation.
Notice how each of the above groups have a similar way of saying ‘Hello!’
Why do you think that is?
(Clue!
Look at a European map).
What English words do the second set of phrases remind you of?
INTERNATIONAL BADGES
See if the whole Six can memorise these Brownie names and badges from around the world.
Try tracing them on to thin card.
Then write the country and Brownie names on separate cards and make up some games.
Use the rules of well known card games such as happy families, snap or pairs.
How many can you invent?
The answers are on page 25.
DISCOVERING…
HOW TO DYE A FLOWER
You could never grow a carnation which had all the colours of the Union Flag, but it is quite easy to make one using food dyes.
A UNION FLAG CARNATION
You will need
3 jam jars
blue and red food colourings
a white carnation
Pour 1cm of water in each jar.
Add red food colouring to one jar and blue dye to another.
Use scissors to cut the carnation stem lengthwise into three.
Place one piece of stem into each jar and leave for a few hours.
The water and dyes will travel up the stem.
The dyes will colour the flower.
The part of the flower which gets the undyed water will stay white.
You will now have a red, white and blue carnation — ready to wear on your uniform.
You could use different coloured dyes to make carnation flags for other countries — red and white for Switzerland or Japan, blue and yellow for Sweden, and so on.
White carnation
The finished carnation
PLANTS AND WATER
To understand why the flower gets dyed, you have to know how plants get water.
Place the stem of a stick of celery in some dyed water and leave it for a few hours.
Cut off the bottom of the stem and look at the freshly cut end.
Can you see small coloured dots where the dyed water is?
Each dot is made of many tiny tubes — much too small to see without a microscope.
These are like miniature straws which suck water up the stem.
If the water contains dye, the dye will be sucked up too — right to the top of the plant.
Busy Lizzie Dyed Water Coloured dots The cut end
WOOD
In trees, the tiny water tubes are in a ring around the inside of the trunk.
Each year a new ring of tubes grows.
Have you ever seen these rings in tree stumps?
The number of rings will tell you the age of the tree — a tree with 20 rings is 20 years old.
One new ring of tubes grows every year
Only the youngest ring is able to suck up water.
The old rings are dead and their tubes are full of air.
This trapped air makes wood float in water.
Global Games
International games to play with your Six or Pack.
PEARL FISHING
This game is played by Brownies in Sweden.
All you need is a pile of different coloured, large buttons — black, white, yellow and green.
Place the pile of buttons on the floor in the middle of the room.
Each coloured button has a different value.
Black buttons have 24 points, white ones 20, yellow 15 and green ten.
Brownies stand in a circle in groups of three — father, mother and child — waiting to go pearl-fishing.
Brown Owl calls out either mothers, fathers or children and the Brownies with that name run clockwise round the outside of the circle.
When they get back to their own places they go to the middle and pick up a ‘pearl’ and go back to stand in their places.
The game continues until everyone has run twice.
The value of the ‘pearls’ each family has collected is then added up and the family with the highest number is the winner.
SWEET POTATOES
This game is similar to one which is played in China.
A Brownie is chosen to be the Farmer and another to be the Thief.
The Thief has to wear something which makes her stand out from the other Brownies.
The rest of the Brownies are sweet potato plants and they crouch in rows, making themselves as small as they can.
The Farmer goes up and down the rows ‘watering’ the ‘plants’and chanting:
‘I water the flowers, I water the flowers
I water them morning and evening hours.’
The ‘plants’ gradually grow until the Brownies are standing as tall as possible.
When the Farmer has finished he sits down and goes to sleep and begins counting to 100.
The Thief then ‘steals’ the ‘plants’by touching them.
The ‘plants’ run off and hide, as does the Thief.
When the Farmer has finished counting he wakes up and starts to search.
If he finds the Thief, all the ‘plants’ must come out of hiding.
If he doesn't he counts as many as he can find.
THE EGG GAME
Brownies in Iceland enjoy playing this fun ball game.
Brownies stand in a circle facing inwards with their legs apart.
One Brownie has a football and starts the game by trying to roll the ball between another Brownie's legs.
Each Brownie tries to stop the ball with her hands but no one must put her feet together.
If the ball does go through someone's legs, that Brownie is out.
A Brownie who stops the ball with her hands must then try to roll it between someone else's legs, but she must not move from the circle.
Let's Learn FRENCH
If you thought learning French would be difficult — think again.
You already know some ‘French’ words because they are exactly the same in English.
The French even have a special name for them —‘Franglais’ words!
For example, French Brownies do le shopping with their mothers who leave their cars on le parking .
At le weekend some Brownies might play le football and some may be lucky enough to go sailing on un yacht .
(Le or la means ‘the’ and un or une means ‘a’).
Actually French Brownies aren't called Brownies at all.
If you were a member of a French all-girl Pack you would be called a Jeanette .
The name comes from Joan of Arc (Jeanne d'Arc ), the patron saint of France, whose bravery is an example to all girls.
If you were a girl Wolf Cub you would be called a Louvette .
Girls can choose whether they want to join a mixed Pack, which is organised by the Scouts, or an all-girl Pack, run by the Guides.
Just like you, French Louvettes or Jeanettes make a promise, but they call it une Promesse .
The French for Pack is Meute and it's divided into groups of six — just like ours.
The girls and boys in the photograph are all members of the Boulogne District Cubs.
Boulogne is one of the French ports and if you went there on a day trip with your parents le ferry would take about 1 heure 40 minutes to cross the English Channel.
Of course, the French don't call the stretch of water between England and the rest of Europe ‘the English Channel’.
They call it ‘la manche ’, which also means sleeve.
The Pack doesn't meet in Boulogne itself but at a small town (une petite ville ), called Wimereux, which is five kilometres north of le ferry port .
The Pack members are all cyclistes .
In the photograph they are getting ready to go off to camp on their bikes (velos ).
The camp will be set up near Marquise.
This is a small town between Boulogne and Calais, which is another ferry port .
The Pack will be playing lots of jeux (games) and taking part in other activities .
During the evening they will join in une cercle and chantent (sing) some songs.
(You don't pronounce the en in chantent ).
Why don't you count up the French words in italics and see how many you can learn by heart.
Then try learning the following words:
Can you think of any other ‘French’ words that are spelt exactly the same, or are similar, in English?
EGG BOX BOARD GAME
This is a game played by most children in West Africa, where it is known as warri or by other local names.
You can sometimes buy wooden or plastic warri sets, but if you want to make your own from ordinary egg-boxes — read on!
You will need
A one-dozen egg-box (or two six-egg-boxes)
48 small beads
Strong sticky tape
Scissors
1
Put the lid off the egg-box.
You only need to use the part of the box in which the eggs stand.
2
If you are using two six-egg-boxes, fasten them together with strong tape to make two rows of six ‘holes’(Fig 1).
If you have a 12-egg-box, your board is already complete!
HOW TO PLAY
Warri is a game for two players with each one sitting on either side of the egg-box.
Both start with 24 beads and they place four in each hole on their own side of the ‘board’.
One girl starts by picking up all the beads in one hole on her side.
Then she drops them, one at a time, into the next four holes.
When she drops the last bead, she picks up all the beads in that last hole (both hers and her opponent's if that's the case), and continues to drop them, hole by hole, around the board.
She continues like this until either her last bead drops into an empty hole and her turn ends;or her last bead dropped creates a new four-bead group in one hole.
If she does create a new four-bead group, she ‘wins’ these four beads and takes them off the board, leaving the hole empty.
(This first turn can take quite a bit of time while the game gets under way).
The other player then picks up four beads from one hole on her side and plays in the same way.
The game continues until all the beads are off the board.
The players then return their beads to the board in groups of four.
If one girl now has more than 24 beads, she has won a hole for each four beads on the other player's side.
She may start her turn in those holes, which will strengthen her position.
The game continues until one player has all 48 beads — or it is time for supper!
Little Women
Little Women is a famous book written by Louisa May Alcott.
It was first published in 1868 and tells the story of the March sisters, Jo, Beth, Amy and Meg, and their mother, while their father is away in the Civil War.
This extract from the book comes after an argument between Jo and Amy.
To get back at Jo for not letting her go to the theatre with her, Amy has burned the book which Jo has written.
Little Women is published by Puffin Books.
WHAT COUNTRY?
Can you guess which countries these are from the descriptions below?
Here's a clue: they are all countries which have Brownies and Guides.
The answers are on page 25.
The kimono is my traditional dress.
My capital is Tokyo.
Karaoke started here and I have a special dish called Sushi.
Which country am I?
I'm famous for Cleopatra, pyramids and the Suez Canal.
A long time ago I was ruled by the Pharaohs.
My capital is Cairo.
Which country am I?
The Taj Mahal is one of my most famous monuments.
Women wear saris and I'm well known for my spicy food.
My capital is Delhi.
Which country am I?
I am in Europe and I have lots of mountains.
I am famous for cuckoo clocks and chocolate.
Our Chalet is here and my capital is Berne.
Which country am I?
My capital is Harare and I have one of the most famous waterfalls in the world.
My name used to be Rhodesia.
Which country am I?
I'm famous for hamburgers, hot dogs and pecan pie.
My capital is Washington and I have lots of skyscrapers.
Which country am I?
Puzzle Page
The following countries can all be found in the wordsearch vertically, horizontally or diagonally.
See how many you can find.
The answers are on page 25.
Now see how many of these countries' capital cities you can name and fit them into the grid.
BROWNIES ROUND THE WORLD
BOTSWANA
Botswana is a country in Southern Africa, about the same size as France.
It is entirely land-locked, which means that it is bordered in all directions by other countries — Zambia, Zimbabwe, Namibia and South Africa.
Fact File
The Okavango swamps are home to lots of animals
History
Botswana was once known as Bechuanaland.
Inter-tribal feuds and problems on the borderlands caused the country's chieftain, Khama III, to ask the British High Commissioner for South Africa for protection.
In 1885, Bechuanaland became a Protectorate under the British Crown.
In 1966, Bechuanaland gained its independence and became officially known as the Republic of Botswana.
Today Botswana is governed by a legislative National Assembly and has its own President.
People
There are many tribes in Botswana but over half the people belong to the Tswana tribe.
Most of the people live in the eastern region.
There is enough rain in this region to provide grazing for cattle and good land to grow crops.
Eighty per cent of the people are farmers.
Women do most of the crop farming, weeding, harvesting, threshing, storing crops and selling.
They also have the job of carrying the water home in pails from a pipe used by the whole village.
The Kalahari Desert
The Kalahari Desert covers two thirds of Botswana.
It is a very dry area and only has rain during the wet season.
About 10,000 Bushmen live in the Kalahari Desert.
These  people are very primitive and live in small groups, moving from place to place.
They eat plants and animals which they kill with poisoned arrows.
Wildlife
Botswana's wildlife is a great tourist attraction.
In the north-west of the country, the Okavango River creates swaps which are inhabited by crocodiles, water birds and hippopotamuses.
Gemsbok national park is also rich in wildlife and is very popular with visitors.
Money
Botswana makes most of its money through mining diamonds, copper-nickel and coal.
It is the second largest producer of nickel in Africa, the third largest producer of diamond and the fourth largest producer of cobalt.
In recent years, Botswana's manufacturing industry has grown and the country produces soap, dairy produce, hides and bonemeal.
Brownies
In Botswana, Brownies are called Sunbeams.
They enjoy learning home-making skills and traditional crafts such as rugmaking.
All members of the Movement in Botswana give service to needy children, the aged and the sick.
They raise money for village development projects, clean public buildings and help with the catering for conferences and state functions.
In 1955 an 11-year-old Sunbeam was presented with the Silver Cross for rescuing her three sisters from their burning house.
Promise
I promise that I will do my best:
To do my duty to God,
To serve my country and to help
other people; and
To keep the Sunbeam law.
Law
A Sunbeam is truthful,
obedient and cheerful,
A Sunbeam thinks of others
before herself.
The Bushmen of the Kalahari Desert
Uniform
Sunbeams wear a yellow short-sleeved dress.
Recipe
Potato Pancakes with Bacon and Banana
Ingredients (serves 4)
175g (6oz) potatoes
75g (3oz) plain flour
1 medium egg
275ml (10 fl oz) milk
Salt and pepper
25g (1oz butter)
2 large bananas
4 bacon rashers, cut into strips
Mix together the mashed potato and flour.
Make a well in the centre and drop in the egg.
Gradually stir in the milk to make a batter.
Season with salt and pepper.
Heat the butter in a frying pan and cook the batter to make four pancakes.
Keep them warm.
Peel and quarter the bananas.
Fry the bacon until crisp.
Gently fry the banana pieces.
Divide the fried bananas between the four pancakes and roll each pancake up.
Cover the top with bacon strips and serve.
SENDING SIGNALS
In this age of the telephone you might think it's never been easier to talk to someone who's not nearby.
But if you learn semaphore or the Morse code, you'll have a fun way to send messages — without paying a penny!
PAST USES
Visual signalling is thought to have been invented by Captain Bolton, of the 12th Regiment, British Army, and Captain Colomb in 1861.
They worked out that the dots and dashes of the Morse code (which were already being used in the telegraph system) could be used by flashing lights at night and waving flags or arms during the day.
Two years later, the War Office picked up the idea and soon the system was adopted by the army and navy.
Today, semaphore signalling is still used at sea, where it is impossible to use wires or cable for communication.
SEEING SEMAPHORE
Think about what semaphore means.
It's all about sending a message to someone who is out of your reach.
If you wanted to make a person at a distance come over to you you'd probably wave your arms.
Semaphore signalling is really only a more scientific way of doing this!
FINDING FLAGS
Your Pack should have a pair of semaphore flags.
If it doesn't, don't worry.
You can still signal using your arms, provided you're standing against a suitable background.
If you're feeling really adventurous try making your own flags using dowelling and cotton cloth or strong paper.
Alphabet semaphore chart
READY TO GO
Stand with feet apart, a flag in either hand, the arms straight and pressed close to the body.
The flags should be crossed in front of your shins, the right flag over the left.
This is called in the READY position.
After signalling each group of letters forming one word, you must return to this position.
If you aren't using flags, cross your arms in front of your body with your right hand clasped over the left.
There is no need to learn all the semaphore signs before beginning to signal.
Try learning the letters A to G.
You must make A, B and C with the RIGHT arm, but D can be made with either arm.
If you're signalling E, F and G, you must do it with your LEFT arm.
Look at the alphabet semaphore chart to find out where to place your flags.
Practise sending the following words: BE, ACE, BAD, BEG, ADD etc.
Stand facing another Brownie and have a ‘knock-out’ competition.
The  winner is the one who sends the most words without repeating any.
Now go on to learn the other letters.
SPECIAL RULES
There are a few special signs you'll need to learn to make signalling easier.
The sender always starts by sending the calling up sign, AA, which is answered with the letter K, by the receiver.
To show that the message has ended you must signal AR.
If the receiver wants to show she has received the message, she must signal R.
If you send the wrong word and want to erase it, signal E eight times.
This can be answered by the receiver by signalling C.
MESSAGE
Now try sending the following message.
Don't forget to take up the READY position after signalling each word.
AA REPORT BACK TO CAMP IMMEDIATELY
MORSE
Morse is about rhythm and timing.
The letters in the system are formed by ‘dots’(.)
and ‘dashes’(—).
The difference between them is just a matter of time.
The dash is always THREE times the length of the dot.
There are all sorts of ways of sending messages in Morse code — flags, light flashes, pencil taps, whistling and so on.
But, you must remember to leave the correct interval of time between each letter, which is one dash.
Look at the Morse code chart and, using a torch, try to spell out your name.
Get another Brownie to write down the dots and dashes you signal to see if you have done it right.
Then send the message ‘AA REPORT BACK TO CAMP IMMEDIATELY’ again — but this time in Morse!
PAPER FLOWERS
Brownies in Uruguay enjoy making these paper flowers.
Why don't you have a go at making them too!
You will need 
a pencil or thin stick about 18cm long
a narrow strip of green crepe paper, to wind around your pencil or stick.
Keep a small piece for later.
tissue paper about 100cm x 100cm, in your chosen colour
a pencil to draw with
scissors
sticky tape
thin cardboard
tracing paper
Wind the strip of green crepe paper round the length of your pencil or stick until it is completely covered.
Hold the end in place with a piece of sticky tape.
Cut out nine squares, each about 10cm x 10cm, from the tissue paper.
Lay the squares on top of each other and fold in half.
Trace the shape in figure 1 and transfer it to thin cardboard.
Cut it out.
Lay the cardboard shape on the tissue paper, with the straight edge on the fold.
Draw round the shape and cut out the pattern.
Following the dotted lines, fold A over B and C over A. You should have one petal (Fig 2).
Cut a small hole at the bottom point and push the green covered pencil or stick through the hole for about 2cm (Fig 3).
Squeeze the paper to the ‘stem’ and wind some sticky tape round it to secure it.
Cover the sticky tape with green crepe paper.
Pull out A and C (Fig 4).
Then separate each sheet of tissue paper, starting with the outside ones.
Twist each sheet slightly to make it look like a petal.
DID YOU KNOW…?
In Uruguay, Thinking Day is celebrated in May instead of February.
This is because February is a hot summer month in that country and people go away on holiday.
May was chosen because the World Chief Guide, Lady Baden- Powell, visited Uruguay in that month.
Brownies and Guides get together and each group entertains the others as part of the Programme 
LEAP YEAR
1992 is a Leap Year — which means that February has 29 days instead of the usual 28.
Leap Years occur every four years.
We usually think of a year as being 365 days long.
We call this a calendar year.
It seems odd that this extra day should suddenly appear every Leap Year but there is a good reason.
Our calendar year is based on the solar year — the number of days the earth takes to travel round the sun.
But it actually takes the earth 365.242199 days to complete this journey.
And it's that extra .242199 of a day that causes all the trouble!
It doesn't sound much, but if we ignored those extra few hours, after four years our calendar year would be a whole day ahead of the solar year.
Each year the seasons would move slowly back through the calendar until Christmas ended up in the summer.
Before people started to need calendars this wasn't a problem.
For thousands of years people calculated time by days and nights and the changing seasons.
But as civilizations developed, people wanted to divide up time into months and years.
So various calendars were developed in different parts of the world.
The old Chinese calendar was based on a cycle of 60 years.
The calendar we use was developed in Roman times.
The Romans divided the year into 12 months and added an extra day to February in Leap Years.
But there was a tiny mistake in their calculations, so by 1545 the calendar year was ten days behind the solar year.
This was put right in 1582 by Pope Gregory XIII who left ten days out of the year.
When England did the same in 1752 we lost 11 days.
Many people thought that these days had been stolen from them.
Mobs took to the streets shouting ‘Give us back our 11 days!’.
But since then our calendar year has been the same as the solar year.
There are other calendars though.
The Jewish Year has 12 months with an extra month every Leap Year.
And although the Hindu year also has 12 months, they are different to our months.
Anyone born on February 29 has a special reason for looking forward to Leap Years.
They have a ‘real’ birthday only once every four years.
However, most February 29 babies celebrate their birthdays on February 28.
Traditional Rhyme
Thirty days hath September,
April, June and November,
All the rest have thirty-one,
Excepting February alone,
And she hath twenty-eight days clear,
And twenty-nine in each Leap Year
The Aztecs
The Aztec calendar had 365 days but these were divided up into 18 months of 20 days each, plus five ‘unlucky’ days.
Legal Matters
Having an extra day every four years makes things very complicated.
So most government departments and insurance companies count February 28 and 29 as one day.
Customs
Traditionally, in Leap Years women have the right to ask a man to marry them.
In Scotland, according to a law passed in 1288, a man could be fined if he did not accept.
Things to do
Find someone who has their birthday on February 29 and work out how many ‘real’ birthdays they have had.
Golden Island
‘Malta's fantastic!’ said Elizabeth, trickling silvery sand through her fingers.
‘I never knew sea could be so blue !’
‘I like the honey-coloured rock,’ said Mum, gazing across Mellieha Bay.
‘It reminds me of marzipan!’
‘More like fudge!’ said Dad.
‘Makes me hungry!’
Elizabeth lay on her tummy, enjoying the sunshine on her bare back.
Hard to believe her friends at home would be wearing anoraks!
‘We're so lucky!’ she thought for the umpteenth time.
‘I do wish it wasn't our last day.’
It was Elizabeth's first trip abroad.
Mum had entered a magazine competition…
‘Identify these famous buildings and win a Mediterranean holiday!’
‘Waste of time!’
Dad had said.
‘No one ever wins those things!
It's all a big con.’
But Mum's tie-breaker slogan had been so clever she'd won the competition and now here they were in Malta.
Elizabeth giggled as she remembered Dad's astonishment.
‘As it was such a waste of time, you presumably won't want to come,’ Mum had said, trying to keep her face straight.
‘I'll just take Elizabeth.’
Malta was gorgeous.
Everywhere was blue and gold.
The buildings were of golden stone, some old and mellowed, some fresh and new.
Elizabeth had been amazed to see workmen slicing through stone blocks with hand-axes, just as easily as cutting butter.
In the south were cliffs of the same pale gold, and rocky bays lapped by vivid blue sea.
The northern beaches had silver sand, the finest Elizabeth had ever seen.
There were enormous churches filled with treasures; sheltered creeks; colourful fishing boats.
The funniest things were the shoats, a mixture of sheep and goat, grazing on the scrubby volcanic land.
What fascinated Elizabeth most were the houses.
Everywhere the narrow, winding streets were lined with little golden terraced houses.
Through open front doors, Elizabeth caught glimpses of shiny tiled floors and highly polished furniture.
The nicest thing about them were their names.
Not ‘Dunroamin’ or ‘Honeysuckle Cottage’, like English cottages, but people's names — Maria, Josie, Peggy, Christopher, Paul.
It made them alive, somehow, and Elizabeth longed to go inside.
It was the one thing you couldn't do when you stayed in a hotel.
‘Hello!’
Elizabeth looked up and saw a brown uniform and a friendly face, framed in the lovely black hair typical of the Maltese.
‘Would you like to buy a lottery ticket?’ asked the girl.
‘In aid of repairing our  Brownie house.’
Elizabeth was pleased.
‘I'm a Brownie, too!’ she said.
‘Aren't you sweltering in your uniform on a day like this?’
The girl shook her head.
‘It isn't very warm today,’ she explained.
‘Not for Malta.
You should come in August; it's really hot then!’
‘What's your name?’ asked Elizabeth as Mum fished out some money for the tickets.
‘Victoria Vella,’ said the girl.
Elizabeth thought that was a lovely name and longed for shiny black curls just like Victoria Vella's.
‘I love your hair!’ said Victoria, enviously, staring at Elizabeth's blonde plaits, and Elizabeth giggled.
The girls began to chatter away.
By the time Victoria's Guider called her, they felt they'd known each other for ages.
‘I won't see our again,’ said Elizabeth, regretfully.
‘We're going home at midnight tomorrow.’
‘Tell you what, come to our meeting tomorrow before you leave,’ said Victoria.
‘It ends at eight, plenty of time for you to get to the airport.’
‘Can I?’ asked Elizabeth, excited.
Mum nodded, laughing.
Victoria hastily wrote down an address, and ran off just in time to catch the bus coming down the hill.
Next evening Dad drove the hired car round Mosta, searching for the meeting place.
Elizabeth gasped when they found it.
‘I thought it would be a hall!’ she said.
‘But it's a house!
I'm, going to see inside a Maltese house after all!’
‘And look what it's called!’ said Mum, pointing to the nameplate.
‘Perfect!’
The house was called ELIZABETH .
Victoria appeared in the doorway.
‘You came!’ she said happily, seizing Elizabeth's hand.
She led her up a stone staircase into a small room where Brownies were sitting on wooden toadstools.
Everyone made Elizabeth welcome.
Victoria showed her round the house, which was so tiny it didn't take long and Elizabeth told the Pack about English Brownies.
It seemed no time at all before the meeting was over.
Elizabeth blinked back tears.
‘I wish you could stay,’ said Victoria.
‘I know!
Let's be pen-friends!’ she suddenly added.
Elizabeth brightened.
‘Could we?’ she said, thrilled.
‘I can send you photos of my Pack and my house!
Let's!’
‘I don't want to go home,’ said Elizabeth sadly, as Dad drove away.
‘I love Malta so much.’
‘Never mind,’ said Dad.
‘Now you have a friend here you can keep in touch with the island.
One day you may come back to see Victoria, and perhaps she could visit us in England!’
‘That would be perfect,’ said Elizabeth and shut her eyes to dream of that far-off day.
PINBOARD
letters
BALLOON DANGER
I have read a book called 50 Simple things Kids Could Do To Save The Earth .
It says that helium balloons travel for miles, fall in the oceans and the sea creatures eat it thinking it is food.
Their stomachs get blocked and eventually they die.
It upsets me that this happens.
I wish people would stop buying helium balloons and letting them go.
People don't seem to know the harm they are doing.
SPONSORED SILENCE
My Pack had a sponsored silence in aid of the NSPCC.
We brought books to Brownies which we read for an hour and we were not allowed to say a word.
We raised £111.70.
Brown Owl was very pleased with what we did.
THINKING DAY ON THE AIR
Last year we took part in Thinking Day on the Air and sent messages over the radio to other Brownies and guides.
We even spoke to the village where Lady Baden-Powell lived.
Mrs Van Smirren, the County Commissioner for Lincolnshire South, also came and Brown Owl gave her a phonetic alphabet worksheet.
But Brown Owl forgot that one of the questions on it asked how old you are and that it is rude to ask a lady how old she is.
When Mrs Van Smirren returned the sheet, instead of writing her age phonetically she put ‘never you mind’.
There were Rainbow Guides, Guides, Guides and Brownies from Eagle and Skellingthorpe.
I think they all enjoyed it.
They spoke to lots of other Brownies, Guides and guiders over the radio and filled in lots of QSL cards.
Tawny Owl helped us to make things from other countries, such as heart decorations, Mexican weaving and raffia mats.
A good time was had by all who came.
WATER WORKS
We wanted to raise some money to buy equipment for our Pack Holiday.
We washed three vans, one mini and 28 cars and we all got soaking wet.
It was very hard work and during the middle we had a water fight.
PACK PRAYER
Dear Lord,
Help each of us to care for one another, to love one another and to help one another .
Let us be kind and thoughtful and not to be unkind and hurt other people.
Let us like all the Brownies, Guides and Leaders all over the world.
Amen.
Members of the 5th Market Drayton Pack in Shropshire enjoy clowning around at Brownie Revels.
The 4th Chester (St Mary's) Pack decided to help their local animal rescue home and brought lots of dog and cat food along to their meetings.
When they had enough they presented the food to Debbie who runs the home and nurses lots of animals back to health.
OXFAM LEAP DAY
‘Hello, Brownies!
My name is Leap Frog and I'm helping to raise money for Oxfam's ‘Appeal for a Million Days’.
‘1992 is a special year for two reasons.
As well as marking Oxfam's 50th anniversary, it's also Leap Year which means that we all have an extra day to do something special for other people and to help Oxfam work towards making the world a fairer place.
‘On Saturday February 29 we want you to use your Leap Time to take part in some fun, froggy fundraising activities.
All the money raised will be clocked up on a giant mobile Time Machine.
‘A free Leap Day Action Pack is available which is full of fundraising ideas.
If you'd like a copy write to Leap time, Oxfam, 274 Banbury Road, Oxford, OX2 7DZ or ring 0865 313131.’
POETRY
TV
Dad rarely lets me watch TV
Because it makes him mad.
But when he lets me switch it on
I'm really very glad.
Neighbours and Home and Away 
I really like to see.
What goes on in Summer Bay
Is very important to me.
People who live in Ramsay Street
Are always having a fight
Just like in our house
Every single night!
THE CHRONICLE NEWSPAPERS
Sarah Holladay, Katharine McGettigan, Helen Robson and Lisa Scott of the 18th Chester Pack take part in a craft session, making skeleton puppets.
Chester Brownies take part in an obstacle race during the Chester South District Brownie Revels, which had a Peter Pan theme.
The writer of this month's Star Letter has won a storybook.
If you would like the chance to win a prize, get writing now.
MUSIC DAY
Last November, there was a music day for all the Brownies in Nottinghamshire and 400 came.
Some of the activities included Ocarinas, recorders, strings, handchimes, singing games and country dancing.
Tivvy (Mrs Limb) organised everything so I would like to say thank you to her and to everyone else who helped.
NO-MENACING WEEK
Tommy's Campaign
Dennis the Menace has turned over a new leaf — for a week!
He's declared March 29–April 4 as National No-Menacing Week, and wants all of his Brownie mates to join in.
What's more, it's all for a really good cause.
Every year, over 60,000 babies are born too soon.
This means they have to spend their first days of life in hospital and can't go home for several weeks.
Worse still, one third of premature babies due or suffer some form of handicap throughout life.
Dennis and his friend Tommy want to stop this by setting up a National Centre where doctors and medical scientists can undertake research to prevent premature birth.
Dennis will try very hard to help Tommy run the campaign because he thinks it's an excellent idea.
All you have to do is be as good as gold for a week.
There will be special ‘Good As Gold Awards’ for the most original No-Menacing ideas and activities, which means you could win a unique award.
Dennis is personally providing a free pack with a poster, stickers, sponsor forms, and lots of fun ideas on how to take part.
He will even send you an official certificate.
And if you do take part, Tommy will also send you an educational pack, full of fun things for you to do.
It's on the theme of families and you'll be able to use it at Pack meetings.
So if you want to find out what family life was like 100 years ago, or when the nappy pin was invented — talk to your Brown Owl!
Ask her to send off for Tommy's free Parent Appreciation Education Pack .
To send off for the packs and sign up to take part in National No-Menacing Week write to: Tommy, London SE99 6RD — Tel: 071 620 2654.
pen-pals
The following Brownies are all looking for pen-pals.
If you would like to write to one of them, send a letter c/o BROWNIE magazine and we will pass it on for you.
Joanne Graham is nine years old and comes from County Durham.
She likes swimming, writing, going away in her family's caravan and going to Brownies.
Seven-year-old Danielle Walker is a member of the 8th Linlithgow Pack in West Lothian.
She enjoys reading, writing, listening to music, looking after rabbits and dancing.
Jaime Collins is nine and belongs to the 4th Harold Hill Pack in Essex.
She likes skating, writing letters, reading and playing the clarinet.
Eight-year-old Hannah Girt likes watching Neighbours and Home and Away .
Her hobbies are reading, maths and dancing.
Hannah lives in Watford, Herts.
Reading, writing, art, wildlife, chess, kite flying and swimming are the hobbies of Lauren Gerrard.
Lauren is nine and lives in Cornwall.
Natasha Lebedeva and Nastya Kharina live in Russia and go to the English Language School in Perm.
They would like to write to Brownie pen-pals in Britain.
ANSWERS
FLAGS
These flags belong to countries which have Brownies in them.
Find out what colours they should be and colour them in.
CANADA
This has been Canada's flag since 1965.
The maple leaf in the centre is Canada's national emblem.
INDIA
This became India's national flag in 1947.
The colours of the stripes stand ford courage and sacrifice, truth and peace and faith and chivalry.
The wheel (chakra) symbolises the power of peaceful change.
JAMAICA
Jamaica has had this flag since 1962 when it gained independence from Britain.
One colour stands for Jamaica's natural resources and sunshine, one for its agriculture and hope for the future and the last one for the nation's past and present troubles.
Can you guess which colour stands for what?
GUYANA
This has been Guyana's flag since 1966 when it became independent from Britain.
The colours stand for different things: Guyana's green land, its mineral resources, the country's rivers, the energy of the people as they build the nation's riches and their persistence in doing this task.
Do you know which colour represents what?
SWAZILAND
Swaziland gained its independence from Britain in 1967 and this has been its national flag ever since.
The centre strip bears the traditional weapons of an Emasotsha warrior.
DAWN SONG
This is Malyali Boat Song from South India.
Sing it with your Pack as part of your Thinking Day celebrations.
Those of you who play instruments can provide the music.
Chorus:
Dance, sing, dawn-light is break-ing o-ver the sea.
Sing, sing, spark-ling the new day greets you and me.
Verses:
1 Hear how the dawn wind whis-per-ing moves all the palm leaves,
With silver and green in rice-fields bright patterns it weaves.
Flocks of green parrots scream and shout-swift they flash by
The Coel sits a-loft and greets the light, clear and strong his cry.
Repeat chorus.
2 Crossing the fields to-wards the well girls walking palm leaves,
With silver and green in rice-fields bright patterns it weaves.
Soon the great sun will blaze and burn all the sparkling earth
So let us be glad in this free air, greet the day with mirth.
Repeat chorus.
THINKING DAY Bookmark
Bookmarks are easy to make and using one will help you look after your books.
They also make perfect presents.
Why not make a special bookmark for Thinking Day?
You will need
thin stiff card
scissors
pens and pencils
glue
ribbon
coloured paper
a hole puncher
1
Cut out or trace the template on this page.
Draw round or trace the shape on to the card and cut it out.
This is your bookmark.
2
Punch a hole in the top of the bookmark.
Fold the ribbon in half.
Thread the folded end through the hold and tuck the two ends through the loop.
Pull on the ends to tighten it.
3
Cut the ends of the ribbon into V shapes to stop them fraying.
4
If you want to you could also cut the bottom of the bookmark into a fringe.
Make it around 1″ long.
5
Now you get to the fun bit — decorating your bookmark.
Choose one of the ideas below or decide on your own Thinking Day theme.
You could:
Use the template on this page to cut out lots of tiny Trefoils and stick them on to the bookmark.
If you don't have any coloured paper you could draw on the trefoils and then colour them.
If you have learned calligraphy in school or at Brownies you could write the words of the Promise neatly on the bookmark.
Cut out or draw a picture of Freda and glue it on to the bookmark.
Trace a picture of Super Brownie on to the bookmark and colour it in with coloured pencils.
If you want to give the bookmark to a friend you could put their name on it.
Cut the letters out of coloured paper, arrange them carefully down the bookmark and glue them on.
Then add six or seven tiny coloured Trefoils.
Find a book of flags in the library and make tiny copies of six or seven different world flags.
Then glue these on to the bookmark.
Write the name of each country under the flag.
Find out how to say ‘Hello’ in as many different languages as you can and use coloured pens to write the words on the bookmark.
Trace the promise Badges on page 31 and glue them onto the bookmark.
Write the Brownie name and country underneath them.
If everyone in your Pack makes a bookmark, you can exchange them as part of your Thinking Day celebrations.
Or, if you have a Brownie pen-pal, you could send her a special bookmark to show her that you are thinking of her on February 22.
Promise Badges
In some countries Brownies are known by different names and have different Promise Badges.
Can you match the list of ‘Brownies’ and countries to the correct badges?
BE FRIENDLY
FUN FOOD
Add an international flavour to your cooking by trying out these traditional dishes from other countries.
VEGETABLE STIR FRY (China)
Ingredients
1 punnet bean sprouts
100g (4oz) mushrooms
1 small packet baby corn
1 small onion
1 small tin water chestnuts
1 red pepper
soy sauce
salt and pepper
1 tbsp oil
Chop the onion, pepper and mushrooms.
Heat the oil in a large frying pan.
Lightly fry the onions.
Add all the other ingredients except for the mushrooms.
Stir fry for a couple of minutes.
Make sure you don't overcook the vegetables or they will go soft.
Stir in the seasoning and mushrooms.
Cook for a little longer.
SPANISH OMELETTE (Spain)
Ingredients
6 eggs
1 small onion
3 small potatoes, boiled and sliced
4 tomatoes
1 small tin of peas
1 tbsp oil
salt and pepper
chopped parsley
Beat the eggs.
Heat the oil in a large frying pan.
Add all the other ingredients to the eggs and pour into the pan.
Fry until brown underneath.
GREEK SALAD (Greece)
Ingredients
1 small packet feta cheese
2 beef tomatoes
½ cucumber
1 small jar stoned olives
2 tbsp olive oil
1 tbsp vinegar
1 small lettuce
salt and pepper
Cut the cheese into cubes.
Cut the cucumber and tomato in large chunks.
Drain the olives.
Wash the lettuce and tear into pieces.
Put the oil and vinegar in a jam jar or other salted container.
Shake together to make the dressing.
Put a bed of lettuce in a serving bowl and add the tomato and cucumber.
Pour on the dressing and ‘toss’ the salad with a spoon and fork until it is evenly covered.
Add the cheese and olives.
COLCANNON (Ireland)
Ingredients
225g (8oz) carrots, peeled and chopped
225g (8oz) swedes, peeled and chopped
225g (8oz) potatoes, peeled and chopped
100g (4oz) shredded cabbage
50g (2oz) butter
1 tbsp brown sauce
Boil all the vegetables together in a large saucepan until tender.
Strain and mash with a fork or potato-masher.
Stir in the butter and sauce.
Serve while hot.
Rainbow
Volume 1 Number 1
FEBRUARY 1992
GUIDE EXTRA
Rainbow Rabbit in Paris
This is Rainbow Rabbit.
She is visiting the Eiffel Tower.
It is in Paris, the capital city of France.
Help Rainbow Rabbit to find 10 things beginning with B in the picture.
The answers are on page 7.
the two clouds
Once upon a time there was a white cloud which drifted all by itself in the clear blue sky.
It was very lonely and longed for a friend to play with.
One day, another cloud appeared.
It was not white and fluffy but grey and miserable — it was a Rain Cloud.
It was full to the brim with little drops of water.
These drops of water argued with each other all day long.
The little white cloud soon got tired of his new friend.
One day he heard Rain Cloud say to the drops of water, ‘Be quiet, stop quarrelling.
You make me so miserable — I'll start crying in a moment.’
But the water drops wouldn't listen.
They just kept on arguing.
Then a few drops of water fell on the side and fell right down to earth.
People there thought it was going to rain — but it didn't.
Later, the two clouds floated over a great sandy desert.
The drops of water became so naughty that Rain Cloud decided to teach them a lesson.
He began to cry.
He cried so hard that he rained himself empty.
The quarrelsome raindrops had never been so quiet.
There they lay in a small, smooth pond in the middle of the desert.
When Rain Cloud had finished crying, he was a beautiful pure white cloud, just like his friend.
Together they floated away and played in the clear, blue sky.
INTERNATIONAL GAMES
Birds, Giants, Gnomes (Greece)
Rainbows stand in a circle.
One Rainbow stands in the middle.
She calls out ‘birds’, ‘giants’, ‘gnomes’, or ‘witch’.
If she says ‘birds’ the Rainbows pretend to fly.
They walk tall for ‘giants’.
And they crouch down low for ‘gnomes’.
All the Rainbows run for home when the ‘witch’ is called.
The Rainbow in the middle chases them.
She changes places with the first person she catches.
Bears (Canada
Half the Rainbows are bears.
The rest are children.
The bears line up at one end of the room.
The children face them from about 3 metres away.
The children chant:
Bears, bears come out of your den,
Try to catch us when we count ten.
Then they count to ten.
At ‘ten’ the children run for home chased by the bears.
Anyone caught becomes a bear.
Fire on the Mountain (Kenya)
This game is like Simon Says.
Rainbows lies on their backs.
A Guider calls out ‘Fire in the forest!’
‘Fire in the house!’ and so on.
When she calls out ‘Fire on the mountain!’,
Rainbows jump up.
The last one up becomes a new caller.
All Over The World
Here is a map of the world.
You can pin it on the wall.
Can you name the animals and match them to the correct countries?
The answers are on page 7.
OPEN SANDWICHES
In Sweden and Denmark, children enjoy making and eating open sandwiches.
You can make them too.
You will need
a slice of brown or white bread
butter or cheese spread
cheese, tomato slices, lettuce, cucumber slices
1
Spread the butter or cheese spread on the bread.
2
Arrange the cheese, tomatoes, lettuce and cucumber on the bread to make a picture
3
Eat your sandwich!
Invent some more ideas of your own.
BITS AND PIECES
A SPECIAL MESSAGE
Dear Rainbows,
Isn't it super now that you have your very own Rainbow pages in BROWNIE magazine?
I do hope you enjoy reading them and have lots of fun trying out new ideas.
NOTEBOOK OFFER
Would you like a Rainbow Notebook?
We've got 24 copies to give away.
Each notebook has 48 pages and comes with its own pencil and eraser.
All you have to do is to ask your parents or Guider to help you send a postcard to us.
It should have your name, age, address and Unit name written on it.
Send the postcard to: Notebook Offer/ BROWNIE , The Girl Guides Association, 17–19 Buckingham Palace Road, London, SW1W OPT.
Entries must be in by March 16.
The first 24 cards drawn will be the winner.
ANSWERS
ALL OVER THE WORLD
What other animals do you know from other countries?
Can you draw them?
RAINBOW RABBIT IN PARIS
Rainbow Rabbit found these things: bird, butterfly, ball, bear, boots, bag, book, bus, boat, baby.
Rainbow Rabbit would love to read your letters and poems and see your photographs.
So if you've got any, send them to us and we'll try to publish them.
Each month, the writer of the best letter will receive a special book prize.
RAINBOW SONG
The 2nd Sunderland Rainbow Guide Unit sing this song to begin each meeting.
It is sung to the tune of Twinkle, twinkle, little star .
Rainbows, Rainbows, everyone,
Here we are to have some fun.
Playing, learning how to share,
Showing others that we care.
Rainbows, Rainbows, everyone,
Thanking God for all we've done.
thinking day card
Thinking Day is on February 22.
It is the day when Rainbows, Brownies, Guides and Rangers think of each other all over the world.
Make this Thinking Day card and send it to a Rainbow or Brownie friend.
You will need
stiff paper
scissors
glue
pencils or crayons
1
Cut out this picture of Rainbow Rabbit or if you don't want to cut your magazine, you can trace the picture and colour it in.
2
Fold the stiff paper in half.
3
Stick the picture on Rainbow Rabbit on to the paper.
Leave it to dry.
4
Write the words Happy Thinking Day inside the card.