

SIX BOX
Exploring ideas for Sixes to try together.
Explore Your Own Hands
You will need an ink-pad and a piece of paper for each Brownie.
Roll your index finger evenly from left to right on the ink-pad, then again on the paper.
Repeat this with all your fingers.
Don't get too much ink on your finger or the print will not be clear.
Write your name on your paper, then compare prints.
What do you notice about each others' prints?
Does your right hand match your left?
Can you find two prints exactly the same?
Explore Your Garden
Every garden is teeming with wildlife, especially in the warmer months.
What garden creatures can you find in this wordsearch?
There are 12 to find.
Explore Your Senses
Taste:Give a blindfolded Brownie a plate on which there are four or five different powders.
Try salt, ginger, icing sugar, chocolate or coffee.
Guide her finger to each one in turn and ask her to taste and identify each powder.
Use a fresh plate for each girl.
Touch:Put several objects in a drawstring bag.
Give each Brownie in turn one minute to put her hand in the bag and identify the objects.
She then whispers them to the Sixer while the next Brownie has her turn.
Try some of the following: wool ball, Brazil nut, button, coin, paper-clip, dice, tiny doll, Oxo cube, empty Smarties tube.
Smell:Blindfold your six and pass round yoghurt pots containing the following peppermint, onion, almond essence, coffee powder, sliced lemon, sliced orange, nutmeg.
See who gets most right.
Hearing:At home, record sounds like a door shutting, car starting, plane going over, bird chirping, dog barking, baby crying, and so on.
Put about ten on a blank tape, then play it once through to your Six.
See who can remember them in the right order.
Sight:Put six foreign stamps on the table.
Give your Six two minutes to study them, then cover them and ask questions like: Which countries were represented?
Where was the green stamp from?
What value was on the blue stamp?
Whose picture was on the smallest stamp?
What shape was the Hungarian stamp?
Explore The Night Sky
On a clear starry night, ask your Leader to help you find the Pole Star.
Use the diagram to help you.
Famous Explorers
Can you match these explorers with their ships?
The answers are on page 29.
Go Exploring
These games are all about places and exploring.
World Game
Here's a game for Sixes to play.
Make a set of cards, each with a name of a different country on it.
You'll need one card for each Brownie in the Pack.
Find a large map of the world and trace it on to a large piece of paper.
Don't mark in the names of the countries.
Pin the tracing on to a wall.
Each Brownie then takes it in turn to pin their card on the map where she thinks that country is.
The winning Six is the one with the largest number of correctly placed cards.
Where Am I?
Make up some cards with the names of different countries on them.
Shuffle them together.
One Brownie picks out a card then gives the other Brownies a clue about the country.
The other Brownies try to guess where she is.
If they haven't guessed after three clues then she chooses another card.
The player who finally guesses correctly chooses the next card.
Compass Game
You don't need any equipment for this game but you do need to know the points of the compass.
One player stands in the middle of the room and points ‘North’ with her arm.
Then she calls out compass directions or degrees.
The other players run in the direction she calls out.
The last Brownie to reach that place and any Brownies who run in the wrong direction are out of the game.
The game continues until there is only one Brownie left.
She takes the place of the caller.
The leader can change the position of ‘North’ as often as she likes.
How Do I Get…?
All the Brownies sit in a circle.
One Brownie is chosen to ask the first question.
She chooses two local places and asks for directions between them.
For instance, ‘I am at the school.
How do I get to the supermarket?’
The Brownie who gives the best directions asks the next question.
DISCOVERING…
WHY TWO EYES?
We use all five senses to explore the world around us — sight, hearing, taste, smell and touch.
The most important of these is sight.
But why do we have two eyes and not just one?
These experiments will show you why.
THE MOVING PENCIL
Hold a pencil in front of your face.
Cover one eye with your other hand and line up the pencil with the edge of a door.
Now change your hand to cover your other eye instead.
What happens to the pencil?
Is it still lined up with the door edge?
It should seem to have moved to the side.
This happens because each eye looks at the pencil from a slightly different angle.
Your brain gets two slightly different pictures of the pencil — one from each eye.
It joins the two pictures together to make one new picture.
The next experiment shows why these two pictures are useful.
TOUCH TEST
Ask a friend to hold a pencil about a metre in front of our face.
Cover one eye and try to touch the pencil with your hand.
Did you find it difficult to judge where the pencil was?
Now try with both eyes open and you will find it much easier.
Your brain uses the slightly different pictures from each eye to judge distance accurately.
If one eye is shut, the brain only gets one picture and it is more difficult to tell exactly how far away the pencil is.
ANIMAL EYES
Animals which need to judge distance accurately have eyes at the front of their heads — like us.
Monkeys leap from branch to branch through the trees and need to know exactly how far to jump.
Foxes and other hunting animals need to know how far to pounce to catch their prey.
Rabbits and other hunted animals do not need to measure distance accurately.
It is more important for them to see all round so they can spot hunting animals in plenty of time to run away.
Their eyes are on the side of their heads so they have an all-round view.
Birds' eyes are similar.
Here are some fascinating facts about animals' eyes.
Golden eagles can see a hare from a distance of 3.2km (2 miles) if the light is good.
Cats have good night vision but can't see colour very well.
They can spot moving objects better than still ones.
Goldfish can't turn their heads around but their slightly bulging eyes give them a wide field of vision.
They have no eyelids.
Flies can see in all directions at once because they have large eyes with thousands of lenses.
LOTS OF KNOTS
There are lots of different types of knots and each have their own uses.
Practise tying the following knots with your Six and you'll soon be so good at them, you'll be able to tie them with your eyes closed.
OVERHAND
This is the easiest knot to learn and you've probably been tying it without knowing its name.
It is also known as the Thumb Knot and can be used to stop the ends of rope from unravelling or as a stopper knot, for example, between beads on the necklace.
How to tie it
1
Lay end A over end B to form a loop (Fig 1).
2
Put end A through the loop and pull tight (Fig 2).
REEF KNOT
This is a knot used for joining two ropes of similar size.
Because the knot lies flat it is often used in bandaging.
How to tie it
1
Hold end A in your right hand and B in your left hand.
Then lay A over B and pass A under and up (Fig 3).
2
Lay A over B again.
Pass it under B and up.
Then pull both ends firmly away from each other(Fig 4).
Remember the rule is ‘right over left, left over right’ or ‘left over right, right over left’.
If you go wrong with your Reef Knot, you'll probably end up with a Granny!
The Granny isn't really a knot — it's a mistake because it either slips or jams.
SURGEONS REEF
This knot is used by surgeons in operations.
How to tie it
1
Tie a double Overhand Knot.
2
Then tie a reverse Overhand Knot on top.
The ends on top.
The ends come out parallel with the standing part (Fig 5).
LARKS HEAD (OR COW HITCH)
This knot is great for tying baggage taps or for attaching string to a ring or post.
How to tie it
1
Fold the rope in half so that there's a loop in the middle.
Pass the loop (A) down through the ring (Fig 6).
2
Pass the two free ends over the ring, down through loop A and pull tight (Fig 7).
The Lark's Head can be made into a Pedigree Cow Hitch by bringing end B back through both loops, to the other side (Fig 8).
ROUND TURN AND TWO HALF HITCHES
This is a useful knot to learn if you want to tie a rope to a post.
How to tie it
1
Wind end A round the post twice (round turn)(Fig 9).
2
Pass end A under line B and up through loop C (half hitch)(Fig 10).
3
Repeat point 2 to complete the knot (Fig 11).
The Cutty Sark
During the 19th Century, the fastest form of transport to carry cargo across the sea was the clipper ship.
The most famous of these, and the only one remaining today is the Cutty Sark, which is now moored in a dry dock at Greenwich in London.
The Cutty Sark was launched in 1869 and was built for speed so that she could compete with other clipper ships in the China tea trade.
Ships would race to deliver the tea, as the first of the new crop to reach land could be sold for a higher price.
Greenwich's famous clipper ship gets her name from the cutty sark or short chemise (a loose-fitting dress or under garment), which her figure-head wears.
Her first (maiden) voyage was made in 1870 and she continued to carry tea until 1877.
Her greatest days, however, were spent sailing in the Australian wool trade from 1883 to 1895.
During these years she made her journeys in record time.
But the days of clipper ships were numbered.
In the same year that the Cutty Sark was launched, the Suez Canal was opened.
The canal provided a shorter sea route for steamships, which enabled them to reach their destinations before the clippers.
The clippers were no longer needed and Cutty Sark was sold to Portuguese owners in 1895.
The Cutty Sark was eventually given to the Cutty Sark Society in 1953 and she was restored to look just as she did during her sailing days.
Since her official opening by the Queen at Greenwich in 1957, over 12 million people have visited her.
The Cutty Sark is now looked after by the Maritime Trust, who teamed up with the Cutty Sark Society in 1989.
Visitors to the ship can see every part — from the dry dock in which it stands, to the cabins and decks on board.
Chests of tea and bales of wool can be found in the lower cargo hold.
There you can also find the ‘Long John Silver’ collection of original ships' figure-heads, which are the only parts left of many sailing ships.
An audio-visual display gives visitors an idea of what life was like aboard a sailing ship.
And ‘the Story of the Cutty Sark ’ is told through paintings, drawings and photographs as well as the ship's equipment and papers.
VISITING TIMES
The Cutty Sark is open to visitors every day, except Christmas Eve, Christmas Day and Boxing Day.
It opens at 10am (12 noon on Sundays and Good Fridays) and closes at 5pm.
If you visit during the summer time it closes an hour later — at 6pm.
There are reduced rates for parties booked in advance, so maybe your Pack would like to pay a visit.
And while you're in Greenwich, there are plenty of other things to see too…
Nearby is the Gipsy Moth IV .
Sir Francis Chichester sailed in this little yacht when he tried to equal the Cutty Sark 's voyage times.
And there's the Old Royal Observatory, the National Maritime Museum, Greenwich Park and the Royal Naval College.
Bookings for the Cutty Sark should be made through the Master of the Cutty Sark on 081 853 3589.
BROWNIES ROUND THE WORLD
ISRAEL
Israel is a small country on the south eastern shore of the Mediterranean Sea.
It is the country where Jesus was born and where he lived.
Sunset over the Sea of Galilee
The Judaean Desert
Fact File
History
You can read the earliest history of Israel in the Bible, where the country is called Canaan or Palestine.
The state of Israel itself was set up in 1948 as a homeland for the Jewish people.
According to Israeli law any Jew can settle in Israel.
The Jews believe that God promised Israel to them because they are Abraham's heirs.
However, the Arabs in and around Israel also claim the country because they have lived there as long as the Jews.
This conflict has led to several recent wars.
Christ's Homeland
Jesus was born in Bethlehem, a small town in the centre of  Israel.
His parents came from Nazareth which is in the north of the country.
It was in Nazareth that Jesus was brought up as a carpenter's son.
Many other places in Israel have associations with Christ and are mentioned in the New Testament.
Jerusalem
This ancient city is an important place for Muslims, Jews and Christians.
The Dome of the Rock is an Islamic mosque which marks the place where the Prophet Muhammad ascended to heaven in AD 619.
Near to it stands the Wailing Wall which is all that remains of the ancient Jewish Temple,.
And, of course, Christians remember Jerusalem because Christ was crucified there.
The Dead Sea
The Dead Sea is the lowest point on the surface of the earth.
Its water contains much more salt than normal sea water.
The salt forms into pillars and small islands in the sea.
It also makes it very easy to float.
You can just lie back and read a book without worrying about sinking.
The black mud from the sea shores is said to be very good for the skin.
Visitors often smear the mud on their bodies.
Brownies
Israeli girls and boys can join the Ofarim (Young Deer) when they are nine.
They meet twice in a week in separate Patrols which have a teenage leader.
Each pack is then attached to a Scout tribe with an older leader.
Meetings always begin with a parade and Brownies learn animal stories as well as crafts and outdoor skills.
Uniform
Brownies wear a long-sleeved khaki shirt, trousers and a yellow tie.
Their promise Badge is in the shape of a deer's head.
Promise
I am ready to keep the pack law, to do a good turn every day, and to help my parents especially at home.
Promise Badge
Law
The ‘ofer’(Brownie) obeys the deer.
The ‘ofer’ does not give in to herself.
Recipe
Potato Pancakes
Israeli children eat these pancakes during Hanukkah in December but you can make them at any time of the year.
You will need
4 or 5 potatoes
2 eggs
125ml (½ cup) vegetable oil
1 onion
45ml (3 tblsps) flour or matzo meal
Salt and pepper to taste
Method
Wash, peel and grate the potatoes.
Peel and chop the onion.
Beat the eggs in a bowl and then add potatoes, onion, flour, salt and pepper.
Mix well.
Heat a small amount of oil in a frying pan.
Place spoonfuls of the batter in the oil and cook for about two minutes.
Then turn over and cook the other side.
Carry on until you have used up all the batter.
Serve with apple sauce, sour cream or jam.
SUPER BROWNIE FINGER PUPPET
Knit up a Super Brownie finger puppet with our special pattern.
YOU WILL NEED
A small ball of pale pink double knitting wool
A small ball of yellow double knitting wool
A length of dark brown double knitting wool for hair
A small piece of black felt
A small piece of deep pink felt
A small piece of red felt
A small piece of blue felt
Red sewing cotton
Blue sewing cotton
Black sewing cotton
A sewing needle with a large eye (for wool)
A sewing needle with a smaller eye (for cotton)
A short length of round elastic or shirring elastic
A pair of 4mm (size 8) knitting needles
HOW TO MAKE
1
Cast on 26 stitches using pink wool.
Start at base of face.
2
Knit three rows of plain knitting.
This is called garter stitch (knit every row).
3
Now change to stocking stitch (knit one row, purl one row).
This stitch is used for super Brownie's face.
4
First row: Knit.
5
Second row: Purl.
6
Repeat this until you have done 12 rows of stocking stitch in pink (around 4cms).
The face is now finished.
Cut off pink wool.
7
Join in yellow wool.
Tie a knot with end of the pink wool and the beginning of the yellow wool.
HAT
8
Using the stitches you already have on your needles, knit two rows plain knitting (garter stitch).
9
Now change to stocking stitch as used on the face.
First row: Knit.
10
Second row: Purl.
11
Third row: Knit.
12
Fourth row: Purl.
13
Now start shaping the top of the hat.
Next row: Knit the first two stitches of the row together.
To do this, put the point of your needle through two stitches instead of just one stitch.
Then put the wool around the needle and pull the wool through both of the stitches.
Now knit the next four stitches in the ordinary way.
Then knit the next two stitches together, knit the next four stitches, knit the next two stitches together, knit four, knit the next two stitches together, knit four, knit the last two stitches together.
14
Next row: Purl
15
Next row: Similar to the first decrease row (see point 13).
Knit together the first two stitches but only knit three stitches before you do the next knit two together.
Repeat all across row.
Then knit two together t end.
16
Next row: Purl.
17
Next row: Knit together the next two stitches all across the row.
18
Cast off.
Cut off wool.
HAT BRIM
1
Cast on 14 stitches using yellow wool.
2
Knit two rows in plain knitting.
3
Next row: Knit together the first two stitches of the row.
4
Knit until only two stitches remain on your needles.
Knit these two stitches together (12 stitches on needle).
5
Knit four rows of plain knitting.
6
Next row: Knit together the first two stitches of the row.
Knit until only two stitches remain, then knit these two stitches together (10 stitches on needle).
7
Knit three rows in plain knitting.
8
Cast off all stitches.
Cut off wool.
SEWING UP
Use a length of wool and a sewing needle with a very large eye (called a darning needle).
Turn the right side (smooth side of knitting) to the inside and fold it so the two side edges of the knitting can be sewn together to make a tube.
Sew together using small firm stitches.
Then use a few stitches to sew up the top of the hat where you cast off.
Turn to right side.
Press it flat with the seam you have sewn down the back of the head of the puppet.
Sew the hat brim on to the join between the pink face and yellow hat.
FACE
Cut two small ovals of black felt and two small circles of pink felt.
Sew in place as shown in picture.
Embroider eyebrows using doubled black cotton.
With a doubled piece of red sewing cotton, embroider a wide ‘U’ shape under the pink felt mouth circle and a smaller ‘U’shape over the mouth.
HAIR
With dark brown wool with a large knot in it, bring wool from wrong side to right side of wool.
Make large stitches with the wool down both sides of the face.
Don't pull the wool tight — leave loops between each stitch big enough to put your little finger into.
Work these loops down either side of the face.
Fasten off firmly.
Thread a small length of round elastic through the base of the puppet.
Draw in slightly so it fits snugly on your finger.
Tie in knot.
SUPER BROWNIE BADGE
Cut out a small ‘S’ from the red felt and a small ‘B’from the blue felt.
This is Super Brownie's badge.
Stitch in place on the hat brim.
MAKE THINGS
Join the Club!
Would you like to join a brilliant new club that's run by the makers of the fizzy drink, Tizer?
All new members get a bumper membership pack which includes a pair of snazzy Tizer visors, a Tizer club ‘bake in the oven’ badge, an A4 sheet of wacky Tizer Club stickers and money-off coupons — all contained in a smart club folder and featuring the Club's president, Bubbles, the cool chimp.
Normally it costs £3.00 to join, but here's the great news!
We've got 500 Tizer Club kits to give away to the winners of our competition.
All you have to do is fit the highlighted words above into our grid.
We've already put in a few letters to start you off.
When you've filled in the grid, rearrange the letters in the shaded squares to make up another word to do with the Club.
Then send that word, together with your name, age address and pack name to:BROWNIE/Tizer Club Competition, The Girl Guides Association, 17–19 Buckingham Palace Road, London SW1W OPT.
The closing date for entries is February 10 1992.
The senders of the first 500 correct entries picked out the hat on that date will become Tizer Club members and get their super Tizer Club kits.
So don't delay — enter our competition now!
THE WARRIOR DOLL
There are many legends about the native Americans.
This one tells of how a young girl gave up everything she had to save her people.
Long ago, in the place we now call Texas, there lived a tribe of Comanche Indians.
Many of the people were dying because of a terrible drought and famine.
There had been no rain for many months.
The land had dried up and no crops would grow.
The people believed that there was no rain because the Great Spirits were angry with them.
The tribe danced for three days in the hope that the Great Spirits would send them rain.
But none came.
Finally, the shaman (priest) of the tribe decided to go alone to the top of the hill and speak to the Great Spirits.
When he returned the people gathered round him to hear what he had to say.
‘I have heard the words of the Great Spirits,’ he said.
‘They say that we have become selfish and have taken too much from the Earth without giving anything back.
We must sacrifice the most valued possession among us and make it a burnt offering.
The ashes will then be scattered to the four points of the Earth.
When this sacrifice is made the drought and famine will cease and life will return to the Earth and our people.’
The tribe sang a song to thank the Great Spirits and everyone thought about what they could offer as a sacrifice.
But no one was willing to burn their most valued possession.
There was one girl, however, who knew what she must do to please the Great Spirits.
Her name was She-Who-Is-Alone and she had been looked after by the tribe since her parents and grandparents died in the famine.
The only thing she had left in the world was a warrior doll which her mother had made from buckskin.
On its head were blue feather which her father had given her.
She-Who-Is-Alone loved her doll very much.
Holding her doll tightly, She-Who-Is-Alone said quietly, ‘You are my most valued possession.
It is you the Great Spirits want.’
While the rest of the tribe were sleeping, She-Who-Is-Alone walked quietly to the hill where the Great Spirits had spoken and offered her beloved doll as a sacrifice.
‘Please accept my warrior doll,’ she said.
‘It is the only thing I have left from my family who died in the famine.’
She-Who-Is-Alone built a fire and, thinking about the suffering her family and people had endured, threw the doll into the flames.
When the flames had died down and the ashes were cold, she scattered the ashes to the north, east, south and west.
Then she fell asleep on the hill.
The next morning, when she woke, the ground where the ashes had fallen was covered with blue flowers, just like the colour of the feathers from her doll's head-dress.
Seeing the flowers from tepees, the people gathered on the hill and sang and danced their thanks to the Great Spirits who had sent the blooms as a sign of their forgiveness.
Warm rain began to fall and the land came to life.
From then on, the little girl was known as One-Who-Dearly-Loved-Her-People.
And every spring the Great Spirits remember her sacrifice and fill the hills and valleys with those flowers.
Later the white people who settled in Texas named them bluebonnets.
Columbus Explorer
This year is the 500th anniversary of Christopher Columbus's first voyage to America.
When Columbus first set sail his aim was to reach India and China.
Instead he found the ‘New World’.
No one really knows very much about Christopher Columbus's background.
His father was a weaver and Christopher was probably born in 1451 in Genoa, Italy.
Young Christopher led an adventurous life.
He first went to sea when he was 14.
By the time he was 30 he had sailed to Iceland and West Africa.
He learned to make maps and even fought with pirates.
During one battle he had to swim to shore when his ship caught fire.
But Columbus had an ambitious dream.
He wanted to discover a new sea route from Europe to China by sailing west instead of east.
In medieval times many people still believed that the world was flat and no one in Europe knew that America existed.
No one had ever sailed all the way round the world.
Columbus knew that the world was round but he thought it was much smaller than it really is.
His geography was a mixture of fact and fantasy and he relied more on the Bible than on maps or mathematics.
Such a voyage would cost a lot of money.
Columbus spent years trying to raise the cash from the rulers of Portugal, Spain, France or England.
At last King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella of Spain agreed to fund the expedition.
So, after years of preparation, Columbus finally set sail in 1492.
He took three ships — the Santa Maria , the Nina and the Pinta — and 88 men.
He also took with him a letter of introduction to the Emperor of China.
Many of his crew believed that they were sailing into nothingness or that they might sail off the edge of the world.
At one stage Columbus only just prevented a mutiny.
But after nearly six weeks the look-out spotted a branch covered in berries — a sign that land was near.
Finally Columbus landed on an island in the Bahamas, but thought he was near Japan and the East.
It is because of this  mistake that we call these islands the West Indies.
After exploring the islands, Columbus returned to Spain in triumph.
He took with him strange plants and birds to show the King and Queen.
But also on his shops was a group of captured ‘Indians’ brought back as slaves.
The King and Queen loaded him with wealth and honours but Columbus wanted even more.
A prize of 10,000 Spanish coins had been promised to the first man to see land and he even claimed this.
The sailor who had first spotted land got nothing.
Columbus made three more voyages to the ‘New World’ he had found.
He set up a settlement there and named it Isabella.
In his search for gold he found many new islands including Cuba and Hispaniola.
He even landed on the South American continent but thought it was just another island.
The new lands he discovered convinced him that the earth was not round but pear-shaped.
Although he was a good sailor, Columbus was a bad governor.
His harsh rule led to rebellion in the settlement and the King and Queen appointed a new governor.
Columbus was sent home in chains.
While other people explored the lands he regarded as ‘his’, Columbus was forced to stay in Spain.
He wrote bitterly, ‘they all made fun of my plan then; now even tailors wish to discover.’
Although he made one final voyage, Columbus was a broken man.
He died on May 19 1506.
Today we can admire the determination that drove him across dangerous seas to find the ‘New World’.
But he was also responsible for the appalling treatment of the natives he killed or turned into slaves.
Things to do
Make a map showing the countries Columbus explored.
Find out what kind of birds and animals Columbus might have seen when he landed in the Bahamas.
Visit a museum or an exhibition and find out about other explorers like Sir Francis Drake or Marco Polo.
In the Country
When you are out and about in the country make sure you keep the Country Code.
1
Enjoy the countryside and respect its life and work.
Some people depend on the land for their income.
If you damage crops or upset animals you are making it more difficult for someone to earn their living.
2
Guard against all risk of fire.
It's an offence to light a fire on someone else's land without their permission.
If you are lighting a fire, take great care.
Fire can damage crops and harm animals as well as people.
3
Fasten all gates.
Gates are used to keep animals in their fields or out of other areas.
If you leave gates open animals may stray on to roads, trample crops or get lost.
It's easy to leave a gate undone, so always double-check catches and bolts.
4
Keep your dogs under close control.
Dogs must never be allowed to attack or chase animals or birds.
Don't let them trample crops or disturb wildlife either.
Landowners have the right to shoot dogs that worry their sheep, so keep your pet on a lead.
5
Keep to public paths across farmland.
What looks like a nice smooth field to you could be a field of barley or hay.
Trampling over it may damage it so that it can't be used.
It's also illegal to trespass on other people's land, so stick to the footpaths.
6
Use gates and stiles to cross fences, hedges and walls.
Using a gate or stile to cross fences, hedges and walls is usually the safest route.
It also protects the fences.
Climbing through hedges can leave holes that animals can escape through.
7
Leave livestock, crops and machinery alone.
This is for your own safely as well as to protect other people's property.
Some animals can be dangerous if you annoy them.
Others can be upset very easily.
Machinery can also be dangerous, so stay well clear of it.
8
Take your litter home.
Each year hundreds of birds and animals are killed by litter.
Plastic bags can choke animals and broken bottles can cut them.
Always clear up after a picnic and never drop litter
9
Help to keep all water clean.
Polluted or dirty water is bad for plants and animals.
Never throw litter into ponds or streams.
10
Protect wildlife, plants and trees.
Many wild plants and animals are in danger of dying out.
Help to protect them by following these rules:
Don't pick or uproot wild flowers.
Don't damage trees.
Don't take birds' eggs or nests.
Don't frighten or harm wildlife.
11
Take special care on country roads.
Country roads are often narrow and winding, so drivers should take special care and slow down.
Be extra careful when walking along country roads.
12
Make no unnecessary noise.
Loud noises can scare animals and birds.
If you have to go through a field of animals move carefully and quietly.
Go round the animals rather than walking through a group of them.
THE COUNTRY CODE REPRINTED WITH THE PERMISSION OF THE COUNTRYSIDE COMMISSION  
Map IT OUT
Maps come in all shapes and sizes.
But the important thing to remember is that a map is a flat plan of an area — a sort of bird's eye view made into a diagram.
Early maps look very beautiful.
They often have coloured pictures and fancy lettering.
But these old maps are not very accurate and often show countries much larger or smaller than they really are.
As people explored more of the world their maps became more accurate.
Now we even have maps of the moon.
If you are in a strange place, a map makes it easier to find your way around.
But even looking at a map of an area you already know can be interesting.
You may discover things you have never noticed before.
Different maps
An atlas includes maps of all the countries in the world.
Ordnance survey maps are the official maps of Britain printed by the government.
Anyone can buy these maps.
A road map shows all the roads in an area.
Different roads are marked in different colours so that motorists know how big each road is.
A street map is a map of the streets in a town or city.
It will include the name of each street so that people can find their way about easily.
The London Underground map is really a diagram of underground railway lines.
It shows passengers where they need to change trains.
Setting a map
Before you can use a map you need to ‘set’ it.
This means lining it up with the features on the ground.
(Figure 1.)
First, look for a big landmark — a church, bridge or village, for example.
Find the symbol for this on the map.
Then turn you map so that the map symbol lines up with the real landmark.
Look to the right and left of your first landmark and find two more landmarks.
Find the symbols for these and check that they also line up.
Once the map is lined up properly you should be able to see where you are standing.
Compass work
A compass is really a magnetized needle which always points to the North.
It does this because there is a large area of magnetized rock near to the North Pole which attracts the needle.
A compass can't tell you where you area.
It shows you which direction is North, and can help you to get your bearings.
Setting a compass
1
Put the compass on a flat surface.
2
Wait until the needle settles and is pointing in one direction.
That direction is North.
3
Turn the rim of the compass round carefully until the North marking points in the same direction as the needle.
4
The compass is now set.
You can use a compass if you want to walk to a place which is marked on the map but which you can't see.
For example, if you are heading for a village to the North, the compass can show you which direction to walk in.
Things to do
1
Draw a sketch map of your village or area.
2
Find a map of your area and identify some of the local landmarks.
Can you spot your school, a hospital or the fire station?
3
Use a compass to find out which direction your house or meeting place faces.
Fig 1 Setting a map
Pinboard
letters
Discovery Day
We had a treasure hunt for our Discoverer badge.
We had to find seven living animals on Brown Owl's farm.
We were split into groups and given some clues.
On the way we had to look for letters and treasure which was leaves, flowers and things.
The letters spelled have fun out doors.
When we got to the end we had a barbecue and were tested on the Country Code.
We really enjoyed ourselves.
PAX LODGE OPENING
Last year my mum took the Sixers and Seconders from my Pack to the opening of Pax Lodge, the new World Centre.
We had to go on three trains.
When we arrived we were met by our guide who came from the Philippines.
She took us to our first activity which was to learn the Pax Lodge song.
The girl who taught us the song was called Isabel.
She has since returned to Mexico and we are now pen-pals.
We played a game, made a friendship tie circle and then we were lucky enough to meet Betty Clay, the only surviving daughter of Lord and Lady Baden-Powell.
After buying our souvenirs we had lunch and visited the Bethnal Green Museum of Childhood.
After a long exciting time we caught the train and went home tired but happy.
Show Time
We did a show at an old people's home one evening.
First we did a show at St Edmund's church.
We thought it was so good that we'd do it for the old people's home.
We practised for two weeks.
We sang songs like My old man ,Any old iron and I'm forever blowing bubbles .
Ship ahoy!
Amy Rimmer of the 5th Eastham (St Mary's) Pack takes her turn at the wheel of the Mersey ferry Woodchurch during a Pack outing.
pen-pals
The following Brownies are all from the 5th Elgin (St Sylvester's) Pack, Scotland and they would all like pen-pals.
If you would like to write to any of them, please send a letter c/o BROWNIE magazine and we will pass it on for you.
Pack prayer
Please help us in this new year to share what we can do with others.
Help us to share not just our toys and our sweets but our time, our talents and our happiness.
Alexandra Smith, Amber Mills, Samantha Butcher and Joanne Baillie of the 4th Shanklin Pack enjoy a cup of tea poured by a Tetley tea man at a giant tea party to mark 1991 as Year of the Maze.
POETRY
Stormy Night
I opened the window,
A quiet breeze
Blew through the sky
And rustled the leaves.
Then suddenly
A great big roar,
Thunder crashes
And even more.
The howling gales,
The lightning bright,
The village church
Chimes midnight.
I close the window
And jump into bed.
I puff up my pillow
For my weary head.
Then again and again
The thunder crashed
Against the window
On which the rain lashed.
Then all of a sudden it cleared up,
The wind is now a breeze
Floating through the sky
Once again.
PACK NEWS
Brownies from Surrey and Essex took part in a ‘Get a Grip on Litter’ campaign earlier this year.
The 1st Chaldon Pack, Surrey cleared the paths around the local council park and the 1st Lawford Pack, Essex picked up four large sacks full of rubbish from a local footpath.
The 2nd Kempshott Pack, Basingstoke celebrated their 21st birthday in Eastrop Park.
The Brownies played games, had a picnic and enjoyed a birthday cake made by their Guider.
Elderly residents of St George's Court, Sheerness, Kent were entertained at the tea party given by the 1st Sheppey Pack .
The Brownies sang, danced and played instruments and afterwards some of them managed to gain their Hostess and Jester badges.
THE WORST WITCH
Those of you who have read Jill Murphy's best selling book The Worst Witch will remember the adventures of Mildred Hubble, an accident prone pupil at the Academy for Witches.
And if you thought the book was brilliant enough, wait until you see the musical!
The stage show (which has the same name) starts a national tour on January 27.
It will be full of surprises and amazing special effects and is a treat not to be missed.
So, if you'd like to find out if and when it's on in your area, ask your parents or Brown Owl to write for details to: Or ring .
During a visit to a local abbey, Sarah Owen made her Promise and became a fully fledged member of the 1st Melrose Pack in Roxburghshire, Scotland.
WINNING PACK
Our Guinness World of Records competition in May 1991 issue of BROWNIE was won by Tamara Philips of the 1st Fellbridge pack in East Grinstead, Sussex.
Tamara's entry won her and her Pack a trip to the Guinness World or Records exhibition in London's Piccadilly Circus.
Here she is measuring up to Robert Wadlow, the tallest man the world has ever known.
HONEY NUT SCONES
In the October 1991 issue of BROWNIE we published a recipe for honey nut scones.
Unfortunately, the list of ingredients didn't include the egg which was later needed for the mixture and we are sorry if anyone has been disappointed when trying to make the scones.
The writer of this month's Star Letter has won a storybook.
If you would like the chance to win a prize, get writing now.
On the Wing
Many of the birds we see in Britain don't spend the whole year here.
Some are summer or winter visitors, while others are just passing through on their journey north or south.
Years ago, people thought that swallows spent the winter asleep at the bottom of ponds.
Now we know that when autumn comes they fly south or ‘migrate’ in search of food and warmer weather.
When the swallows left Britain for Africa our winter visitors started to arrive.
Keep an eye open and you may spot a barnacle goose or a Bewick's swan.
These birds have breeding grounds in the Arctic.
When winter snow and ice cover the breeding grounds the birds head south to Britain.
It's easy to spot flocks of geese as they migrate.
They fly in long diagonal lines or large V-shapes.
The older and stronger birds lead the way while the weaker ones follow.
Some birds fly incredible distances.
Every year Arctic terns fly from the North Pole to the South Pole — and then back again.
You may see them during the summer when they rest in Britain.
It's a journey of around 15,000 miles and these champion flyers don't even take a map with them!
So how do birds find their way?
No one really knows.
Some scientists think that they use the sun as a compass.
Or, if they fly at night, they use the stars as a guide, just like ancient sailors used to do.
They may also recognise landmarks and smells as they fly.
Some birds do lose their way.
Bad weather can force an emergency landing or strong winds can blow them off course.
Or they may be unable to find food.
But the biggest danger comes from humans.
Oil slicks, overhead cables and pollution are all death traps for birds.
And in Europe some migrating birds are killed for sport or food.
Despite these dangers many birds find their way back to the same spots year after year.
Things to do
1
Visit a bird sanctuary and try to spot some winter bird visitors.
2
Map a map of the world and mark in the areas of our winter visitors come from.
3
Set up a bird table to help birds find food through the cold winter months.
BARNACLE GOOSE
The barnacle goose has a black chest, white face and a grey back with bars across it.
After spending the summer in the Arctic region, it arrives in Britain in October to spend the winter months here.
REDWING
The redwing looks like a song thrush but has a bright red patch under its wing.
This tiny bird flies to Britain every winter from Scandinavia.
It eats berries, fruits worms and insects.
BEWICK'S SWAN
Bewick's swans are smaller than the mute swans we see in Britain all year round.
You can also recognise them by the round yellow bill patch.
Wild swans are very shy so you probably won't be able to get very close to them.
WAXWING
Like the redwing, the waxwing comes from Scandinavia.
The number of waxwings that arrive in Britain each year changes depending on how cold the Scandinavian winter is.
A pretty little bird, the waxwing has very bright feathers and a prominent crest.
Not Yet Natalie!
My mum's favourite saying is: ‘Don't wish your life away’.
It means, don't keep wishing for the next day, or the next week, or month, or year, or your life goes too fast.
I suppose Mum should know, as she's always saying it only seems like yesterday that she was young.
Mum's favourite times for saying ‘Don't wish your life away’ are when we've just booked a holiday for August and it's only January, and when it's nearly Christmas and we're bursting with excitement.
And she also used to say it a lot when my sister Natalie was very little, which is what I'm going to tell you about now.
Natalie's three years younger than me.
She gets on my nerves quite often, but I feel sorry for her too.
You see, whatever I do, Natalie wants to do, and usually she's too young.
When I joined Brownies, Natalie was four.
I'd been excited about Brownies for so long that I'd been warned about wishing my life away nearly a hundred times by the week of my first Pack meeting.
Natalie was almost as excited as me when I tried on my Brownie uniform.
‘When's Brownies, Jo?’ she asked, bouncing on my bed.
‘Tuesday.
I've told you that a million times.
Do you like my uniform?’
‘Nice,’ she said.
‘Wear it on Tuesday.’
‘No, not till I make my Promise.’
‘Oh.
Can I wear Nuform on Tuesday then?’
I laughed.
‘Silly!
You can't wear a uniform!
Not for ages!’
She stopped bouncing and frowned at me.
‘When I say my Promise, like you, I'll wear a Nuform, then?’
‘Yes, but that won't be for years yet!’
‘But…
’ She jumped off the bed heavily.
‘You said Brownies starts on Tuesday!’
‘It does, but not for you!’
I stared at her.
‘Natalie, you're not coming to Brownies!’
‘YES I AM!’
‘You're not!…
Listen!…
You can't!’
But she'd already gone, howling all the way down the stairs.
‘MUMMEEEE!
Joanne says I can't go to Brownies!’
See what I mean?
It didn't make any difference when Mum and Dad tried to explain to Natalie that she just wasn't old enough for Brownies.
She'd made up her mind that it was all my fault!
Every week when I went to Brownies, Natalie cried.
I was dreading the scene we'd have at my Promise Ceremony, but when it came to it, she was actually on her best behaviour.
Of course, she'd made a big fuss about not having a Brownie ‘Nuform’, but she calmed down when Mum let her wear her new blue party dress.
‘I'm a pretty Brownie, aren't I?’ she said as she got ready.
‘You are not becoming a Brownie tonight,’ Mum reminded her for the hundredth time.
‘Joanne is.
You're not.
Not yet!’
Natalie just smiled as if she hadn't heard.
I felt very nervous about what she might do during the ceremony!
To my surprise, she sat quietly all through it, until the important moment when I had to say my Brownie Promise.
Out of the corner of my eye I saw Natalie stand up, salute and begin to silently mouth the words of the Promise!
She'd learnt it off by heart but knew she mustn't say anything out loud!
But as Brown Owl pinned my Promise Badge on me, and said, ‘I trust you to keep the Promise’, the excitement must have been too much for Natalie!
Before we went home, Brown Owl came to talk to Mum and Dad and she bent down and said ‘Hello’ to Natalie too.
‘I couldn't help noticing how well you'd learnt your Brownie Promise!’ she told her.
‘You must be looking forward to when you're old enough to be a Brownie like your sister!’
That was putting it mildly.
Natalie nodded excitedly.
‘Going to wear a Nuform like Jo,’ she said happily.
‘I'm afraid she's got a long wait, though,’ said Mum to Brown Owl.
‘She's only four.’
‘When will she be five?’ asked Brown Owl.
‘In September.
Why?’
Brown Owl smiled.
‘Have you heard of Rainbows?’
We looked at her blankly.
I wondered if she was feeling alright!
What a peculiar question!
‘They're what you get in the sky when the sun shines and it's been raining…
’ I began.
Brown Owl laughed and said, ‘Not that sort of rainbow, Jo!
They're the newest branch of the Girl Guides Association specially for little girls too young for Brownies — from five to seven years.
Do you think Natalie might like to be a Rainbow when she's five?’
Would she like to…?!
Brown Owl didn't really have to ask!
Before Mum or Dad could say a word, Natalie was jumping around the hall, singing, ‘I'm a Rainbow, I'm a Rainbow!’ much to the amusement of all my Brownie friends.
After that, Natalie didn't cry any more when I went to Pack meetings.
She used to look me up and down as if the Brownie uniform was really nothing to get excited about, and say smugly, ‘Rainbows wear green Nuforms!’
Then she'd start on at Mum, ‘When can I go to Rainbows?
Can I go tomorrow?
Can I go next week, then?
When?
When can I go?’
And Mum used to sigh and say, as always, ‘Soon, Natalie, but not yet!
For goodness sake, don't wish your life away!’
A NEW LOOK BROWNIE…
From February,BROWNIE magazine will be bigger, brighter and better than ever!
To find out why, read on…
Apart from all your usual favourites — Super Brownie, Fun Food, Fiction, Competitions, badge hints, Freda and more — there's going to be a special eight-page pull-out section for Rainbow Guides, the Rainbow Guide Extra .
It will include stories, games, things to make, puzzles and cookery.
And there'll be a special page for Rainbows' letters and photos and some fabulous freebie offers too.
So, if you've got a sister who's a Rainbow Guide, don't forget to tell her about this super section — after all it is especially for her, although you might find it useful too!
…
AND GUIDE PATROL
Brownies who will soon be moving up to Guides have a brand new magazine to look forward to.
GUIDE PATROL , launched this month, will be packed with a lots of ideas and activities for you and your Patrol.
Regular features include:
Two badge work articles each month
Tasty Treats — lip-smacking recipes
WAGGGS Tales — an international link
Crafty Ideas — things to make
Noticeboard — special events and reunions
Plus the following special Patrol pages:
Patrol Box — essential ideas
Our Patrol — challenges for all
Patrol Time — further ideas for fun and games
Patrols Out — trips and outdoor activities
And all this for just 85p!
Freda & Friends
WHATEVER THE WEATHER
In times past — before we had scientific weather forecasts on radio and TV — people had to use their own powers of observation to forecast the weather.
Many of these observations became well-known sayings and some of them were made into verse to help people remember them.
Here are a few of these sayings.
What do you think they mean?
Make your own observations and see if they are true.
If a moon show a silver shield,
Be not afraid to mow the field;
But if she rises haloed round,
Soon we'll tread on deluged ground.
Why would you not be afraid to mow the field?
What will cause ‘deluged ground’?
A January spring is worth nothing.
Did we have a fine, warm January last year?
If so, did it make the rest of the winter any warmer?
The following lines in an old poem point to some of the signs of foul weather.
Do you agree that these things happen before rain or a storm?
Spiders from their cobwebs creep…
The moon in haloes hid her head…
Loud quack the ducks, the sea fowl cry.
Low over the ground the swallow wings.
The sky is green, the air is still,
The mellow blackbird's voice is shrill.
In fiery red the sun doth rise
Then wades through clouds to mount the skies.
This last line reminds us of one of the most famous weather forecasting rhymes:
Red sky at night,
Sailor's delight;
Red sky in the morning,
Sailor's warning.
Other sayings about happenings that foretell rain or bad weather are:
The farther the sight,
The nearer the rain.
Sound travelling far and wide,
A stormy day will betide.
When black snails on the road do be,
Then on the morrow rain will be.
KEEP A RECORD
Write down the weather patterns each day over the next few weeks.
Think about these sayings which predict the weather and any other sayings you can collect from your family and friends.
Are any of them true?
STAR SIGNS
Thousands of years ago, when the first sailors set out to explore the world, there were no such things as maps and compasses.
So how did these ancient sailors manage to find their way?
At first, sailors used to sail along the coast and stay within sight of land so that they didn't get lost.
If they did lose sight of the coast, they would watch out for birds and clouds because they knew that birds flew near land and that clouds formed over land.
But no one really knew how far one country was from another So, when they began to explore further and sail across the ocean, they had to find some other means of navigating or finding their way.
At first they used the sun and stars.
SUN SPOTTING
The sun always rises in the east, sets in the west and reaches its highest point at midday.
Early sailors noticed that the height of the sun varied as they travelled north or south.
So, by measuring the height of the sun, they could tell how far north or south of the Equator (an imaginary line round the middle of the earth) they were.
This was fine during the day but at night, there was no sun to help them.
They had to rely on the stars instead.
THE POLE STAR
The stars move about in the sky, just as the sun does.
But the sailors in the northern hemisphere — the part of the earth north of the Equator — realised that there was one star which always seemed to stay in the same place — the Pole Star.
The Pole Star is directly over the North Pole and shows where north is.
This was a great help to sailors when exploring at night.
But what about the sailors in the southern hemisphere — the part of the earth south of the Equator? they couldn't see the Pole Star, so what did they use to guide them?
THE SOUTHERN CROSS
The Southern Cross is a group of stars in the southern hemisphere.
They give a rough clue as to where the south is.
The group is made up of four stars in the shape of a cross.
These stars stand out from the other around them because they are so bright.
The Pole Star and the Southern Cross gave early sailors some idea of where they had come from and the direction they needed to take.
This method of finding the way was used until compasses and maps were invented.
Chinese sailors made the first compass over 800 years ago.
They used a magnetized needle which pointed north in a bowl of water.
Early maps were made from sticks and shells, which were used to show where islands were positioned.
Later, charts were drawn up to show where islands were.
These weren't very accurate, though, and the islands were often drawn upside down, the wrong shape or the wrong size.
Gradually, however, maps became more and more accurate as people found out more about the world.
FINDING NORTH AND SOUTH
Here is a way for you to find north and south without using a compass.
All you need is a watch with hands and a sunny day.
Point the small hour hand of your watch at the sun.
Imagine a straight line halfway between the hour hand and the figure 12 on the watch.
This line points north and south.
ANS TO SIX BOX
WISE OWL
Hello again Brownies, here are some amazing exploring facts for you.
Sir Francis Drake was the first Englishman to sail around the world.
It took him three years.
It was Sir Walter Raleigh who introduced tobacco to England.
When one of his servants first saw him smoking, he thought Sir Walter was on fire and threw a jug of ale over him.
To measure a ship's speed, medieval sailors used to throw a log on a length of knotted rope over the side and then count off the knots.
‘Knots’ are still used as a measurement of speed today.
Potatoes originally came from South America.
They were first brought to England by explorers like Sir Francis Drake and Sir Walter Raleigh in Elizabethan times.
The first living creature in space was a Soviet dog name Laika who spent ten days in orbit in 1957.
The river Amazon was named by Spanish explorer Francisco de Orellana.
While he was exploring the river he was attacked by a group of Indian women warriors who reminded him of the Amazons (female warriors who appear in ancient Greek myths).
FUN FOOD
Potatoes were first grown in Peru and were brought to Britain by Sir Walter Raleigh.
Today they are an important source of food all over the world.
The following recipes all include potatoes.
Have a go at making them.
SPICY SOUP
Ingredients (serves 6)
1 large onion, chipped
75g (3oz) butter
1.15lt (2pt) milk
2 large potatoes, peeled, boiled and diced
75g (3oz) plain flour
1 tsp curry powder
Salt and pepper to taste
½ tsp celery salt
2 tbsps parsley, chopped
Fry the onion in butter until soft but not brown.
Add the milk and bring to just under the boil.
Carefully whisk the hot milk and onions into the potatoes and add the flour, curry powder, salt, pepper and celery salt.
Bring back to just under the boil and simmer gently for 5 minutes.
Pass the liquid through a strainer and serve very hot, garnished with the chopped parsley.
SAVOURY NESTS
Ingredients (serves 6)
1.75g (4lb) potatoes, peeled
110g (4oz) butter
2 medium eggs
Salt and pepper
450g (1lb) minced, cooked beef with onions
50g (2oz) peanuts, chopped
Parsley, chopped
1 egg, beaten
Cook the potatoes in lightly salted water until tender.
Drain and mash well with the butter.
Beat in the eggs and seasoning.
Put the potato mixture into a piping bag fitted with a star nozzle.
Pipe out four flat circles about 10cm (4in) diameter on a baking tray lined with non-stick paper.
Pipe another circle around the edges to make nests.
Divide the mince into each nest.
Garnish with the peanuts and parsley.
Brush the potato with a little beaten egg and brown under a grill.
Serve hot.
POTATO PIZZA
Ingredients (serves 6)
110g (4oz) potatoes, cooked
25g (1oz) butter
A pinch of salt
Black pepper
110g (4oz) self-raising flour
1 tbsp milk
225g (8oz) tomatoes, skinned and sliced
1 onion, finely chopped
50g (2oz) mushrooms, sliced
110g (4oz) strong cheese, grated
A few drops of olive oil
Base
Puree the potatoes through a sieve then beat in the butter, salt and pepper until the mixture looks creamy.
Slowly add the flour, then the milk, to form a fairly stiff dough.
Roll out to about 20cm (8in) diameter and fry in a greased frying pan until the underside is slightly browned.
Filling
Put the tomatoes on the potato base, then the onion and mushrooms.
Scatter the cheese over the top.
Dribble a few drops of olive oil over the filling and place the pizza under a hot grill until the cheese has melted and browned.
SPICED CAKES
Ingredients (makes 12)
450g (1lb) potatoes, cooked and mashed
25g (1oz) butter
25g (1oz) sugar
A pinch of salt
110g (4oz) plain flour
1 tsp baking powder
1 tsp ground cinnamon
1 medium egg
Mash the potatoes while still warm, then add the butter and stir in the dry ingredients.
Beat the egg and add to the potato mixture, blending well to make a smooth dough.
Turn the dough on to a floured surface and roll to a thickness of 2.5cm (1in).
Cut into 5cm (2in) rounds, placed on a greased baking tray and bake in the oven at Gas Mark 7, 425°F, 220°C, for 20 minutes or until nicely browned.
Serve hot or cold, with butter.