

Ontario for long, hot summer days
Miles of golden beach at Point Pelee; tall, cool cocktails at a Toronto lakeside cafe; scuba diving, sailing or windsurfing at any of our nature-made resorts.
However you enjoy the sun — get ready for the long, hot Ontario summer.
You're in for a few surprises.
First, Toronto shares the same latitude as Nice, and summertime temperatures are around 80°F in June, July and August.
So pack the sun oil!
And other similarities?
Well, there are acres of sandy beach.
Pine scented and roomy.
(Check out Lakes Superior, Huron, our Provincial Parks, Grand Bend or Wasaga Beach for starters).
There are sunsets in huge skies to take your breath away.
And there are chic waterfront restaurants, clubs and cabaret from Toronto to Ottawa, Windsor to Thunder Bay.
Fly-Drive Air Canada to Ontario and discover the unexpected for yourself.
Check out the back pages for more information.
Quintes Isle.
Paradise, Ontario style
A pine scented beach near Sault Sainte Marie
Truth is, our lakes, cities and summer sunshine have attracted holidaymakers for generations.
From the fashionable Muskoka resorts of the 1920s to white water enthusiasts on the Ottawa River today.
The C.N. Tower dominates the Toronto cityscape
Early evening on Georgian Bay
Ontario for a warmer welcome
A warm welcome that comes in every conceivable language.
From Iroquois to Italian.
Ontario's cultural mosaic is waiting to welcome you.
People from the four corners of the world have come to Ontario to make it their home.
And each time they've brought their own brand of hospitality.
A stroll through Toronto's Kensington Market and you'll discover a harmonious, cosmopolitan blend of sights and sounds.
So Welcome, Benvenuto, Willkommen, Konichi-Wah, to Ontario.
Orillia's Farmer's Market
Canada Day in Ottawa
Then, you'll meet native Ontarians of a thousand years standing.
Indian and Inuit with a culture unique to Ontario — and a smile especially for you.
All in all, Ontario people offer a cultural blend you'll find nowhere else on earth.
And a welcome that could hardly be warmer.
Pow-wow at Walpole Island, St Clair River
Street theatre at Toronto's Harbourfront
Welcome to Kingston
Ontario for a world of excitement & adventure
When it comes to enjoying yourself in Ontario, there's just one problem.
Where do you start?
With the roar of the crowd at a Blue Jays baseball game?
White water exhilaration on the Ottawa or Madawaska Rivers?
Thrills, spills and cotton candy at Canada's Wonderland?
Or a step back in time to Upper Canada, circa 1862?
Wherever you begin, you're certain of a pleasant discovery round the next bend and a Fly-Drive package is far and away the most convenient and comfortable way to see all there is to see.
Just relax, get in the car and go!
Marineland, Niagara — larger than life
The ‘Maid of the Mist’ takes you closer to Niagara Falls
Getting away from it all
Ontario's contrasts offer adventure whether you're a participator, a spectator, a big city person or a small town aficionado.
From waterslides to lake cruises, harness racing to rickshaws, picking fruit to wine tasting.
Shooting the rapids on the Ottawa River
Catch the Blue Jays in action
Family fun at Canada's Wonderland, Maple
Thrills and spills to take your breath away
Toronto skyline
Island life, Toronto style
Rideau Canal, Ottawa
Ontario for cities so full of life
Your first impression flying into Toronto is the stunning skyscape, dominated with graceful ease by the majesty of the C.N. Tower.
As ever, first impressions count.
In Ontario, cities are colourful, sophisticated, vibrant and friendly — there's something going on at every street corner.
From the stately architecture of historic St. Catharine's to London's chic boutiques, you'll discover a lively blend of music, culture, food and nightlife in all our cities.
However, there two or more things you can be sure of: clean, safe surroundings and a warm Canadian welcome.
This applies whether you're  taking in an impromptu street performance at Toronto's Harbourfront or breakfasting on beaver-tails at Ottawa's Byward Market (relax, beaver-tails are Indian dumplings and delicious).
Or strolling through one of Hamilton's many museums.
As for nightlife — well, we don't roll up the sidewalks at 11pm.
You can catch a show, a concert, a first-run film or club into the small hours.
Then, perhaps, you'll see that our sunrises are as spectacular as our sunsets.
Ontario Place, Toronto
The colour of Kensington Market, Toronto
The roar of Niagara at sunset
Totem pole, Pembroke
Charming Niagara-on-the-Lake
Ontario for scenery to take your breath away
Hold your breath, here comes the Ontario panorama — from quaint small towns to thundering waterfalls.
There's plenty for you to discover.
Like soaring, pink-topped, granite cliffs on the wilderness trail in Algonquin Park.
Perfect jewel lakes brimming with fish and the rugged majesty of the Agawa Canyon.
And along every route, you're in for a surprise, whether it's a lone totem pole, a reconstructed Indian Village or a pioneer's stone homestead.
Ontario was designed by a master hand, with many built-in contrasts — for example, compare the eerie wind sculpted rocks at  Tobermory (Flowerpot Island got its name for a good reason) and the twists and turns of the 1,000 islands to the smooth, sandy beaches at Grand Bend or the rolling farmland in Mennonite country.
And, no matter what you do, don't forget your camera!
Flowerpot Island
Thunder Bay
Fall colour
One of our famous residents
Thousand Island cruising
Ontario from galleries to gastronomy
Ontario will delight all your senses; from tastebuds to fingertips.
To begin with, you'll find food from the world's four corners and then some.
Cajun, Creole, Soul food, Japanese, Russian — you name it, we cook it.
And many with Ontario grown ingredients — fresh and wholesome.
Go for local dishes and you'll find yourself going back for more.
Then there are our wines — unexpectedly oaky, full-bodied and marvellous.
Look out for Inniskillin and Chateau des Charmes.
But Ontario is not food alone.
From Touring Theatre to Film to Art and Dance, prepare to be dazzled.
Ontario is festival country — the Stratford Festival boasts North America's best Shakespearean productions.
The Shaw Festival attracts visitors to the colonial charm of Niagara-on-the-Lake.
You'll find footlights all over the province, from the National Arts Centre in Ottawa to Hamilton's own Orchestra.
Art Gallery of Hamilton
Niagara-on-the-Lake
And as if Ontario wasn't pretty enough of a picture, there are the galleries showing everything from the avant-garde to Old Masters.
‘Must sees’ are the McMichael Collection in Kleinburg and Ottawa's new National Gallery (the building is itself a work of art).
You'll want to have a piece of Ontario wrapped to take home with you.
Here too we can oblige.
From unique boutiques in Byward Market, Ottawa, to countless acres of shopping on the Eaton Centre's four floors.
Whatever your expectations, Ontario will better them.
Turn the page and we'll help turn your dream into a reality.
The spectacular new National Gallery, Ottawa
Eaton Centre, Toronto
The National Gallery, main hall
Ontario
Air Canada to Ontario.
A breath of fresh air.
With Air Canada your holiday begins the moment you step onto one of our modern wide-bodied aircraft.
After 50 years of experience we have perfected the art of passenger hospitality on long flights.
During your trans-atlantic crossing you can enjoy an aperitif, followed by a delicious three-course meal, fines wines and liqueurs, all with our complements.
Catch up with the latest movies and audio programmes or just sit back and read the papers.
A duty-free boutique will also be available.
Air Canada flies into Toronto up to 15 times per week departing from London Heathrow, Manchester and Glasgow (Prestwick).
And from Toronto, you can connect to all other Air Canada destinations in the province and beyond or hop onto an Air Ontario connector flight.
Fly Air Canada to Toronto and you'll discover an airline that really is a breath of fresh air.
Drive Ontario
Easily the most convenient, comfortable and enjoyable way to holiday in Ontario is to tour by car; combining city sightseeing with ventures off the beaten track.
The modern, uncrowded highways and inexpensive fuel (much cheaper than the U.K.) makes Fly-Drive the most popular way to go.
Whatever you decide to do, the Canadapass brochure gives you the flexibility to plan an itinerary in as much detail as you wish, before you travel.
Complete the coupon for your copy.
Summertime and the living is easy.
Unlike the U.K., Ontario has the advantage of very distinct seasons.
Long, hot Summers sandwiched by fresh, green Springs and crisp, colourful Autumns.
Toronto shares the same latitude as Nice in the South of France so Ontario summers guarantee hot temperatures of around 80°F throughout June, August and most of September.
In Spring, the ‘maple syrup’ season, a lumberjack breakfast provides a perfect start to the day and the quality of light in late September ignites the spectacular scenery into a glorious climax of multi-hued ‘Fall’colour.
So much to do, so much to see.
By now, you probably have a few ideas of sights and scenes to visit.
Your Canadapass brochure will give you a whole lot more.
Of course, your travels will be dependent on the amount of time you're prepared to invest behind the wheel.
For example, Niagara Falls by road is only 1½ hours South-West of Toronto, whereas a trip up North to ride the Polar Express will almost certainly mean an overnight stay.
Ontario's two hundred Provincial Parks are all accessible by car, the wild beauty of Algonquin providing canoeing, camping and fishing only 3½ hours North East out of the big city.
If you're heading for Festival Country and the refined pleasure of Shakespeare and Shaw, head South-West and you'll be there in 3 hours at most.
And of course, if you are based on Toronto itself, all the sophisticated pleasures of the world's most perfect city will be on your doorstep.
Five star or log cabin.
Ontario offers a real variety of accommodation whatever your budget.
Book Canadapass and you will receive a voucher pack valid in all kinds of places from hotels and motels, to resorts and lodges.
If you're Toronto based, The Briars, a 200 acre world class resort on the south shores of Lake Simcoe, has welcomed guests for more than a century.
But if you prefer rooms of the pine-panelled variety, The Pow Wow Point Lodge near Huntsville is a fine example, combining traditional home comforts with modern facilities.
The Motel Ontario scheme has over 100 participating motels, motor inns and motor hotels spread right across the province from Cornwall in the East to Grand Bend in the West.
Graded 3-star or better and privately owned, this type of accommodation offers private bathroom, colour television and telephone as standard and prices, from as little as £82 for 3 days, include the use of the car.
Wherever you stay you can be sure of a warm welcome.
Going mobile.
Car Rental is available on either a limited or unlimited mileage basis.
A two door compact class car can be hired from as little as £16 per day not including provincial sales tax.
See your Canadapass brochure for more details.
Tourist information
For more detailed information contact the Travel Counsellor at: Ontario Tourism  Telephone:
Air Canada A breath of fresh air
Your holiday begins with Air Canada.
Checking into Air Canada's Hospitality Class is like checking into a five star hotel.
The accommodation is superbly comfortable.
The food wonderfully delicious.
And the people relaxed, helpful and friendly.
What's more, we offer you the height of luxury at highly competitive prices.
You can take off from either London Heathrow, Manchester or Prestwick.
Destinations include Toronto, plus many more.
When you fly to Canada, make sure you fly Air Canada.
We promise, you'll enjoy your stay.
Air Canada.
A breath of fresh air.