

HOME MATTERS
Each month in this column I'll be looking at subjects of particular interest to me that reflect certain aspects of home ownership and all it entails
ON A PERSONAL NOTE
I would like to thank all those readers who took part in our recent research discussion groups.
It gave us a marvellous opportunity to listen to your views about IDEAL HOME, face to face.
We sincerely hope you like the changes we have made this month.
THE LIVING PROOF
One of the hardest and most expensive purchasing decisions we ever have to make is about buying a new home.
And, on average, we each do it five times in our life.
But, unlike buying a car or new shoes, we don't try it out first.
Worse still, we sometimes decide on impulse.
I was, therefore, intrigued to learn of a new scheme from Bryant Homes that allowed a prospective purchaser to ‘road test’ one of its newly built homes.
Families are invited to spend a weekend in a showhome identical to the one they are thinking of buying, so they can get an insight into the location and the layout.
Bryant believes that any benefits and drawbacks can then be weighed up more clearly before a commitment is made.
Maybe this idea could catch on for older properties?
A MITE TOO COLD?
The British Oxygen Company (BOC) has recently conducted trials using liquid nitrogen and a specially developed vacuum cleaner to kill house dust mites in carpets.
BOC believes that the mites, a major contributor to asthma, can be more effectively destroyed this way.
Although there are no immediate plans to launch the system on the domestic vacuum cleaner market, I believe it would be welcome as it is environmentally better than standard chemical sprays.
Also, liquid nitrogen has a temperature of -196°C, which is enough to freeze the fur off any hardy carpet bug.
A QUESTION OF ATTITUDE
Earlier this year, a poll was conducted to gauge consumers' attitudes to shopping in DIY stores.
Results show that lack of product knowledge by staff was a major criticism.
Many of those taking part in the poll also believed DIY stores still ‘stack it high and sell it cheap’.
In the main, I wouldn't disagree with the first point.
I believe stores must invest more in training to provide a better service to customers.
With regard to‘stacking it high’, I understood this to be the whole point of a DIY superstore where stock is virtually guaranteed.
‘Selling it cheap’ is another matter.
There is, in the minds of consumers, the automatic belief that quality takes second place whether this is true or not.
Perhaps if these stores were to promote a more caring attitude, we'd have less cause for complaint.
SHOPPING IN STYLE
GETTING IN SHAPE
Choose classic stripes, modern dots or geometrics for bold interiors.
This month, Tom Gadd and Suzanne Ardley look at striking furnishings and accessories designed for a brighter life
Weird and wonderful, Shogun is London Lighting's hi-tech version of a table lamp.
The black and white striped base has a double mesh shade that you can position at an angle, £332.35
This traditional-style comfort room shows how plains, patterns and stripes can be used together to give a lived-in look.
Louis XV armchair covered in Regency Stripe fabric, £850.
Boston needlepoint rug, £420; 19th-century lithographs, from £100; metal cachepot, £120; table, £420; candle lamp, £63.10 complete.
Ceramic fruit cup/saucer.
Wall painted in matt emulsion N2-1O, £13.99 per 2.5 ltr; skirting in L1-4P eggshell, £7.49 per ltr
Ideal for a spot of salad or soup, Chanticleer china has the kind of country charm and simplicity that makes it good for everyday use.
Prices start at £2.75 for small dishes up to £64.50 for the large bowl shown; other items in the range include cups, mugs and plates; The General Trading Company
Strong design and texture are essential ingredients for interiors with a modern appeal.
These two fabrics from the Lelievre collection fit the bill perfectly, both available in seven colourways.
From top: 854/4, a cubist pattern, 100 per cent cotton, 130 cm wide, £66 per m; 898/10 zigzag, 100 per cent cotton, 130 cm wide, £66 per m
Lelievre's glossy Pavlova 41 16 fabric has a chic Art Deco design that catches the light in a fascinating way.
Available in five colourways, 52 per cent cotton, 48 per cent viscose, suitable for upholstery and curtains, £100 per m.
Silk cushion, from Ravissant
With its fun spot and stripe pattern, daubed with bunches of grapes, cherries, plums and pears, this Fruit Salad china would give any table a refreshing new look.
Mugs, from £6.75; side plates, £8.50; dinner plates, £10.95; jug, £20.25.
These and the accessories are available from The General Trading Company
More spots and stripes to tempt you.
Clockwise from top: Clover 616 fabric, 14 colourways, £28.20 per m.
Chaumont moire stripe, in seven colourways, £39.40 per m; Chateau, £37 per m
Be colourful and keep dry in those April showers with Totes' new Spots, Stripes and Plains collection of Umbrella designs.
Prices from £7.99
Raise your standards and add extra style to modern interiors with the Club light from London Lighting.
Geometric in design, it is available in black/white, as shown here, or maroon/white and is height adjustable.
It costs £300.15
Add a touch of style to a take-away for two with The Conran Shop's range of ceramic plates by Maryse Boxer.
With just a little imagination, an exciting combination of shapes will brighten up any sweet'n'sour.
Prices start from as little as £4.40 for the round dishes.
Complete the look with Coloured Weft seagrass flooring, £10.95 per sq m, Crucial Trading
Colourful and co-ordinated, the Selfridges range of ceramic jars uses a jazzy combination of spots, stripes and geometrics, £13.95 each.
Also available from the kitchen department, red vacuum coffee pot, £13.49
Dramatic dishes in black and white can hold a variety of foods, prices start from £7.95, Heal's.
Shown with a Jacy Wall rug, from £275, depending on the design you choose
If you hunger for a totally monochrome kitchen, feast your eyes on these goodies.
Fox pinstripe oven gloves, £6.20 each; apron, £22.85; Fornasetti platter, £130; Patob cutlery, from £16.65 for a paring knife; tea towels, £2.25 each
As interesting as any dish you care to serve on it, The Conran Shop's Aleta trolley is sure to create a good impression in the choicest dining rooms.
The frame is chrome and the flip-top surface is made from a rich veneer, £295.
The Vehan Spot china is also from The Conran Shop
Designed on paper and then woven on her loom, this pure wool rug in a geometric pattern is one of the many designs available from Jacy Wall.
Prices start from about £275
Make tea-time fun time with this colourful Spot tea set from Ceramica Blue.
Teapot; sugar bowl; milk jug; cup and saucer.
Also shown, Taitu plain red and yellow dinner plates.
Table, from Heal's
Budding architects can test their worth with this classic 1930's building set from Oggetti, £125
These classic stripes in shades of green and terracotta have textured finishes for a sophisticated look.
From top: Promenade Wr7356/2 wallpaper, £10.95 per roll.
Epinal-76 100 per cent cotton fabric, 140 cm wide, £25.30 per m; Chaumont moire stripe, 53 per cent viscose, 47 per cent cotton, 130 cm wide, £39.40 per m.
To complement these, we chose Kenneth Turner's scented candles simply and attractively displayed in rustic pots and moss, from £15.50
Make sure your travel arrangements include Oggetti's robust leather and canvas duffle bag, £65, and pure wool rug/blanket, £185.
And for the beach, Descamps' Regatta towel in Emerald, £36.90; NafNaf hooded teeshirt, from a selection available throughout Selfridges' Children's World promotion over the Easter holidays, 23 March to 13 April
Anyone looking for an exotic finish to a room need go no further than Ravissant.
Draped to form an eye-catching window treatment or a canopied bed, these gold-dotted saris are quite unique.
Colours include this design in red and mauves, or choose from a range of blues, yellows and greens, £200.
Matching cushions available, about £30
Scrap Scrap's getting fat.
Why?
The answer lies in this unusual candlestick and mirror.
Scrap Scrap is a recycling shop so nothing is wasted — not even empty cat food tins, something eight out of every 10 readers would recommend.
Candlestick, £18.50; mirror, £17.50.
Warp & Weft fabric, £15 per m, The Conran Shop
Polka Dot is a range of fabrics by Parkertex that is suitable for both upholstery and curtains.
It is available in a total of 32 colourways, all with a self-coloured raised-spot design.
Prices start at £21.80.
Thai silk photo frames, from a wide selection available by mail order, prices start at £2.55, p&p extra, Tandem Ellis
Give your floor a new angle and your feet a treat with Habitat's new deep pile Pyramid rug.
With three colourways to choose from, it is guaranteed to fit in with any colour scheme.
It measures 170 cm by 260 cm, £250
The simple and straightforward design of Shaker furniture is perfectly complemented here by the colourful colonial-style quilt and cushions.
Chair, £209; boxes, from £28; basket, £37.95; candle sconce, from a selection.
Quilt, £115; cushions, £8.99 each
The latest topic of conversation is the Swatch Twinphone.
It is not one telephone but two, and it's an ideal solution if you want to avoid people grabbing the phone from you.
Facilities include 20-number/name memory, mute button and last number re-dial, from £34.95
Novices and grand master alike would find this geometric Bauhaus chess set a logical purchase.
It costs £132, Oggetti
This decorative combination of strips and patterns is from the Faience Collection by Today Interiors.
The fabrics come in 23 colourways, 100 per cent cotton, 137 cm wide, £22.43 per m.
Wallpaper, £15.42 per roll; border, £12.02 per roll, they come in 44 and 27 colourways respectively
If you are seriously into spots, stripes or geometric designs, a visit to the Contemporary Textile Gallery will be serious temptation indeed.
Just some of the rugs, cushions and scarves are shown here, with prices from £45
Brighten up a child's room with one of these near-fluorescent carpet designs from the Prime Movers collection by Tomkinson Carpets.
The three designs shown here are Pindot, Multistripe and Plain, from £8.99 per m
Set the scene at St Tropez this summer with Descamps' Les Regates collection of beachware.
Bold stripes in any one of six colours are set against a crisp white background.
The range includes three different beach bags, towels and a hooded robe, as shown, from £29
Arts and Crafts in style and equally suited to today's modern interiors, this rug was designed as a tribute to Charles Rennie Mackintosh.
One of a series of motifs available from Craigie Carpets in 100 per cent pure new wool, it measures 1.2 m sq and costs about £830.
The design can be woven in larger sizes and colours to suit any colour scheme
If you would like to find out more about any of the items featured here, see our Address Book on page 144 
BRIDGING THE GAP
THE FIRST THING THAT PAULINE AND JOHN WILLIAMS HAD TO DO WHEN THEY MOVED INTO THEIR NEW HOME WAS BUILD A BRIDGE.
AND THAT WAS JUST THE START OF A THOROUGH RENOVATION THAT'S TAKEN 20 YEARS TO COMPLETE.
ALAN O'KELLY CROSSED OVER TO MEET A TRULY ENTERPRISING COUPLE
There are very few homes in Middlesex where you need to cross a stream to reach the front door, but that's just what Pauline and John Williams have to do to reach their beautiful detached house.
The house is very charming but it's taken 20 years to get to the present condition.
‘The house had been neglected for some time,’ explains Pauline.
‘There was a lot of wet and dry rot and a terrible smell of damp throughout.
We soon discovered the reason why — the floorboards had been laid directly on to earth.’
The Williamses fell in love with  the outside of the house at first sight and Pauline admits the condition inside was far worse than they first thought.
A surveyor wrote a report the size of a small book, and they had difficulty in obtaining a mortgage.
Once they'd moved in, it took them three years just to make the necessary structural changes, but with a neglected 350-year-old house that was to be expected.
It was built originally as two cottages, and one of the most striking features of the house is that the ceiling at the front is at a different level to that at the back.
There are rooms where you feel you should duck to avoid the sudden dip in the ceiling.
The two staircases that are situated just a couple of yards from each other are another curious remnant from the past.
Downstairs, the large kitchen looks out on to a spectacular garden, complete with fountains, a stream and sculptured bushes and shrubs.
The Williamses installed a window in the kitchen that was made from a genuine cartwheel with glass specifically cut to fit between the spokes of the wheel.
‘This part of the kitchen was originally a coal shed and it was a very dark and dingy area,’ Pauline explains, ‘so we knocked down the adjoining wall and opened up the staircase that comes down into the corner of the kitchen.
It gave us a much larger, lighter space.’
They chose old pine units by Smallbone as Pauline was keen to  have all the modern amenities without detracting from the old style of the house.
The grandfather clock and Welsh dresser were from the antiques stall she once had in London's Portabello Road market.
Around the walls are the type of prize catches that most anglers could only dream about.
Fishing is one of John's hobbies and he collects trout and bream that have been mounted in bow-front glass cases, with the date of their catch.
Many of them go back over 80 years.
‘They're actually quite collectable now,’ says Pauline.
‘And they do occasionally turn up in auction.’
Pauline and John now have an art studio that deals with advertising agencies.
And on one wall of the kitchen are the large brass letters, JBW, S1.
Pauline explains: ‘That's John Brian Williams and Square 1 is our studio.
We got those letters from over an old shop.
Years ago, most of the shops had their name printed in that lovely gold lettering.’
Through into the dining room, a bay window overlooks the front lawn that slopes down to the stream.
‘The dining suite is Regency and we bought it at an auction in Bournemouth,’ says Pauline.
‘The desk by the window is Georgian.’
John also bought the oil paintings by Samuel Alkem at an auction.
Nearby is a ship in a glass case that adds to the timeless atmosphere of the house.
The chocolate-coloured Art Nouveau William Morris wallpaper blends perfectly with the warmth of the room.
Next door, the living room is large and beautifully proportioned, running the length of the house.
Oil paintings in gold frames hang on pale pink painted walls.
The carpet is pale green and scattered with Oriental rugs.
Small tables, covered with ornaments and books, and an antique armchair and matching footstool in green velvet and another in light brown all add to the charm of the room.
‘We used to have Victorian chesterfields in here but they were so hard and uncomfortable,’ explains Pauline.
‘We gave in to comfort in the end and bought the suite instead.
The rugs came from the antique department at Liberty in London.’
Upstairs, the bay window in the main bedroom overlooks the small bridge leading from the front garden.
The bedroom is wallpapered, both on walls and ceiling, with a delicate tiny pink flower motif on a white background.
The cream and gilt suite is a reproduction of antique French furniture and the matching cream and pink quilt was made to match the decor.
‘Our home mirrors our own particular tastes,’ says Pauline.
‘I've always liked the gentle curves of Art Nouveau and the squares and triangles of Art Deco and I think this is reflected in the house.
After years of hard work, I think we've got it looking as we want it to.’
Above: A pretty bridge links the Williams' house with the outside world
Left: Accessories were carefully chosen to complement the traditional atmosphere
Main picture: Running the length of the house, the elegant living room is bright and beautifully proportioned
Left: The back garden has been carefully landscaped to add character and interest
Left: A quiet corner of the dining room that typifies the restful atmosphere of the room
Paintings, small tables and elegant antiques add to the timeless atmosphere of the dining room
Right: French windows lead from the living room into the secluded back garden
Main picture and left: The homely kitchen was originally a dark, dingy coal shed.
Pauline and John knocked down an adjoining wall and opened up a staircase to create a large, bright room
Left: The Regency dining table and chairs were bought at auction and combine well with the Georgian desk
The unusual circular window in the kitchen was specially made from a genuine cartwheel
Right: Pauline loves collecting antiques and her finds are lovingly displayed throughout the house
Main picture: The cream and gilt furniture in the main bedroom is based on an antique French design
Left: An elegant brass bed adds to the Victorian charm of this guest bedroom
Left: William Morris wallpaper in the bathroom continues the period theme of the main bedroom
After years of hard work, the house now looks just how we always wanted it to
Right: Even this small spare bedroom is full of antique finds and oddities, such as the school desk
Left: This ornate boudoir couch came from a stately home
bold STATEMENTS
Inside, this conventional English home is a testament to modern living, where even clothes become part of the scheme.
Judi Goodwin meets one couple who had the courage to revamp their lifestyle completely
A 400-year-old school for boys in Shrewsbury is hardly the place you might expect to find a true example of hi-tech living.
But art teachers Philip Wooley and his Californian-born wife, Victoria Dark, have some highly progressive ideas about how they want their home environment to be.
Philip is head of the school's art department; Victoria is in charge of ceramics.
And, for a number of years, their home in the grounds of one of the most historic public schools in Britain was pleasant and artistic, but fairly predictable.
In fact, the couple's furnishing style had changed little since their student days.
So their home was decorated with cane furniture, old pine and, of course, their own paintings and sculptures.
Three years ago, Philip and Victoria took a four-week trip to San Francisco and stayed with a friend who had completely transformed the interior of his house with Oriental art and antiques.
The Woolleys were so impressed they decided to do something exciting with their own 1950s house.
So, back in England, they got rid of everything in their home that wasn't in the new, modern style they wanted.
The toaster went, the china went, the furniture was sold and they started again, creating something more individual and modern.
They spent a year painting designs on the walls, finding new designer furniture to replace the old and making modest alterations like removing doors to create space and light.
Perhaps the most remarkable feature of the revamped house is Philip's wallpaintings — not murals in the conventional sense but huge, graphic geometric designs in red, white and grey.
As he is used to painting large canvases, a huge blank wall was not a problem.
He made no sketches in advance but got straight down to work with pencil and ruler, drawing the outline before filling in with emulsion paint.
The designs are different in every room.
The living room scheme — inspired by the 1986 design for  the Hongkong and Shanghai Bank in Hong Kong — is the most complex and took him two months to complete.
Philip's transformation looks like a suspended grey tent around the walls, supported by two huge red cross beams.
Finding the furniture to suit these designs wasn't easy.
As students, Philip and Victoria had lived in America and travelled around Europe a good deal.
On their travels they had fallen in love with some exciting pieces of furniture, most of which were unavailable here.
But eventually they managed to get hold of some pieces to suit the new look: two Bauhaus chairs, a bent-arm chair in black by Mario Botta, a halogen light by VeArt from Italy and a huge black refrigerator by Zanussi, designed in Italy by Pezzatta.
They found their bedroom the hardest room to decorate in the new style.
‘We decided we needed a bed, an exercise bike, a small set of drawers and a clothes cupboard,’ said Victoria.
Consequently, their bedroom with its mattress on the floor and a black and white duvet looks spacious, verging on empty, but this is the way the Woolleys like to live now.
However, their nine-year-old son, Justin, didn't want to conform to his parents minimalist style, so they let him choose his own furniture from Habitat.
The existing carpet throughout the house was pale blue-grey — an appropriate background for their new living style.
They replaced the curtains with metallic finish Venetian blinds, punched through with tiny holes to let the light filter through.
To fit in with the minimalist style of living, the couple had to pare down their possessions drastically.
They replaced their kitchen crockery with simple black and white octagonal glassware crockery and even the car was changed to fit in with the new image — their champagne-coloured  Ford was replaced with a grey and red Peugeot.
‘You have to be totally ruthless,’ said Victoria.
‘We got rid of everything we didn't need.
Now I feel very confident about life.
Everything is so organised.
We never go into shops and just browse.
We know what we want and we don't accumulate unnecessary things.
We decided we didn't really like a lot of our clothes, so we replaced them with a few very simple things.’
Open the door of Victoria's wardrobe and a minimal amount of clothes hang there tidily.
Everything is black, white or red, with the occasional splash of other bright colours.
And as everting co-ordinates, it makes getting dressed in the morning so much less complicated.
Simplifying their lifestyle has made a tremendous impact on the Woolleys.
It gave them space and energy to reconsider what they wanted from life and to make certain changes with confidence.
One day Victoria made herself a pair of earrings out of porcelain to go with a particular dress, and they turned out to be the start of a new part-time career.
Now she and Philip create designer jewellery in their spare time that they sell through galleries and museums in Britain and America.
In creating their new home, they feel they have succeeded in making their own personal artistic statement.
‘Every visitor to the house reacts in some way,’ says Philip.
‘But they would never have reacted to just our pictures or our ceramics.
A house is different, and most people way they think it's amazing!’
The designer jewellery collection of Victoria Dark and Philip Wooley can be seen at Lesley Craze Gallery, 34 Clerkenwell Green, London EC1R 0DU; tel: 071–608 0393.
Or contact them for a list of galleries at the Art Department, Shrewsbury School, Kingsland, Shrewsbury, Shropshire SY3 7BA.
Main picture: The unusual red and black chair in the living room was bought in Honolulu
Left: In the grounds of Shrewsbury School, the house has changed very little from the outside since it was built in the 1950s
The Woolleys have channelled all their creative effort into making their house a work of art
Right: Once a chaotic artists' studio, this upstairs room is now used for making jewellery, reading and listening to music
Main picture: In either black, white or red, all Victoria's clothes co-ordinate with the house
Above: Crockery and cutlery were carefully chosen to fit in with the new style
Left: In the kitchen, Philip painted an impression of sunlight filtering on to the wall in a style reminiscent of a Hitchcock film
Grey, red and white stripes make a dramatic display in the kitchen and throughout the house
Right: Philip designed and made the circular dining table using  smoky blue glass
Main picture: The uncluttered bedroom sums up the atmosphere of the house
Above: Victoria making a three-dimensional broach
Left: This bent-arm chair — La Quinta, by Mario Botta — is a design classic
Having only a mattress in the floor is a perfect example of the Woolley's minimalist style
Right: Natural shadow patterns inspired Philip to copy them in paint on the landing wall
VICTORIAN SPLENDOUR
Kaye and Max Michie's London home had to be completely renovated to suit their busy family lifestyle.
But they have preserved its Victorian elegance as Jill Abraham discovered
It was the wonderful Victorian conservatory that convinced Kaye Michie and her husband, Max, to buy their big old house in south London.
Adding great architectural style, the conservatory also provides a wealth of extra colour and light at the back of he house.
This is mainly due to the graceful original windows and stained-glass insets that set it off beautifully.
Stained glass features throughout their home and the Michies have incorporated it with great success.
‘I realised I had to stop putting it in though,’ Kaye admits, ‘when a friend of one of my sons told me the house looked more and more like a church every time he came round.’
She has used stained glass to dramatic effect in the kitchen, where a bright, specially designed window above the deep blue Aga reflects the strong blue and yellow theme in the rest of the area.
When the Michies moved in five years ago, they had to carry out  extensive renovations.
They have an album of photos showing the house at different stages of completion over a period of 18 months.
The place was originally built in 1880 and they're only the third people to have owned it since then.
When they bought it, the upstairs had been made into bedsits.
Each room had a small stove and sink.
All this had to be ripped out before any redecoration could get underway.
It's a very special house for Kaye and Max because they bought it after spending 10 years abroad.
‘It's really our first proper home together in England,’ says Kaye.
Max works for a large oil company and is now based in London, while Kaye is a dedicated mother — they have four sons aged four to 14.
‘I adore children and love nothing better than a household full of youngsters.’
When Kaye's not rushing round after her children, she makes time for her hobby which is collecting 19th-century watercolours.
‘I found collecting watercolours so rewarding and interesting that I'm slowly turning my hobby into a part-time business,’ she says.
In the meantime, the walls of the house show evidence of her favourite finds.
Like the attractive Victorian beach scene, for example, painted by Scottish artist Robert Gemmell-Hutchinson, which has been hung above the mantelpiece in the living room.
Refurbishing and choosing the decor for their new home was an exciting project for them, as this is the first home they've designed and decorated to suit their needs.
What is now a spacious, much-loved kitchen and casual eating area, for example, was once a muddle of little rooms — sculleries and larders.
They were all knocked together into one useful, roomy area and the blue and yellow colour scheme is highly appealing.
‘We just love these two colours together — it's such a happy combination,’ enthuses Kaye.
Kaye still laughs when recalling  what the house was like before — even the now cherished conservatory needed a lot of attention.
‘It was painted throughout in a very unattractive shade of green,’ she explains, ‘and someone had plumbed in a WC there — what a bizarre thing to do.’
This was quickly removed and the conservatory completely redecorated with stained-glass doors added leading into the main hallway.
The conservatory still has an old, lived-in feel, which is exactly the atmosphere the Michies wanted.
In contrast to the blue and yellow, the main living room has a strong pink and blue theme.
The walls have been painted a deep coral pink with mouldings picked out in white.
Dramatic, swagged deep blue and pink chintz curtains are an attractive feature and are complemented by the furniture that has been upholstered in a slightly paler blue.
One large wing chair in an attractive pale pink fabric blends perfectly with the dual colour scheme.
Pink was also chosen for the main bedroom and its large en suite bathroom — once another bedroom.
In this bathroom, dark mahogany units echo the tones of the dark antique furniture in the bedroom.
A tiled Victorian fireplace has been kept intact and makes a pretty additional feature.
The cast-iron bath continues the Victorian theme and has been painted pink on the outside to fit in with the rest of the decor.
The Victorian feel of he Michie's bathroom continues in the bedroom.
The bed and bedhead are from the same era and are made of brass.
Kaye made the gorgeous patchwork bedspread herself from oddments of Liberty and Thai silk.
It took seven years to complete, but then that's the secret behind the success story of this home where time and careful work have combined to create an elegant and colourful base for this busy family lifestyle.
Main picture: The elegant proportions of the living room are complemented by the pink and blue colour scheme
Above left: The splendid Victorian conservatory
Left: Each corner of the house is full of individual character and paintings cover the walls
The house was originally built in 1880 and the Michies are only the third owners
Left: Beautiful stained-glass windows feature throughout the house
Main picture: Kaye, with her youngest son, George, at the kitchen table
Left: The cheerful kitchen has a strong blue and yellow theme
Right: A bright, specially designed stained-glass window has been positioned above the blue Aga
I adore children — and love nothing better than a house full of youngsters
Main picture: A magnificent Victorian brass bed dominates the main bedroom
Left: In a corner of the bedroom, family photographs cover the ornate sideboard
Right: Once a bedroom, the en suite bathroom echoes the Victorian theme with its mahogany units and the cast-iron bath
The beautiful patchwork quilt is made from oddments of Liberty and Thai silk
HEAD STARTS
Make your bed the focus of attention with our stylish ideas for bedheads.
From the simplest screens to elaborate drapes, Denise Brock shows you how to give your bedroom a fresh new look, plus novel ways to add your own touches
Screen play
Folding screens at the top of the bed make an impressive focal point.
Here, two three-panelled screens have been overlapped in the middle.
Their pretty lace design is repeated on the side tables, lamps and blanket box.
The embroidery-edged bed linen picks up the delicate decoration as does the appliqué bedcover, while the plain brown walls add warmth and lend a strong contrast.
To give the screens extra stability, screw them on to the floor or support them with hooks attached to the wall.
If you want to add a back rest, fit a low, plain headboard such as the buttoned Warwick headboard from Sharps Bedroom Essentials.
Or make one using a headboard kit from Cover Up and cover it with fabric.
Bedhead: French lace 152 cm high three-panel screen,(two are shown here with the centre panels overlapping)
Furniture: Handpainted French Lace pine wine tables, 35 cm diameter, £133 each; blanket box.
Herald 137 cm by 190 cm sprung-edged divan set with individual pocket springs
Lighting: Candle lamp
Bed linen: Macaron 100 per cent cotton pillowcase; flat double sheet.
Henley Antique Gold Merino wool blanket.
Yellow and white cotton appliqué single bedcover.
Walls: Risa C3-10 matt vinyl emulsion.
Skirting: Satinwood A1-70 gloss.
Flooring: Blenheim Herringbone Jute flooring in natural and brown, 3.66 m wide.
Accessories: Papier-mâché doll; Charleston photo album; notebook; yellow glass vase; Peepul Tree Trading Leather stud box; clothes brush.
Framed embroidery picture by Amanda Jane Leonard; cream lace neckroll, £16.95 from a selection at Liberty.
Cotton basket weave heart cushion.
China sleeping kitten; cushion tray.
Poynter earthenware teapot; large tray; creamer; desk-top items, linen and other accessories also available, from a selection at Recollections
Testing times
Made from a mass of floral striped fabric, this pretty half-tester decoration sets off the exuberant floral bed line perfectly.
The Swish Half Tester Kit recommends 20 metres of 122 cm wide fabric.
We used 8.5 metres of 137 cm wide floral fabric and 11 metres of 137 wide striped fabric.
This allowed us to line the side curtains in striped fabric and make up a flat roof instead of a gathered one.
Position the track at least 220 cm high and allow for it to be slightly wider than the headboard.
You don't have to use frills and floral fabrics for this style.
Two plain contrasting fabrics would look equally dramatic.
So, too, would a check with a plain fabric.
Bedhead: Half-tester bed canopy kit to fit 137 cm wide bed,(crib and corona bed canopy kits also available).
PR7463/1 Day Dreams, 100 per cent cotton fabric, 137 cm wide; PR7357/4 Candy Stripe, 137 cm wide, 100 per cent cotton fabric
Furniture: Sheredon white headboard, 147 cm wide; single-drawer bedside chest with pull-out tray.
Herald 137 cm by 190 cm sprung-edged divan set with individual pocket springs
Lighting: Speckled ceramic lampbase; 38 cm diameter white lampshade
Bed linen: Nicolette 50 per cent cotton, 50 per cent polyester pillow shams; double quilted decor duvet; lace-trimmed valance
Walls: Cottage Rose WR7458/2 spongeable wallpaper, £11.95 per roll
Paint: Brilliant White gloss, £5.49 per ltr, Crown
Flooring: Romance 8151 80 per cent wool, 20 per cent nylon carpet
Accessories: Lace-cover photograph frame.
Wallington Ribbon round box with lid; bowl; small cachepot.
ICF C730L clock radio.
China rose posy; Garland of Flowers with bow framed print; Tree Urn print; pink striped patchwork cushion; berry garland cushion.
Tape lace cushion; pink handkerchief case; lace-covered tissue box
Sheer delight
Creating this elegant, opulent bedhead is as simple as making curtains and hanging a rack.
Single widths of printed muslin are made up into a pair of 3-metre curtains.
The curtain pole measures about 107 cm and is positioned 220 cm from the floor.
Curtain holdbacks are fitted on the wall beside the headboard.
The top drape is made up from a 150 cm square of fabric cut across diagonally from corner to corner to make two triangular shapes.
You'll only need one.
Hem it on all sides and sew ribbon along the edges.
A plastic teardrop has been sewn on each corner to match the chandeliers.
Hang the curtains on the track and drape them over the foldbacks.
Drape the triangle of fabric in folds over the curtains and pole.
Use an extendable pole, as we did here, so you can adjust it to the exact length you require.
You could drape a large lightweight shawl over the front of the curtain instead of this triangular drape.
Bedhead: Graber Elegance Reeded curtain pole, 25 mm diameter, adjusts from 72 cm to 123 cm; Holdback finished in white with solid brass leaf highlights, £32.95 per pair; also in brass finish.
Cinderella Ribbon printed muslin, 150 cm wide, £19 per m; printed voile also available.
Big plastic drop
Furniture: White Serpentine double headboard in steel coated with cream textured paint; Cadogan cherrywood bedside cabinet, with bronzed effect handles.
Herald 137 cm by 190 cm sprung-edged divan set with individual pocket springs
Lighting: Dutch Stass wall chandelier
Bed linen: Pompeii 100 per cent printed cotton square pillowcase; rectangular pillowcase; double quilted bedcover
Walls: MW45 spongeable wallpaper, £17 per roll
Paint: Satinwood A1-70 gloss, £7.49 per ltr
Flooring: Chantilly 8138, 80 per cent wool, 20 per cent nylon carpet, £18.50 per sq m Accessories: Alpine Minstrel Plus phone.
Red check document box; green box; bottle of Lait Moussant; Eau de Violette.
Argenta silvered crystal bowl; perfume bottle; Crystal Quartz clock.
Charlotte glass vase.
Silver-plated photograph frames; oval; rectangular.
L'heure du Bain towelling dressing gown, from £81.20
American dream
An American patchwork surrounded by pictures and arranged above a curved headboard is a simple way of creating a stunning bedhead.
The style mixes patterns and textures with inspiration taken right across America, from New England in the north to Santa Fe way down south.
To hang the quilt, tack a hooked side of Velcro tape to a batten slightly narrower than the quilt and fix to the wall.
Sew the looped side of Velcro to the back of the quilt and then press the two firmly together in position.
For safety, make sure any pictures you fix above your bed are secure.
If you don't have a tapestry, look for a single large item, like a poster, or group together smaller items in a balanced arrangement.
Bedhead: Square American patchwork quilt.
Santa Fe solid pine sunburst headboard, made to order, price on application
Furniture: Santa Fe bedside table, decorated with turquoise bullet shapes and nickel silver handles, inspired by Navajo Indian Jewellery, made to order, price on application.
Herald 137 cm by 190 cm sprung-edged divan set with individual pocketed springs
Lighting: Edison natural wood candlestick lampbase.
White 30 cm lampshade
Bed linen: Vermont 50 per cent cotton, 50 per cent polyester pillowcase; filled flat sheet.
Funchal double cotton bedspread
Walls: Playtime 557291 vinyl covering, £21.28 per roll
Paint: Mountain Mist W1-100 matt vinyl emulsion
Flooring: Chantilly 8138, 80 per cent wool, 20 per cent nylon carpet, £18.50 per sq m Accessories: Papier-mâché animal; blue-rim water glass; small glass jug.
Blue frosted scent bottle; white frosted scent bottle; blue frost vase.
Poynter tray.
Brixton teapot; milk jug; mug; bowl; green wooden duck; brass Lutine bell clock; Heals Framed antique patchwork; Barbara Bourgeau Richards print; Heart and check throw; painted box.
Lilac toilet water; orange flower water.
TOP OF THE CLASS
If you don't have the time to create an individual look for your bed, opt for the simple solution — a new headboard.
Lorraine Ramsey selects the latest styles
A headboard is an easy and effective way of giving your bed a new sense of style.
But apart from looking good, a headboard has other useful purposes — it can offer a comfortable support to rest against and also protects the wall behind it from wear and tear.
If it's comfort you're after, a padded design is the ultimate in luxury while woven cane also provides gentle support.
Brass or metal bedheads may look elegant but they aren't very comfortable to lean back against.
So try combining them with lots of decorative cushions for added comfort.
1 Rosamund padded, small double headboard; padding made from 50 per cent cotton, 50 per cent polyester satin
2 BR8 mahogany-finish headboard, 152 cm wide, suitable for a small or standard double bed
3 Laurel handpainted small double headboard, made from medium density fibreboard
4 Windsor small double headboard made from brass with cream lacquer
5 Shaker pine and beech mix small double headboard, 200 cm high
6 Victoria small double gunmetal and brass bedhead
7 Chelsea small double headboard, made from medium density fibreboard with painted finish
8 Traditional solid brass tubing bedhead, 141 cm wide
9 Sherwood pine small double headboard, with shaded antique mahogany finish
10 Traditions 1056H small double mahogany headboard
11 Provence pine small double headboard with limed finish
12 Windermere pine small double headboard
13 Château pine small double headboard with cognac finish
Corail bed linen printed on 100 per cent Egyptian cotton percale, available in red, blue or green; Double duvet cover; pillowcase; designed by Pierre Frey for Yves Delorme.
(A small double headboard measures 4 ft 6 in.)
how to get that look
Each month, How To Get That Look brings you ideas and information on one particular room or furnishing style, with hints on how you can adapt it to suit your own home.
In the fourth of our series, we show you how to create a romantic bedroom.
Inspired by the late 19th century, the emphasis is on luxury and opulence.
Julie London demonstrates how well-chosen accessories and colour schemes can transform your bedroom into a romantic hideaway
CREATING A ROMANTIC BEDROOM
The romantic look is essentially a feminine style — a reminder of days gone by and an escape from life's worries.
That's why it's so well suited to a bedroom.
The restful but decorative atmosphere in this room is achieved by using a colour scheme of soft pink and cream.
The bed itself is the central feature.
Soft pillows and delicately patterned bed linen add to the air of luxury.
And the window treatment is opulent, too — layers of fabric, held in place with filled tiebacks, filter the sunlight.
The lighting in the room is functional as well as decorative.
As a finishing touch, an antique embroidered shawl has been draped over a table to provide the perfect setting for a classic marble bust.
But you can introduce whatever treasures you like — the scope is endless.
Decorative art
Create a French château or Regency-style bedroom by cleverly using decorative panel mouldings on your walls.
Branches of timber merchants, such as W H Newson, stock a range of hardwood mouldings for you to put up yourself.
If you want to use wallpaper, go for a design with layers of pattern.
A floral design with a Regency stripe background, for example, fits the bill perfectly.
You'll find examples of these in Sanderson, Warner Fabrics and G P & J Baker sample books.
Subdued colours are an important part of the romantic look.
Muted tones of powder blue, dusty pink and antique white, eau de nil and creamy yellow encourage a feeling of calm and relaxation.
From top, clockwise: Maryport CS 3600, 100 per cent cotton chintz, pink/blue colourway, 122 cm wide.
On show
Ornamentation plays an important part in this look.
A generous pile of cushions, or a treasured marble bust can add the required decorative touch.
Traditional botanical prints in ornamental frames suit this style, or try framing lace handkerchiefs, gloves, beaded evening bags, or even fans.
Fastframe will frame three-dimensional objects and a 22.5 cm by 20.5 cm frame will cost between £55 to £70.
Left: Bust of Antonia in reconstituted marble, 69.5 cm by 48.5 cm by 32 cm
Bed linen: Charlbury reversible double duvet cover, 50 per cent cotton, 50 per cent polyester; filled pillowcases; square filled cushions; filled bolster; co-ordinating cream and pink spot double valance
Windows: Charlbury unlined 50 per cent cotton, 50 per cent polyester satin curtains, 170 cm by 229 cm drop; satin festoon pelmet; satin tiebacks.
Antique lace, from a selection
Bed: French late 19th-century-style bed with padded headboard, about £1,650, from a selection
Lighting: French 19th-century hanging candelabra, about £195; wall candelabra, about £100 per pair.
Tiffany 28 cm lampshade
Above right: Hand-gilded cross-frame stool, 56 cm by 46 cm by 36 cm; hand-gilded ottoman, 127 cm by 58 cm by 39.5 cm; upholstery available in customers' own fabric
Right: Louis XVI reproduction double bed in antique white paint finish with caned head and floorboards; upholstered version also available
Lighting-up time
Chandeliers and wall lights are an obvious choice and the more ornate they are the better.
Go for something dripping with glass lustres or a filigree bracket with etched glass shades.
An elegant lampbase, such as a shapely ceramic one with a fringed, pleated or floral shade, will look good by the bedside.
Right: Othello white ceramic lampbase with Sonar 45 white pleated shade, 45 cm by 58 cm
Left: Gunter five-arm brass pendant; with Wingrave etched glass shades
French polish
The furniture for this style should be reproduction, not necessarily from one distinct period, but with a definite French flavour.
Anything that has ornate carving or gilding, a rotund profile or shapely curved legs is ideal.
A padded button-back chair or an elegant dressing table and matching stool are well suited to this look.
Look out for furniture in lined woods and antique or paint-effect finishes.
Or you could try adapting an existing piece of your furniture with one of the special House Style paint-effect kits from Jocasta Innes.
Choose from the antiquing, crackle-glaze or verdi-gris kits, £19.99 each
Luxury lines
Choose bed linen that combines luxury with a sense of tradition.
Anything with lace, embroidery, satin or ribbon in the design will be perfect, with silk or satin sheets as the ultimate luxury.
Opt for ivory and pretty pastel shades and mix subtle patterns and textures together.
Floral bed linen and a plain white quilted bedcover with masses of appliqued cushions, for example, capture the romantic look perfectly.
Bed linen: Ivory lace 100 per cent cotton double duvet cover; double valance; lace-trimmed pillowcase; filled pillowcase
Curtains: Juliet 100 per cent cotton, rose multi white, 137 cm wide
Furniture: Buttoned double headboard, 137 cm by 6 cm by 68 cm; blanket box, 74 cm by 46 cm by 46 cm; both covered in Juliet, rose multi white, 100 per cent cotton
Colours clockwise from top right: vinyl matt and vinyl silk emulsion, £15.49 per 2.5 ltr, satinwood and gloss, £8.99 per ltr.
Carved ornaments from £1.58 per pack of two
Background: Watermark WR 7462/1 wallpaper, £10.95 per roll
Material Assets
Use generous amounts of fabric to create romantic-style window treatments in your bedroom.
For the first layer, start with lace or voile, or choose a Roman or roller blind with a decorative edge.
Anna French and Laura Ashley both stock a range of lace and voile.
Sunway offers plain roller blinds with a choice of decorative edges.
The main curtains should look full, falling generously to the floor, topped with a valance or pelmet.
To achieve this look yourself, try Duo from Swish — a corded curtain and valance track system, from £24 for a 125 cm length.
Alternatively, Harrison Drape's corded Superstyle Twintrack will take a valance and curtain, from £25.99 for 120 cm length.
Edge curtains with a row of co-ordinating fringing or a frill to add to the layered look.
If you don't want to go to all the trouble of making curtains yourself, Rectella has a huge range of ready-made curtains and operates a made-to-measure service through its nationwide stockists.
Laura Ashley also has a curtain-making service.
Dorma offers a range of ready-made curtains, valances and tiebacks.
Floor work
A stone floor is the perfect foil for this very decorative style, but it's not always practical, especially in winter.
So look for a neutral tone carpet, in shades of blue, pink or green with perhaps a delicate floral design.
Alternatively, try a rug or carpet in the French romantic style, such as Aubusson and Savonneries.
The Vigo Carpet Gallery stocks faithful reproductions and Shya, Ahuja makes a range of modern rugs based on these designs.
Above right: Honiton Beige 3/2411, 80 per cent wool, 20 per cent nylon Axminster carpet
If you would like to find out more about any of the items featured here, see our Address Book on page 144 
NEXT MONTH How to brighten up a dark hallway and give it a new lease of life
LIGHT SLEEPER
Bedroom lighting needs to be planned just as carefully as that elsewhere in your home if it's to provide the right atmosphere and be practical.
Elizabeth Keevill sheds a little light on how to get the right combination and presents some modern and traditional styles
A well thought-out lighting scheme can enhance the atmosphere of your bedroom and help create the look you want.
A good lighting scheme needs to be a clever combination of task and general lighting.
Most people like some form of bedside lighting — either for reading in bed or simply to create a cosy atmosphere.
Table lamps are ideal for soft lighting and look particularly good in a traditional-style room.
Choose a design that hides the bulb effectively and a heavy base to keep it stable.
However, table lamps aren't the right solution if you are a regular bedtime reader.
What you really need for reading is a design with a localised beam that can be directed precisely.
Adjustable fittings are also useful when you want to avoid glare on glossy pages.
A bedside light should be placed so the light source is above your head but not shining directly onto your eyes.
Older people need stronger lighting — a 60-year-old needs, on average, twice as much light as a 30-year-old to read by — so buy an appropriately powerful light.
Fixed or Free
Freestanding lighting is popular because it's easy to move around, needs no extra wiring if you have a convenient power point, and is available in a wide choice of designs.
On the other hand, wallmounted fittings don't take up table space, have no trailing flex and can be properly directed to your reading material.
However, spotlights need to be positioned so that light falls in the right place.
The beam must be bright enough to read by, but not create glare and shadows.
The best position for wall fittings is near to the centre line of the bed, with the light sources focused outwards.
If you choose a wallmounted fitting, make sure the arm doesn't jut out so far that the light is in front of you as this will throw your book into shadow.
But do remember that wall lights usually need to be wired in, so if you decide to reposition the bed or use the room for something else you'll have to remove the fittings.
To direct the beam of light precisely where you want it, choose a fitting that takes narrow-beam reflector bulbs or has a narrow-beam reflector in the fitting.
Look for spotlight or halogen bulbs with beam angles of 10° or 25°, or else for reflector fittings marked ‘narrow beam’.
Fittings with small bulbs work best because the nearer the filament of the bulb is to the reflector, the narrower the beam of light.
Night Lights
Lighting in children's rooms often needs special consideration.
Small children may like a night light, while older ones will want a light to read by.
Of course, bedside lights need to be out of the reach of children too young to understand the dangers of electricity.
Be especially careful with lights that look like toys, as small children may try to play with them.
Once you've got your bedside lighting sorted out, there are still other important areas for you to consider…
Bedside lighting alone will not be sufficient for most bedrooms.
You need to put in just as much care and consideration into creating a well-integrated total lighting scheme for your bedroom.
There are basically three types of lighting: general (or background) lighting, task lighting, and atmospheric lighting.
Switched On
General lighting in a bedroom should be subtle, but be able to provide bright light when necessary — for example when trying on clothes or getting dressed.
Installing a dimmer switch will often give you the flexibility you'll need.
A central pendant light is often used to provide general light.
This is unflattering in any room as the effect is harsh, but in a bedroom there is the added disadvantage that if you stand between the light and the window your silhouette will be visible on your curtains or blinds.
So, if you do want a pendant light, fit it close to the window to ensure privacy.
Ideally, general bedroom lighting is best provided by wall lights, floorstanding lights or downlighters, or a mixture of two or more types.
Taken to Task
Task lighting includes bedside lights and also mirror and wardrobe lights.
Lighting for a mirror should light the person and not the mirror, so position lights on either side of the mirror.
Theatre dressing room-style fittings with small golf ball bulbs are especially effective.
Freestanding wardrobes can be lit from outside, using an eye-ball downlighter focused into the cupboard.
Fitted wardrobes can have internal lights worked by pressure switches that operate when the door is opened.
Downlighters, recessed into the top of the wardrobe are ideal, provided there is at least 20 cm clearance above the clothes.
Alternatively, you can opt for a strip light, and cut out any glare by concealing it with a baffle.
In the Mood
The third type of lighting is atmospheric lighting, or mood lighting.
Bedside lamps, picture lights and lighting used to enhance certain features, such as architectural details and large plants are all types of atmospheric lighting and, used cleverly, can transform a bedroom.
Classic lighting is ideal for creating atmosphere in traditional-style bedrooms, although if you often read in bed you may need to opt for a more practical design
Melanie Grey ash lamp base; Victoria 11 in shade.
Shamrock cup and saucer by Beleek
Bestlite 31170 solid brass lamp base with dark green enamelled shade.
Lutine Bell alarm clock by Wherle
Decosphere light.
Celadon cup and saucer
Furniture
Bedside chest with pull-out shelf; double headboard; from the Summer Oak collection by Stag.
Grand Luxe divan set, 150 cm wide
Limed oak lamp base; cotton coolie shade from £7.25; Astor limed oak clock
Bed linen
Avignon White double duvet cover, from £69.99; filled pillowcase.
Double duvet; pillow
Wooden urn lamp base; pleated natural silk coolie shade.
Limed oak photograph frame
Walls
Willow Bough Minor wallpaper WR7296/21, £11.95 per roll, from the Options Collection by Sanderson.
Framed flower print
As they are adjustable, modern lighting designs are practical and functional.
Some designs use tiny halogen bulbs, so have neat, compact fittings, and give out a clean, white light
Dimmlite II.
£70, Philip.
Brionvega clock radio, £125, Authentics
90LV low-voltage lamp, from £85, Anglepoise.
Sienna teacup and saucer, £18.47 from Villeroy & Boch at Liberty.
Minstrel Plus phone in Alpine
Manhattan QTG 200, low-voltage tungsten halogen light.
Tribune phone in charcoal grey
Furniture
Gallerie bed, black tubular steel head and footboards, mahogany-coloured slatted base (futon or mattress extra).
Roma table
Grillo low-voltage tungsten halogen lamp with dimmer switch.
Water carafe and glass.
Red notebook
Bed linen
Samba square dance double duvet cover; pillowcase.
Double duvet; pillow
Pyramid low-voltage lamp.
Flic Flac clock.
Notebooks
Walls
Karat 982–07 wallpaper, £14.50 per roll, Duro 29 collection, Brian Yates.
Framed Albert Grooteclaes photographic print
Centrally spaced and firmly screwed to the wall, adjustable spotlights can be angled outwards to provide efficient lighting for reading without disturbing your partner.
Final wall lamps, £10.50 each, from a selection at Ikea
The rule with mirrors is to light the person, not the mirror.
When using a downlighter, the light should fall between the person and the mirror, as shown in the illustration.
Or you can use wall lights, positioned on either side of the mirror, as in the photograph above, for maximum effect.
Similar lights are available from Christopher Wray.
Charisma dressing table, stool and mirror with handpainted textured finish, about £590 including delivery and fitting, Personal Touch
Internal wardrobe lighting makes it much easier to find what you're looking for.
The conventional method is to conceal striplights behind a baffle, but there are also other possibilities, such as tiny low-voltage spotlights built into the cornice to illuminate the inside when the door is open.
Furniture from the Trendystyle 2000 collection by Hülstra
BEDDY BUYS
Brighten up your bedroom with crisp new bed linen or a special feature of furniture.
Julie London selects some of the best buys around
1 The Linden Oak Collection is a freestanding range of bedroom furniture that looks fitted.
Made from solid oak with veneered interiors, the wood has been limed to enhance the grain.
For every bedroom sold, a broad-leaved tree will be planted as part of The Woodland Trust's Create-a-Wood scheme and a certificate sent to the customer.
Three-drawer chest, 84 cm by 45 cm by 73 cm
2 This classic dressing table from The Ovolo Collection now has a three-panelled mirror added to the range.
Available in solid oak only, the dressing table measures 106 cm by 55 cm by 130 cm; the mirror measures 68 cm by 33 cm
3 The Neckcare pillow has been specially designed to alleviate any cricks and tension on your neck at night.
Use under your usual pillow to give extra support to your neck.
Made from 100 per cent contoured non-allergic latex
4 For an alternative to a duvet on mild nights why not try these luxurious pure merino wool Henley blankets in bright jewel colours.
Edged with satin ribbon, they are available in four sizes:
5 The Laybak is a clever new device that will convert your existing bed headboard into a comfortable lumber support.
Its specially designed mechanism can be attached either to the back of the bed or directly on to the wall.
You can then pull the headboard out and rest it at any angle on the mattress for reading, watching TV or enjoying breakfast in comfort.
On its own, the Laybak mechanism costs £29.99 (including p&p), but is also available ready fitted on selected makes of headboard.
5 New from Marks & Spencer this spring is fresh hyacinth blue and white reversible bed linen in 50 per cent cotton, 50 per cent polyester.
Single duvet cover, £16.99; double £25; king size, £29.50; pillowcase.
£5.99; also available in pink and white, and wine and beige colourways; from major M&S branches
SLEEP TIGHT
For the past 60 years, The Savoy Group has manufactured its own beds to make sure guests have a good night's sleep.
Now these handmade beds are on sale to the general public.
Each Savoy bed is constructed from natural materials and can be specially made to suit individual requirements.
Mattress and divan, 137 cm by 198 cm (5 ft), £1,679, The Savoy Bedworks
If you are allergic to feathers but don't like the idea of sleeping under a synthetic duvet, Brinhaus' Exotic natural silk duvet could be the answer.
A refining process ensures that the fibres of the raw silk filling are always non-allergic.
Lightweight and fluffy, the duvet is ideal for summer use.
Single duvet, about £79.95; double duvet, about £115 
READER PRIZE DRAW
An Ideal Home Survey
SLEEP TALKING
What type of bed do you sleep on?
Was it chosen to suit your weight and with comfort in mind, or did you just like the look of it?
Do you use sheets and blankets or a duvet?
How many hours do you sleep each night?
IDEAL HOME and Vi-Spring are interested in finding out about your bed, whether it's comfortable and what features you would look for when choosing a new one.
We can then use this information to help influence the latest designs according to your needs.
FILL IN OUR QUESTIONNAIRE FOR YOUR CHANCE TO WIN THIS FABULOUS VI-SPRING BED
All you have to do is answer our questions and, if your name is drawn out of our postbag, you could be the lucky reader to win a handmade Vi-Spring Herald 5-foot Spring Edge divan set, worth over £1,300.
The questionnaire results will be published in a future issue of IDEAL HOME.
The questionnaire itself is strictly confidential.
If you wish to take part in the IDEAL HOME/Vi-Spring prize draw, please write your full name and address and telephone number in the box at the end of the questionnaire.
These details will not be included in the survey.
YOUR BED
1
What is your make of bed?
2
What size is your bed?
3
What type of bed do you own?
Divan without drawers
Divan with drawers
Futon
Water bed
Four-poster
Other (please specify)
4
What is the construction of your bed?
Open spring
Pocketed spring
Foam
Water
Don't know
5
How long have you had your bed?
Under 1 year
1 to 5 years
6 to 10 years
More than 10 years (please state length of time)
6
How satisfied are you with the comfort of your bed?
Very satisfied
Fairly satisfied
Dissatisfied
7
If you are dissatisfied with your bed, please give your reason(s) below
8
Who chose your bed
Myself
Spouse/partner
Joint decision
Bed was a present
9
Which of the following did you buy when you bought your bed?(please tick all that apply)
New mattress
New base
New headboard
Secondhand mattress
Secondhand base
Secondhand headboard
10
Where did you buy your bed?
Department store
Specialist bed shop
General furniture store
11
Did any of the following influence your choice of bed?(please tick all that apply)
TV advertisement
A buyer's guide in a magazine
Salesperson's advice
Friend's advice
Manufacturer's literature
12
Which of the following did the salesperson encourage you to do when you bought your bed?(please tick all that apply)
Discuss any personal requirements
Test or try out the beds on display
Look at companies specialising in tailor-made beds
Take away manufacturer's literature
Examine ways of making your new bed last longer
13
Which of the following is your highest priority when buying a new bed?
Manufacturer's reputation
Price
Overall quality
Comfort
Appearance
14
Which of the following features do you feel are important when choosing a bed?(please tick all that apply)
Colour and design of mattress colour
Handmade construction
Specially built to suit your requirements
Storage drawers included in base
Attractive headboard
Orthopaedic mattress
Price
Comfort
15
How much would you pay for a new mattress and divan set?
16
Are you aware that you can choose a bed with either soft, medium or firm springing, depending on your weight?
17
How long do you think your bed should last?
1 to 5 years
5 to 10 years
10 to 15 years
Longer than 15 years
Don't know
EVERYDAY USE OF YOUR BED
18
Which of the following do you have on your bed?
Duvet
Sheets
Blankets
19
How many pillows do you sleep on?
None
3 or more
20
How often do you turn your mattress?
Once a week or more
2 or three times a month
Once a month
Every 2 to 3 months
Once or twice a year
Less often
Never
21
Do you have any back problems?
22
If you have back problems, how does your bed affect this complaint?
Helps
Aggravates
No effect
YOUR SLEEPING HABITS
23
On average, how many hours do you sleep a night?
Under 4
5 to 6
7 to 8
9 to 10
11 or more
24
On an average weekday, what time do you go to bed?
Before 9 pm
9 pm to 10 pm
10 pm to 11 pm
11 pm to 12 am
After 12 am
25
In what position do you usually sleep?
Foetal
On your back
On your side
On your front
Other (please specify)
26
What do you wear in bed?
Pyjamas
Nightdress
Shirt/T-shirt
Nothing
27
Do you share your bed with anyone else?
28
Does you partner disturb your sleep?
29
If you answered yes to question 28, how does your partner disturb your sleep?
Snores
Reads in bed
Watches TV
Eats
Other (please specify)
IF YOU SHARE A BED WITH YOUR PARTNER, PLEASE CONTINUE.
OTHERS PROCEED TO QUESTION 30
THE FOLLOWING QUESTIONS WILL HELP US ANALYSE THE QUESTIONNAIRE
30
Are you?
Male
Female
31
Which age group are you in?
16 to 24
25 to 34
35 to 44
45 to 54
55 to 64
65 or over
32
What type of property do you live in?
House
Flat/maisonette
Bungalow
33
Is your present home your first home?
Yes
Second home
Third home
Fourth home or more
34
If you work, what is your occupation and industry?
35
If you are married/living together, what does your partner do?
LETTERS
Let us know your views and home hints.
There's a handy powered screwdriver from Black & Decker for the star letter; £10 for every other letter published
Modern myths
I was interested to read a letter in the November issue about modern housing estates being regimented and standardised.
There seems to be a myth that only older properties can have individuality and character but I disagree.
In the past I have lived in a large Victorian house and a 1930s semi-detached.
Both were almost identical to hundreds of other houses in the surrounding areas.
I now live in a new house which has as much character as either of my previous homes — but without the rising damp and woodworm.
Throwaway society
Over the last year, I have had to replace my steam iron and hairdryer that had both developed faults.
I tried to get them repaired, but was told that it would be much cheaper to buy replacements.
More recently, my microwave oven began to smoke and, again, the dealer said that as it would cost more than £200 to repair, I should consider buying a new one.
Is the quality of modern-day appliances really improving or are they meant to be disposable?
Unlucky break
In the December issue we asked readers what they considered to be their most treasured possessions in the home and whether they preferred to use or admire them.
Here are two of the replies we received.
One of our wedding presents was an elegant set of tall, slender-stemmed wine glasses.
Never daring to use them on a regular basis, they were placed inside a display cabinet for many years.
They were brought out on only a few special occasions and were always carefully washed and returned to their place of honour.
During one of these rituals, I dropped and smashed one of the glasses, ruining my set.
To think that for all these years I had tried to protect them from this very fate and I hadn't even the pleasure of using them very often.
To have and to hold
My most treasured possession is a silver teapot which was presented to my grandfather, by his employer, on his marriage in 1879 and is so inscribed.
A second inscription on the opposite side reveals that it had been given as a wedding present to the employer himself in 1838.
We use the teapot frequently, enjoying the look and feel of it and thinking of all who have used it before us.
When not in use it is displayed in a glass-fronted cabinet, giving us the best of both worlds.
Boundary lines
I recently read that it is now possible for any individual to look through the Land Registry files to confirm ownership of land.
Having had difficulties with determining the garden boundary of my house, I welcome this new move.
It will be of immense help to people who need to discover who owns a particular property or piece of land and to solve any disputes that might occur over ownership.
The Land Registry has a free explanatory leaflet that will enable anyone to enquire about ownership of registered property and obtain details of the ‘layout’ of a particular piece of land.
To obtain a copy of the leaflet, write to:
The Editor
Essentially fragrant
An effective way to introduce a delightful perfume throughout your home is simply to place a few drops of essential oil or pot-pourri revitaliser into the water of a room humidifier.
Ceramic humidifiers on a warm radiator are particularly effective because the oils evaporate, filling the room with a beautiful scent.
Wasteful work
I would like to advise readers of IDEAL HOME always to carry out basic surveillance when a washing machine is installed.
When our kitchen was modernised, we left the repositioning of the washing machine to the ‘experts’.
This meant that used water was not directly plumbed into the outside drain but linked into the sink waste.
Surprisingly, this worked until recently when we decided to replace the machine with a newer model.
The problem was then pointed out to us and we had to employ a plumber to put matters right.
This was not cheap and owing to the length of time since the kitchen was redesigned, we have no recourse in law.
Although there are special fittings to allow washing machine waste pipes to be connected to the sink waste, the best way of plumbing in a washing machine is to make a permanent connection to the pipes in the kitchen for the water supply and to fit a stand pipe and trap leading through a hole in the outside wall for the waste pipe.
It is usually simplest if a washing machine can go next to the sink, but it can easily fit in other places.
Home Improvements Editor
HOME IS WHERE THE HEART IS
At a coffee morning recently, we were discussing what makes a house a home.
I opted for bright welcoming lights, while my friend said that she liked warm rooms and a good fire.
Other suggestions were wholesome, home-cooked meals or decorating the home with flowers and plants.
It was interesting to hear different views, and yet we all agreed that it was the people with whom we shared our home that mattered most.
The winner of our star letter will receive a Black & Decker Super Powerdriver
Please address letters to The Editor, ‘Letters Page’,
CONSUMER FILE
IN OUR NEW SPECIAL SECTION, CONSUMER FILE EDITOR RUTH HAYHURST WILL BE KEEPING YOU IN TOUCH WITH THE LATEST CONSUMER LEGISLATION AND ISSUES.
THIS MONTH SHE EXPLAINS THE FUNCTION OF TRADE ASSOCIATIONS, OFFERS SOME ADVICE ON HOME SHOPPING AND FINDS THAT WATER COMPANIES DON'T ALWAYS COME CLEAN WITH THE CONSUMER
A QUESTION OF ASSOCIATION
Will you get extra protection — or benefits — if you only deal with companies belonging to a trade association?
When you last called in the professionals to repair your washing machine or fix the car, how confident were you that the mechanic was up to the job?
In the search for reliability and good service, you could rely on crossed fingers or personal recommendation.
But if you don't want to stretch your luck or your circle of friends, you might think that using a trade association offers some form of protection.
But what exactly is a trade association?
There are an estimated 3,500 trade associations in Britain covering a wide range of industries: cycle traders and Christmas tree growers, repairers and timeshare developers, dry cleaners and tyre distributors.
Anyone can form a trade association — you don't need any special qualifications or approval.
And they don't exist primarily to help consumers.
Their function is to promote and protect the industry they represent.
How they do this varies.
Some are exclusively concerned with public image: placing advertisements, briefing journalists and lobbying opinion formers.
However, some trade associations seek to raise standards within their industry and have acquired the status of pressure groups, consulted on matters of public concern by the government and consumer bodies.
Many accept that consumer confidence is good for business and have sought to give their members an advantage over competitors by drawing up a series of consumer protection measures, such as codes of practice, arbitration procedures and bonding schemes.
CODES OF PRACTICE
These are voluntary statements of the standards of business the trade association expects from its members.
They go beyond minimum legal levels of consumer protection and could deal, for example, with quality of work and materials, speed of completing jobs and selling techniques.
But remember, codes have no legal status and they are only as good as the organisation's power to enforce them.
In many cases, the only action a trade association can take against a member that doesn't comply is to expel it.
Nearly 50 trade associations have taken one step further and had their codes of practice approved by the Office of Fair Trading (OFT).
The OFT investigates complaints if it appears that these trade associations are not following their own guidelines and, as a final sanction, the OFT can withdraw its endorsement.
It's hard to assess how well members of trade associations meet their own standards.
But surveys by Consumers' Association magazine Which?of the Retail Motor Industry Federation (RMI) and the Association of Manufacturers of Domestic Electrical Appliances (AMDEA) suggest there's room for improvement.
The RMI, which represents 13,000 garages, has a comprehensive code, endorsed by the OFT, which covers areas such as servicing, warranty repairs, quotations, estimates and premises.
Last September,Which?published the results of an inspection of standards of garage servicing at 30 garages, including 12 members of the RMI and the Scottish Motor Trade Association (which also has an OFT-approved Code of Conduct).
Only two of the 30 garages managed to do a complete service and, according to Which?. the RMI members weren't following their association's guidelines in service schedules and price display boards.
The RMI's press officer, Sue Robinson, said the organisation was trying to improve standards but this could not be achieved overnight.
AMDEA represents about 90 per cent of the companies that make domestic electrical equipment in Britain and was the first trade association to draw up a code of practice approved by the OFT.
Its members undertake to repair or service 80 per cent of all appliances they are called out to within three working days.
A more recent Which?survey, published at the beginning of this year, suggests that AMDEA companies arrive within three days of being called and one, Hotpoint, was often quicker to respond than the guidelines, with three out of four of its repairers arriving within two days.
However, some members still failed to meet the guidelines on finishing jobs within 15 days of their first visit.
One in 12 people who took part in the survey was without the use of their machine for over a fortnight.
CONCILIATION AND ARBITRATION
Of the 27 codes of practice endorsed by the OFT, most include some procedure for settling disputes by conciliation and 19 offer some form of independent arbitration.
These are intended to be a cheap, quick and informal way for customers to resolve disputes.
But a recent study by the National Consumer Council (NCC) highlighted a number of problems with arbitration schemes.
It found that little use is made of arbitration procedures, although there's no evidence that consumers are so satisfied that they have no disputes  needing to be judged independently.
In some cases, trade associations seem to have little sanction over rogue members.
In the only case in which a customer tried to invoke the Consumer Credit Trade Association scheme, the trader left the association rather than go to arbitration.
The NCC was also concerned that arbitration was often too slow.
It took over 10 months to take a case through the ABTA conciliation and arbitration scheme and over a year through the one run by the Glass and Glazing Federation (GGF).
People using the ABTA scheme thought awards were too small and there's evidence that arbitrators awarded lower sums than the County Court.
Furthermore, some companies didn't pay up when awards were made against them.
Of a sample of 23 complaints against members of the GGF, 18 received an award.
But of those, three awards were never paid and one was paid only after the consumer began court proceedings.
Those who were paid had to wait an average of eight weeks for payment.
BONDING SCHEMES
Members of some trade associations are also covered by a deposit indemnity fund.
One of the best-known examples is operated by the GGF.
If a member cannot carry out work for which a deposit has been paid, the fund will either ensure the work is carried out at a fair price less the deposit or refund the deposit.
GETTING THE BEST
Using a member of a trade association doesn't guarantee a high standard of work.
However, the OFT does carry out periodic reviews of trade association codes of practice.
Keith Richards, a senior lawyer with the Consumers' Association, believes personal recommendation is the best way to guarantee good value.
But if all else is equal, it's probably worth using a trader who offers an arbitration or bonding scheme.
It's also important to check that a trader who claims to belong to a trade association is in fact a member, and to check with the trade association that a code of practice offers what the trader says it does.
You and your rights
Shopping at home from a catalogue or newspaper can be convenient, comfortable and fun.
But if things go wrong, how easy is it to complain and get your money back?
Your legal rights are the same when you buy mail order as from a shop.
Goods must be of merchantable quality, fit for their purpose and as described.
But to help shopping go smoothly, follow these points.
If you're buying from an advertisement, check the magazine or newspaper is a member of a mail-order protection scheme
Never send cash by post.
Use cheques or postal orders, and keep stubs or counterfoils as a record of payment
Keep a copy of your order and note the date it was sent
When making a complaint, give full details of your order and the advertisement
Faulty goods: Send them back immediately with a note explaining the fault, and keep a copy.
You are entitled to your money back only if you reject the goods immediately.
After that you're entitled to compensation only.
If you have to sign a delivery note as proof of receipt, and the words ‘not examined’ to show that you haven't examined and accepted them
Damaged in transit: Mail-order companies belonging to trade associations generally agree to replace goods that have been damaged.
If they won't you may have to claim against the Post Office.
Late delivery: Goods must be delivered in a ‘reasonable time’ or by an agreed date.
If they don't arrive on time, write setting a new date.
If they still don't arrive, you're entitled to cancel your order.
Price rises: Firms can't increase their prices unless they say so in the catalogue or advertisement.
Check the conditions because you may have agreed to pay any increase between ordering and delivery.
Collapsing companies: Try to order from companies that don't require payment in advance because there's little chance of getting your money back if the trader goes bust.
However, if you paid by credit card and the goods cost more than £100 you may have a claim against the credit company.
STOP PRESS
From April, the limit for claims in the Small Claims Court in England and Wales goes up from £500 to £1,000.
INFORMATION ON TAP?
Do you know what's in your tap water?
By law, your water company must tell you if you ask.
But a survey by Which? way to Health magazine suggests that most suppliers don't give enough information to tell you whether your water complies with the quality rules.
The magazine requested reports from 44 of the 51 water supply areas in Britain.
Twenty-one suppliers didn't give the maximum permitted levels of contaminants like lead or aluminium in water for comparison with actual levels.
Seventeen suppliers didn't give any details to measure water quality against, no information on maximum permitted levels and no data about how many samples exceeded the maximum.
Water companies are obliged to give more comprehensive data to local councils, so consumers should be able to get at least the same amount of information.
The environmental group Friends of the Earth (FoE) is an experienced campaigner for improvements in the quality of our water and has produced a briefing giving detailed advice on requesting information from your water supply company.
The briefing sheet also provides help in interpreting the data.
For a free copy, send an sae to  .
The Water Services Association, the trade body representing the water companies, said the suppliers were not trying to make access to information difficult for consumers.
If more detailed information was required, the companies would provide it.
The Drinking Water Inspectorate and the Director General of Water Services could also give more details.
COMMON GROUND
For the last three months, the Government has been collecting responses to its proposals to overhaul the law on leasehold flats.
Late last year, it published a consultative document that could pave the way for legislation to replace the leasehold system with an alternative called Commonhold.
The present leasehold system affects an estimated three million owners and has been widely condemned as unfair and archaic.
Many flat owners don't own the land on which their homes are built or the shared areas inside, like stairs or hallways.
Under the terms of their lease, they have to pay maintenance charges and annual ground rent to a landlord.
And when the lease expires, their flats become the landlord's property.
Many owners experience problems with their landlords over maintenance charges, repairs and insurance.
The proposed Commonhold system would give flat buyers greater control over their homes.
It would transfer ownership of the land and shared areas from the landlord to the owners in a block of flats and would establish a system for communal management and repairs.
Legislation could still be a long way off but the proposals are an important first step.
Howdee Mam.
I'm a member of C.O.W.B.O.Y. Where is your dishwasher?
An Ideal Home reader offer
THE PERFECT COVER
ADD A TOUCH OF ELEGANCE TO ANY TABLE WITH THIS DELICATE CHINESE TABLE LINEN
There's nothing more satisfying than dressing up a table to suit the occasion.
And whether it's tea, breakfast or supper, this month's white tablecloth will provide an elegant setting — and at an excellent price.
Made in China following time-honoured traditional methods, it has been hand-trimmed with intricately patterned lace for a truly delicate effect.
And to give a beautifully co-ordinated look we're also offering napkins to match.
Available in a variety of sizes, the table linen can be either hand or gently machine washed and will provide pleasure for years to come.
Don't miss out on this very special opportunity — fill out the order coupon now.
And, if you're not delighted with your purchase, we guarantee to refund your money in full.
HOW TO ORDER: Please complete the coupon in block capitals.
Remittance may be made by Access/Visa, PO or cheque (name and address on back of cheque please), crossed and made payable to Ideal Home Offer.
Send to Ideal Home Table Linen Offer,.
Only available while stocks last to readers in Great Britain, Channel Islands, and the republic of Ireland where readers could be liable for duty (the prices quoted are Sterling and a conversion to Punt must be made).
Orders are normally despatched within 28 days, please allow for carriage.
You will be notified if a longer delay is expected.
Take advantage of our phone-in services: Access/Visa cardholders may order direct on (0279) 427271.
Readers' offer enquiries; tel:(0279) 635348.
China, Royal Worcester Summerfields from Liberty Flowers, Vase florists Background painted using Crown Expression Matt Emulsion
UPDATE
LINDA NEWMAN KEEPS YOU UP TO DATE WITH ALL THOSE MATTERS THAT AFFECT YOU AND YOUR FAMILY AND TAKES A LOOK AT THE LATEST PRODUCTS AND FORTHCOMING EVENTS
OUT AND ABOUT
From day excursions to mini breaks, there are plenty of fun places to take all the family
Unpredictable weather can upset the best-laid holiday plans.
The advantage of a Center Parcs break, however, is that whatever the weather you can bask in the centre's sun-tropical ‘Swimming Paradise’ where the temperature is maintained at a constant 84°F.
A wide range of other indoor and outdoor activities means that there should be something to suit all tastes.
On arriving at Elveden Forest in Suffolk (one of only two Center Parcs' locations in the UK and the newest of the Dutch-owned villages), we were immediately greeted with a taste of Holland.
Bikes are everywhere (3,000 are available for hire) and cycling is the popular mode of transport around the 440-acre site.
However it is possible to request a villa close to the centre if you don't want wheels.
The main facilities at Elveden Forest are housed beneath a giant transparent roof.
These include shops and restaurants as well as a variety of sports facilities.
During our cool weather short stay, we made the most of the water facilities — shoots, slides, exciting rapids and a wave pool, Jacuzzis, saunas, solariums and steam baths are also available, as are indoor badminton and bowling, archery, roller skating, windsurfing, canoeing, snooker, horse riding and tennis.
To save time we planned, booked and paid for activities soon after arrival (although entrance to the pool is free).
The cost of a long weekend or midweek mini-break in a two-bedroomed, self-catering villa at Elveden Forest begins at £159 and £138 respectively.
Center Parcs, which won last year's English Tourist Board ‘England for Excellence Green Tourism Award’, also has a centre in Sherwood Forest in Nottingham, in France, Holland and Belgium.
For a brochure, please tel:(0272) 244744.
MAKING WAVES
The Wind and Surf exhibition (19 to 21 April) signals the beginning of the main windsurfing and surfing season on the 250 acres of lakes at Thorpe Park, Surrey.
For seasoned surfers and novices alike, attractions include displays, as well as windsurfing taster lessons for children on tethered boards; an ‘It's a Knock Out’ competition; a wet and dry fashion show; plus the chance to see some of the country's most skilled windsurfers in action.
Open: Mon to Sun 10 am to 6 pm.
Admission: Adults, £6; children and OAPs, £3.50.
Thorpe Park is close to Junction 13 on the M25.
ENGLAND'S AMAZING ATTRACTIONS
To celebrate Britain's rich heritage of mazes, 1991 has been designated Year of the Maze — a venture backed by the English Tourist Board and the Maze Society.
The first known mazes (in Syria and Sardinia) date back some 4,000 years.
They consisted of a single twisted path, built for ritual walking, running and processions.
Many of our own labyrinths were built for public amusement in the Victorian era but were destroyed during wartime.
However, enthusiasm for mazes has been renewed in recent years and, with over 100, Britain now has more mazes open to the public than any other European country.
These are constructed from a variety of materials and are often immaculately kept like the Festival Maze in Bath (shown left).
Fourteen new mazes will open this year — locations include Blenheim Palace and Wookey Hole Caves — which is also the 300th anniversary of the maze at Hampton Court.
For a list of events taking place at mazes around the country, including exhibitions, tours and competitions, send an sae to Year of the Maze Campaign at .
If you would like to receive British Maze News , the campaign newsletter that includes a calendar, please enclose £2 of stamps.
NEWS & VIEWS
KEEPING YOU IN TOUCH WITH NEW IDEAS, PLUS WHAT'S HAPPENING AND WHERE
TRAVELLERS' YARNS
‘They was clean on at beginning o' week,’ said master dyer Mike Barraclough, ruefully surveying rainbow-spattered grey trousers as 47 assorted housewives, secretaries and teachers on a Rowan Travel weekend crowded in to see him chuck red and yellow powders into a battered plastic measuring jug.
‘Aaah!’ they chorused minutes later as the delicate hanks of peach yarn emerged.
The next stop was Samuel Lumb's Yarn Spinning Works where the vibrantly coloured wools peeked out of fat paper parcels.
At the knitting workshop at Rowan's mill in Holmfirth, we had the chance to design our own knitted samples under the watchful eye of Rowan designers Annabel Fox and Jean Moss.
Talk was of the mysteries of tension ribbing…and men.
‘My husband's jealous of my knitting,’ announced one.
Others nodded, needles clicking conspiratorially.
Knitting was their secret passion, knitting friends were never cast off or dropped.
For many it was a creative godsend: no dishes, demanding children and husbands.
Rowan Yorkshire Knitting Weekends 1991:
Times: 1 pm Fri to mid-afternoon Sun.
Cost: £199 per person in either a twin or double room (single supplement, £25); includes two nights with breakfast and dinner at a 4-star hotel and Rowan yarn worth up to £40.
Rowan Creative Hand Knitting Weekends are also available in London.
Enquiries to; Rowan Travel Co,
A busy weekend at Rowan's mill in Holmfirth
A dedicated follower of knitting
EXHIBITIONS AND EVENTS
25 April to 16 June ‘The Evening Standard Art Machine’, the largest art and design show ever created for children, brings together a wide range of art, design and technology under the same roof.
Attractions include a futuristic children's room with holograms, a re-creation of the Venice Carnival and the Wooden Whaler — a giant sea monster.
There are also workshops involving computer graphics and Meccano.
At the Barbican Centre,
27 April The Leeds Doll House & Miniature Collectors Fair has over 90 stands selling dolls' houses, furniture, miniature shops, tiny people and other accessories.
BROADENING HORIZONS
If you're fed up with your teenage children getting under your feet in the school holidays, help may be at hand.
The Teenager's Vacation Guide to Work, Study & Adventure , by Victoria  Pybus, has plenty of good ideas about how teenagers can get the most out of their breaks, both in Britain and abroad.
Suggestions include restoring a 16th-century windmill in Italy, working in a bird sanctuary or theme park in Britain, and spending time on an English Language summer camp in sunny climes.
The guide also includes a useful directory of the best language schools in Europe, plus a list of over 70 adventure holiday organisations in Britain and Europe.
Published by Vacation Work, it costs £6.95 paperback and is available from all good bookshops.
Alternatively you can buy it from Vacation Work Publications,.
If ordering by post, please add £1 to cover p&p.
Room set by Gerard Rigot
The Wooden Whaler by David Kemp
KNOCK, KNOCK
Style arrives at your doorstep with the Feron range of door furniture by Clayton-Munroe.
Crafted from hand-forged steel and solid brass, the range covers every style.
There are lever and turn handles with swirls and scrolls; fingerplates and a variety of window fasteners, hinges and accessories.
Prices range from 78p for a cabinet knob with pewter-look finish to £101.92 for a door pull with brass finish.
For a brochure write to Clayton-Munroe Ltd,.
GOING TO THE CLEANERS
Cleaners of the 1990 have a new image.
They're a fast moving, trendy tracksuited, van-driving team.
Not for them your ordinary household polishes and bleach — they use the latest industrial cleaning gear.
Clearing up the debris after a teenage party and the damage caused by fire or flood is no problem to this new breed of cleaner.
And tidying up after removal and spring cleaning homes that haven't been touched for years are all part of a normal day's work.
But if you're considering hiring a team of cleaners, be careful.
After testing nine such cleaning firms,Which?magazine found many charged high rates for poor quality service.
To avoid being taken to the cleaners,Which?suggested the best way of getting good results was to hire a firm recommended by word of mouth.
Currently, no professional body exists to monitor cleaning standards, but Sheila Peach and John Scott, directors of Chores Nationwide Cleaning Ltd, are keen to set one up.
If you have any queries or have had either good or bad experiences with cleaning firms, contact either Sheila or John at  .
Cleaning Checklist
Get a proper written quote first — a telephone quote is not enough
Be specific from the outset.
If you ask for a ‘general clean’ you might only get vacuuming and light dusting
If you aren't given a list by the firm, make your own priorities list of all the things you want or don't want cleaned
See jobs are ticked off when completed
Check the firm's insurance.
Is there adequate cover for your valuables?
Which?reported that for safety reasons some firms wouldn't take on jobs where cleaners might have to stand on a ladder, etc.
And most won't take rubbish away, but some will ‘bag it up’ ready for collection
Check the firm has completed all tasks — ideally, while the people are still there
Think ahead.
Tell them if you want a mucky oven cleaned before the visit as special steam-cleaning equipment may be needed.
Some firms charge by the hour, roughly between £6.50 and £10; others by the job, which can work out at about £80 to £120-plus for a four-hour clean
Read the small print about cancellations.
Expect to pay half the cost if you give less than 48 hours' notice
IN GOOD TRIM
Introducing the first collection of trimmings by Sanderson — each design is styled to complement the company's printed and woven fabrics, and is available in eight colourways.
The range features cut and tasselled fringes; small and large tiebacks; plain and flanged ropes; picot braids and fan edging; bullion and rosettes.
Available from the main store in Berners Street, London W1, and Sanderson stockists around the country.
Large tieback, £29.95; rosette tassel, £7.50 each; tassel fringe, £7.50 per m; flanged rope, £4.95 per m
MONEY TALK
WENDY ELKINGTON REPORTS ON THE GROWING NUMBER OF PRIVATE DENTAL-CARE PLANS, PLUS THE LATEST NEWS ON TAX-FREE SAVINGS, PENSIONS AND TAXATION
DENTAL CARE BITES BACK
 Dentists' dislike of the new NHS contracts means more and more are turning to private practice, according to the British Dental Association.
About 1 in 10 has now followed this route over the country as a whole, and in the costly Southeast as many as 20 per cent may opt out of the NHS.
This means it will be more difficult to find dentists prepared to accept NHS patients.
But to ensure quality dental care at affordable prices, there is a growing number of private plans on the market that have been designed to help you with your dental bills.
One of the largest is Denplan, which was set up four years ago by an ex-dentist.
You have to be adjudged ‘dentally fit’ to join and its aim is to ensure continuing care.
The scheme now has about 3,000 participating dentists.
You can choose any registered dentist and will get a full preventative service.
Private treatment covers such services as check-ups, fillings, extractions and hygiene.
But more complex work, such as crowns and bridges, is not covered and you have to pay the full laboratory cost of this work or 35 per cent of the dentist's normal fee.
Premiums start at £4 per month, and average around £6 to £8 but can be £15-plus in London.
Discounts of up to 15 per cent are available for family membership and worldwide emergency cover is included in the price.
For details, tel:(0962) 66662.
One of the latest schemes on the market is CDC Cost Care.
Fees depend on where you live but range from £1.70 per week per person to about £2.50.
The fee you pay also depends on the present condition of your teeth.
The average payment at the moment works out at £8 per month.
As with Denplan, you get preventative and private treatment but have to pay for orthodontic and laboratory work.
If you would like any further information on CDC Cost Care, tel: 081–848 1028.
FUTURE PERFECT
No-one ever spends much time thinking about the longest holiday of their lifetime — retirement — until a few years before the big day actually arrives.
Yet if you want to ensure a trouble-free retirement, it's never too early to start financial planning.
Many employees run private pension schemes, but often these won't provide enough income to give you a really comfortable lifestyle.
You can take out an extra saving for retirement which is called an additional voluntary contribution (AVC).
One of the latest comes from the Ecclesiastical insurance group and it is a freestanding AVC, ie, it is not linked in with your company pension scheme.
You can pay in a minimum of £25 per month or £300 per year and you can choose whether your cash goes into a green ‘environmentally friendly’ unit trust, an income builder fund or a deposit fund, or a combination of the two.
SPLIT DECISIONS
Married couples each have a capital gains tax allowance of £5,000.
This means each partner can make a profit by selling assets of up to £5,000 in any one tax year without having a tax bill from the Inland Revenue.
A point to remember is that there is no tax payable on gifts between husband and wife, so there are opportunities of saving tax on profits by first making transfers between each other.
Couples who sell a jointly owned asset should make sure the tax man knows the ownership split, if it falls into the gains tax net.
The Inland Revenue says any gain is apportioned on the basis of ‘beneficial ownership’.
For example, a couple may own a second home, with the wife having an 80 per cent share and her husband the remainder.
When they come to sell it, any capital gains tax would then be divided on an 80:20 basis.
TAX-FREE SAVINGS
Since their introduction in January, Tessas are fast becoming the savings hit of the 1990s.
The initials stand for Tax Exempt Special Savings Account, but according to a recent survey not everyone it seems is aware of a Tessa's principal attraction — its tax free label.
In fact, Tessas are a very tax-efficient way to save — provided that you are prepared to tie your money up for five years.
All the interest you get will be tax free as long as you don't touch the capital during this period.
However, if you do withdraw part of the capital before the time is up you will have to pay tax on the interest.
You can save up to £9,000 in a Tessa account.
In the first year, £3,000 can be invested and up to £1,800 in the following years until you reach the maximum.
There is a wide variety of schemes on offer from the big banks and building societies.
Most pay a rate of interest that will vary from time to time, but there is nothing to stop you moving your Tessa from one bank or building society to another if you think you can get a better return from another source.
However, there may be a transfer charge of about £10 or £20 as well as an interest penalty of up to 90 days.
So shop around carefully before investing your cash.
Among the best all-round Tessas are those from the Nationwide and Abbey National.
The Government watchdog Securities and Investment Board (known as SIB) has teamed up with the Consumers' Association to run a stand at the Home Buying And Finance show at the Ideal Home Exhibition, Earls Court, from 4 to 7 April.
Staff will be on hand to give advice on all aspects of home-buying and what things to keep in mind before making an investment decision — as well as tips on how to keep the money sharks at bay.
MORTGAGE MATTERS
WILL AN INDEPENDENT FINANCIAL ADVISER FIND YOU THE BEST MORTGAGE DEAL?
AND WHERE ARE PROPERTY PRICES HEADING NEXT?
VALERIE BAYES EXPLAINS
AN INDEPENDENT STAND
In recent years, independent financial advisers (IFAs) have been playing an increasingly important role in the mortgage arena.
But many people still aren't sure what they do.
IFAs are an essential part of centralised mortgage lending and instigate a significant amount of business.
Often having exclusive access to the special schemes or funding available from centralised lenders, they can help borrowers unable to get suitable terms from the more orthodox lenders.
Bit IFAs can also arrange mortgage loans through the high-street lenders.
In fact, one of the main advantages of using IFAs is that they can hunt through the range of mortgage offers and find the best deal for you.
‘Best advice’ is the criterion by which FIMBRA-registered advisers must operate.
(FIMBRA stands for Financial Intermediaries, Managers and Brokers Regulatory Association.)
IFAs belonging to the association must also belong to a contributory compensation fund that protects your investments from unforeseen problems, such as fraud.
The maximum protection is £48,000 per person, or 100 per cent of the first £30,000 and 90 per cent of the next £20,000.
If you're using an IFA, find out if they hold professional indemnity insurance cover, too.
Remember the mortgage itself isn't a debt, and so the compensation scheme doesn't apply.
But it does apply to endowment policies and, since many good-value mortgage offers depend on you also taking out an endowment policy, FIMBRA registration is important.
For a list of registered advisers in your area, write to IFA Promotion,.
BUILDING BRIDGES
Bridging loans are short-term loans used to finance the purchase of a second property before you've sold your previous home.
Closed bridging is for transactions where you have a definite time limit.
In this instance, you'll already have signed contracts on your old house and will, therefore, have a definite completion date.
Open bridging is needed when you haven't yet signed a contract for the sale of your current home and so you don't know how long you'll need the bridging loan.
Open-bridging lending is more risky to lenders than closed bridging.
That's why building societies and banks tend to shy away from it.
But open-bridging is a big business and now accounts for borrowing of about £430 million a year.
Specialist companies offering open-bridging include Home Bridging of Winchester tel:(0926) 840555 and Cavendish Capital tel: 071–408 0840.
FRENCH CONNECTIONS
With more and more Britons buying property in France, many French banks have come to the UK, eager to lend us funding in French francs.
Banque La Henin (tel: 071–630 0965) is a typical example of a bank well used to dealing with homebuyers of every nation.
‘France has six borders,’ says La Henin, ‘and will soon have seven when the Eurotunnel spans the Channel.’
‘Different nationalities prefer different corners of France,’ explains La Henin.
It seems that British investors go for the north and west — Normandy and Brittany — and also like to invest their money further south in Aquitaine and Perigord.
Ski resorts also attract the British.
The Germans and Swiss like the eastern border regions and buy property in the Vosges and Alsace, in the Doubs, the Jura and Upper Savoie.
And the Spanish buy homes on the coast between Hendaye and Bayonne, or in the French Pyrenees.
THEN AND NOW
It ain't always easy to get economic forecasts right.
For example, back in 1984, a Building Societies Association working group attempted to predict the state of the housing market in the 1990s.
Called Housing Finance Into The 1990s , the report estimated that house prices would rise by 7 per cent a year.
This meant first-time buyers would have to pay an average of £32,700 for their home in 1991.
But, as every homebuyer knows, house prices have risen at a far greater rate.
As the Halifax Building Society stated in its House Price Index at the end of last year, the average price paid by a first-time buyer in November was £47,200.
That's 50 per cent higher than was forecast only six years ago.
But who could have foreseen the amazing house-price boom of 1987 and 1988?
The 1984 working group also over-estimated the importance of MIRAS (or mortgage interest tax relief).
‘It is undoubtedly the case that the demand for mortgage finance would be lower if the provision of tax relief was reduced,’ said the report.
But this was based on the assumption that the current tax relief limit of £30,000 would be increased in line with inflation.
In fact, the MIRAS ceiling hasn't risen and is now worth considerably less in terms of the national average house price.
This hasn't deterred homebuyers from paying high prices for property, though.
The belief that you can make a profit from investing in property has remained strong until recently.
The working group also miscalculated the number of new houses that would need to be built in the future.
‘The demand for new houses is forecast at about 200,000 a year to the end of the century,’ says the report.
In fact, completions recorded by the National House-building Council (NHBC) are consistently well below this figure, with the exception of 1988.
In 1989, 186,000 new houses were finished and in 1990 the total will be about 157,000.
Most housing developers believe about 30,000 of these are surplus to requirements.
In four years' time, it will be interesting to check the accuracy of this house-price prediction made by the Household Mortgage Corporation (HMC).
‘In 1995, the average home in the UK will cost £108,950,’ says the HMC.
HEALTH MATTERS
HAVING YOUR EARS SYRINGED…
NEW HELP FOR EPILEPTICS…
AN UPDATE ON THE ABORTION ACT…
DR JOHN HALSER HAS THE DETAILS
WAX WORK
Many people visit their doctors to have their ears syringed — often because their hearing is impaired or they have a bad earache.
But even though ear syringing is a common procedure, surprisingly little is known about it.
A GP once said it was the nearest he ever got to brain surgery.
And problems can arise after syringing, such as inflammation of the ear canal and occasional damage to the canal and ear drum.
Dr Sharp and his colleagues from an Edinburgh hospital questioned nearly 300 doctors in southeast Scotland and found that some GPs get up to 50 requests a month for ear syringing.
Although this is the usual way of removing wax, some doctors find it easier to use a special probe to pick the wax out.
Dr Sharp, part of the ear nose and throat team writing in the British Medical Journal , reported that the hearing of some patients did improve a little after wax removal, but there wasn't a dramatic change.
Ears should only be syringed if there is a real need — if you're in pain or if there's a reduction of hearing in one ear, for example.
If wax isn't causing problems then doctors advise it should be left alone.
Removal can cause unnecessary complications to the middle and internal ear.
If you do need your ears syringing, however, it's a good idea to use olive oil to soften the wax a few days beforehand.
This will reduce the amount of syringing needed.
SCHOOLS FOR SCANDAL?
Two doctors from a local department of public health were so concerned about an outbreak of gastroenteritis in a primary school, they decided to make further investigation.
Their findings, reported last year in the British Medical Journal , highlighted poor sanitary conditions in some inner London schools.
Using school nurses to carry out their survey, the doctors investigated almost all the 41 primary and secondary state schools in their health district.
And although regulations stipulate the number of toilets and washbasins in schools, over a third of the schools surveyed didn't come up to scratch because of an inadequate number of toilets.
One primary schools only has one inside toilet for 60 pupils in one of its buildings.
In two schools, the toilets were kept locked for most of the day.
Other problems included lack of toilet paper and dispensers and inadequate hand-drying facilities.
Dysentery and other diseases tend to spread easily in schools and poor facilities clearly make matters worse.
In some cases, a small increase in education authority funding would improve the situation.
DEALING WITH EPILEPSY
A new leaflet from the British Epilepsy Association shows some simple ways of dealing safely with an attack.
For further information send an A5 sae, requesting a copy of the free leaflet,Epilepsy and Safety In The Home , to:
SMOKESCREEN
Are we doing enough to prevent teenagers from smoking?
Dr Amanda Amos from Edinburgh University doesn't think so.
Writing in the British Medical Journal recently, she points out that between a quarter and a third of 15-year-olds smoke.
The tragedy is most of them become addicted.
What is equally disturbing is the number of tobacconists selling cigarettes to children under 16.
Very few are prosecuted for this.
Surely firmer government control is needed to restrict ‘the drug that will eventually kill 100,000 of today's 11 to 15-year-olds,’ says Dr Amos.
HEADLINES
With around 700 people a year dying in house fires, doctors from Cardiff Royal Infirmary stress how important it is for all homes to have smoke detectors.
Women GPs have been complaining about the breast screening programmes.
They claim that there is little communication with general practices in some areas and that the system for calling patients is sometimes inadequate.
A new scheme experimenting with medical records on small plastic smart cards seems to be a success, according to Medical Monitor .
Patients in and around Exeter can use the cards to present to doctors, dentists and hospitals so that everyone has easy access to their medical history.
Calpol can now be given to babies developing a feverish reaction after triple immunisations against whooping cough, diphtheria and tetanus.
The dose is half a 5 ml teaspoonful.
ALL CHANGE
Important changes to the 1967 Abortion Act have now come into effect.
The new law states that pregnancies can't be terminated after 24 weeks unless the mother's life is at risk or there's a substantial chance the baby will be seriously handicapped.
And if twins, triplets or multiple pregnancies are expected, some rather than all the fetuses can now be aborted provided there are sufficient grounds to do so.
Dr Hasler is unable to enter into any correspondence regarding medical enquiries
£15,000 OF TINTAWN WOOL CARPETS TO BE WON
For over half a century, Tintawn has been producing wool and wool-rich carpets of the highest quality.
Skill, experience and the natural beauty and resilience of wool make Tintawn famous for its exacting standards.
And this confidence is backed up by guarantees of up to seven years.
Tintawn wool carpets are available in a wide range of colours.
They're flame resistant, hardwearing, easy to clean and soil resistant.
All the competition prizes will contain at least 80 per cent wool and carry either the woolmark or the wool heart mark as a guarantee of quality.
For further information on Tintawn Carpets, write to Tintawn Carpets Ltd,.
HOW TO ENTER
Listed below are eight features of Tintawn wool carpets.
Simply list them in the order of importance to a typical IDEAL HOME reader.
Write the key letters — in ink — in the spaces on the entry coupon and send to IDEAL HOME/TINTAWN COMPETITION,, to arrive no later than 30 April 1991.
IMPORTANT: Before sealing, copy out — on the outside back of the envelope — the eight key letters in exactly the same order as they appear on your entry coupon.
YOUR ENTRY MAY NOT BE CONSIDERED IF THIS IS NOT DONE.
RULES
All entries must be on a proper entry coupon cut from IDEAL HOME and must bear the entrant's own name and address.
All accepted entries will be examined and the judges will award the first prize to the entrant they consider has shown the greatest skill and judgement in placing the eight letters in the order most likely to appeal to a typical IDEAL HOME reader.
Remaining prizes will be awarded in order of merit.
No entrant may win more than one prize.
Prizes must be accepted as offered, there can be no alternative awards, cash or otherwise.
If any prizewinner is under 18, then parental consent must be obtained before the prize can be awarded.
In the event of a tie, there will be an eliminating contest.
Any entries received after the closing date will be disqualified, as well as any received mutilated, illegible, altered, incomplete or not complying with the rules.
No responsibility can be accepted for lost entries.
The decision of he judges is final, as is that of the Editor in all other matters affecting the competition.
No correspondence will be entered into.
Entry to this competition implies acceptance of the rules as final and legally binding.
The competition is open to all readers living in Great Britain, Northern Ireland, Eire, the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man, other than employees (and their families) of IPC Magazines Ltd, Alan Wells International, Tintawn Carpets Ltd and its publicity agents, and the printers of IDEAL HOME.
All winners will be notified by post and the result published in a future issue.
1st PRIZE: £5,000 of Tintawn carpets — the last word in luxury
2nd PRIZE: £3,000 of Tintawn carpets — for a whole new look
3rd PRIZE: £2,000 of Tintawn carpets — the mark of lasting quality
Five runners-up will each receive £1,000 of Tintawn carpets
Tintawn carpets add comfort and charm to any room
IN TIP-TOP CONDITION
The health and beauty business is flourishing with more sophisticated products than ever before.
In this special feature we check out the latest treatments and appliances — from reflexology to electric razors.
Here, Linda Parker looks at a range of beauty products that you can use at home to pamper yourself from head to toe
Head to head
If your hairdryer is a few years old, you'll be surprised to see how many different types are now available.
Standard pistol-shaped dryers are still the most popular but many come with a diffuser attachment.
This is ideal for drying long, curly or wavy hair without causing frizziness.
Power ratings vary from 250W to 1,600W, and the higher the power rating the quicker it will dry hair.
Except for very basic or compact travel models, most hand-held dryers have a choice of power settings.
The Braun PFV1600, £16.95, has, for example, a total of 12 heat and speed combinations and comes with a diffuser.
The 1,500W Professional Dryer with diffuser by Carmen has five different heat settings and two speed settings and costs £23.95.
Other features to look out for when choosing a hairdryer are a comfortable handle, a removable air filter that can be cleaned, a hanging loop and a nozzle to direct the air flow.
If you are looking for a travel model, choose one with dual voltage, a folding handle and integral cord storage, such as the Braun Silencio PD1200, £12.95.
Lower-powered models are suitable for short, fine hair that doesn't take long to dry.
Two lower-powered diffuser dryers available on the market are the Philips Breeze, £14.99, and Carmen's Curly Top, £15.95.
Our Verdict: A pistol-shaped dryer with diffuser attachment is the most versatile option.
Magic wands
There have also been several innovations in the design of styling wands and hot brushes.
One new idea is to combine a styling brush with hot air, so the hair can be dried, curled and styled at the same time.
Models include the Blow'n'Curl Plus by Carmen, £16.95, which has retractable bristles so the wand can be slipped out without unravelling it, however — about 250W is average.
Other innovations are wands of all shapes and sizes that can be used to create different effects such as spiral, flat or zig-zag shaped curls in dry hair.
The Philips Geometricks styling set, £14.99, has five such attachments, while the Frenzee wand by Wahl, £6.99, makes Z-shaped curls.
There are two standard types of  wand stylers: hot-brushes with bristles, and curling tongs without bristles for a smoother, tighter curl.
You can also buy travel versions, powered by butane gas cylinders so you don't have to worry about plugs, leads and adaptors.
The Creations Steam Brush by Pifco, £9.95, is like a hot brush, but with a steam unit for extra styling control.
Another curling method is Benders by Clairol, £29.95.
These are long, flexible curlers that are heated in a plug-in carrying wallet and can be used on dry hair for all-over curly styles.
No separate pins are necessary — you simply bend the ends of the curlers together.
Heated rollers are still a firm favourite, and Clairol Curl Control Setters, £29.95 for 20 rollers, are rubber coated to grip hair gently.
Our verdict: A travel brush or curling tongs powered by a gas cylinder are a good investment — they can be used every day, not only for holidays.
Smooth operators
There are now several ways that you can remove unwanted hair, including shaving and depilatory creams at home, or waxing or electrolysis at a Salon.
You could also try a home waxing kit like the One Touch Roll-On Waxer, £17.95, where the wax is heated and then rolled on.
A further option is a mains-powered depilator that is the size of an electric razor.
A rotating mechanism traps the hair and plucks it out by the root.
Manufacturers claim hair removal is efficient and total, once you are used to the product.
Remington's Smooth And Silky depilator, £29.95, removes hair with a revolving rubber roller that has tiny slits in it.
As the roller is drawn over the skin, hairs are trapped in the slits and plucked out.
The BaByliss Epilady, £37, works on a similar principle; a soft metal coil is drawn over the skin and as it vibrates hairs are trapped within the coil and plucked out.
Our Verdict: If you don't want to visit a salon, a depilator gives good results and is obviously more convenient for regularly removing stray hairs although it may be painful at first.
Close shaves
Electric razors are now more sophisticated than ever.
Useful points to look for are cord/cordless functions and travel cases so the shaver can be charged up and used while travelling.
Specially designed for women, the Ladyshave range of electric shavers by Philips comes in a choice of shades and includes a battery model, a mains model, a mains/rechargeable model and a wet/dry rechargeable.
Men's razors some in two styles, either with a foil head or with rotary heads.
Choose a model with a long-hair trimmer attachment for extra versatility, such as the Boots Mains/Rechargeable TwinFoil Plus, £54.95, or the Braun Universal 3550, £79.95.
Both have a universal carrying case and charge capacity indicator.
Our Verdict: An electric razor is quick and simple to use, although hair grows back soon afterwards.
Body beautiful
A home massage will tone and improve circulation and help to relieve aching limbs.
There are plenty of kits available, such as the Petra Electric Massage Kit that includes a gentle facial massage attachment, £19.99.
Carmen has three massagers in its range — the rechargeable Cordless Massager, £24.95; the Beauty Massager for facial care and body treatments, £12.95; and the new Celly Massager, a body massager to treat cellulite on thighs, bottom and stomach, £39.95.
Wahl's Compact Comfort Massager is a cordless rechargeable two-speed model, £]22.95 while the BaByliss Aquamassage, £15, is a waterproof massage brush that can be used in the bath or shower to exfoliate the skin.
If you want to cleanse your face thoroughly, why not try a home facial sauna.
Carmen's Facial Sauna, £15.95, has a low setting to produce mist to cleanse sensitive skin, and a higher setting to produce steam for normal skin.
A new product by Carmen, Steam Therapy acts as a facial sauna but also has a nasal inhaler to help alleviate colds and sinus problems.
It has three different heat settings and costs £26.95.
And to round off your top-to-toe beauty treatment, the Clairol Foot Spa, £39.95, is a thermostatically controlled water massage treatment for tired and aching feet.
But don't forget to pamper fingers and toes as well.
Two useful nailcare systems are the Remington Smooth And Shapely, £9.95, and Boots Nailcraft, £8.95.
Both of these are battery powered with interchangeable heads that can be used for filing and buffing nails.
Our Verdict: We especially liked the facial saunas, a relaxing treatment that gave a lift to tired skin.
Safety tips
Don't use mains-operated electrical products or appliances in the bathroom
When you take appliances abroad, check the voltage and take a suitable adaptor
If you have a cordless gas-powered hot brush, check the manufacturer's instructions before packing for a holiday.
Some can be carried in hand luggage, others must be checked in.
If in doubt, check with the airline
Always read manufacturer's instructions carefully — especially before using a depilator for the first time 
Above: Professional PFV1600 diffuser dryer, £26.95, Braun.
A nozzle for concentrated drying is also supplied and the dryer comes with a fitted plug
Above: Supersilent 2000 hairdryer, £16.99, Petra Electric, is a powerful 2000W model, supplied with a nozzle for concentrated drying.
Also in white
Main picture: Hot Air Brush, £14.99, Philips.
Styles and dries your hair at the same time
Above: Nailcraft kit, £8.95, Boots, shown here with buffing attachment
Below: Carmen Curls, 12 unique travel rollers, £15.95, using disposable heating sachets
Steam Therapy, £26.95, Carmen.
This can be used as a cleansing facial sauna or to ease congestion
Above: Emjoi depilator, £39.95, Carmen, supplied with luxury moisturising oil to care for the skin, and fitted with a plug
Left: Curly Top dryer, £15.95, Carmen, for a gentle, diffuser-type drying effect to give your hair body
Philishave HS975, £99.95, Philips.
A cord/cordless model, with low-charge alarm, minutes-left indicator, long hair trimmer and carrying case
Aquamassage brush, £15, BaByliss, can be used in bath or shower for an invigorating massage treatment
PC60 Massager, £19.99, Petra Electric has a variety of different heads.
Shown here with the scalp massager
The Spiral wand is just one attachment included in the Geometricks styling system, £24.99, Philips
Caresse epilator, supplied with plug, £34.99, Tefal
STYLE ON TRIAL
We put a selection of the latest beauty and grooming products to the test
Home editor Linda Parker tried three different hot-air styling brushes: ProfiAircurl 200 by Petra Electric (£17.99); Carmen Blow'n'Curl Plus (£17.99); and the Philips Hot Air Brush (£14.99).
She also compared them with a standard-style hot-brush (only for dry hair), the Braun Independent 500 Combi (£16.95).
Linda found the Philips brush the easiest to use.
‘The brush gripped my hair really well and was easy to control.
However, at 150W it wasn't as powerful as the others I tried.’
The Carmen model also worked well and has retractable bristles, so Linda's hair didn't get tangled.
The ProfiAircurl has two brush heads for different sized curls.
The Carmen and the Petra models have two heat settings, but the Carmen model is the most powerful at 250W.
The Braun Independent 500 Combi brush-tong styled Linda's hair quickly and easily.
‘I ended up with the same look as with the hot-air brushes, but it can only be used on dry hair.
As my hair is very thick I liked the Philips Hot Sir Brush best, but I would recommend towel-drying hair before using it.’
Tom Gadd, who works in our Shopping In Style department, prefers to wet shave, but we persuaded him to try three different electric razors and one battery-powered wet shaver.
He tested the Philishave 975 Rechargeable (£99.99); the Braun 3550 (£79.95); the Boots Twinfoil Plus (£54.95); and the Carmen Clean Shave (£9.95).
Tom found that the rotary-headed Philishave gave the best results: ‘A bit expensive but well worth the money.’
This shaver has a low-charge alarm, minutes-left indicator and can be used either corded or cordless mode.
The Braun and Boots models both have the same features — cord/cordless operation and foil heads, ‘although I think the Boots model gives better value for money’, says Tom.
The Carmen Clean Shave, a battery operated twin-blade razor, also gave good results.
Sarah Richardson, a sub-editor, has long, straight hair, so was the perfect candidate to try some hair curling products.
Sarah tested the Braun Independent 2000 (£18.95); the Philips Geometricks (£24.99); and Carmen Curls (£15.95 for 12).
The Braun Independent heated up very quickly, but Sarah found it tricky to use the tong without the ends of her hair having a kink.
The Geometricks styler took a long time to heat up.
‘I found it difficult to get perfect results with the spiral and flat wands.
But as it includes a crimper, a straightener and a triangular wand for angular curls, it's good value.’
Sarah said that the Carmen Curls were quick and effective to use, ‘although I would prefer to use more than 12 rollers at a time’.
Carmen Curls are used with heating sachets (£4.50 for packs of 24 refills) that are inserted into each roller.
‘These have to be discarded after each use, so it is quite an expensive way to curl hair.’
Assistant editor Helen Barnett tried to relax her tense shoulder and back muscles by trying three different massagers.
The models tested were: the Wahl Compact Comfort (£22.95); the PC60 Massager by Petra Electric (£19.99); and the Aquamassage by BaByliss (£15).
The Wahl model, the most powerful, is cordless and Helen found the flexible head made it easier to reach shoulder and back muscles.
The PC60 Massager was gentler than the Wahl model, and also had a choice of six heads.
‘The scalp and facial massagers were very relaxing, and a spherical head relaxed my tense shoulder muscles.
This model is good value — my favourite,’ says Helen.
The Aquamassage brush is waterproof and can be used in the bath and shower: ‘The only difficulty is keeping enough soap on the brush head to keep it from dragging the skin,’ she says.
‘So it's better to turn the water off while using it.’
Lorraine Ramsey works in our furnishing department.
She has long thick hair and tried drying it with three different dryers.
Lorraine tested the Supersilent 2000 by Petra Electric (£16.99); the Braun Professional PFV1600 diffuser dryer (£26.95); and the Curly Top by Carmen (£15.95).
She especially liked the Supersilent 2000 as it was very powerful and dried her hair quickly.
‘It felt comfortable to use, it's light and has three heat settings.’
The Braun Professional is more expensive but has more features.
It is larger than the Petra model, but Lorraine points out it does have a diffuser attachment, six heat/speed settings and a removable filter.
‘Definitely a good buy if you want to use a diffuser,’ she says.
The Curly Top dryer felt quite strange to use at first.
After using a pistol-shaped dryer, this rather flat, lollipop-shaped dryer took some getting used to.
‘However, it dried my hair gently,’ says Lorraine.
Paula Lockey works in our home department.
She bravely tried out six different epilators.
The models tested were:.
‘Top marks go to the Carmen Emjoi.
It has three different heads and was the most efficient,’ she says.
The Caresse gave good results although it was noisy.
Paula found the Silk Epil worked well but was painful, as was the Epilady.
But the Remington Smooth And Silky removed hairs painlessly, while the Satinelle was good for longer hairs.
RELAXING RITUALS
Learning to relax is as important as a healthy diet.
But how many of us make time to unwind?
We try out some popular treatments
What better way to unwind at the end of a frantic week than treating yourself to an hour or two of pure pampering?
A regular beauty treatment, relaxation therapy, yoga class, or even a quick visit to a health farm can be all it takes to repair the week's damage to body and soul, and prepare you for the week ahead.
IDEAL HOME's Assistant editor Helen Barnett spent a day relaxing at Henlow Grange Health Farm in Bedfordshire where she tried both an aromatherapy and a reflexology massage.
Helen found the aromatherapy massage very relaxing and liked the way the therapist used an infra-red lamp to warm her skin, allowing the oils to really penetrate.
Offers week-long stays, mini-breaks (from 11 am to 4 pm Sun), or an individual period tailored to your specific needs.
The Top-To-Toe day is particularly good value for money, offering the use of the sauna and sports facilities, a Swedish body massage, dance exercise class, G5 Vibro massage and a facial and manicure or pedicure.
Starting at 9.30 am and available Mon to Fri, it costs £50 per person including lunch.
Editorial assistant Paula Lockey spent a day at Grayshott Hall Health and Fitness Resort where she had a body massage, a reflexology consultation and an hour-long Cathiodermie facial.
Cathiodermie used a gentle electric current, applied through small rollers, to massage the skin and help in deep cleansing, nourishing and firming treatments.
Paula found the facial help her relax, and was especially soothing when different gels were applied and rollers were used.
Her skin also felt very soft after the treatment.
Grayshott Hall Health and Fitness Resort, Grayshott, Nr Hindhead, Surrey GU26 6JJ; tel:(0428) 606189.
Has individually tailored programmes, and an extensive list of activities including: country walks, cardiovascular fitness training, body toning, sports activities, and beauty and medical treatments, such as osteopathy and physiotherapy.
The centre offers three special days: a Fitness Day (available Mon to Thur) which includes a fitness assessment, heat treatment, friction back rub, gym workout and lunch; a Beauty Day (Mon to Thur) which includes a facial, make-up, manicure, heat treatment, massage, exercise class and lunch; and a Healthy Day (available Fri and Sat) which includes a cholesterol test, facial, massage and lunch.
Each special day costs £75.
Write or telephone for brochure and price details.
For the ultimate in relaxation, few treatments can beat the experience of a flotation tank.
Floating is said to be the perfect way of easing tensions and calming the mind.
Personal assistant Jacqueline Branch went to London's Raphael Clinic to try out a float.
The float room is a separate room within the clinic with its own shower.
Clients wash and shower before entering the flotation tank.
Relaxing music is played at the beginning of the float and again at the end to indicate your time is up.
There's a light switch near at hand inside that tank and, as you are wearing ear plugs, you find yourself floating in a soundless, dark and warm environment.
Jacqueline certainly found her float relaxing, ‘I drifted in and out of awareness and felt stress and tension ease away,’ she explained.
‘But I think anyone who's sensitive to enclosed spaces could find a flotation tank claustrophobic.
But I personally would do it again.’
The Raphael Clinic,.
Charges £21 for a one-hour float, or £48 for three floats, as an introductory offer, and you need to book in advance.
The water in the tank is constantly filtered.
The Raphael Clinic is a member of The Flotation Tank Association () that guarantees high standards of hygiene and privacy.
The Raphael Clinic also offers reflexology, aromatherapy, holistic healthcare, stress management and biodynamic psychotherapy, which focuses on repairing the damage caused by stress an anxiety.
And, finally, for everyone who groans at the idea of a twice-weekly exercise class, what about trying toning tables?
You just relax and let the machines do all your exercises for you.
Although not strictly a relaxation therapy, toning tables offer the benefits of exercise without a great deal of effort, and without the aches and pains of overstretched muscles.
But how do they work?
It's all to do with tensing and releasing muscles in order to tone your body.
As well as helping you lose inches, the manufacturers claim the tables are good for your body's blood circulation and oxygen flow; that they improve joint flexibility; relax neck and back muscles; reduce stress and improve posture.
Each of the tables works one area of your body.
The tummy toner, for example, raises and lowers the bottom half of the body, and the waist trimmer swings the legs from side to side.
Helen Barnett tried out Shapemaster Toning Tables at the Inch Loss Body Toning Centre in London.
‘The tables are fun to use and after 10 one-hour sessions I did feel slimmer and more enthusiastic about exercise in general,’ she said.
Helen lost a total of six inches (staff measure your body at the start of the course and then again at the end to ascertain the inch loss).
The Inch Loss Body Toning Centre,.
Charges £69 for a course of 10 one-hour sessions on the toning tables (nine minutes on each of the six tables per session).
Write or telephone for further details.
Whenever you visit a beauty salon, attend a yoga class or experience a float, try and check that the operator or teacher is a member of the relevant professional association — these associations exist to maintain standards within the profession.
OFFER
Healthy Living
So you can't afford a health farm.
But are you happy with your lifestyle?
Or do you think a little(free) healthy advice wouldn't go amiss?
The Health Show, held at London's Olympia stadium from 4 to 7 July, is a fascinating forum for anyone who cares about their health.
Subjects covered range from healthy eating to natural beauty and exercise, as well as aromatherapy, acupuncture, kinesiology and reflexology.
The lively programme of events also includes microwave cookery demonstrations by celebrities, championship aerobics displays, fashion shows, competitions, plus a series of lectures on natural therapies and much, much more.
If that's not enough to whet your appetite, we've 100 £4 entrance tickets to give away free!
Simply send your name and address to Ideal Home/ The Health Show Free Ticket offer,.
London shopping
With quality as our watchword, we present our regular round-up of the best buys in and around the capital
FURNITURE DESIGN HAS NEVER BEEN SO ADVENTUROUS OR SO BOLD.
AND, AS BARBARA CHANDLER DISCOVERS, THERE'S SOMETHING TO SUIT ALL TASTES
Guaranteed value
Merchandise is new, prices low and value good at The Reject Shop, despite its misleading name.
Its buyers work with suppliers worldwide to initiate exclusive fashionable designs.
Best branch for furniture in London is in the King's Road, Chelsea.
The new Erica pine bedroom range features a double bed at £149 and a wardrobe for £199.
A Manor House stained, solid pine, glazed dresser sells for £350 complete; or base and top are available separately for £175 each.
There's a coffee table for £99.99 and a sideboard for £175.
The Manor House dining table is £139.99, with chairs at £49.99 each.
The two-seater Charlotte sofa in Madras red is £499.
In contrast, the Kersten range is black and cherry, with an eight-seater black extending table for £169 and Noir chairs at £59.99 each.
Kersten wall unit with glass doors, drawers and two-door base unit is £299, with a three-door sideboard for just £199.
For today's technology, there's a black mobile video unit at £49.99, or a ‘hi-tech station’ for £59.99.
The Nathalie two-seater sofa at only £229 is a firm favourite, or you can have a sofa made to order in a choice of over 40 fabrics.
The popular ‘Furniture To Go’ range includes slatted folding chairs in a choice of colours from £12.50 and trestle tables from £50, complete with tops.
The Reject Shop, for general information and enquiries, full branch addresses and transport details; tel: 071–736 7474.
Do the continental
The Smith brothers, Mike and Robert, have established themselves as London's leading exponents of international furnishing fashion at their Fulham shop, Maison.
It seems Spain has taken over from Italy as chief innovator on the modern scene: ‘The 1990s will see Spain firmly positioned at the top of the international market,’ declares Robert Smith.
Designers to look out for, he says, are Jorge Pensi, Alberto Lievore, Vincent Martinez and Javier Mariscal.
The Spanish look is simple, witty, bright and light, and most of it quite affordable.
It includes upholstery, storage, dining tables and chairs, and lighting.
It's supplemented by the best from Italy, France, and Britain.
Downstairs at Maison there is an intriguing accessories department with original table and kitchenware, luggage, glass and ceramics — ideal for spring wedding presents.
Parking: In side streets.
Jewels in the crown
Colonialism is not a dirty word at a new Fulham antique furniture shop that evokes with affectionate nostalgia the era of the Raj in India.
Against a warm ochre background over two floors, William Sheppee displays authentic colonial designs from the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
‘Our stock is carefully chosen to blend well into British homes,’ explained director William Hiley, who fell in love with Indian style some years ago when he first travelled  around India as a student.
Now he is bringing back the famous ‘planter chairs’ whose long solid arms swivel out to provide footrests.
Alternative versions with fixed arms are called ‘long sleevers’.
These antiques of the future sell for about £375 in rosewood.
‘Thakat tables’(from £450) were originally used in India as beds and now make generously sized low tables.
Other pieces include Goanese benches and sofas in wonderful romantic shapes, and rosewood linen presses.
There are also chests, sideboards, chaise longues and chairs.
Furnishing accessories include marble urns, prints, glass paintings, bowls, jars, brass and lacquerware, wooden figures and sandstone reliefs, all at reasonable prices.
The personal touch
Exquisite furniture handmade in Sussex and handpainted in Islington is the speciality of Hutson Designs.
The company has a new showcase at Daniella in Walton Street where around 25 pieces are on display for immediate delivery.
‘We don't use any stencils,’ emphasises Amanda Hutson.
Painting is carried out by a team of around 20 artists, all with art-school training, at their studio in Islington.
Proving very popular are the new serpentine bedside cabinets in real satinwood handpainted with classical motifs, at about £600.
Small ‘tip-top’ tables that fold flat to show their pretty painted tops cost about £160; tray tables cost about £240.
There are also dining tables, chests, corner cupboards, TV cabinets, headboards, etc.
The range is imaginative and comprehensive.
Designs can be evolved form your own colour and pattern swatches, or created from scratch.
Chat through your ideas in the shop; Amanda herself can meet you there by appointment.
Furniture can also be incorporated into larger room schemes, with matching wallpanels and murals to order.
Parking: Some meters but difficult.
Or telephone the studio on 071–281 9986/4175.
Walk on the wild side
Good news for fans of 1950s style and fun furnishing.
Gina Newman has uprooted her inimitable Something Wild boutique from Swiss Cottage, and transplanted it to the more accessible environs of Covent Garden.
Don't miss her zany original furniture by John Sullivan and Jim Travers, some with an Art Deco feel, some 1950s style, and some firmly from the present.
Plus the best and most affordable selection of fake fur cushions in town — zebra, leopard, tiger among others.
Buses: As for The Strand, Charing Cross Road, Holborn.
Parking: NCPs in Drury Lane, Shelton Street and Upper St Martin's Lane.
Early influences
The delightful New England collection of freestanding storage furniture from Rhode Design is inspired by the simple styles of early 19th-century American craft furniture.
‘A Shaker look, if you like,’ says partner Mark Blunt, ‘but we're not purist about it.’
There are a variety of cupboards, drawer units, dresser tops, chests and bookcases to choose from.
Senior partner Steve Armitage is the designer, Mark the paint expert.
The range of colour and finishes is unique, based on authentic early American shades, using natural earth pigments, linseed oils and water-based media.
The result is an earthy look, which can be colour-rubbed, antiqued, stippled, crackle glazed or dragged.
Very popular is a dark brick red, with a thin coat of green over the top.
There are also sea blues and greens.
‘And we're just introducing some more shades,’ reports Mark, ‘such as yellow, orange and a light blue in a matt finish that suits our style.’
Techniques for making the furniture combine traditional and modern constructions, and the resulting prices are reasonable.
Pieces come ready-painted or ‘in the wood’ for DIY finishing.
Paint-effect kits with authentic early American reproduction paints (unavailable elsewhere) are a new venture.
A small hanging cupboard with one shelf costs £53 painted, £33.55 unpainted.
Three larger, more elaborate styles are available.
A favourite design is a tall, narrow bookcase costing £149.50, painted (deeper version for storing clothes costs £178.25, painted).
Due to demand, Rhode Design is moving into  kitchens, with fitted and unfitted furniture, including a delightful solid wood kitchen table with drawer, waxed top and painted base for £249.
Open: Or by appointment during the week.
Pine pieces
‘We've London's largest specialist displays of pine furniture,’ claims The Pine Shop.
Sunday trading is an added attraction.
Fine handmade dovetail joints are a distinguishing feature of its Country Traditional bedroom furniture, in hand-waxed solid pine, with an antique finish.
Individual items can be made to measure.
Also popular are the solid pine Farmhouse tables in standard designs, or in special sizes to order.
Still selling well is the Victoria range with an antique finish.
The new Hampshire collection as a dining range in rich, dark oak.
Well-established, this company has a reputation for quality and service.
Most items are available from stock, or can be delivered within a few days.
Telephone for a copy of the current brochure.
Simplicity itself
Can — or should — furniture be moral?
The Shakers believed so.
They are an American religious sect, a Quaker splinter group started in the 18th century.
Their founder, Manchester-born Ann Lee, who arrived in America in 1774, said: ‘Put your hands in work and your hearts to God.’
Shakers saw — and still see — their home and furnishings as extensions of their religious beliefs and social integrity.
At The Shaker Shop, Tim Lamb and Liz Shirley are committed to presenting the essential simplicity of authentic Shaker style.
There are pieces of furniture that would grace any interior, such as sewing and coffee tables, benches and steps.
A slat-backed rocking chair with arms and acorn finials costs £329 (£189 in kit form).
Or try installing a length of  the famous Shaker pegged wall-rail for hanging small cupboards, shelves, mirrors and even chairs.
The Shakers believed rooms should be tidy so they designed finely crafted fitted and storage furniture, all available from this shop.
Trestle tables in solid American cherrywood are masterpieces of elegance and practicality.
A design classic — a 5 foot Mount Lebanon trestle, for example— costs £749.
This is country style with a grace and lightness that makes a welcome change from the usual heavy stripped pine.
A colour catalogue, costing £3, also illustrates the abundance of smaller accessories that make up the Shaker look.
Carving a niche
The finely proportioned modern oak designs of Luke Hughes have a splendid new showroom in Drury Lane.
Already established as classics, these appealing bedroom and dining ranges, including the ever-popular blanket chest, are assured of their place in Britain's furniture future.
Open: Mon to Fri 9 am to 6 pm.
Sat by appointment only.
Tube: Covent Garden, Holborn.
Buses: As for Holborn.
Parking: NCPs in Drury Lane, Shelton Street, Bedfordbury, Upper St Martin's Lane.
Modern essentials
A bright new corner shop in Westbourne Grove is an essential stop-off for those short on cash but interested in modern furnishings.
Australian architect Rob Whyte and British avant-garde designer Paul Newman have joined forces at Aero to show that innovative furniture can be affordable, too.
They keep prices down by designing, making and marketing their own pieces.
There's inspired storage ideas for London's horde of flat and bedsit dwellers — including good-looking castored hanging  rails for only £65 (add an optional tray and baskets for an extra £55).
Inexpensive wire frames and pull-out baskets do away with conventional chests of drawers; all available in cool white or chic black.
Other bright ideas include shoes, tie/belt and record/book racks.
But Aero isn't just about saving money, it's about style: the shapes for dining chairs and tables are some of the best-looking around.
Prices for chairs start at about £50 for an elegant slatted chair in a choice of finishes, including a super silvery anodised version.
Shapes for dining and side tables are both sculptural and elegant.
You'll also find some unusual beds, sofabeds, lighting and desks.
Parking: Meters and Whiteleys car park.
Fixtures and fittings
Tucked away in a quiet court hidden from the bustle of Covent Garden is Diametric, making and selling modern, mainly metal, furniture by designer Stephen Povey.
He has taken industrial Kee Klamp fittings (for joining metal tubes) and added extra components to produce innovative kits for chunky original designs.
A television pole, for example(from £165), takes brackets (from £60) to support TV, video and hi-fi; the height of the floor-to-ceiling pole is adjustable, and it needs no fixing.
The Postmodern 4 Poster has bedposts that lock into place between floor and ceiling, with optional glass disc pedestals, low-voltage lights  and fjord headboard, from £525.
The platform bed, featuring safety rail and desk underneath, costs from £590.
There are also tables and simple beds.
The finish of the tubing is speckled grey or black — or any colour to order — with standard table tops in melamine, or customised in glass, steel, wood or many other materials.
Diametric offers a unique design service; send a sketch or short description of what you would like for a particular room or purpose, and it will work out and cost the design.
Buses: As for The Strand, Charing Cross Road, Holborn.
Parking: NCPs in Drury Lane, Shelton Street, Bedfordbury, Upper St Martin's Lane.
Scandinavian craft
A steady demand for modern solid wood furniture is being met by Scandinavian World, a division of family furnishing company Tuberville Smith.
The teak and rosewood designs come from all over Scandinavia, but mainly from Denmark.
The company is, for example, the UK agent for Dyrlund, a top Danish maker, and carries 80 per cent of its domestic range.
Styles for living/dining rooms, bedrooms and halls are simple, robust and unlikely to date.
Cherrywood and pine are also used.
‘People come to us from department stores because they can't find this kind of furniture there,’ said manager Steve Raper.
‘Danish design and craftsmanship is timeless and never likely to lose its appeal.’
A back-up service for carpets, curtains and blinds is available, including French polishing and upholstery, in the company's own  well-established workshops.
Parking: In adjacent Lynton Road.
French dressing
Beds at Simon Horn are beautiful pieces of furniture in their own right.
He is Britain's leading specialist in antique and reproduction French classical beds, sold with matching furniture.
His exclusive designs have been adapted for English homes through unusual partnerships with suppliers in provincial France and, more recently, a team of craftsmen in Kashmir.
Over 30 traditional bed designs in solid wood range from the simple yet elegant Lit Bâteau (sometimes called the boat or sleigh bed), to the ornate splendour of the Lit Versailles.
Prices start at about £681 for a single Lit Bâteau with curved head and foot in cherrywood, up to £3,554 for an ornately carved Louis XV style in rosewood.
Other timbers include oak and walnut, in colours and patinas to order.
‘The patina is the degree of ‘distressing’ a customer requires,’explains Simon.
‘You can decide how old you want your furniture to look — the number of worm-holes and that sort of thing!’
Beds can also be supplied ‘in the raw’ for decorative painting, which the shop can do to order.
Simon Horn also has mattresses and divan, bedside tables, chests of drawers, ottomans and wardrobes.
Antique beds from all over Europe include magnificent rococo styles.
Traditional English furniture includes desks, filing cabinets and chairs in polished yew or mahogany, or plain white ready for decorative painting.
Exclusive folding designs are handmade in solid rosewood by craftsmen in the Far East, with careful attention to detail.
For example, a hand-caned chair with curved back and legs costs £128; a folding octagonal table (dining height) costs £146.
A slatted steamer chair costs £186; well-worth investigating, for occasional or regular use.
Simon Horn Furniture, 117/121 Wandsworth Bridge Road (entrance in Broughton Road), SW6 2TP; tel; Parking: In side streets.
Design departments
At long last, top modern furnishing design comes to Britain's department stores.
Congratulations to Barkers for turning over the whole of the basement into one big  showcase for some brilliant furnishing fashion — much of it British.
This is the brainchild of design consultant Dallas Herbert who believes that ‘furniture, like fashion, should be fun as well as functional.’
Her aim is to take elitism out of design and make it accessible to a wider public.
A large section is devoted to Peter Leonard of Soho whose graceful gothic shapes in slender metal certainly deserve a wider audience.
Dallas Herbert believes in contrast, so she's included subtly painted furniture by Sasha Waddell, originally inspired by Swedish illustrator Carl Larsson.
But, Sasha says, ‘it's really a mixture of English country furniture and Swedish, with a bit of Beidermier thrown in’
NEXT MONTH Designs on floors — everything from handmade tiles to fitted carpets
Good value modern furniture From The Reject Shop
A winged horse and Regency Sofa from William Sheppee
A planter chair, circa 1880, from William Sheppee
Some of the furniture at Something Wild…and fake fur too
One of the many dressers from Rhode Design
Design classics from The Shaker Shop
Innovative furniture from Aero
Simple, wooden Scandinavian furniture
Desk from Simon Horn
Gothic chair, from Soho
Innovative looks from Soho…and Sasha Waddell at Barkers
HOME IMPROVEMENTS SPECIAL
April is the NHIC's National Home Improvement Month and it's also a great time of year to take a look at your home and see what needs doing.
With this in mind, home improvements editor David Holloway has put together a special section on how you can increase the comfort and value of your home.
The section also includes his new-look Practical Matters, plus our selection of books for home-improvers
In today's economic climate of high interest rates and a virtually static housing market, it makes more sense to maintain and improve your existing home rather than move on to something bigger and better.
Now is the time to extend, update, renovate and generally overhaul your home.
And when the market does pick up again, you can expect to get back at least some of what you've spent in the increased value of your property.
Starting points
Regular maintenance is the most important ‘improvement’ you can make to your home.
The basic structure (roof, walls, floors, loft, doors and windows) needs constant attention to keep it in good repair; and essential household services (electrics, plumbing, heating and drains) need regular servicing in the same way as your car.
After that, the order in which you tackle home improvements depends on what your priorities are and what you can afford.
According to the Halifax Building Society, the top 10 home improvements are:
1
Double glazing
2
House extension
3
Fitted kitchen
4
Central heating
5
New bathroom suite
6
Roof repairs
7
Conservatory
8
Loft conversion
9
Fitted bedroom furniture
10
New fireplace
These tend to be the more expensive home improvements (or, at least, the ones for which people borrow money).
You could also add things like a new porch or garage, improved security measures, or make improvements to interior decor.
Footing the bill
Small-scale improvements can often be paid for out of savings, but if you are spending more substantial amounts, it might be better to borrow the money and keep your savings for regular maintenance work.
Many of the large home-improvement companies can arrange a loan for you, or you may be able to arrange a loan or overdraft yourself.
The best way to borrow money for home improvements is to extend your existing mortgage, so you can spread the cost over several years.
Or, if you can get a lower rate of interest, you could re-mortgage , ie, take out a larger loan with a new lender and pay off the old mortgage.
Unfortunately, you no longer get tax relief on home improvements (nor on the extended part of a mortgage used for home improvements), and grants from local councils have also been cut back quite dramatically.
Help at hand
There are likely to be times when you will need specialist help.
During the designing, for example, you'll probably come into contact with architects, surveyors and other consultants.
When it comes to construction, you'll probably need builders, plumbers, electricians, roofers, etc.
Many professional advisers and qualified tradespeople belong to a professional body (such as the Royal Institute of British Architects), or a trade association (such as the Federation of Master Builders).
(For more information on trade associations, please see our Consumer File on page 68.)
These organisations will often have stringent rules of membership and many will have their own codes of practice, guarantee schemes and arbitration or conciliation schemes.
The main professional institutes and trade associations are members of the National Home Improvement Council (NHIC).
The council's membership also includes manufacturers, financial institutions, retailers and the major fuel industries.
IDEAL HOME has worked closely with the NHIC over the years to produce home-improvement guides and books, and we have no hesitation in recommending the council.
You can contact the NHIC at  .
Following the rules
Many home improvements can be carried out without having to let anyone know.
However, if you're not sure whether you need planning permission or Buildings Regulations approval, talk to your local authority.
It will tell you how to apply if necessary and how much it will cost.
Home sweet home — the benefits of regular maintenance and improvement are clear
AROUND THE HOME
improvements at a glance
Roof
Roofs should be repaired as soon as they show signs of trouble — check for slipped slates and tiles, failed flashings around chimney stacks and damage to the chimney stack itself.
Replacing a roof can cost anything from £4,000, but there is an excellent choice of roofing materials available and a new roof should last for years.
Extension
To create an extra kitchen, utility room or garage (plus, with a two-storey extension, an extra bedroom, bathroom or study), a matching brick-built extension will add most, if not all of its value to the home.
Each extra square metre of floor space will cost about £500; so the price for the average home will be upwards from £5,000.
Garage
A new garage is one of the most cost effective of all home improvements and can add 10 to 15 per cent to the value of your home.
Attached brick-built garages are similar in cost to extensions; pre-fabricated concrete garages cost from about £1,000 up to £4,000, but now come in attractive finishes and, at the top of the range, with pitched roofs that can be tiled to match the house.
Porch
A new porch has several advantages: it will improve the security of your home; be somewhere welcoming for visitors; reduce heat loss from the house; and cut down noise.
Porch kits start from under £1,000; a purpose-made brick-built porch could cost from about £1,500.
Security
Improving the security of your home won't do much to increase it's value — but it may prevent a break-in.
Simple security measures — such as fitting good locks to doors and accessible windows — can cost as little as £150.
A professionally installed alarm will cost from about £500, but DIY versions are available for about £150.
Damp, rot and woodworm
Try to keep and eye out for these threats.
Often, the cause can be simple — piled-up earth in flowerbeds causing rising damp; a faulty overflow or down pipe resulting in penetrating damp; or inadequate ventilation leading to condensation or rot.
A new damp-proof course could cost £1,000 or more (including hacking off and replacing plaster); complete woodworm treatment could cost anything from £500.
Loft conversion
Not all homes can be converted to make extra space — particularly modern homes with trussed rafters.
But if you can board the floor and install a light, you can make some cheap extra storage space.
If you decide to go for a full conversion, it could cost about £8,000 to £10,000 of which 50 to 75 per cent could be added to the value of the house.
New Fireplace
As a source of heat and a focal point in a room, it's difficult to beat a flame fire.
And because of the wide variety of electric and gas-fired fuel-effect fires available many people are taking up this option.
A fully fitted fireplace with gas fire is likely to cost from £1,000 to £1,500, but it's a worthwhile home improvement.
Double glazing
Although double glazing won't save much on fuel bills, it'll make the house much more comfortable and less noisy.
It could cost from £1,200 for professionally installed secondary windows, and from £3,500 for replacement windows in maintenance-free materials.
Double glazing could add 30 to 50 per cent of all its cost to the value of the house.
Bedroom improvements
Many potential purchasers expect to find fitted wardrobes in bedrooms these days.
There are many systems that you can install for yourself if you're keen on DIY, but professionally installed bedroom furniture can cost about £2,500 per room, and should add at last half its cost to the value of the house.
Bathroom
Putting in a new bathroom suite can cost as little as £500 if you are simply replacing an old one.
But you may want to add a second (perhaps en suite) bathroom or to re-arrange the existing layout to squeeze in extra equipment, such as a bidet or separate shower.
A completely new bathroom will cost between £1,000 and £2,000, and add about half its value to the home.
Heating
Installing central heating will more than pay for itself.
Older systems can be improved with modern, efficient components and controls can be added to improve fuel economy.
A new system will cost up to £2,500 to install; and updating an old one, from £300 (£1,000 plus if you replace the boiler as well).
Conservatory
A conservatory is not only a nice, warm place where you can enjoy the view of the garden, but it can also provide savings in heating costs.
Simple aluminium lean-to conservatories start from under £1,000, but you can spend up to £25,000 if you decide to go for something complete with double glazing, brick walls and decorative finials.
Kitchen
A modern kitchen is often top of the list of home-improvement priorities — and will add considerably to the value of the home as well as making it more attractive when you come to sell your property.
A new kitchen will probably cost between £5,000 and £10,000 for the average three-bedroomed home, but don't spend more than 10 per cent of the house's value.
MAKING SPACE
Making the best use of space is important in any room, but we show how it can make all the difference in kitchens and bathrooms
KITCHEN CRAFT
Proper planning is the key to a successful new kitchen.
Think about how the room is to be used (for example), will you want to eat there?) and find out if it's possible to re-arrange the room to make better use of the available space.
You may want to move doors or windows,(or block them off); reposition drainage and plumbing points; or move the boiler — either from the floor to the wall or out of the kitchen altogether.
In some houses, it may be possible to steal space by moving an internal wall, but think carefully about whether you want laundry equipment in your kitchen or in a separate room.
There's a vast range of kitchen units available in a choice of materials.
For those on a budget, there a self-assembly units from the DIY superstores (often surprisingly good value).
More expensive, but still good value, are the units from direct-sell kitchen manufacturers — their quality and installation services can be excellent, but you may be subject to some fairly hard selling methods at first.
Kitchen specialist shops, builders' merchants and the kitchen sections of department stores will often concentrate on the more expensive (but high quality) rigid ranges of kitchen unit.
Most expensive are hand-built kitchens that have been tailor-made to fit your room.
With so many ways to build a kitchen, it helps if you have clear idea of what you want.
Kitchen designers are often just salespeople and the ‘design’ may simply be an exercise in fitting units into the space available.
Remember, you can always use IDEAL HOME's Kitchen Planning Service.
For £45 you will be given suggestions and ideas for the best arrangement of a new kitchen.
To find out more about this special service, see page 120.
BANISHING WASHDAY BLUES
Deciding where to put your washing machine and tumble dryer can often be a major headache.
The advantage of a special utility room (perhaps and old scullery or larder) is that the noise, steam and clutter associated with doing the laundry is kept out of the kitchen, but the disadvantage is the extra space it takes up.
Always keep a dishwasher in the kitchen rather than the utility room, so that you can make the best use of it.
But if your utility area is large enough, it will be the ideal place to have a freezer.
BATHROOM BASICS
Often the most difficult thing to decide about your bathroom is the colour of the sanitaryware.
Fashions change rapidly and the wrong colour can make any bathroom look dated.
So if you're thinking about selling your house, white is the best choice.
Colours can then be introduced into the bathroom with paint, wallpaper, curtains and accessories, all of which can easily be changed if you fancy a new look.
There is a good choice of bathroom equipment available — from DIY superstores, specialist bathroom centres, builders' merchants and plumbers' merchants.
Modern pieces of equipment include whirlpool or spa baths (whirlpools inject a mixture of air and water, spa baths just have air jets), a power shower (with a choice of jets), fitted bathroom cupboards and, if you have space, exercise equipment.
Also, when planning a bathroom, remember to allow enough space in front of each item so there's room to use it.
AT CLOSE QUARTERS
In some bedrooms, there may be enough space to fit a shower cubicle, but others may only have space for a bedroom basin.
A basin will be easy to fit if the bedroom is next to the bathroom.
But in a large house, it's often possible to convert a small bedroom into an en suite bathroom for a large adjoining bedroom.
Alternatively, you could partition off part of a large bedroom to create a small en suite bathroom or shower room.
SHOWER SENSE
The main advantages of a shower are that it's more hygienic and uses less water than a bath — typically, 70 to 80 per cent less, 30 to 40 per cent less for a power shower.
In a small house, you might want to replace the bath with a shower to create more space; in larger houses, you may be able to fit a shower unit elsewhere to help you cope with the early morning rush hour.
Bath/shower mixers (fitted in place of existing bath taps) and electric showers (connected only to the cold rising main) are the easiest to fit.
An electric shower, however, needs to be wired into its own circuit.
When planning a new shower cubicle or an enclosure, remember it must be connected ti the main drainage system, so this will affect where you can put it.
You also need to allow for the cost of both building and tiling a separate shower enclosure; this can often be more than the cost if installing the shower itself.
Oyster sink in Asterite, with matching tap and white baskets
The Blenheim kitchen in white oak is part of the Manor House range
Twyfords Debut suite, shown here in Freshwater from the Water Colours collection
The Showerpack 922 power shower
COMFORT & JOY
How to keep your home warm and save energy at the same time
HEAT OF THE MOMENT
About 75 per cent of homes in the UK have some kind of central heating.
But many older systems have inadequate controls or are poorly designed.
The most effective improvements to central heating controls include fitting a programmer (to control when the heating is on and off) and a room thermostat (to maintain the temperature you want).
A surprising number of systems have neither of these.
Although modern electronic controls aren't always very easy to set, they are very precise and economical.
Systems with ‘gravity’ hot water circuits can be improved by converting to fully-pumped operation (ie, the pump drives round both the heating and the hot water circuits).
This will mean installing a three-way motorised valve, a cylinder thermostat and making some changes in the pipe layout.
Not only will this make the system more efficient, but the hot water will heat up faster and its temperature will be controlled.
The main pieces of equipment that might need replacing in a system are the boiler and the radiators.
Modern boilers are much more efficient than their predecessors, particularly condensing boilers.
And designs have improved greatly, too.
A combination boiler provides both heating and a continuous supply of hot water (though at a slower flow than from a hot water cylinder).
Radiators have also undergone a major change of image — there's now a wide range of styles, colours and materials.
Convector heaters are also very useful, and can sometimes be more convenient than a radiator.
TIMELY TARIFF
If you use electricity for heating water (ie, with an immersion heater) you should switch to Economy 7.
This two-part tariff offers electricity at less than half price during seven night-time hours (typically midnight to 7 am) and can slash your water-heating bills, provided that you have a timer (or, better, an economy 7 controller) to ensure your water is heated during this period.
With Economy 7, you may pay slightly more for electricity used during the day and have higher quarterly standing charges, but overall you will make savings.
Even greater savings are possible if you can arrange (with the use of timers of delay controls) for washing machines, dishwashers and tumble dryers to operate during the nights.
Early risers can also have cheap electric showers (not quite so early in the summer, as the clock is not altered when the change is made to British Summer Time), while fridges, freezers and outside lights will cost less to run.
Switching to Economy 7 will usually be done free by your local Electricity Board.
No wiring changes are normally needed, only the meter needs to be replaced.
WINDOW SHOPPING
Proper heating and insulation will make your home more comfortable, and one of the best ways to do this is to install double glazing.
Although double glazing (either secondary glazing or replacement windows) won't reduce fuel bills by that much, it will help make some rooms a lot more comfortable.
A single-glazed window has a ‘cold zone’ around it where you'll get convection draughts (as well as the draughts coming in through the gaps).
Double glazing will eliminate these draughts as well as stopping condensation on the window pane and reducing noise.
For effective noise insulation, secondary glazing (a second window pane inside the existing one) is most effective; the bonus of secondary windows is that modern materials (especially uPVC and factory-coated aluminium and steel) need virtually no maintenance.
SAVING IT
As we all become more energy conscious, it makes sound sense to install efficient heating equipment and fit proper controls.
This will have a significant impact on your fuel bills and help to reduce environmental pollution, but the most important thing you can do is to insulate your home properly.
A proper insulating jacket for the hot water cylinder is the first priority, followed by a 100 mm or 150 mm layer of insulation in the loft.
If you have cavity walls, these can be insulated by injecting foam, or by blowing in polystyrene beads or mineral wool fibres through holes drilled in the outside walls.
Solid walls can be insulated by ‘dry lining’ with sheets of insulating plasterboard on the inside surfaces.
These measures, along with effective draughtproofing, can cut the energy requirements of a house by more than half — so it should be done before you install a new boiler, which can then be of a smaller design.
THE FINISHED LOOK
The final decorative touches to achieve the style you want
DOWN TO EARTH
Whatever room you're working on, don't forget about the flooring.
It's no good putting floorcovering of any sort on a floor that isn't sound.
Timber floors, in particular, should be secure with all floorboard nails punched home (if necessary, use screws to secure loose floorboards), and if the floor is at all uneven nail down sheets of hardboard to provide a base.
Solid floors may need to be repaired if they have cracks or deep hollows; and many will need to be levelled, especially if you're laying tiles or wood block flooring.
There's a good choice of floorcovering materials available.
In living rooms, you'll probably have carpet unless you want a timber floor that you can cover with rugs.
Most people also want carpet for bedrooms, and there are waterproof types for bathrooms.
In bathrooms and kitchens, you might want something more durable, such as timber flooring, PVC-coated cork tiles, ceramic tiles, or vinyl sheet or tiles.
Suitable for kitchens only, quarry tiles or studded rubber are both attractive and hardwearing.
FINISHING TOUCHES
Co-ordination is crucial when you come to choose paint, wallpaper, tiles, curtain fabrics and soft furnishing.
Whole ranges are available with matching fabrics and colours; for bathrooms, these can also be co-ordinated with the colour of the sanitaryware.
Modern one-coat paints make redecoration simple and the range of designs in easy-to-strip flat and sculpture vinyl wallcoverings allow almost any effect to be created with the minimum of fuss.
VIEW POINTS
Window treatments can make all the difference to the look of a room.
If you go for conventional curtains, you have the choice of metal or plastic rails, tracks and poles.
Poles are generally used only on straight windows, but rails and tracks can usually go round curves and bays.
Blinds are an attractive alternative to curtains, and there are many types available.
Straight blinds need only a simple fixing on either side of the window; Austrian and Roman blinds are slightly more complicated but can produce stunning effects.
The possibilities with window treatments are endless; Austrian blinds in individual windows in a bay, for example, can be combined with curtains between the windows to give a framing effect.
STORAGE SOLUTIONS
As families grow, so do possessions and inevitably more space is needed.
Now that fitted cupboards are commonplace in the home, storage is less of a problem than it used to be, but shelving and cupboards in living rooms, dining rooms and bedrooms is always useful.
As well as fitted storage units, there is a wide range of freestanding furniture, modular units and shelving on the market.
It comes in many styles and is available in a range of colours to match your own schemes.
Adjustable shelving is still a very popular choice; timber and glass shelves are ideal for displaying ornaments.
And for fitted cupboards in bedrooms, there is a good choice of hanging rails and organisers to make the best use of available space.
LIGHT FANTASTIC
A central pendant light can easily spoil the effect of stylish decoration and furniture.
(Although pendant lights are perfect in some situations, like a rise-and-fall fitting over a dining table.)
You can achieve much softer and more interesting effects by using different types of light carefully positioned around a room.
Uplighters will bounce light off walls and ceilings will highlight plants; recessed downlighters give pools of light (especially useful in kitchens); spotlights ‘wash’ walls or highlight features such as pictures; concealed lighting inside display cabinets or hidden behind cornices and pelmets is effective; plus an array of table, standard and desk lamps.
Particularly effective are the different types of low-voltage lights now available.
Some of these include the necessary transformer in the fitting, but others require a separate transformer and some heavy-duty wiring.
In place of ordinary light bulbs, you could use compact fluorescent lamps.
Although more expensive, they are much more efficient at converting electricity into light (so a lower wattage is needed), and the lamps last much longer.
Some lighting improvements will mean new wiring — but this would give you the chance to fit dimmer switches, security light switches and two-way switches, all of which make the lighting more flexible.
Practical Wood-o-Cork flooring in Cherrywood
Co-ordinating colours — walls: Lilac Rose matt emulsion; bedhead/dado: Blush Pink gloss; stencil: Soho Satin Jade
Rails and accessories for this window come from Swish
The Spur steel shelving system can be cleverly used to create a wardrobe
PRACTICAL MATTERS
DAVID HOLLOWAY SHEDS SOME LIGHT ON THE LATEST DETERRENT, MAKES CHANGING A LIGHT BULB SAFE, AND SHOWS YOU HOW TO FIT A NEW SINK
SENSING TROUBLE
Shedding some light on home security
Putting burglars in the spotlight is always a good way of deterring them, so why not consider installing a passive infra-red (PIR) sensor.
The sensor will react instantaneously to body heat and bring on a light outside your home whenever anyone approaches.
As well as deterring possible burglars, this will light the way for welcome visitors without you having a light on all night.
The Crabtree Minder 180 is a separate sensor that you can fit internally or externally, and can be wired up into an existing light fitting.
It has a dual lens system, with 180° coverage.
Either lens can be covered (with inserts supplied) to adjust the field of view.
Using the simple controls you can adjust the length of time the light remains on; the high level at which the device will come on; and the distance over which it will operate (up to 16 metres).
The Crabtree Minder 180 costs about £95.
Further details from Crabtree Electrical Industries,.
LIGHTS OUT
SAFETY FIRST
Changing a light bulb can be very tricky, especially if a two-way switch makes it difficult to tell whether the light is switched on or off.
But the new Safety Autoswitch Pendant Lampholder from B&R Electrical resolves this potentially dangerous situation.
This ingenious device ensures power is switched off whenever the bulb is removed so there's no risk of electrocution — a comforting thought when you're balanced on a stool, fitment in one hand and replacement bulb in the other.
The Safety Lampholder costs about £3 and is also available as a prewired pendant set (complete with ceiling rose) for about £8.
YOU CAN DO IT
Step-by-step guide to installing a new sink
Fitting a new sink may seem a somewhat daunting task but it needn't be, provided the new sink is going to be in the same position as the old one.
Most people these days want an inset sink fitted into a continuous length of worksurface, and replacing an existing inset sink is relatively straightforward.
But replacing the still popular linked rectangular sink and drainer that fit over a base unit will mean fitting a new worksurface, and perhaps even a new base unit as well— a much more difficult task.
Here, we show step-by-step how you could fit the new Leisure sink.
Further details are available from Leisure,.
1 After removing an old inset sink, you might have to make the opening larger to fit the new sink
2 A holesaw fitted to an electric drill cuts the right size hole for your taps
3 Pipes, waste outlets, sink clips and fittings are included, allowing you to connect the new sink with existing waste pipe
4 The tap is fitted to the sink first.
The water pipes are connected later
5 The sink is held in place with clips which are fitted and then tightened up when in the correct position
6 Once the sink has been plumbed in, silicon sealant is used around the edge to make the unit completely watertight
7 The final result — an attractive new sink to brighten your kitchen
ON YOUR MARKS
Be sure of standards where you see this mark
It's not enough for British products to be good value in terms of price — they must also match the standards of products from other countries in both performance and reliability.
The British Standards kite mark is a symbol of reassurance to the consumer that items carrying the mark will meet those standards.
A kitemark shows that products — anything from adhesives to zinc alloy die castings — have been independently inspected and satisfy the relevant British Standards requirements.
As well as having samples tested, manufacturers must also demonstrate that their quality-control system is up to scratch.
Both the product and the quality-control system are audited by the British Standards Institute at regular intervals.
IN CASE OF EMERGENCY
A special repair scheme for the home
Anyone whose car has broken down in the middle of nowhere will appreciate the value of belonging to a motoring organisation that'll come to the rescue at any time of the day or night.
But what about emergencies at home?
Accidents can strike at any time — things like broken windows, overflowing cisterns, leaking pipes or damaged roofs all need immediate attention — and, in times of crisis, working your way through a telephone directory can be extremely frustrating.
National Breakdown has 20 years' experience of getting emergency help to stranded motorists.
And now it has launched a Home Emergency Service to do the same for homeowners.
All-year-round protection costs £60, and that covers the cost of the call-out, the first two hours' labour and up to £10 of materials on each job.
And there's no limit on the number of calls you can make in any one year.
Home Emergency Service is designed to provide essential help rather than regular household maintenance, but it also covers many emergencies arising from normal wear and tear unlike some household insurance policies.
If you'd like further details of the scheme, contact Home Emergency Service on 0800 800688.
NEW OPENINGS
Updating your garage
Give your garage a complete facelift with a new door from the Belmont range by Apex Doors of Bolton.
This sophisticated range of steel-based, glass-reinforced plastic garage doors is maintenance-free and available in woodgrain finish or brilliant white gloss.
The doors come in eight different widths starting from £387.
To help with installation, the company has produced a leaflet which gives full details of timber framing needed.
Further details from Apex Doors,.
BATHROOM BREAKTHROUGH
The Avalon bathroom from Caradon Twyfords
According to Government health statistics, over five million people of varying ages have difficulty using a conventional bathroom.
Not only are they afraid of getting in and out of the bath, but they also have problems in operating the taps and using the WC.
Traditionally, those bathrooms for people with mobility problems haven't been attractive — available only in white and with various attachments that appear to be included as afterthoughts.
Now Caradon Twyfords has come up with Avalon — an attractive, stylish, user-friendly bathroom designed for anyone, old or young, disabled or able-bodied.
The Avalon bathroom was developed after three years' extensive research into the difficulties associated with ageing.
At first sight, it looks much more like any other modern bathroom suite and is available in eight different colours, including white.
The difference is that each piece of equipment incorporates special features to help the user, without highlighting any disability.
The bath, for instance, has an integral seat and a lowered front edge to make getting in and out easier, and the basin is fitted with special brackets that allow it to be moved up and down to suit.
A typical Avalon bathroom is expected to cost less than £1,725, depending on the elements chosen.
Further details from  
EDGING AHEAD
Take the hard work out of wallpapering
If you're planning to do some wallpapering this month but are dreading the thought, don't panic — help is at hand.
The Classic Wallpaper Trimming Wheel by Harris is a nifty little gadget, specially designed to trim positioned wallpaper neatly and efficiently.
Normally, it would cost you £2.49, but we've 200 to give away to the first readers who write in.
Quicker and easier than scissors or a knife, the razor-sharp Harris Wheel won't rip or snag wallpaper, but trims away any excess from awkward corners in seconds to give your wall a smooth, professional finish.
To protect your fingers, the wheel also features a built-in safety guard to push up when not in use.
Just send your name and address to:
FREE
READ ALL ABOUT IT
However you're planning to improve your home, the right book can be a source of inspiration as well as a practical guide.
Helen Barnett takes her pick from the bookshelves
HOME HELP
KEVIN McCLOUD'S DECORATING BOOK
Kevin McCloud
An inspirational and beautifully illustrated book from one of the newest names in interior decorating.
Kevin McCloud, whose background is in history of art and theatrical set designing, presents 40 individual roomsets in a variety of styles to copy or adapt to your own home.
The book offers plenty of advice on how to achieve special decorative effects, plus how to go about choosing fabrics, furniture and accessories to re-create the look of each style.
There's also a comprehensive section listing the materials and equipment needed for everything from liming wood to ageing plasterwork with clear, concise instructions on how to master each technique.
THE HOUSE RESTORER'S GUIDE
Hugh Lander
Although it was published a couple of years ago, this book still remains one of the most useful all-round guides to restoring old houses and cottages.
Aimed at the amateur, it begins by offering advice on how to assess a building for any structural failures followed by a step-by-step guide to the most common problems you are likely to encounter, including how to repair walls and roofs, dealing with damp and choosing doors and windows to suit the style of the property.
With the emphasis very strongly on restoration rather than modernisation, this is a must for true conservationists.
SUN ALLIANCE HOMECARE MANUAL
Nina Grunfeld
An invaluable reference book offering plenty of advice on looking after everything in the home — from the furniture to the family.
The book is divided into four sections covering general cleaning and maintenance, simple home repairs, safety in the home plus ways of adding interesting decorative touches to give a quick lift to a room.
Beautifully illustrated throughout, the book is packed with information, often with clear, step-by-step drawings to show techniques.
THE COUNTRY HOME DECORATING BOOK
Miranda Innes
Creating a country-style look in your home is not just down to selecting the appropriate paint colours and fabrics.
It's also about choosing the right kind of lighting and furniture and, above all, how you put the whole lot together.
Miranda Innes' new book offers sound practical advice on all aspects of decoration from painting walls, treating floors and using fabrics to collecting and displaying a variety of favourite objects like china, paintings or even jelly moulds.
A useful section at the back of the book gives clear instructions for carrying out various DIY tasks.
These include putting up wall panelling, boxing in a radiator and making picture frames — all accompanied by step-by-step instructions and clear, easy-to-follow diagrams.
MARY ROSE'S 1001 COUNTRY HOUSEHOLD TIPS
Mary Rose Quigg
A concise, practical household guide with information and expert advice on topics as diverse as stain removal, gardening, home decorating and cookery.
ENQUIRE WITHIN UPON EVERYTHING
Mayra Bremner
The new updated and revised edition of this bestselling home-reference book includes solutions to all kinds of problems from negotiating a mortgage to planting a garden, based on the author's own experiences.
FOCUS ON FLOWERS
THE TRADITIONAL GARDENING BOOK
Graham Rose
This practical guide shows you how to incorporate all kinds of period garden features into today's smaller plots, ranging from creating elaborate topiary shapes to constructing an arbour.
Graham Rose also includes some fascinating historical background information.
THE FIVE MINUTE FLOWER ARRANGER
Jane Nedwick
Few of us have much time to spend on lavish flower arrangements, but this innovative little book will show you how to create stunning yet simple displays.
THE COTTAGE GARDEN
Christopher Lloyd and Richard Bird
All you need to know about creating a true cottage garden — including plants and shrubs, layouts and accessories.
THE GARDENER'S ILLUSTRATED ENCYCLOPEDIA OF CLIMBERS AND WALL SHRUBS
Brian Davis
A comprehensive listing of more than 2,000 plant varieties including information on foliage and blooms, plus expert advice on how to choose the best site for successful cultivation.
FLOWER ARRANGING — A STEP-BY-STEP GUIDE
Susan Conder, Sue Philips and Pamela Westland
A beautifully presented guide featuring over 140 stunning flower displays from natural country-style creations to dramatic modern displays.
The illustrations are clear and easy to follow, and there are tips on how to make flowers last longer, and other tricks of the trade.
COOK'S CHOICE
RECIPES FROM A SPANISH VILLAGE
Pepita Aris
Pepita Aris' mouthwatering collection of traditional recipes captures the magic of unexplored Spain.
Exceptional photographs feature both the dishes and their rural villages of origin.
COUNTRY HARVEST
Linda Burgess and Rosamond Richardson
If, like me, you read cookery books as a hobby, this book is a real treat.
There are over 1754 recipes in the book, with enticing names such as Wild Plum Vodka, Chocolate and Blackberry Brownies and Crunchy Harvest Butter.
RUTH MOTT'S FAVOURITE RECIPES
Ruth Mott with Wendy Hobson
Following the popular BBC series,Victorian Kitchen , Ruth Mott presents a collection of recipes and tips collected during her years as a cook.
SUPERFOODS
Michael Van Straten and Barbara Griggs
A fascinating guide to the therapeutic properties of foods, with recipes to help you improve your health.
CREATIVE CRAFTS
VICTORIAN EMBROIDERY
Freda Parker
Among the pages of this book you'll find a superb collection of embroidery from the Victorian era.
Freda Parker, an embroidery expert and crafts journalist, suggests ways of making cushions, curtains and embroidered linens.
NATURAL FRAGRANCES
Gail Duff
Bring a breath of country air into your home using some of the traditional pot pourri, herb and spice preparations from Gail Duff's fascinating book.
The book provides wonderful inspiration for gifts as well as practical household tips for using flowers and herbs in your own home.
THE BEATRIX POTTER NEEDLEPOINT BOOK
Pat Menchini
A collection of more than 35 needlework projects, from firescreens to rugs, inspired by Beatrix Potter's illustrations.
BASKET MAKING
Olivia Elton Barratt
A practical guide to basket making with step-by-step instruction on basic techniques, including projects 
Save 30% on a year's subscription to Ideal Home
This offer is valid until 31 May 1991
We are offering readers an opportunity to take out a money-saving subscription to Britain's leading home-interest magazine for just £14, saving £5.95 on our usual rate of £19.95 for 12 issues.
That's a 30 per cent saving on a copy delivered to your door.
So why not ensure a postage-free copy for yourself — or a friend (gift cards available) to give them a present that lasts the whole year round.
Celebrate the coming of summer at the Chelsea Flower Show Royal Gala Preview evening…and receive a complimentary cassette tape/CD from THORN EMI
You are invited to join Save the Children, The Royal Horticultural Society and THORN EMI on Monday 20 May at The Chelsea Flower Show Royal Gala Preview Evening, one of the most magnificent and prestigious events of the London society calendar.
The Gala Preview, which will be attended by HRH The Princess Royal, President of Save the Children, takes place on the evening before the public opening of the show when the exhibits are at their best.
The preview offers a unique opportunity for guests to view the show without crowds from 7 pm to 9 pm and to enjoy complimentary champagne and canapés.
The atmosphere, beautiful surroundings and music will create a truly memorable occasion.
Tickets are £110 each and free parking is available in Battersea Park with a courtesy minibus service to and from the showground.
THORN EMI, the evening's sponsor, is a corporate member of Save the Children and as such is delighted to be working in partnership with Save the Children and the Royal Horticultural Society to create a spectacular evening aiming to raise over £½ million.
It is also the sponsor of a children's garden for the show, designed by Gillian Temple.
THORN EMI, in partnership with IDEAL HOME, is offering readers a chance to attend this very special evening.
For every pair of tickets purchased, you will receive a free cassette/CD, entitled Flowers in Music , which has been specially compiled by Music for Pleasure, a division of EMI Records (UK).
PLANNING THE PERFECT PATIO
A garden patio will give you an attractive area for entertaining during the long summer months ahead.
We lay down the ground rules for creating a successful patio to suit all your needs
To really enjoy your garden it shouldn't just be a home for plants.
It also needs to have a sitting-out area where you can savour the different scents and sights, and enjoy an alfresco meal, relax with a drink after a busy day, or entertain friends in informal surroundings.
This space doesn't have to be vast — just think of how many people can be accommodated around a 1.5-metre circular table, for instance.
And treat it as an outdoor room, not just another part of a garden.
All too often a patio is merely an area of plain paving slabs furnished with a few metal-framed sun loungers, which are functional but hardly attractive.
Yet you can find plenty of garden furniture that is both elegant and practical.
There is also a wide range of paving materials that can create a very decorative effect.
Together, they can make a patio both comfortable and stylish.
This month, I'm showing you how to create quite small patios, though not necessarily for small gardens.
They can be integrated into larger plots to give a secluded hideaway.
For a patio to be used most of  the year, the site must be sunny and sheltered form the wind.
And, ideally, part of it should be dappled in shade to provide shelter on those really hot sunny days that we've experienced in recent summers.
It's sensible, too, to choose a site conveniently near the house, so you won't have to carry food too far.
And, so you can reach the area without getting your feet wet after a shower, there should be an all-weather path leading to it.
If you want to use your patio in the evenings, especially for entertaining, you'll probably need some electric lighting.
A few carefully placed lamps will provide atmosphere and show off the surrounding plants.
They would also illuminate any steps.
As for the patio surface, remember that pale colours reflect light and can be dazzling in the sun.
Darker surfaces absorb heat, which is then radiated as the temperature falls towards the end of the day.
And the surface should fall slightly to one side to shed rainwater.
It's always wise to follow the technical advice offered by paving manufacturers when preparing the foundations of your patio.
A patio doesn't need to be grand to be attractive
An area about 2.1 m sq and a small approach path are surfaced with handmade Sussex Terracotta tiles.
These are available in warm natural colours and are frost proof.
Prices range from about £43 to £55 per sq yd.
They're not cheap but look magnificent.
Surrounding plants provide scent and interest throughout the year
The surrounding borders are mulched with Cocoa Shell, which provides nourishment, conserves moisture and suppresses germinating weeds.
Approved by the Soil Association, Cocoa Shell is available from leading garden centres and marketed by Sunshine of Africa,
Brick makes great paving on its own and looks best when used in a pattern
An elaborate setting for stone beds
A mass of shrubs creates a secluded hideaway
Variations on a brick theme
BRING YOUR PATIO TO LIFE WITH PLENTY OF COLOUR, SUCH AS A COLLECTION OF BRIGHT LONG-LASTING FLOWERS IN POTS GROUPED TOGETHER FOR MAXIMUM IMPACT.
A PERGOLA DRAPED WITH WISTERIA WILL ALSO PROVIDE COOL SHADE
A simple design gives greater impact to the plain paving
A ship's figurehead makes an unusual focal point
Other designs: You can easily create patterns with Ruabon Clay Pavers, such as(1) Framed Square made from left and right-hand Quoins and Half-Bats,(2) Patchwork using Bats and Pikes,(3) 3D-square with Quoins and Half-Bats
A more extensive area is surfaced with Ruabon Welsh Clay Pavers in Hopsack pattern with traditional borders.
The 50-mm-thick pavers are frost proof and non-slip.
Available in a wide range they can be used in many attractive combinations
Here, ECC Countryside Derbyshire Textured Hexagonal Paving slabs with edgings make a neat square seating area.
A simple pergola and screen provide light and shade.
The iroko chair and butler's table are from The Colonial Range of folding garden furniture by Stuart Garden Architecture.
They're available from branches of John Lewis
A PATIO NEEDS A SUNNY SPOT, WHETHER IT'S JUST OUTSIDE YOUR FRENCH WINDOW, AT THE SIDE OF THE HOUSE OR AT THE BOTTOM OF THE GARDEN
IDEAL HOME READER SERVICES
FOR WHEN YOU NEED EXPERT PLANNING ADVICE
IDEAL HOME COLOUR DESIGN SERVICE
Which colours should you use in a north-facing room that seems cold all the year round?
And how can you make a high, narrow room seem like it's in proportion?
When you're decorating a room these are just some of the problems you're likely to face, and they illustrate why you mights need professional guidance.
We can offer you a helping hand.
For £40, our interior designer, Pauline Giddins, will create a room scheme exclusively for you.
All you have to do is write to her at the address below to receive a questionnaire (don't send any money now).
The questionnaire helps give Pauline an idea of the kind of look you want to achieve as well as details about the size of the room, position of doors and windows, and so on.
Send back your completed questionnaire with your cheque and in return you will receive a presentation folder containing full detail's of Pauline's design.
It will also contain samples of paint, wallcovering, flooring, curtains and upholstery.
For your questionnaire, send an sae to Pauline Giddins,(Allow 28 days once you have returned your questionnaire to us.)
IDEAL HOME KITCHEN PLANNING SERVICE
A well-planned kitchen is an asset in any home, but fitting a kitchen can be expensive and mistakes will be costly to put right.
Our kitchen planning service will help you to get it right first time.
For £45, our kitchen planner, Roma Jay, will suggest the best arrangement with ideas for cooking, eating and utility areas.
Write to Roma at the address below for a questionnaire (don't send any money now).
This covers the areas Roma needs to know about to design a kitchen perfect for you — and all within your stated budget.
Just return your completed questionnaire, together with your cheque, and Roma can start planning your new kitchen.
Or you may like to take advantage of our bathroom postal planning service, also £45.
For your questionnaire, send an sae, stating which service you require, to Roma Jay Design Consultants Ltd,
Choosing the right colour scheme is essential for a well-planned room
Good design is crucial in a kitchen
THE LINDA GILLARD COLUMN
PLAYING THE PART
My children's ideas of male and female roles are thoroughly entrenched.
Despite all my hard work, my son still wants to be a train driver and my daughter a nurse.
Where did I go wrong?
My daughter (seven) wants to be a ballerina when she grows up and my son (five) says he wants a wife ‘to do the cooking’.
Where did I go wrong?
Twenty years ago, I was avidly reading Cosmopolitan and The Female Eunuch .
(I have regarded myself as a feminist ever since I finally stopped wanting to be a pretend boy like George in the Famous Five.)
But 20 years on, things seem to be much the same or even worse —Cosmopolitan now subsidises its middle-of-the-road feminism with ads for depilatories and cosmetic surgery and my daughter, now a Famous Five fan herself, identifies with Anne not George.
(You probably don't remember Anne.
She was the nonentity with the wavy blonde hair who made the cocoa, and ironed the treasure maps.)
From the moment of their birth my children have been exposed to non-sexist parenting.
They have been fed non-sexist, multi-cultural books and toys along with their strained apricots; they have been treated by female GPs, they have sat and watched Kaffe Fassett knitting and sewing on TV, but their ideas of male and female roles are as sexist as if we had never made the effort.
No-one could have done more.
My son always had dolls and his favourite toy is a doll's house.
My daughter had a wooden train set when she was a toddler; construction toys have been available to both children, so we have dolls' cots and buggies, plastic swords, sewing cards, cars and garages.
At home we have an impressive library of books, carefully selected to give our children the widest possible view of life: black families, single fathers, working mothers, girls rescuing the western world single-handed and boys moping in corners because they long for a doll.
You name it, we've got a book on it.
We went to so much trouble because we were aware of the power of cultural conditioning.
We also knew that we constituted the stock middle-class ‘Ladybird’ family: Father who goes out to work, mother who works at home, one daughter and one son; as such we are entirely unrepresentative of the average family.
I am a working mother but the children rarely see me working.
What they do see me doing is the school run, shopping, cooking their meals and running the household.
Their father sometimes baths them, often puts them to bed, irons, sews on his buttons and makes cakes, but as far as the kids are concerned, the main thing about Daddy is that he goes off to work in that magical place known as The Office.
He even flies to Scotland now and again for meetings.
In the glamour stakes poor Mummy can't really compete.
I hadn't realised how bad things were until the children were playing some complex fairy-tale game.
Amy cast herself as The Maid and proceeded to rush around the house performing errands and putting the world to rights.
A female friend who was visiting suggested that Amy might have more fun being the Prime Minister than a lowly maid and so Amy went off to dress as the PM.
She came back in her brother's tie and jacket.
‘But Amy,’ I said, ‘You look like a man.’
‘The Prime Minister is a man,’ she said indignantly.
This was in the last days of Mrs Thatcher's leadership and my daughter had never known anything other than a female PM.
So why did Amy  think that the Prime Minister was a man?
Why did she cast herself as a resourceful ‘maid’?
I puzzled over this one for some time and came to the conclusion that my children's concept of life is largely derived from fairy stories in which anybody with power is always male.
(Of course, if the power is evil it is quite likely to be wielded by a female and just for good measure she is likely to be ugly.)
The only good and powerful females I can think of are fairies (ie, not real people) and for every fairy godmother there are 10 wimpy heroines waiting for a prince to rescue them.
Even though my children's reading has long since moved on to Roald Dahl, C S Lewis and Judy Blume, the story ‘template’ is there, the dubious role models of their best-loved tales are firmly entrenched and I'm beginning to wonder if they are there for life.
Substitute an inheritance for a fairy godmother, an ex-wife for the wicked witch and you've got the basic plot of a thousand paperback romances.
With these unrealistic expectations I'm not sure who stands to lose the most — my daughter believing that you need a man, wealth and preferably a title to be happy, or my son who believes that women are beautiful and passive or wicked and powerful but, either way, he'd better be handsome.
I have thought about this depressing state of affairs and its implications.
It is all of a piece; Amy talks about becoming a nurse, not a doctor; a librarian, not a best-selling author.
We have pointed out that her ambitions are relatively lowly and that she could earn far more and do more interesting work as a doctor than as a nurse, but her attitudes seem thoroughly entrenched.
At seven, this isn't crucial, but I'm well aware that this is the beginning of a tendency girls have to underachieve academically and in other walks of life.
The world is her oyster but she dreams of being a librarian.
This is, of course, because she loves books and the library she visits is one of her favourite places.
All the librarians she knows are, of course, women.
She likes them, she thinks their work is interesting, she longs to do Story Time and read aloud to an audience of adoring tots.
My son loves books and the library, too, but he doesn't want to be a librarian.
Oh no, he wants to be an engine driver ‘with a wife to do the cooking’.
There is no identification with librarians, nor with his teachers (all female), or the school nurse, or the lollipop lady.
Ralph, as a male, has had to delve into his fantasy life to come up with his role model and he has, I think, more freedom and more choice in doing so.
He doesn't know any engine drivers but then he doesn't know many men.
All the men he knows are fathers or grandfathers and it is in that capacity that he knows them.
Neil is Max's dad; Neil is also a chiropractor but this doesn't concern Ralph at all since his only dealings with Neil are merely in his capacity as Max's dad.
The real world of the young child is peopled by women, the most important and influential of whom are mothers, grandmothers and teachers.
Their world is populated with nannies, au pairs, child minders, dinner ladies, librarians, shop assistants, hairdressers, playgroup leaders and other mothers.
One female GP — our surgery has just the one — is not really going to make much of an impression among that lot.
Young children see the world as being serviced by women.
They observe women in their roles as care-givers and caretakers.
They do not see women going out into the world and doing .
If women do that then they are not seen by their children.
The child of a globe-trotting executive mother is looked after by a female nanny and so the positive image of women in outward-looking powerful jobs is at once cancelled.
Mummies don't chair board meetings, mummies are the people who wait at the school gate in the rain.
I can't see that children's perception of women is going to change until there are as many dads as mums waiting in the rain and, frankly, I think hell is likely to freeze over first.
So my advice to new parents who are keen to bring up their children in non-sexist ways is, go easy on the fairy stories.
Kids love them, we all love them.
Maybe one of the reasons we all love them is because they subtly reinforce the status quo.
MOTORING
Peter Cracknell looks at two luxury models from manufacturers with proven track records: the Peugeot 605 SVi and the Volvo 940 SE
FROM STRENGTH TO STRENGTH
Launched last autumn, the Peugeot 605 has four engine choices and four trim levels with prices ranging from £16,660 to £26,520.
All models have anti-lock brakes, power steering, an ultrasonic alarm and remote control locking as standard.
The SVi has the basic 2-litre engine — catalytically converted like the other petrol models — but its interior brings it into the luxury class.
Features include a trip computer, heated washer jets, electric sunroof, automatic temperature control, plus a high quality audio system.
With its supremely aerodynamic body, the 605 moves through the air quietly and efficiently.
A slight drumming under heavy acceleration soon disappears at motorway cruising speeds, when you can really appreciate the comfort of the car.
The seats are slightly firmer than in most French cars, and the steering wheel has a rake adjustment.
The test car was fitted with the optional automatic transmission (£800) which makes the car even easier to drive.
You can also see well in all directions, the controls are responsive and the instrumentation clear.
Leg and head room are plentiful, and headrests at the rear are reach and height adjustable.
This hasn't restricted the boot space which is 18 cubic feet — square and uncluttered thanks to the good suspension design.
One disappointing point, however, is the high sill (31 inches), though the wide-opening boot lid makes loading easier.
The 605 is available in 11 colours including five metallic and two ‘pearlescent’ finishes.
If I had to design an attractive luxury car that gave the optimum compromise between performance, space, noise level and fuel economy, it would quite probably resemble the 605 SVi.
SAFE AND SOLID
When the Volvo 700 series was launched, the saloon's rear styling, though effective in its use of space, came in for some heavy criticism in terms of appearance.
In the new Volvo range the 700-series models have been replaced with the 940 and 960 saloons and estates (only the GL remains).
There has been a minor reshaping of the rear quarter-light and more radical changes have been made to the car's back end.
A gentler slope to the rear window is accompanied by an extra 2 cm headroom, a higher boot lid and a sill that is 12 cm lower.
Extensively equipped, with a neat integral child seat option for the saloon's rear armrest, the 900 series ranges in price from £16,425 to £28,995, and all the petrol models have catalytic converters.
Like the basic GL model, the SE I tested is powered by the proven 2-litre engine allied to a smooth five-speed gearbox (automatic transmission is an £875 option).
Power steering, central locking, electric mirrors/windows/sunroof and stereo system with electric aerial are all standard.
The safety and durability that have become Volvo hallmarks are an added bonus, though anti-lock brakes are an extra £595.
The engine doesn't have the power output to match the top of the executive ranges, but it is certainly adequate.
The ride is comfortable, though there is a slight roll when cornering.
But for so large a car, the 940 is amazingly easy to drive, controls are well spaced and light to use, and the height-adjustable seating position means you have a commanding view all round.
As you might expect from a Swedish manufacturer, the heating and ventilation are superb; you can supply cold air to the face and warm air to the feet at the same time.
The interior styling is sombre; apart from the headlining and plush seat facings everything is either dark grey or black.
However, there are plenty of storage areas plus a ‘ski-flap’ through to the 17 cubic feet boot for long, thin items.
To sum up, the 940 is the traditionally sensible Volvo product — well specified, spacious and solid.
With its supremely aerodynamic body, the 605 moves through the air quietly and efficiently
The 940 is typical of the traditionally sensible Volvo product — well specified, spacious and solid
EXTRAS
How to get four-wheel drive experience — and enjoy it
SAFETY DRIVE
Most motorists can manage without the benefits of four-wheel-drive (4WD).
But for some drivers the ability to cover inhospitable terrain can literally be a matter of life and death — if not for themselves, then for their livestock or their patients.
Motor Safari, based in north Wales, was founded four years ago by Peter and Heather Morgan to provide training for such motorists.
But as I discovered on a one-day introductory course, enjoyment is also a priority.
Balloon-tyred quad bikes and an eight-wheeled amphibious device were a couple of the more light-hearted attractions, but correct use of 4WD vehicles is the reason most people attend.
So, after some basic instruction in the grounds of Ruthin Castle, we took to the hills in a variety of 4WD vehicles.
All Motor Safari's instructors are members of the Driving Instructors Association, and the fact that two of the instructors are women proves that off-road driving is not primarily a macho pastime.
Indeed, more than 30 per cent of clients are women who are generally more successful as they are better listeners and tend not to rush at obstacles.
In a disused limestone quarry we tackled one of these obstacles safely, once we had been told how to do it.
In first gear, a seemingly impossible slope was negotiated with ease as long as the pedals were left well alone on the way down.
All Motor Safari clients are briefed not only in safe driving but care of the countryside, too.
Courses range from a half-day sampler (£48) up to a five-day Trans-Wales Safari (£370).
For full details, contact  .
MAPPING PROGRESS
A new edition of Philip's Road Atlas of Europe is now on sale in both paperback (£7.99) and spiral-bound (£9.99) versions.
Western Europe is scaled at a useful 12 miles to the inch, while the remainder, including Poland, Romania, northern Scandinavia and western USSR, is at 48 miles to the inch.
All European road networks are fully updated, distances are shown between major towns and 45 city plans are also included.
Coping with rough terrain: the four-wheel-drive way
TRAVEL
Holiday SPECIALS
If sun, sea and sand aren't your idea of fun, why not try something completely different?
In the first of a two-part special, Robin Dewhurst reports on a variety of action-filled, special interest packages designed to cater for all conceivable tastes
TICKET TO RIDE
For sheer indulgent nostalgia, it's hard to beat the Venice-Simplon-Orient-Express (which from June will also go to Budapest via Vienna).
The atmosphere is pure 1920s and 1930s, the golden age of the railways.
In a cocooned world of gilt, panelled and heavily draped splendour, you dress for dinner, drink in the Art Nouveau piano bar and sleep between cotton damask sheets turned down by your cabin steward.
The train has been painstakingly restored to all its former glory, even down to its traditional wood-burning stoves and original post box.
The journeys start from Victoria station in the umber-and-cream-coloured Pullman carriages.
Once you have crossed the Channel, you then board the gleaming blue and gold coaches for the main journey.
Straight single fares with sleeper and meals from London to Venice or Vienna cost £850; to Budapest, £950; to Paris by day, £390.
Or you can choose from a variety of packages with different top hotels.
The British section of the Orient Express, equally faithfully restored, runs a series of day trips to such places as Leeds and Hever Castles in Kent; Salisbury and Bath; and racing at Newmarket and Ascot.
For a brochure; tel: 071–928 6000.
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT
Spread-eagled on the stairs of the Queen's Hotel in Farnborough, Hampshire, lay a bloodstained body.
‘Someone's been murdered again,’ a voice shouted hysterically.
And into the confusion strolled an elderly passer-by who had just popped into the hotel for a quiet ploughman's lunch and nearly passed out instead.
The staff had a hard time assuring him that is was all make-believe.
He had arrived at the precise moment when another twist in the plot of a murder weekend was unravelling itself.
Murder mysteries are something of a British tradition — you only have to look at the popularity of thriller novels and TV ‘whodunits?’, for example.
If they fire your imagination, you can go a step further and pit your skills during a weekend of intrigue, conflicting evidence, clues and the ‘rich reek of red herrings’, as one brochure graphically puts it.
Mixing with the bemused and baffled guests are actors who stage-manage the whole affair.
The weekend starts innocently enough, perhaps with a school reunion, the reading of a will or maybe the birth  of a new political party, and there are all sorts of suspects — a takeover tycoon, possibly, or a young heir with gambling debts.
Held throughout the year, these weekends cost from about £150 to £195 and include two nights' accommodation in a Trusthouse Forte hotel, most meals and a welcome reception.
Dial (0345 500400) for more details of Murder Weekends.
SNAP HAPPY
Some students arrive at Phil Monk's photographic studio in Bath the proud possessors of the most expensive and advanced computerised cameras you can buy.
Others have the battered old manual models they bought cheaply years ago.
But when the students' work is displayed on the last day, it makes no difference as you can't tell which camera produced which result.
Between them, Phil Monk and his wife, Jackie, run 5 Belmont, a photographic workshop in a tall, Georgian house near the centre of Bath.
The workshop is open to beginners and experienced photographers who want to improve their photographic techniques.
On general courses, you'll take location and studio pictures and learn all about the mysteries of the darkroom and printing processes.
Only black and white film is used — partly because it's easier and quicker to process.
You must bring a camera that can be operated manually — no compacts, instants or ones without adjustable ‘f. stops, focus and shutter speeds — and a sturdy tripod.
Weekend courses cost £115; weekly courses cost £287.50, plus about £30 or so for film and paper.
Accommodation and meals aren't included but you'll get tea, coffee and humour in abundance.
Nearby accommodation costs from £14.50 per night.
For further information and a brochure; tel:(0225) 335947.
BATTLE TACTICS
A holiday brochure that is also a history lesson in itself is a good briefing for a unique range of military tours that takes in some of the world's legendary battlefields.
Among the 50 or so battlefields to choose from are: Wellington's defeat of Napoleon at Waterloo, the ill-fated Dardanelles campaign, the cowboys and Indians of America's Wild West, and the Battle of the Somme.
There's also D-Day, ‘the mightiest invasion armada in history’, and Operation Barbarossa, Hitler's ‘greatest ground attack in history’ against Russia in 1941.
Major and Mrs Holt's Battlefield Tours are run with the efficiency of a military operation.
They come complete with full battle briefings, thought-provoking commentaries, films and realistic audio effects that make you feel as if you're almost witnessing the battle scene.
For full details; tel:(0304) 612248.
VINTAGE TRIP
Noble rot is, as all wine buffs will know, nothing to do with decay in stately homes but simply the French way of describing botrytis cinerea, the mould that forms on over-ripe grapes to produce the smooth taste of Sauternes.
Fascinating facts, wine lore, numerous tastings and expert guidance are all part of a series of tours that take in famous Continental wine-growing areas from Tuscany to the Rhine, Bordeaux to Burgundy, Rioja to the Rhône.
The majority of tour leaders are Masters of Wine, the British wine trade's highest accolade, and they'll open the doors of such exclusive châteaux as Margaux and Cos d'Estourel.
Anyone interested in wine, beginner or expert, will find like-minded fellow-travellers.
Prices range from £650 to £1,000-plus with travel, half-board accommodation, numerous tastings and ‘unlimited soft drinks while on the coach’— a sensible touch.
Full details from World Wine Tours; tel:(0865) 891919.
SERIOUS PURSUITS
Famous People, Historic Houses, Country Gardens, Britain Through the Ages, Cities and Towns, Edwardian England, Canals and Transport…
They sound like the headings for a Trivial Pursuit kind of quiz game but are actually the subjects of various short breaks available in Britain and abroad.
Famous People, for instance, could be study of Henry VIII; Historic Houses, an amble round such famous homes as Knole in Kent; Cities and Towns, a flying visit to Mozart's Vienna or Madrid and Castile; Edwardian England, a look at the life of those times, based in a new hotel in central London.
These short study breaks include specialist lectures, quality accommodation and meals.
Three brochures produced by hotel groups that are worth browsing through are: Special Interest Weekends, Hilton UK, tel:(0923) 31333; Embassy Leisure Learning Breaks, tel: 071–581 3466; and Discovery Short Breaks in association with the National Trust, tel:(0622) 691024.
Robin Dewhurst is unable to enter into any correspondence regarding holiday enquiries.
NEXT MONTH Action and special interests — from golfing to sub-aqua diving
Naughty…but nice
A WINNING COMBINATION OF CHOCOLATE AND CHERRIES IS THE DARK SECRET BEHIND THIS WICKEDLY RICH CAKE.
AND OUR TEMPTING IDEAS FOR DELICIOUS CHOCOLATE TREATS DON'T STOP THERE
Rich rewards: a cherry gâteau to crown any special occasion
COOKERY EDITOR NORMA MILLER
Few can resist the tantalising taste of chocolate.
Whether dark, milk or white, in rich cakes, delicious desserts, drinks, sauces or even to flavour Mexican meat dishes, chocolate has always been a favourite.
This month I've chosen a variety of recipes — like cherry gâteau, banana and chocolate soufflé, and ginger truffles — to show just some of the ways chocolate can be used to add that special mouthwatering touch to your cooking.
GINGER TRUFFLES
Served with coffee, these delicious truffles are perfect at the end of a meal.
Makes about 25
Preparation time: 30 min
Cooking time: 2 min
175g (6 oz) ginger biscuits
50g (2 oz) preserved ginger
175g (6 oz) dark chocolate
50g (2 oz) unsalted butter
1 tbsp ginger syrup
25g (1 oz) desiccated coconut
2 tbsp cocoa powder
1
Crush the biscuits with a rolling pin and finely chop the preserved ginger.
2
Melt the chocolate and butter in a bowl over a saucepan of hot water.
3
Remove from the heat and stir in the crushed biscuits, chopped ginger, syrup and coconut.
4
Chill the mixture until it becomes form.
Shape into small balls and roll in the cocoa powder.
PEAR UPSIDE-DOWN PUDDING
Most fruits are delicious with chocolate sponge — this mouthwatering sauce complements the dessert beautifully.
Serves 6
Preparation time: 20 min
Cooking time: 50 to 60 min
Oven setting: 160°C, 325°F, Gas 3
2 tbsp brown sugar
428g (15 oz) can pear halves, drained
8 glacé cherries, halved
125g (4 oz) self-raising flour
2 tbsp cocoa powder
125g (4 oz) brown sugar
125g (4 oz) margarine
2 eggs, size 2
1 tbsp milk
SAUCE
4 tbsp golden syrup
4 tbsp cocoa powder
1 tbsp brandy
1
Grease the bottom and line a 20 cm (8 in) deep sandwich tin.
2
Sprinkle the brown sugar over the base of the tin and arrange pear halves and cherries on top.
3
Sieve the flour and cocoa powder into a bowl.
Add the sugar, margarine, eggs and milk.
Mix all the ingredients together for 2 to 3 min.
4
Pour the mixture over the fruit and bake in a pre-heated oven for 50 to 60 min.
5
While the pudding is baking, make the sauce.
Put the syrup, cocoa powder and brandy in a pan.
Heat until smooth.
6
Turn the pudding onto a plate.
Remove the paper and serve with the sauce.
GIANT CHOC CHIP COOKIES
No-one can resist these huge gooey cookies.
Bake an extra batch as they are sure to disappear pretty quickly.
225g (8 oz) butter
125g (4 oz) raw cane sugar
1 tbsp clear honey
275g (10 oz) self-raising wholemeal flour
1 egg, size three, beaten
2 tbsp grated orange rind
1 tbsp orange juice
75g (3 oz) dried apricots, finely chopped
175g (6 oz) milk or plain chocolate chips
1
Cream together the butter, sugar and honey until light and fluffy.
2
Stir in the flour, beaten egg, orange rind and orange juice.
3
Mix thoroughly and stir in the chopped apricots and chocolate chips.
Add more orange juice if the mixture is too stiff.
4
Put tablespoons of the mixture on to greased baking trays and flatten, leaving plenty of room for them to spread.
5
Bake in a pre-heated oven for 20 to 25 min until golden brown and firm to the touch.
* To freeze: Use within three months.
MARSHMALLOW FLOATS
These creamy milk shakes are so thick, you'll need the widest straws you can find!
850 ml (1½ pt) milk, chilled
5 tbsp drinking chocolate
4 scoops vanilla ice cream
10 marshmallows, chopped
Grated chocolate to decorate
1
Put the milk, drinking chocolate and vanilla  ice cream in a food processor or liquidiser.
2
Blend and pour into chilled glasses.
3
Float a few pieces of marshmallow on top of each drink and decorate with grated chocolate.
BANANA AND CHOCOLATE SOUFFLÉ
Buried at the bottom of this sweet soufflé is a layer of banana flavoured with rum.
3 large bananas
3 tbsp dark rum
150g (5 oz) dark chocolate
50g (2 oz) plain flour
450 ml (¾ pt) milk
50g (2 oz) sugar
25g (1 oz) butter
4 eggs, size 2, separated
Sieved icing sugar to dust
1
Thinly slice the bananas and spread over the base of a buttered 1.8 ltr (3½ pt) soufflé or ovenproof dish.
2
Pour the rum over the bananas.
3
Melt the chocolate in a basin over a pan of hot water.
4
Blend the flour with a little of the milk to make a smooth paste.
5
Warm the remaining milk and stir into the melted chocolate.
Pour into a saucepan.
6
Mix in the sugar and blended flour and, stirring continuously, bring to the boil.
7
Remove from the heat, beat in the butter and leave to cool.
8
Stir in the egg yolks.
9
Stiffly whisk the egg whites and fold into the chocolate mixture.
10
Pour over the sliced bananas and bake in a pre-heated oven for 50 min until risen and firm to the touch.
Dust with icing sugar.
CHOCOLATE AND RASPBERRY BOMBE
A bombe-shaped trifle with a gorgeous filling of raspberry jelly, covered with a chocolate Swiss roll.
CAKE
15g (½ oz) cocoa powder
150g (5 oz) self-raising flour
175g (6 oz) caster sugar
75g (3 oz) butter
4 eggs, size 3, beaten
6 tbsp apricot jam
FILLING
1 tablet raspberry jelly
350 ml (12 fl o) double cream
125g (4 oz) raspberries, thawed if frozen
Whipped cream and raspberries to decorate
1
Line a 33 cm by 23 cm (13 in by 9 in) Swiss roll tin with greaseproof paper and lightly butter.
2
Sieve cocoa powder and flour into a bowl.
3
Add the sugar, butter and eggs and mix thoroughly for 2 to 3 min.
4
Turn the cake mixture into the Swiss roll tin and smooth the surface.
5
Bake in a pre-heated oven for 10 to 12 min.
6
Put a sheet of greaseproof paper on top of a damp teatowel and sprinkle with a little caster sugar.
Turn the cake onto the paper.
Trim the edges and spread over the jam.
Fold over one end of the roll and use the greaseproof paper to help roll the cake.
(See above.)
Leave to cool.
7
Heat together the jelly and wine until jelly dissolves.
Remove from the heat and leave to cool until it's almost on the point of setting.
8
Cut the Swiss roll into 18 slices.
Cover the sides and base of a 1.4 ltr (2½ pt) pudding basin with 14 of the slices.
9
Whisk the double cream until stiff.
10
Crush the raspberries and stir with the whipped cream into the jelly.
11
Pour the jelly mixture into the basin.
Cover with remaining Swiss roll and chill until set.
12
Turn on to a plate and decorate the base with cream and raspberries.
MOCHA PUFFS
Light choux pastry puffs have a coffee filling and a delicious chocolate topping.
CHOUX PASTRY
50g (2 oz) butter
65g (2 ½ oz) plain flour, sieved
2 eggs, size 3 beaten
FILLING
150 ml (¼ pt) double cream
½ tsp coffee essence
ICING
75g (3 oz) plain or milk chocolate 
15g (½ oz) butter
2 tsp golden syrup
Chopped walnuts to decorate
1
In a large pan, melt the butter in 150 ml (¼ pt) water and bring to the boil.
2
While the liquid is boiling, quickly add all the flour.
3
Remove from the heat and mix until the mixture leaves the sides of the pan.
4
Slowly add the beaten egg.
5
Spoon blobs of the choux pastry on to wet baking sheets and bake in a pre-heated oven for 15 min.
Then reduce the oven temperature to 190°C, 375°F, Gas 5 and cook for a further 20 to 15 min.
Make a slit in the side of each puff and leave to cool.
6
Half whip the cream, stir in the coffee essence and continue whisking until the cream is stiff.
7
Widen the slit in each puff and fill with the flavoured cream.
8
Break the chocolate into pieces and place in a basin over hot water.
When the chocolate has melted, add the butter and golden syrup and stir until they also melt.
9
Dip tips of the filled buns in the sauce and sprinkle with the chopped walnuts.
Leave to set.
•To freeze: Freeze the unfilled cooked pastry puffs for three months.
Crisp in a hot oven.
FLORENTINES
For a tasty afternoon treat, try mixing nuts and cherries in a rich toffee and then coat in chocolate to make delicious, crisp florentines.
50g (2 oz) light brown sugar
1 tbsp golden syrup
50g (2 oz) butter
25g (1 oz) plain flour
25g (1 oz) walnuts
25g (1 oz) blanched almonds, chopped
25g (1 oz) sultanas, chopped
50g (2 oz) glacé cherries, chopped
125g (4 oz) dark chocolate
1
Melt the sugar, syrup and butter in a saucepan over gentle heat.
2
Remove from the heat and stir in the flour, chopped walnuts, almonds, sultanas and cherries.
3
Mix well and drop teaspoonfuls of the mixture on to a baking sheet lined with greaseproof paper.
Allow space for them to spread.
4
Bake in a pre-heated oven for 10 min until golden brown.
Remove from the oven and push the edges in with a knife to give a neat shape.
Carefully lift off tray and cool on a wire rack.
5
Melt the chocolate in a basin over hot water and spread a little on one side of the florentine.
When the chocolate begins to set, run a fork through it to give wavy lines.
CHERRY GÂTEAU
A really rich cake for a special occasion.
CAKE
125g (4 oz) dark bitter chocolate
125g (4 oz) butter
125g (4 oz) caster sugar
6 eggs, size 2, separated
125g (4 oz) plain flour, sieved
FILLING
1 jar cherry preserve
COATING
225g (8 oz) dark chocolate
125g (4 oz) butter
125g (4 oz) icing sugar, sieved
DECORATION
Milk, plain and dark chocolate leaves
1
Break the chocolate into pieces and melt in a basin over a pan of hot water.
2
Cream the butter and sugar until fluffy.
3
Stir in the egg yolks and melted chocolate.
4
Add the flour and mix well.
5
Stiffly whisk the egg whites and fold into the cake mixture.
6
Turn into a greased and lined 20cm (8 in) deep cake tin and bake in a pre-heated oven for 1 to 1¼ hr.
Turn out of tin to cool.
7
Cut the cake horizontally into three slices, spread with the cherry preserve and reassemble.
8
Melt the chocolate in a basin over a pan of hot water.
Stir in the butter.
9
Beat in the sieved icing sugar and when smooth spread over the cake.
10
Decorate the cake with milk, plain and dark chocolate leaves.
To freeze: Freeze unfilled cake and use within three months 
NEXT MONTH A collection of spicy dishes full of Eastern flavour
Delicious bite-sized truffles for after dinner
Coffee-filled puffs with a rich chocolate topping
Crunchy florentines are sure to be a family favourite
COOKERY PLUS
HOW TO MAKE CHOCOLATE DECORATIONS, PLUS HINTS ON WHERE TO BUY ORGANIC MEAT, AND A LOOK AT FRUITY, NON-ALCOHOLIC DRINK
SWEET TALK
Sweet Moments from frozen pastry specialists Jus-rol are deliciously wicked individual desserts.
Crisp filo pastry slices are filled with bramley apple, sultanas, and black cherry with kirsch and must be served warm.
The filo pastry shells are served cold and contain rich mousses — lemon cream, butterscotch and toffee.
A handy two-portion pack costs about £1.19.
HANDY HINTS
Chocolate should never be melted over direct heat in a saucepan by itself.
Instead, break it into pieces and place in a basin over a pan of hot water — making sure the basin doesn't touch the water.
If using a microwave, break the chocolate up and heat on defrost for 3 min.
Droplets of water can ruin melted chocolate, as can overheating.
If either of these occur, start again with more chocolate to avoid spoiling the rest of the recipe.
Pretty decorations for cakes and desserts are easy to make using milk, plain or white chocolate, or even a combination of all three for an attractive marbled effect.
Spread a layer of melted chocolate on to non-stick paper, leave to almost set and use tiny cutters to stamp out desired shapes, such as Christmas trees, leaves, star-shapes, teddy bears, or rounds.
Another idea is to coat one side of clean leaves with melted chocolate, leave to set and then carefully peel off the leaves.
Or for after dinner chocolates, flavour melted chocolate with a little liqueur or flavouring essences, drop blobs on to paper and leave to set.
COOK'S BOOKSHELF
The Microwave Cookbook (£19.95, Darling Kindersley) is another comprehensive book from Reader's Digest.
Whether you are a new or experienced microwave cook, this book will prove invaluable with over 600 recipes, technical information, advice on safety, handy hints and tips.
I particularly like the step-by-step photographs and menu-planning charts.
PASSION FRUIT
Sorelle, a refreshing blend of passion fruit, peach juice, aromatic herbs and spring water, is now available in convenient 25 cl mini bottles for 75p.
This non-alcoholic drink has less than 50 calories and is a healthy addition to any picnic or packed lunch.
THE HEALTHY OPTION
At selected Iceland stores you can now buy naturally reared pork and beef.
The beef joints, beefburgers and mincemeat are 100 per cent organic as they come from cattle grazed on land kept free from chemical pesticides and artificial fertilizers for at least two years.
Look for the Organic Farmers and Growers symbol.
AN IDEAL HOME ADVERTISING PROMOTION
SHINING EXAMPLES
PRODUCING GREAT MEALS IS AS EASY AS PIE WITH PRESTIGE COOKWARE AND BAKEWARE.
WITH THEIR STYLISH LOOKS AND ENDURING QUALITY, THEY'RE THE PERFECT ADDITION TO ANY KITCHEN
When it comes to choosing kitchen equipment it can be difficult to find items that suit the style of your kitchen and perform well.
Boots, the largest specialist cookshop chain in the country, offers a wide range of products including the Prestige Lifetime Cookware range shown here.
Prestige saucepans and bakeware offer the perfect combination — excellent performance and quality.
The Lifetime Cookware range is made of the very finest  mirror-polished stainless steel which is easy to clean and maintains its good looks.
The pans are specially designed for more efficient cooking with a unique Thermocopper base — a ‘sandwich’ of stainless steel, aluminium and copper — and are ideal for cooking on all heat sources (except induction).
The pans shown here have dishwasher-safe phenolic handles and knobs and a handy hang-up loop for easier storage.
Available individually or in attractive gift sets, the Lifetime Collection pans are covered by a lifetime guarantee and supported by the Boots Assured Shopping pledge.
Prestige's stainless steel pressure cooker with a Thermocore base allows you to produce delicious, complete meals in minutes.
It is a quick, convenient and healthier way of cooking.
The use of steam and high temperature means the loss of nutrients is kept to a minimum but the flavour, colour and texture of the food are maintained.
A separator and trivet mean you can cook more than one thing at once and a Rise'n'Time indicator lets you time the cooking process by telling you when the right temperature is reached.
It is durable, easy to clean and has a 10-year guarantee.
To complete your kitchenware collection, Prestige bakeware comes in a variety of shapes and sizes (not all shown).
The unique Master Baker non-stick silicone coating ensures a perfect turn-out.
Whether you want to bake or boil, steam or fry, Prestige has a quality product that you can rely on.
If you'd like to try the Lifetime Collection for yourself, cut out the coupon below and take it to your local Boots Cookshop to get £5 off the Prestige three-piece cookware set.
ALL ABOUT WINE
Ned Halley discovers improving standards in the high street and the best buys from cross-Channel forays.
Plus the pick of the wines for April
THRESHER COURSE
Compared to its high-street rivals, the Thresher chain of wine shops has seemed to me a little too low profile for its own good.
But don't be fooled by the less-than-brash appearance of so many branches, for some brilliant bargains lurk within.
Start among the regional French wines with Château de Lastours, Cuvée Simone Descamps — a ripe rural red with a great slurpy weight of vigorous fruitiness, from the Corbières appellation .
It's a very powerful wine at 14° alcohol, and well priced at £4.49.
Also look out for another southern red, Minervois Domaine Sainte Eulalie — again a classic wine of its type, packed with rich fruit and a good buy at £3.49.
Both wines are currently from the 1988 vintage and will improve over the next few years.
Buy a dozen of each at a 10 per cent discount.
For some fine French whites, rummage among Thresher's outstanding choice of Alsace wines.
The Zind Humbrecht 1988 Pinot Blanc is quintessential Alsace: intense with an inviting spring-flower aroma and heaps of fresh grapey-fruity flavour.
The £5.49 price is well worth paying for this kind of quality.
Thresher has a modest selection of Bordeaux including several branded wines: Calvet Reserve 1985 red is ripe, soft and likeable at £5.75; while Sirius 1986 red has a good defined flavour and a better price at £4.99.
Among the classic wines, the best buy looks like Clos Du Marquis, the second of the great St Julien cru classé Château Léoville Les Cases.
At £12.45, this fine and ready-to drink 1985 wine isn't cheap.
but then these wines never are.
Farther afield, Thresher has the best of Italy's supremely dry, herby and exotic white wine, Vernaccia di San Gimignano, the San Quirico 1989 — a definite must at £4.99.
And from Spain, there's Gran Coronas Reserve 1985, a gorgeous rich red at £6.99.
GOLD TOP
Exorbitant champagne prices can make the pleasure of marking a special occasion with a bottle or two seem all-too fleeting at such high cost.
But don't despair — now you can preserve the celebratory moment by having the cork converted into a princely ornament.
Bravely brushing aside any question of taste, Mementos invites customers to send in their champagne corks for dipping in silver or gold, ‘transforming them into wonderful mementos of happy occasions’.
You can have your cork engraved with names and dates.
Cost per cork (with or without its wire) is £24.50 for silver or £49.50 for heavy gold.
Details from Mementos,.
LE SHOPPING TRIP
Un mot of advice to budget-conscious wine buffs making forays to French ports in search of bargain bottles from the huge ranges stocked by the hypermarkets: stick to wines in the lower price scale.
Tempting though it is to believe that the top-priced grands vins must be the biggest bargains of all, the opposite is in fact the case.
French retailers hike up the prices of their mature stocks with even more frequency and gusto than their British counterparts, and this can make ready-to-drink claret and burgundy très cher indeed.
Big-name Bordeaux reds of older vintage are very pricey at the giant Leclerc stores: compare the prices of Château Lagrange 1975, about £17, and Château Montrose 1982, about £20, to those charged by London merchants Bibendum — £11.50 and £15.81 respectively.
But the good news (or the bad, depending on your point of view) is that younger and humbler wines are extremely cheap at Leclerc.
You can still find grande marque champagnes such as Lanson and Moët at about £10 and generic burgundies at under £3 that you wouldn't find in Britain for under £6 or £7.
There are also scores of appellation contrôlée country wines of real quality costing between £1 and £2 per bottle.
Do bear in mind, of course, that wines over your duty-free concession will cost about £1 in duty and VAT.
THE SOFT OPTION
As we consume little more than 10 litres of wine per person per year, Britons can hardly claim to be a ‘wine-drinking nation’.
None of our Continental neighbours drinks less wine per capita.
The Portuguese and Italians drink 10 times more than we do.
But in the soft-drink stakes, Britain reigns supreme.
According to market research firm Euromonitor, each of us downs about 150 litres of fizzy pop per annum.
The total cost is more than twice the amount we spend on wine.
WINES FOR APRIL
A red wine to put spring in your step is the romantically named Castello Vicchiomaggio Chianti Classico 1986 from Victoria Wine at £4.99.
It has all the characteristics of a proper Chianti — sweetness of fruit, fleshiness but lightness of texture and sheer slurpability.
My white of the month is the 1989 Dry Muscat from Portugal's Joao Pires winery, where the man in charge happens to be an Australian.
This 1989 lives up to the standard of the previous vintage: smoky, lightly spicy dry white of immense charm and character.
It costs £4.29 from Oddbins.
NEXT MONTH From spring fever in Scotland and wine fever in Bulgaria to price hikes in Bristol
Getting the best from your GARDEN
With the latest furniture, conservatories, barbecues and swimming pools
The Late Show
WITH JUST A LITTLE THOUGHT AND PLANNING, YOUR GARDEN CAN BE THE PERFECT PLACE TO ENTERTAIN FRIENDS ON WARM EVENINGS.
FROM FURNITURE TO FOOD, LIGHTING TO FRAGRANT PLANTS, WE SHOW YOU WHAT YOU NEED TO MAKE THE MOST OF SUMMER
On a warm sunny evening, it's always a pleasure to invite friends round and dine alfresco.
Cookery editor Norma Miller offers some tips for carefree entertaining in your garden.
Now isn't the time to spend hours in the kitchen, so use quick, easy and well-tried recipes.
I prefer serving cold started and desserts because then all the food can be put outside at once buffet style.
You'll find plenty of inspiration for nibbles and starters at the delicatessen counter of a good supermarket.
From the wide range of cheeses, smoked and pickled fish, pâtés and salads, you can quickly make up some tasty treats — like  marinaded herrings in soured cream on pumpernickel bread, smoked salmon wrapped around asparagus spears, coarse pâté on hot toast, or salami with cream cheese and olives.
Alternatively, light a barbecue.
Throw a few twigs of rosemary, fennel or lavender on to hot coals for extra fragrance.
Duck breasts, lamb chops, spare ribs and Cumberland sausages only need a quick brush with oil but marinading will add spice and also tenderise the meat.
For a simple marinade, mix together wholegrain mustard, a crushed clove of garlic, a little vinegar, fresh herbs and a dash of soy sauce.
Most fish cooks beautifully in a barbecue as well.
Look for fresh sardines, tuna steaks and king prawns, or use some more exotic varieties such as parrot fish or snappers.
Monkfish has a very firm and meaty flesh, so it's easy to use for kebabs.
Just thread cubes onto pieces of pepper, tomato and mushrooms.
Remember, your fishmonger will always clean and prepare your fish selection.
With hot, sizzling barbecued food, serve large bowls of salad, pasta tossed with herby tomato sauce or olive oil, chopped basil and pine nuts.
Complete your meal with a selection of local cheeses, fresh bread and, of course, iced drinks.
The Light Effect
BRIGHTEN UP YOUR GARDEN WITH EXTERNAL LIGHTS AND IMPROVE HOME SECURITY AT THE SAME TIME
There are many advantages to installing lights in your garden.
Apart from helping you see where you're walking at night, they will increase home security and also enhance your favourite trees and shrubs, garden pools and any other special features.
In fact, well-designed outdoor lighting can create some really spectacular effects and allow you to make full use of your garden during the summer — especially if you have an eating or barbecue area.
Providing garden lighting doesn't have to be difficult or expensive, but permanent mains-voltage fittings should be professionally installed.
What kind of fitting?
Garden lights break down into three different categories; low-voltage, permanent mains-voltage and temporary mains-voltage.
Low-voltage lights are a good idea as you won't get an electric shock from them, even if you cut through the cable when digging.
They are connected to a transformer, which provides the 12 V supply to the lights.
The transformer can be inside the house or in the garden shed or garage — provided this is dry and there is a mains electricity supply.
Typical low-voltage lighting sets consist of two or four lights, usually coloured and mounted on spikes that you push into the soil in flowerbeds.
Permanent mains-voltage lights include floodlights, lanterns, bulkhead lights and spotlights attached to the house itself and lighting bricks in garden walls, spike lamps, post-top lanterns, floodlights and spotlights in the garden.
Where lights are attached to the house, they can normally be run from one of the house lighting circuits (provided fittings and external switches are weatherproof).
Light fittings in the garden should be connected to a separate circuit, from a spare fuse ‘way’ on the main consumer unit and protected by a residual circuit device (RCD)(see Safety first ).
They should also be run in a special armoured cable (or PVC cable in a conduit) and buried at least 450 mm (18 in) underground.
Mains-voltage cable should not be run on the surface of the ground and should never be attached to fences — as these can be easily blown down.
Temporary mains-voltage lights are mainly festoon lights — strings of coloured light bulbs in robust holders — which you arrange around patios, eating areas or barbecues when you need them.
You simply plug them into a convenient socket outlet inside the house (protected by an RCD) and put away once you've finished using them.
Festoon lights have the added advantage that, if positioned high enough above an eating or barbecue area, they'll attract insects away from the food and you.
Safety first
Apart from making sure that permanent mains-voltage lights are installed by a competent electrician, the main way of protecting yourself against getting an electric shock from garden lights is to install an RCD.
This senses the current flowing in the live and neutral wires and cuts off the electricity if there is a fault anywhere in the circuit.
A permanent garden circuit can be protected by a whole-circuit RCD, wired into the cable(s) after the consumer unit (unless the consumer itself is RCD protected).
Temporary mains-voltage lighting (and the transformer for low-voltage lighting) can be protected either by plugging it into an adaptor RCD, which goes into the socket outlet first, or by plugging it into an RCD socket, which can easily be fitted to replace a normal socket outlet.
Thoughts on design
Whether you want a functional or decorative scheme, you don't actually need very much light in the  garden.
Too many bright lights can create a glaring contrast between the lit and unlit areas.
But security lighting is a different matter, as you'll probably want a lot of light to come on when an intruder approaches.
Think, too, about flexibility — especially if you are putting in permanent garden lights.
You may want to light up different parts of the garden at different times of the year as different plants and shrubs come into flower.
Try experimenting with light fittings on an extension lead (protected by an RCD) to find out where lights look best, how powerful they need to be and whether the colours should be white (not always the case — especially when lighting trees).
Outdoor lighting should not cause any glare and even low-power lights should be fitted with diffusers or placed so they bounce their light off trees, shrubs or walls.
Functional matters
For paths and steps, permanent mains-voltage lighting can improve safety considerably.
Wallmounted lights (including lighting bricks set into the wall) are a good choice for steps, while post-mounted lights, bollard-type lights or low-level lanterns are good for paths.
Fit lights wherever a path changes direction or slopes up or down.
For illuminating patios and walkways close to the house, use wall-mounted lights — such as spotlights, tungsten halogen floodlights or one of the many decorative types of light available (globes or lanterns, for example).
Decorative effects
Mains-voltage festoon lights are ideal for stringing decoratively through the branches of a tree.
Here, and around the edges of a patio, you'll probably want to have them wired to a permanently fixed outdoor socket.
To light up plants, shrubs and other garden features, such as statues, ground-level light fittings (such as spotlights) are the most effective.
Shine the light upwards into the branches of a tree, and light plants and shrubs from the side or from the back rather than the front.
Where shrubs or small trees are in front of a wall, create an interesting effect by illuminating the wall rather than the shrub so that the shrub stands out in silhouette.
Rockeries and plant displays can be made into focal points by overhead lighting — with spotlights mounted in trees, for example.
For a really stunning effect, fit fully submerged lights into a garden pond or pool.
If the pond is fitted with a pump, there will already be an electricity supply for running pond lighting — normally low-voltage.
Sense of security
You can choose any kind of outside light to increase home security.
But normally, they are attached to the wall of the house.
Security lights have an infra-red sensor that detects human body heat and brings the light on whenever anyone approaches — welcoming for invited guests, but off-putting to intruders.
You can get separate sensors to wire up to an existing exterior light or you can buy security lights with a built-in sensor.
Both types of sensor can usually be wired to bring on more than one light.
HOW SAFE IS YOUR GARDEN?
Make sure there are no hidden hazards in your garden
The garden is a perfect place to entertain on summer evenings, but you should take basic steps to ensure safety.
Special attention should be given to the design, maintenance and illumination of areas used at night to avoid accidents, especially to visitors who aren't familiar with the layout of the garden.
For example, keep thorny and prickly plants and shrubs away from paths and seats.
Also cut back shoots growing into such areas, particularly those above chest level, that could catch people unawares in dim light.
Paths should be smooth and unbroken and any steps should be well constructed, with firm treads at least 30cm deep.
In shaded or damp areas that tend to collect a slippery coating of algae, paving and steps should always be cleaned regularly.
Finally, apart from comfortable seating, do provide ample table space so that empty glasses, bottles or broken crockery don't have to be left on the ground.
Left: For a startlingly different effect in the garden, try the Contessa E3 post-mounted lantern from Noral Lanterns, £491.25
Left: An adaptor RCD is ideal for plugging in temporary outdoor mains-voltage lighting or the transformer for low-voltage lighting.
The B & R PowerBreaker (shown here) costs about £20 Below: Brighten up your garden or patio after dark with inexpensive flares/torches in a variety of attractive colours and designs — ideal for barbecue parties.
From Odell Leisure Products
Above: The Noral Lanterns range of wallmounted lanterns includes the Regent Mini (shown here) for attaching to the wall of your house.
About £65.65
Above: The Mazda Lightstring promises to liven up any garden party or barbecue.
It has 25 assorted 25 W coloured light bulbs plus 12 m of weatherproof cable.
About £28 Right: This sturdy weatherproof patio lighting from Wiskes gives an attractive low-level lighting effect.
Globe post-lights, £18.99; Globe wall-light £10.99; Globe pedestal-light, £11.99
Left: The new Silver series of passive infra-red (PIR) lights from Smiths Industries offers inexpensive security lighting.
The SL01 (shown here) has a light and sensor and costs about ‘50 Above: MK's Seal splashproof light switches and socket outlets are ideal for use in the garden
LOOKING FOR A SECURITY LIGHT?
OR A SPECIAL-EFFECT SPOTLIGHT?
THEN FOLLOW OUR GUIDE TO SOME OF THE BRIGHTEST BUYS AROUND
Above: Favourite or hazardous features in your garden show up well under Hozelock's Hi lights.
Pre-wired with easy-fix connectors, the lamps can be positioned anywhere along the length of the low-voltage cable.
This is supplied along with a transformer to step the mains power down to a safe 12 V. Available in two or four-lamp kits, prices start from £45.75
Left: The Citronella range of outdoor lamps from Odell is safe, convenient and attractive.
Filled with scented citronella oil, a proven insect repellent, the lamps have pre-set wicks with 50 or 100 burning hours and will extinguish automatically if  accidentally tipped over.
Shown here is the Garden Lamp Set complete with 100-hr lamps, shades, extension rods and support stakes so they can be placed anywhere around the garden.
Price, £19.95
Above: Specially designed to be wallmounted outdoors, the Mazda 2D GEM is a versatile, rainproof light, ideal for porches, drives and paths.
Supplied with an energy-saving 16 W 2D fluorescent bulb, it costs about £23 from Omega Lighting
Left: Highlight attractive areas of your garden with Hozelock's Moonglow Feature Lights.
Moulded in dark green to make them more discreet, a set of four different coloured lenses is provided along with spikes, wall brackets, cable and a transformer for conversion from mains to a safe 12 V. Price, from £48.95 for a two-lamp set
Left: For decorative garden lighting, choose this delightful Victorian-style, double-wall lantern from Chelsom.
Made from rust-resistant cast-aluminium with a stove-enamelled finish, the vandal-resistant globes in white are suitable for use with the energy saving Osram Compacta bulb.
Price, £114 
Scents of Purpose
SWEET-SCENTED VARIETIES OF PLANTS AND SHRUBS WILL MAKE ANY GARDEN A DELIGHT ON SUMMER EVENINGS
Dusk on a still and balmy evening, after the heat of the day has passed, is the time when you can really appreciate the full fragrance of flowers.
It may be due to the change of temperature and humidity, or because our sense of smell becomes sharpened as fading light reduces vision, but we certainly become much more aware of scent at night.
Some plants harbour their scent until late in the day, when it is released in abundance.
Bedding stocks, for instance, are noted for their fragrance, but none compares with the night-scented stock (Matthiola bicornis).
A hardy annual, it can be grown in any garden where a few patches here and there can be a delight.
Although the plants are dowdy looking and scentless during the day, at dusk they suddenly release a powerful ravishing scent.
Virginia stock (Malcomia maritima) is another scented hardy annual.
Short of stature and quick to flower, its pastel flowers become almost luminous as light fades.
Another evening performer is the tobacco plant (Nicotiana alata).
Not the modern, short, colourful varieties, though some of these are quite well scented, but the common tall white form.
This, too, holds its sweet fragrance until the evening arrives.
The half-hardy marvel of Peru (Mirabilis jalapa), with bushy growth and oddly marked flowers, enters the scent stakes a little earlier as its flowers open around 4 pm, but continues until the flowers die the next day.
The hardy annual mignonette (Reseda odorata) is always listed with scented plants, although I have rarely noticed its fragrance.
But when I have, it has always been a green-flowered form, like the Machet variety, and in the evening.
There are many plants that give off scent during the day but which seem to take on fresh strength in the evenings.
One of my favourites for growing in containers on a patio or terrace is the heliotrope used for bedding.
Its scent is delicious.
Found in many cottage gardens, sweet sultan (Centaurea moschata) is another scented annual easily raised from seed sown in open ground in spring.
Sweet peas, particularly the old fashioned varieties and selections, with their smaller flowers, are far more powerfully scented than many of their modern counterparts.
For early summer, sweet Williams produce a powerful fragrance that can be detected from some distance in the late evening.
They will flower one year after they are sown.
As a form of dianthus, sweet Williams are closely related to the garden pinks, any of which are also richly endowed with scent, like the old favourite Mrs Sinkins.
Some may bloom for only a few weeks, but their display is beautiful.
So, too, is that of the taller, scented border phloxes when they are open after mid-summer.
Shrubs can also add fragrant delight to the night garden.
In early summer, lilacs finally open and release their heady perfume.
The pale mock oranges (philadelphus) also scent the air when they open.
There are plenty of fragrant roses available, too numerous to mention individually and including many old varieties with ravishing perfumes.
One of the most scented of all must surely be the old Zéphirine Drouhin.
Buddleias, of course, produce plenty of scent.
Try the early summer flowering B. alternifolia, its shoots wreathed with clusters of pale purple flowers, and August flowering B. davidii, with tapering heads of white to purple at its stem tips.
Not to be neglected, either, are the scented honeysuckles.
There are a number of them, but planting just the early Dutch (Lonicera periclymenum Belgica) and late Dutch (L. p.
Serotina) honeysuckles should ensure a charming display from May through to October.
1
Phlox, border
2
Centaurea moschata (sweet sultan)
3
Rosa Zéphirine Drouhin
4
Matthiola (stock)
5
Dianthus (sweet William)
6
Philadelphus
7
Malcomia maritima (Virginia stock)
8
Syringa vulgaris (lilac)
Eating Out
HOT SUNNY DAYS AND WARM EVENINGS ARE THE IDEAL TIME TO BRING OUT THE BARBECUE.
AND NOW THERE'S A DESIGN TO SUIT EVERYONE
Above: The sturdy Alicante ALNO10C is a super new electric barbecue from Alfresco.
With two wide shelves, an adjustable cooking grill and a warming rack, it comes complete with spit rod for rotisserie cooking and re-usable lava rock.
Prices start from about £80
Below: Introducing Optima 1, a cleverly designed charcoal barbecue from Garden Life.
It has a large preparation and grilling area with a removable firebowl, which if reversed with the windshield still attached will prevent rainwater collecting.
Price about £44.99
Below: An innovation from Garden Life, the portable Beach Burger barbecue is ideal for picnics, parties and for days out.
It has two round firebowls with grills that tuck neatly inside when you fold the barbecue up and it has removable legs for easy storage.
Price £19.99
Right: Whether you're cooking in the garden or out on a picnic, the portable Smokey Joe barbecue is ideal.
Made from solid steel with a porcelain-enamelled finish, it has detachable legs and a vent that you close to extinguish the briquettes or charcoal.
This sturdy and weather-resistant one from Weber Barbecues costs about £40
Above: From Gaggenau, this sophisticated electric barbecue on wheels can be used all year round.
The Grillmobil has two separate heating elements, both with 12-step variable temperature switches and two stainless steel grids that are removable.
Under the grill is a pan filled with lava stones that absorb and condense any dropping fat.
Available in white or brown, it costs about £750
Right: One of the most fully-equipped, traditional-style barbecues available today is Gaucho's Bistro 5 Grill 891505.
It has a built-in oven to keep the food warm, two side shelves and front shelf to prepare food on and a removable grid and hearth for quick and easy cleaning.
Price from about £130
Left: The Odell Griddle Pan is specially designed for food that's normally difficult to cook on a barbecue.
Made from rust-proof aluminium, it will retain heat and is suitable for both gas and charcoal barbecues.
Price from £9.95
Left: Rectella's Bar-Be-Quick Instant Lighting charcoal means you don't need firelighters or lighting fluid and is completely clean to handle.
It comes pre-packed in two sealed 1- kg bags.
To use, you simply place it on the barbecue and light with a match.
Available in recyclable cardboard tub, £4.29; or in a lacquered bag, £3.99
Take a Seat
ENJOY YOUR GARDEN TO THE FULL WITH OUR SELECTION OF STYLISH GARDEN FURNITURE
Above: This practical Premiere sun-lounger from M & P Leisure has adjustable backrest and seat positions, wheels to help move it around easily and a drinks tray just below the armrest.
The cushions are available in four pretty designs.
Shown here in Verona, it costs £149
Right: With an unusual hoop-back Regency design, the Greenwich armchair from Barnsley House's Winterthur collection is a must for those looking for sturdy yet stylish garden furniture.
Price from about £265
Left: The Verbania garden chair from Rovergarden can adjust to five different positions.
Shown here with a pretty floral cushion called Etna, it costs about £155.
Above: The Deauville Spring Seat from Barnsley House's Smithsonian collection combines comfort with elegance.
Available in white or green, either as an armchair or side-chair, prices start from about £235
Above: Handmade by craftsmen, this willow chair from Marston & Langinger is ideal for either conservatory or a garden.
It comes complete with loose cushions that have removable covers and are available in a variety of fabrics.
Price from about £300
Left: Made from naturally seasoned, untreated oak and solid cast bronze, the Gothick garden chair from Malling Joinery & Design blends well with almost any garden.
Price from about £340
Left; De-luxe is a super lightweight, portable deck chair from Lister by Geebro.
Made from polished beech with an attractive blue and red striped canvas seat, it has large flat arms for comfort and folds flat for easy storage.
Price from £55.20
Above: The traditionally designed Edwardian Steamer chair by Sarah Burgoyne Revivals looks elegant and is comfortable, too.
In hand-rubbed beech, the robust frame features an extra-long legrest, chunky arms and a brass drinks holder that swings out when required.
Including the canopy and cushions, it costs £285
Right: For total relaxation in the garden choose the Warwick rocking chair from Lister by Geebro.
Made from teak, it has smooth round arms and rockers and comes complete with a beige cushion.
Price from £345.92
Left: From Nova's Imperial range, a comfortable wheeled lounger to sit and relax in.
The sturdy frame has a special protection to make it waterproof and the cushions are covered in a charming songbird design fabric.
Price from about £225
Left: Shown here on Rovergarden's Ascona chair, which has 20 adjustable positions, is a royal blue Dralon cushion with a removable cover.
Price complete with cushion is about £265
Above: Tropicana is a colourful range of garden furniture exclusive to M & P Leisure.
Shown here is the pool chair and deck chair that can be folded flat for easy storage.
Each comes with a four-year guarantee.
They cost about £26.99 and £58.99 respectively
In the Swim
MAKE A SPLASH THIS SUMMER WITH ONE OF THESE SUPER POOLS.
INDOOR OR OUT, THE CHOICE IS YOURS…
Below: Enclosed inside an attractive walled garden, this Buckingham pool blends perfectly with its surroundings.
Prices on request
Below: A striking slatted-wood ceiling and decorative brickwork combine with bright lighting to complement this rectangular-shaped indoor pool by Cascade.
Prices on request
Right: Protect your outdoor pool from the rigours of winter by enclosing it in a Norwegian log chalet.
Installation is quick and clean, and very soon you could be enjoying a warm, comfortable swim whatever the weather.
The one shown here incorporates a spa.
Prices on request
Right: A rectangular concrete pool designed by Buckingham to make the most of a walled garden.
It is equipped with a Grando fully retractable safety cover.
Prices on request from manufacturer
Below: For sheer luxury and all-year-round comfort, choose this splendid indoor pool and Jacuzzi from Penguin Pools.
It is shown here in the beautiful Colonial swimming pool conservatory that makes the most of surrounding views.
Prices on request
Left: Distinctive dark pool-surround tiles contrast with the light brickwork of the house.
Set in a beautiful patio areas, this concrete pool is by Buckingham.
Prices on request
Left: Luxuriant trees and flowers are planted in swirls and curves to highlight the lines of this beautiful pool by Penguin Pools.
Statues and a summerhouse complete the effect.
Prices on request
Below: This free-shaped pool by Simplex has traditional brick copings that make an attractive feature in a rural setting.
A co-ordinating brick wall completes this stylish scene.
Prices on request
Above: The great thing about this indoor pool by Cascade is that during the warm summer months the doors slide open to give you the best of both worlds.
Prices on request
Below: Set in a large, sloping garden amid mature trees, this elegant design by Cascade makes the most of its south-facing position.
Prices on request
Clear Winners
FILLED WITH LUXURIANT, LEAFY PLANTS, A CONSERVATORY WILL NOT ONLY BRING YOUR GARDEN INDOORS BUT ALSO CREATE A STYLISH EXTRA LIVING SPACE TO ENHANCE THE APPEARANCE OF YOUR HOME
Below: Amblestone is a charming Victorian-style conservatory that offers plenty of space and light.
It has a hardwood frame and full-height sealed-unit double glazing.
Available from Strand conservatories, it costs about £4,750
Right: It's so easy to sit back and relax in this beautiful conservatory from Durabuild.
Like all its designs, the B3 is tailor-made and you can buy it as a flat-pack for self-assembly or have it assembled by the company.
Made from red cedar, it is double glazed throughout and all opening window fittings are in solid brass.
A similar design would cost about £8,188 (self-assembly)
Below: Cast-iron pillars are incorporated in the design on this Bartholomew conservatory, which blends perfectly with the house.
Standard components can be assembled in different ways to suit a variety of requirements.
This one costs about £10,500
Above: Aptly named the Sun Lounge, this neat conservatory from Sunrise has a thermally efficient uPVC framework and sealed-unit double glazing so you can use it all year round.
Available in any size, this version costs £6,750 (including basework and installation)
Below: Built to last, Bermuda is an attractive conservatory by Marley.
Made from aluminium and toughened safety glass, it's finished in a choice of white or brown polyester paint and comes with single or double sliding doors.
Prices start from about £1,935 (including delivery)
Below: For stylish extra living space, choose the elegant Regency conservatory from Sunrise.
Available in a wide range of sizes, the uPVC framework will never rot or corrode and the conservatory is double glazed throughout.
Price as shown, £11,250 (including basework and installation)
Right: Gothic arches feature strongly in this stunning conservatory from Crystal Palace Developments.
Made to measure in glass fibre with toughened glass roof and sides, optional extras include ventilation and double glazing.
Price as shown, £11,000
Above: Marston & Langinger designs and builds conservatories to complement the style and period of your home.
This attractive hardwood conservatory has a steep pitched roof that blends in well with the gabled Elizabethan building behind.
It is fully double glazed, and ventilation plus an underfloor heating system means it can be used all year round.
It costs about £37,000
Right: Colonial is a luxury conservatory you can erect yourself.
The components come ready-prepared for assembly and only a small amount of drilling is needed to attach the conservatory to the base and the wall.
Made from solid cedar wood with hardwood sills, the Colonial is double glazed with a polycarbonate roof.
Available from Halls Homes & Gardens.
Price from about £3,038 (supply only)
Left: The low-profile ridge height of the Mistral conservatory from Eden makes it ideal for bungalows.
This spacious design has an aluminium frame, finished in dark brown or brilliant white, and is single glazed with toughened glass throughout.
Prices start from about £2,300 (supply only)
Left: Wickes has combined its Victorian-style Oxford conservatory with its lean-to Cambridge design to create the luxurious and spacious Oxbridge conservatory.
The maintenance-free uPVC panels feature screen-printed designs and sealed-unit double glazing.
A detailed leaflet with illustrations is available for self-assembly, but the company offers a complete installation service as well.
Price from about £7,420
Above: Add value and charm to your home with this delightful conservatory from Amdega.
Octagonal in shape, the framework is made from western red cedar and is available with single or double glazing throughout.
Amdega will build it from start to finish or supply the materials only.
Prices start from about £4,319 (single glazed, supply only)
Helping Hands
THE RIGHT TOOLS ARE ESSENTIAL TO THE SUCCESS OF ANY GARDEN.
WE SHOW YOU WHAT YOU'LL NEED TO GET STARTED
Basic tools
Large garden centres and DIY stores offer a bewildering array of garden tools.
There's not only a vast choice, but most are available in all sorts of materials and designs.
And if you're just taking up gardening, it can be difficult to decide what you really need — to begin with you can easily get by with a few basic tools.
Then, as you become more experienced, you can increase your collection according to the type of gardening you want to do.
Tools are expensive, but it is often a false economy to go for the cheapest.
Gardening tools have to be strong enough to take some hard wear and tear, and those made of poor-quality metal will tend to bend or break under stress.
On the other hand, it would costs a small fortune to equip yourself with a full set of stainless steel tools, although these are best if you can afford them.
If not, ordinary steel tools of reasonable quality will give good service if they are looked after properly.
Minimum requirements
If you're starting from scratch, what do you really need?
Well, my basic kit of hand tools consists of 12 items with which you could tackle any common gardening job.
They are:
1
Digging spade Essential for winter digging to leave the soil rough, for digging trenches and large planting holes for shrubs, etc, and any other general shovelling.
Most are very similar, but some differ in that they have a flat ‘tread’ at the top of the blade.
This tread is less damaging to your boots or shoes when pushing the spade in with your foot, but the soil tends to pack beneath it.
I prefer a threadless spade which is easier to keep clean.
2
Digging fork Used for loosening and breaking soil down finely, mixing fertiliser into the soil surface, moving plant debris and manure, and lifting and dividing plants.
3
Rake For levelling dug soil, creating a fine surface tilth for sowing, working in fertiliser and raking up any plant debris.
The main difference between rakes is how the head is made.
The best are those where the head is made from a single piece of metal rather than where individual teeth are riveted into place.
The head must be substantial enough not to bend easily and should be about 30cm wide.
4
Draw hoe Needed for chopping out large weeds, loosening a compacted soil surface, drawing up soil around plants as well as making drills for seed sowing.
Easiest to handle is one with a swan neck, where the blade is held away from the end of the handle by a curved shaft.
5
Dutch hoe The best tool for controlling weeds.
Used with a pushing motion so that the blade skims along just under the soil to kill weed seedlings and keep the surface open.
The traditional design has only a front cutting edge and is still one of the best tools to use between rows of tiny seedlings.
Modern variations have two cutting edges and are used with a push/pull action.
I particularly like the model from Wolf Tools that enables a large area of ground to be hoed quickly and with minimum effort.
6
Garden trowel The curved blade allows seedlings to be lifted with a block of soil around their roots.
It can be used for setting out plants, sowing large seeds individually and planting bulbs.
A trowel with a forged blade is best.
The cheapest trowels stamped from sheet metal tend to bend.
You'll save a lot of wear and tear on your hands if you buy a stainless steel trowel, because nothing causes more blisters than using a rusty trowel.
7
Garden line and reel Though you can mange with two short stakes and a length of cord, a garden line with reel and peg saves a lot of frustration and time when sowing individual rows of seed or marking border edges.
8
Watering can and rose For watering plants, soaking drills before sowing or, fitted with a rose, to moisten seed beds and water tiny seedlings.
For general garden use an upright, galvanised metal can will give years of service.
If you do much watering by can a long way from a tap, get a matching pair, each holding 2 gallons.
It's more comfortable to carry a full can in each hand and using two will save you a lot of time and effort.
9
Plastic bucket A lightweight hold-all for transporting fertiliser or water, depositing weeds and plant thinnings when working, or carrying tools about the garden.
Choose a large bucket with a  metal handle and it should last for many years.
10
Wheelbarrow Essential in any but the smallest garden for moving manure around, as well as garden compost and plant debris, including hedge clippings and grass cuttings.
Choose one that's the right size for your garden and with a wide wheel tread — narrow wheels sink into soft ground.
Better still is a wheelbarrow fitted with a ball instead of a wheel; they are more easily manoeuvred over soft and rough ground and are kinder to lawns.
If you have a large lawn, a barrow that can be fitted with an extension is handy as you can remove more grass each time.
11
Secateurs For pruning and cutting back fruit trees, canes and bushes and other tough woody plants and shrubs.
These come in many styles but are basically of two types — those where the blades pass each other in a scissor action, and those where a single sharp blade presses down on a block or ‘anvil’.
Both are effective and it's really a matter of personal preference which you choose.
On some models you can adjust the distance that the blades will open and this can make them less tiring to use for a prolonged period.
12
Shears Essential for trimming hedges and edges of lawns, shears come in a variety of weights and sizes, some having a notch near the handles for cutting tough stems.
So choose a pair that feels comfortable and not too heavy.
Most people find their wrists ache due to the constant jarring as the shears are closed and some better models are fitted with buffers to help alleviate this.
Optional extras
Apart from the basic hand tools that most gardeners will find useful, there are a few more you might need, depending on your special interests  and the type of garden that you have.
Border fork A smaller version of a digging fork; very handy for working among close-spaced plants and lifting individual seedlings.
Tines cultivator Ideal for breaking up rough dug soil and mixing in fertiliser.
Invaluable for anyone who grows vegetables.
Dibber Used to plant brassicas and to make holes to plant leeks.
Metal-tipped ones are much easier to use.
Lawn rake The most common type is fan-shaped with close-set wire tines and is used gently to remove surface rubbish from the lawn and to lift long stems to blade height so they will be cut off.
Occasionally, a lawn rake is used with pressure to break up and loosen the surface of the turf and rake out dead matted growth, or ‘thatch’, from beneath the surface to improve water penetration and aeration.
Onion hoe A small hand version of a swan-necked draw hoe, useful for working between close-set plants and rows.
Invaluable if you are growing vegetables intensively in beds.
Power points
Anyone with a large plot to maintain, who wants to reduce effort and time spent on regular jobs, such as hedge trimming, will find power tools invaluable.
They are more expensive and need some servicing, but will certainly make life easier.
Lawn mower
Essential to anyone with a lawn, this is the single largest investment most gardeners make in equipment.
There is a huge variety available, powered by either petrol or electricity, ranging from lightweight 30-cm-wide models to mini-tractors you can sit on.
However, there are only three basic types:
Cylinder mowers
The best type for a luxury lawn, these cut with a scissor action to give a good finish.
Most have a roller drive that creates attractive light and dark stripes on the lawn and also allows you to cut the grass right up to the edge.
Clippings are easily collected, but these mowers only work efficiently on reasonably short grass.
Most power models are self-propelled.
Rotary mowers
Hand or self-propelled, these cut the grass with a scything action as the blades revolve.
Good for utility lawns and keeping rough grass under control.
Also for cutting longer grass or seed heads that tend to be missed by cylinder mowers.
Not so efficient at collecting clippings.
Most have wheels but some are fitted with rollers to create stripes.
Some are also fitted with a blade break for safety.
Very small and lightweight electric models are also widely available.
Hover mowers
These rotary mowers ride on a cushion of air when in use and can be hung up out of the way afterwards.
Used regularly the short clippings get hidden below the surface of the lawn so you don't have to dispose of them, but long grass is left in bands on the surface and usually needs to be raked up and removed.
They can be easily manoeuvred, but tend to slip downhill on any pronounced slope.
Will cut over the edge of a lawn and the low-profile enables them to cut under low shrub branches.
The choice of mower you make will depend on the area and type of grass you have to cut.
The wider the cut, the quicker the lawn will be mown, but there must be room to manoeuvre the machine properly.
Electric models are clean and efficient but cable must be run out and stored away each time.
Petrol models need to be fuelled and serviced and can be difficult to start if not maintained properly.
Electric hedge trimmer
Doesn't give such a fine finish as hand shears, but gets the job done quickly
Nylon line trimmer
For cutting down grass and weeds around tree trunks, buildings and other odd places as well as trimming overgrown lawn edged.
Choose one that takes a thick nylon line rather than the thinner type that will break more easily.
Electric lawn scarifier
Although not used more often than once a year in autumn, this tool saves all the hard work involved in scarifying (breaking up and loosening the surface of) a lawn by hand with a lawn rake.
A scarifier is a sound investment for anyone aiming to create and maintain a first-class lawn.
It's surprising how much moss and dead growth it clears from an area of established turf on the first use; just the type of debris that tends to suffocate fine grasses.
Rotary cultivator
A powered digger to break up ground.
The most common type used by gardeners is drawn through the earth by rotors that dig the soil and it takes practice to get the knack of using it.
More expensive wheeled models are available and are easier to handle, but they might need more room to manoeuvre.
Rotary cultivators are ideal in the kitchen garden for digging and preparing seed beds quickly, particularly on difficult soils.
They are not very efficient at working in raw manure, but will mix in proprietary composted manure and bark spread over the surface.
SIMPLE SAFETY MEASURES
Basic tools
Garden tools designed to cut, chop, or which have prongs, are hazardous if carelessly handled.
Never throw a fork or spade or put it down near your feet.
Always carry it with you or push it into the soil.
A spade or fork should always be hung up with tines or blade curving in towards the support.
If it should drop there's less chance of it hitting anyone's foot.
A rake left lying on the ground is dangerous, not only because of its teeth, but because an unwary step on the head of the rake could suddenly swing the handle upright with shattering force.
Power tools
Gardeners should always follow these simple rules when dealing with any piece of electric or petrol-driven machinery.
Always remove the lead from the spark plug of petrol machines and unplug electric models before cleaning or servicing.
Keep hands and feet well away from blades and rotors when machines are in operation.
Use only outdoor waterproof fittings for electric cables.
Run the power from a circuit fitted with a residual current circuit breaker to cut off power in the event of the cable being cut or any other short circuit developing.
Take care to keep the power cable out of the path of electric mowers.
When working with a hedge trimmer, run the supply cable over one shoulder well away from the blades.
Growing Under Glass
A GREENHOUSE HELPS BOOST YOUR GROWING POWER WHATEVER THE WEATHER
A greenhouse is one of the simplest ways to expand your scope for raising and growing plants.
But when you start with just a basic structure, you must remember that there are certain things you'll need to get the most out of it — both for you and your plants.
As a useful first step it is worth installing electricity to provide light and power.
So much greenhouse equipment is electric and a light will allow you to work with the plants at any time of the day.
All the fittings must be waterproof and made for outdoors, and the supply should be connected by a qualified electrician.
A change of air
Ventilation is needed to help control temperatures in warm weather and prevent the air becoming stagnant and dank, particularly on dull days.
Some form of automatic operation is vital if you'll be leaving the greenhouse unattended for any length of time.
This will ensure that plants aren't damaged by the early morning sun, and that heat will be conserved when the temperature drops.
As extractor fan fitted into the apex of the greenhouse at one end and controlled by a thermostat works efficiently.
For proper ventilation, cool air must be drawn in at the base to replace the hot air that has been extracted.
Most greenhouses are easily fitted with a louvred ventilator in place of a normal sheet of glass.
One alternative is to fit individual automatic openers, such as Bayliss Autovents, to ventilators.
These are powered by expansion, opening and closing automatically according to the temperature.
Shaded corners
In hot weather some form of shading is necessary to keep down the internal temperature, as well as to shield plants from direct sunlight.
You can buy liquid shading (a spray-on opaque covering) that can be applied directly to the glass, as well as plastic sheeting and mesh that you pin inside the greenhouse.
Blinds can be raised and lowered as required.
External roll blinds are the most efficient since they prevent heat rays from penetrating the glass.
Heating in the hothouse
The heat necessary for raising and growing tender plants and crops can be provided by solid fuel, oil, gas or electricity.
Electric heating is clean and easily controlled, but it's expensive.
If you want to maintain a minimum temperature above 10°C, it may be economical to use a cheaper form of fuel to provide the bulk of the heat and top up the supply with electric heaters in very cold weather.
To be really efficient, electric heaters should be controlled by a thermostat with a remote sensor mounted at plant height.
An efficient maximum/minimum thermometer is essential for keeping a check on the heating and to assess whether ventilation and shading are adequate to keep day temperatures down to a reasonable level.
Propagating plants
An electric propagator is both economical and extremely useful.
It is economical because it allows a high temperature to be maintained in just a small area, and useful as it encourages speedy germination of seeds and rapid rooting of cuttings.
It gives you the potential to raise many varieties of exotic plants.
Make sure you choose a model that can increase the normal temperature to that required for propagation.
A propagator can also be used to safeguard tender plants from frost.
Staging and shelving solutions
Some form of staging, and possibly shelving, is needed to support plants.
Aluminium benching is easily the best, as it virtually lasts for ever and is easily cleaned.
High standards of cleanliness are essential as the extra warmth and humidity can encourage pests and diseases.
Benches with reversible tops give the option of either a smooth surface or recessed gravel trays for summer and are particularly useful.
Shelves are handy, not only for displaying plants, but also to hold seedlings closer to the glass where they can get most benefit from the light.
Again, lightweight, easy-to-clean aluminium is probably best.