

1992 AN INTRODUCTORY GUIDE FOR LOCAL AUTHORITIES
LOCAL GOVERNMENT INTERNATIONAL BUREAU 1992
INTRODUCTION
By Paul Bongers, Director, Local Government International Bureau
Of all the misconceptions surrounding progress towards completing the internal market perhaps two stand out.
Firstly, that time is on our side in that the process doesn't start until 31 December 1992 and, secondly, that the whole thing is to do with the business and commercial sector and that it has no direct relevance for local authorities.
In essence, there is little for local authorities to do, and what does need to be done can wait at least a couple more years!
This is a sure recipe for ensuring that when the barriers do come down, those who think this way will be left behind.
This leaflet is intended to provide a concise overview of the 1992 process, focusing on what it might mean for local authorities.
It is aimed primarily at local authority members and officers who have not as yet been closely involved in European Community issues but who recognise that 1992 will bring important changes of policy and practice.
For many, such a leaflet will be redundant as they have already passed the level at which it is pitched.
The more that fall into this category, the better local government is prepared for what lies ahead in the Europe of the 1990s.
The Local Government International Bureau will have a major role to play in ensuring that local government is indeed ready.
The Bureau is the servant of local authorities and the Associations and I and my colleagues are available for information and advice on any aspect of 1992 and all that it might mean.
We shall be deeply involved in the 1992 process in the months and years ahead, and our monthly bulletin European Information Service will give high priority to keeping UK local authorities in touch with developments.
Arguments may continue at varying levels about what completing the internal market does or should mean.
Few, however, would dispute either the inevitability of the process or that its effect on the 320 million European citizens will be real and lasting.
The United Kingdom as a whole needs to be ready for the challenge ahead.
So does the part of government within it which is closest to the daily concerns of its citizens.
1992 marks a major change in which Europe ceases to be a matter for specialists and becomes the concern of everyone in local government.
Is your authority ready?
Are you?
This leaflet may help you judge.
WHAT IS 1992 ALL ABOUT?
Completing the internal or single European market and 1992 are one and the same thing.
The basic aims were already set out in the original Treaty of Rome (1957) establishing the European Economic Community.
But two more recent developments accelerated the process and brought things to where they stand today.
In 1985 Lord Cockfield as European Commissioner responsible for the Internal Market presented the White Paper ‘Completing the Internal Market’.
The paper was approved by Heads of Government at their Milan summit held in June 1985.
The White Paper set out some 300 proposals (since reduced to 279) aimed at removing physical, technical and fiscal barriers affecting trade in goods, services, capital and the movement and employment of people.
The proposals cover a wide range of areas, some very specific in nature, others with a wider implication.
They fall into eight broad groupings:
Simplification and abolition of frontier controls on goods simplification of Community transit procedures, affecting current customs procedures
Freedom of movement and establishment of people making it easier for people to move around, live and work within Europe.
Mutual recognition of qualifications
Technical harmonisation and standards developing standardisation the European level covering a wide range of products.
In short, if any of them reaches this standard it should be acceptable Community-wide
Opening of public procurement lifting national barriers to the award of public supply and public work contracts.
Community-wide tendering for large contracts.
Reducing national and local preference schemes
Services greater freedom of choice in a variety of sectors, e.g. banking and insurance, liberalisation of regulations covering air transport
Liberalisation of capital movements relating to international movement of money, access to loans, etc
Fostering industrial co-operation definition of European company law, harmonisation of company taxation, trademark laws, protection of patents, etc
Removal of fiscal frontiers harmonisation of VAT rates, of rates of taxation on cigarettes, alcohol, etc
HOW WILL THIS AFFECT LOCAL AUTHORITIES?
It is no exaggeration to say that every committee, every department of every local authority, in Britain will be affected by some aspect of the 1992 process.
Some of the changes will affect authorities across the board, others will be specific to particular services.
Some of the changes will flow directly from the legislation, others form the new socio-economic circumstances resulting from it.
These are the key areas:
Public contracts — a new directive covering supply contracts over £140,000 came into force at the beginning of 1989.
A similar directive covering public works contracts over £3.5 million is scheduled to come in at the beginning of 1990.
Public sector tendering will in future be opened to all European Community firms with a requirement to advertise tenders and award contracts without discrimination.
An authority's ability to favour local firms will be curtailed.
Most of the provisions of the new directives may in future apply to the previously excluded sectors of energy, transport and water distribution.
Authorities will face greater administrative burdens through the more detailed tendering provision.
There may be more enquiries from tenderers outside the UK and specifications will have to refer to relevant European standards.
Technical harmonisation of standards — the move away from national to European standards will have major implications for authorities responsible for implementing measures in the health, environmental and trading standards sectors.
In some areas the new standard might differ markedly from that we have been used to in Britain.
The work of the environmental health officer will be particularly affected.
Which profession carries out particular work may differ from country to country.
Trading standards officers have been the most directly involved in European legislation to date: other professions will need to follow their lead in developing close working relations with their European counterparts.
Free movement of workers — the aspect of the 1992 process of most immediate effect for individuals or local authorities as major employers is the ‘social dimension’.
This covers such areas as the mutual recognition of technical and professional qualifications, greater facility to travel to and work in other member states, the increasing need for language skills, developing the dialogue between employer and employee organisations, and the improvement of living and working conditions.
Strictly speaking not all of the measures within these areas fall within the 1992 programme but given their inter-relationship they need to be looked at together.
Local authorities as employers may for example, wish to consider attracting workers from other European countries.
But they may need to bear in mind the wish of some of their key workers to move in the opposite direction.
The education service — will have major tasks to fulfil in vocational training to prepare future employees and citizens for a barrier-free Europe.
In schools, the development of European awareness will have to be built into the curriculum much more than it has been so far.
And the importance of modern language teaching will be very much greater.
Libraries — will need to extend their information services, both externally and within the authority, to ensure proper access to Community legislation, funding opportunities, standards and databases.
On the environmental side it will be vital to ensure that the standards, rules and codes of practice drawn up at Community level are appropriate to all our circumstances and are capable of being enforced economically and efficiently.
Environmental impact assessment procedures, pollution control measures and environmental standards must be based on agreement at Community — and often at a wider international — level.
Social services will not escape the 1992 programme either.
Freedom of movement of people may lead to significant changes in the age structure in certain parts of Europe, with consequential changes in demand upon the social services.
Equally, unless the sharp differences in social security régimes among the Member States are harmonised through an effective levelling-up process, the social services in some areas may find surprising new demands placed upon them.
In the field of social housing , discrimination against nationals of other Member States will be out of the question.
Police forces, too, will be in the front line of the 1992 process.
Day-to-day cooperation between police forces must move to a new level of efficiency to allow European citizens to move freely but to ensure that drugs and arms cannot.
Economic development — the completion of the internal market will lead to greater industrial mobility within Europe.
Companies throughout the Community will be looking to expand their markets.
In an increasingly competitive environment local authorities will, more than ever, need to reappraise their economic development polices, to asses how attractive to inward investors their area is compared with their neighbours' or other parts of Britain and Europe.
Local firms will need to have a good grasp of the challenges or threats that 1992 will bring, to have a good feel for which sectors and industries locally will be most affected when the barriers come down.
It will be vital to ensure that the right types of sites are available for the firms likely to be attracted, and to have the necessary back-up infrastructure in place.
There will need to be an assessment of which overseas markets offer the most opportunities at the same time as looking for early signs of local companies being eyed by competitors as ripe for merger or acquisition, forecasting what the effects of this might be on the locality.
Easier and cheaper travel will lead to more tourists coming to Britain.
Authorities will wish to attract them to their area, and ensure that the necessary infrastructure and services are there to receive them.
Structural funds — running alongside the completion of the single market will be the doubling, by 1993, of the European Community']s three structural funds — European Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund.
These funds support infrastructure projects and training courses.
Authorities will need to be fully aware of what these funds and other sources of European funding might have to offer their area, and to make sure that the fullest use is made of them.
Local autonomy — an increasingly integrated Europe cannot operate effectively by drawing all power to the centre.
It will require strong democratic local or regional government institutions, equipped to respond to local needs and to reflect these in the Community policy-making process.
Together with their partners in other member states, local authorities will need to seek the full implementation of the principles set out in the European Charter of Local Self-Government.
IS MY AUTHORITY READY FOR 1992?
This can probably best be discovered from responses to a series of questions:
What is my authority's position or policy on 1992?
Do we have an officer co-ordinating our 1992 effort?
Is our information service adequate to cope?
Have we identified specialists in the main areas to assess the implications for the authority of the proposals?
Are we in close touch with our firms in discussions on 1992?
Which of our firms or sectors are likely to be most affected by 1992?
Will those relying on the home market, particularly in the public sector, be ready to face the new competition?
Which markets in other member states can they best move into?
Does our area have a planned strategic approach to 1992?
Are we discussing implications of 192 with our neighbouring areas?
Will those relying on the home market, particularly in the public sector, be ready to face the new competition?
Which markets in other member states can they best move into?
Does our area have a planned strategic approach to 1992?
Are we discussing implications of 1992 with our neighbouring areas?
Are professionals within our authority in close touch with their colleagues elsewhere, both in Britain and across the Community?
Are we as an authority in contact with equivalent authorities in other member states to find out how they are tackling things?
What is my authority's policy on improving language training — not simply for those at school or college but for executives and senior officers within the authority?
Do we have 1992 Clubs?
Should we have a Europe Week?
Have we assessed their advantages?
Do our senior decision takers and those responsible for formulating policy know enough about 1992?
WHAT IS THE BUREAU DOING?
The Bureau is taking a lead in ensuring that local government is ready for 1992.
The European Information Service bulletin regularly reports progress on the main proposals.
It will, in the coming months, look closely at how local authorities are tackling 1992.
A working group under the chairmanship of Robin Beechey (Chief Executive, East Sussex CC) has been established to look closely at the effect 1992 will have on local government and organise an effective response.
The group, which covers all types of authority and all services, will meet bi-monthly, reporting regularly to the Policy Board with recommendations for action.
The Bureau's Director and Deputy Director are regularly visiting and addressing groups of local authorities and others on 1992.
This enables the Bureau to find out at first hand how authorities are tackling the issue and what they need form the centre.
The Bureau also remains in close touch with the key people in Brussels and Whitehall.
The Bureau is setting up a library of background information on 1992, including publications, major speeches, newspaper articles and details of work carried out by authorities.
It is also building a key contacts list covering those with a part to play in the process.
It can offer advice on publications to concentrate upon for the member or officer whose interest is either general or specific and whose reading time may be limited.
The Local Government International Bureau exists to serve you, whether a member or an officer.
If you need help or advice on any aspect of 1992, please use us.
The Local Government International bureau is the European and international affairs unit of the U.K. local authority Associations.
It's main tasks are:
putting forward UK local government views at European and international levels;
making UK local authorities aware of European and international affairs which affect them;
promoting the exchange of experience and ideas between UK local authorities and those in other countries.
The Bureau is directed by a Policy Board of leading elected members and officers from its parent Associations.
The Bureau's European Information Service, a monthly bulletin and back-up inquiry service, keeps local authorities and other subscribers up-to-date on European Community policy proposals and funding opportunities.
A key area of the service will be to ensure that all readers are kept up to date on developments in the completion of the internal market.
Local Government International Bureau 
Telephone: Telex: 21879 Att IUL Fax: 01 222 0878
THE HEALTH SERVICE
The NHS Reforms and You
The NHS Reforms and You
The National Health Service and Community Care Act 1990 will bring about important changes in the way our caring services are run.
There have also been changes in the way the family doctor service operates.
Others are planned for dental care.
These changes, and those arising from the Act, are designed to give you a more efficient and an even better service — above all, a service that puts you, the patient, first.
They are intended to reinforce the main aim of the National Health Service — to help people live longer and enjoy a better quality of life.
As a matter of fact, today's NHS, employing record numbers of doctors and nurses, is treating more people than ever before.
As now, the NHS will continue to be open to all, regardless of income, and paid for mainly out of general taxation.
NHS services will continue to be largely free at the point of use.
A word of reassurance
Changes in health services affect everyone.
Some people are worried about what services will be available.
Some of the questions being asked are:
will my doctor be able to spend as much time with me?
Yes
will I continue to get my prescriptions, even if the medicines are expensive?
Yes.
if my family doctor has a practice fund, will I still get the treatment I need?
Yes.
can I still have treatment at a local hospital?
Yes.
will I still have the choice about where I have my baby?
Yes.
will hospitals which become self-governing NHS Trusts stay completely within the NHS?
Yes.
So, quite simply, the answer to all these questions is ‘Yes’.
This booklet explains the changes and how they will affect you.
You and your family doctor
Family doctors — also known as General Practitioners (GPs)— will be able to offer you and your family a wider range of services.
There will be more emphasis on the promotion of good health and the active prevention of disease.
This section looks at the range of services and how the family doctor service will be run to meet your needs.
SERVICES FOR THE FAMILY
Good health care is not just about treating you when you are ill, but also giving help and advice so that you stay fit and well.
The Government's Chief Medical Officer says:
‘Prevention is better than cure.
A better quality of life comes from better health.
The range of services available from your GP will help you maintain or improve your health and reduce the risk of illness.
Of course these services are optional — it is up to you whether you decide to make use of them.
For the sake of your own good health I would strongly urge you to do so.’
What services should you now look out for?
For all adults
Regular ‘life-style’ check-ups will be available.
These will be offered to you when you first register with a doctor or if you have not seen your doctor for some time.
The purpose of these check-ups is to:
give you the chance to discuss anything worrying you;
provide an opportunity to carry out a few simple tests (such as checking your blood pressure):
offer professional advice if needed on such matters as diet, exercise, smoking and alcohol consumption.
In other words, your GP can advise you on how to look after yourself.
This may include recommending that you attend one of the practice's health promotion clinics.
The ‘Health Check’ in the centre pages of this booklet gives further advice on healthy living.
GPs will be encouraged to provide more health promotion clinics.
These may include clinics giving detailed advice on diet, blood pressure, giving up smoking, diabetes, heart disease, alcohol control and stress management.
There could also be well-person clinics.
Family planning services
Family planning services are available from most GPs and from health authority family planning clinics, which also makes services available to men.
You can choose where to go for family planning advice.
If you prefer to get advice from a GP about contraception, you may choose to see a GP other than your own family doctor, if that GP is willing to accept you.
Information about whether particular GPs provide contraceptive services is now more readily available (see ‘More information for patients’ on a page 11).
Details of family planning clinics in your area should be available from your local health authority.
In addition to general sessions, you may find that some clinics offer sessions to deal with particular methods of contraception or for particular groups — for example, for young people.
Family planning services are provided free of charge to encourage all those who wish to use the services to do so.
Cervical screening (smear tests) For women
About 2,000 women die from cervical cancer every year.
Many of these deaths could be avoided if more women had regular smear tests (known as cervical screening or cervical cytology).
Improvements are being made to the NHS cervical screening services.
How will these affect you?
all women between 20 and 64 years old are to be invited for screening (by March 1993);
the new computerised call and recall system will ensure that all women in this age group are offered a test at least one every five years.
Your doctor will be able to give you advice and encourage you to have a smear test if appropriate.
The aim of the test is to detect conditions that could develop into cancer.
If these conditions are found in good time, treatment is usually straightforward and almost always effective.
Breast cancer screening
Breast cancer is the most common form of cancer among women.
An entirely new nationwide breast cancer screening programme run from specialised centres is being introduced.
How will this affect you?
all women between 50 and 64 years old are to be invited for screening by breast X-ray (mammography) by March 1993.
You will then be invited for screening every three years;
screening for older women (over 64 years old) will be provided on request every three years.
This service is being targeted at women over 50 years old because there is as yet little evidence that routine screening is of benefit to younger women.
Your local health authority will be able to give you advice on local services or your doctor can advise you.
Women registered with a GP will receive invitations for cervical and breast screening if appropriate.
So please make sure that your GP has your correct address, especially if you have moved recently.
Well-women clinics
GPs will be encouraged to provide more well-women clinics which deal with many issues to do with women's health.
Child health for children
Your GP may offer a programme for following the development of your young children (under five years old).
That means checks in your GP's surgery on the height, weight, growth, development of the senses and other essential features in the first five years of your child's life.
Where your GP does not undertake this work it will continue to be provided at local health authority clinics.
Childhood immunisation
If you don't get your children immunised against measles and whopping cough you are putting them at risk.
These illnesses can be very distressing and sometimes dangerous.
Your doctor will encourage you to make sure that your children get the protection of safe immunisation.
The table below shows when you should get your child immunised (but if your child is older and has not been fully immunised it is not too late to see your doctor).
Remember — immunisation is the safest way to protect your child
If you are over 75
Each year your doctor will offer you an assessment of your health and circumstances to make sure that all is well.
You may have this check-up done in your own home or at the practice premises.
In any event your doctor will offer to visit you at your home, or arrange for one of the professional practice staff to visit you, to make sure all is well and that you are able to cope.
These services are strongly recommended, but of course whether you wish to take advantage of them is up to you.
They offer the chance to get advice on how to deal with the problems everyone faces in old age.
Failing eyesight, hearing difficulties, trouble with your feet and similar problems can often be helped once they have been identified.
A BETTER RUN FAMILY DOCTOR SERVICE
Greater convenience for patients
Changes are taking place in the way your doctor's surgery is run.
Over the next few years you may find the following:
more convenient surgery hours;
a wider range of professional staff in the surgery such as nurses and physiotherapists;
minor surgery available on your doctor's own premises, to save having to go to hospital;
improvements in the appearance of your doctor's surgery.
Will your doctor be able to spend as much time with you?
Yes.
There are now more family doctors than ever before.
As practice teams develop so you may be able to see not only the doctor, but the nurse, chiropodist, counsellor, physiotherapist and ethnic community link-worker.
More information is now available to help you know more about the services your doctor provides.
More information for patients
Family Practitioner Committees (FPCs)— which run the family doctor service — now produce directories of local family doctors giving information about each doctor and the service the practice provides.
You can find the address of your Family Practitioner Committee in your local telephone directory, or ask for the address at your public library.
Each GP practice is now producing leaflets telling you about the range of health services available from the practice.
Moving to another doctor if you want to is now easier.
All you have to do is turn up at the surgery of the doctor of your choice and ask to be registered.
If your new doctor agrees to put you on his or her list, that's it.
Different doctors may offer different types of services, and their information leaflets will help you choose.
General Practice Funding Scheme
Family doctors already play a vital role in the Health Service and they will play an even bigger role in future.
From April 1991 larger practices will be able to choose to take control of some NHS funds to finance a range of local services for their own patients — including certain hospital treatments, and the cost to the NHS prescriptions and some staff needed for the practice.
If your GP chooses to join the practice funding scheme, what will it mean?
The level of funds will be agreed between your GP and the Regional Health Authority.
It will take into account the health care needs of all the patients on the practice list — for example, the extra requirements of elderly people, patients with special needs, the hospital services likely to be used and so on .
Your GP will be able to use the fund to arrange the right treatment for you speedily and effectively.
For example, your GP should have greater flexibility to look around for treatment in hospitals which offer the shortest waiting times.
The aim is to improve the choice of good quality services available to you and your GP.
The practice will be able to use any savings from the fund for your benefit — for example, in employing another nurse or buying new diagnostic equipment for the surgery.
So if your doctor has a practice fund, will you still get the treatment you need?
Yes.
GPs will receive sufficient funds to enable them to provide full and proper treatment for their patients.
Even if the practice overspends its funds, there is no question of patients not getting the treatment they need.
Your local family Practitioner Committee will be able to answer further questions you may have about the scheme.
Prescriptions from your family doctor
When you visit your doctor, he or she may give you an prescription.
medicines prescribed by your family doctor are an important part of your treatment in helping you to get well, in helping you to cope with your illness or in preventing serious illness.
But you may find that sometimes your doctor will explain that a prescription will not help to treat your illness and that the best way for you to get well is to rest, change your diet, drink plenty of fluids, stop smoking, cut down on alcohol or take more exercise.
Sometimes, though, doctors prescribe more medicines than are necessary because they think that most of their patients always expect a prescription.
Prescribing unnecessary drugs or too many medicines can be just as bad for your health as prescribing too few.
So it is important that your GP thinks carefully about how much medicine you need.
To help your GP prescribe for you in the best possible way, from April 1991, what is called an ‘indicative prescribing scheme’ will be introduced.
You will continue to get the medicines and appliances you need.
The scheme should cut out waste, which will mean more money is available to spend on other patient services in the NHS.
How will the ‘indicative prescribing scheme’ work?
Each family doctor practice will be able to discuss with the local Family Practitioner Committee the amount it needs for prescribing for its patients.
This should enable the needs of patients who require expensive medicines or larger quantities of medicines to be taken fully into account.
A practice with more patients needing expensive medicines will be set a larger amount.
The amount is not fixed firmly and the doctor will in no circumstances be told to stop prescribing necessary medicines.
If the doctor overspends, he or she may be asked to explain the medical reasons for this to another doctor.
Will you continue to get your prescriptions, even if the medicines are expensive?
Of course.
There will be no limit on meeting the cost of medicines or the amount of medicines that your doctor can prescribe.
You can be sure that you will still get all the treatment you need from your family doctor.
LOOK AFTER YOUR HEART ‘Health Check’
(A programme to promote healthier lifestyles, supported by the Department of Health, the Health Education Authority and the National Health Service)
Good health is to be valued and enjoyed.
It cannot be taken for granted.
Changing to a healthier way of life will not only make you feel good, it can lead to a longer and more fulfilling life.
It can help to reduce the risks of serious illness or death from heart disease, stroke and cancer.
Her are some tips and space for you to keep track of your progress.
Physical activity
Regular physical activity can help you control your weight and can help protect you against heart disease.
It helps you relax and can make you feel better.
Most importantly, it is something to enjoy.
And not only will you feel better, but you will look better.
By regularly using your muscles, they will be firmer and in much better shape.
Keeping fit and healthy does not have to be a chore.
Here are some practical ways in which you can be active.
Walking is one of the best forms of exercise.
Why stand in a bus queue or sit in a traffic jam when you can walk almost as quickly?
Use stairs rather than an escalator or a lift.
Go for a swim.
Try cycling or gentle jogging.
Take up dancing.
If possible, try to exercise at least two or three times a week for about half an hour at a time.
Remember, it is important to start gently and build up slowly.
Healthy eating
Here are some easy tips about healthy eating:
Try grilling your food instead of frying it.
Cut the fat off meat.
Cut down on butter or use a low-fat spread instead.
Use semi-skimmed or skimmed milk instead of ordinary milk.
Use fish or chicken more often, or the leaner cuts of red meat.
Try drinking tea or coffee without sugar.
Go easy on cakes and biscuits — try fruit instead.
Try to eat at least four slices of bread a day.
You can enjoy what you eat and protect yourself form illness at the same time.
The wrong sort of diet, especially one with too much fatty food, makes your arteries more likely to clog up and makes you much more liable to a heart attack.
Eating well does not mean giving up all the things you like.
It means eating a variety of foods, going easy on fat, sugar and salt, and eating more fibrerich starchy foods like bread, pasta, rice and potatoes.
Ten tasty things you can eat more of:
Jacket Potatoes
Beans on toast
Chicken
Pasta
Fish or fish fingers
Vegetables
Fruit
Rice
Bread
Liver
Smoking
Tips on giving up
Think of the reasons why you want to stop — and keep reminding yourself of them.
Pick a day for giving up.
On the day — give up.
Just stop.
Don't be tempted to have a cigarette — not even one.
Take one day at a time.
Every day without a cigarette is a success.
Some people find it easier to give up with a friend or a group at work.
You might be able to help each other.
Smoking — particularly cigarettes — is the cause of one in every five fatal heart attacks.
It is directly responsible for 35,000 deaths from lung cancer and twice this number from other diseases every year.
Most smokers want to give up because of the effect of smoking on their health — not to mention the smelly clothes, the bad breath, the coughs and wheezes.
Don't forget, too, that you are not the only one to be affected.
Smoking can harm those close to you — those who breathe your smoke, including your children, can be harmed.
Inconsiderate smoking can cause considerable offence to the majority of people who do not smoke.
For some, giving up smoking may not be easy.
On the other hand, you will never know until you try.
In recent years, more than 11 million smokers in Britain have kicked the habit.
Nine out of ten have done so without any medical advice.
Lots of them tried several times before succeeding.
And for most, the first few days were the worst!
After that the compensations make it all worthwhile.
You can taste food again, you feel better, you smell better and you feel like a winner!
If you need an incentive to start giving up, think about the cost — and what you could use the additional money for!
For your health's sake, it is important not to let yourself get overweight.
See where you are on this chart.
Underweight.
Maybe you need to eat a bit more.
If you are very underweight, see your doctor.
O.K. This is the desirable weight range for health.
Overweight.
Your health could suffer — don't get any fatter!
Fat.
It's important for you to lose weight.
Very fat.
This is severe and treatment is urgently required.
From GARROW, J.S. (1981) Treat Obesity Seriously,Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone.
Alcohol
And a couple of sensible tips
Choose low or non-alcoholic drinks sometimes.
Drink slowly so that your glass stays fuller longer.
Drinking can be enjoyable and safe, as long as you don't overdo it.
But too much alcohol can be bad for your heart and your liver and cause problems at work, with family and friends.
You can protect yourself by keeping a count of what you drink.
An easy way to do this is keep track of the units of alcohol you drink in a week.
Medical advice is that men who drink more than 21 units a week and women who drink more than 14 units could damage their health.
One unit of alcohol equals
½ pint of ordinary strength beer lager or cider
1 single measure of spirits
1 small glass of sherry
1 single measure of aperitifs
1 small glass of wine
Estimate your weekly total 
Going to hospital
Each year the NHS cares for some 8 million inpatients in hospital and handles over 43 million visits to out-patient departments.
But some people have to wait much longer for operations in some places than in others and the system can be insensitive to individual needs.
The changes that are being introduced are all designed to enable those who work in the NHS to give you even better care.
This section looks at how your hospital treatment will be arranged, and the service you should receive when you get there.
ARRANGING YOUR HOSPITAL CARE
Your local health authority's new role
The new system will give more attention to the quality and value of the hospital and community health services you receive.
Local health authorities will play an important part in the new system which comes into effect from April 1991.
They will act on your behalf to make sure the NHS is working for you.
Your local health authority will have a legal duty to ensure a comprehensive range of health services to meet the needs of the local population.
They will aim to provide you and your GP with the maximum choice.
Your local health authority will assess the state of the health of the local population, and decide what services are needed.
This will include such things as accident and emergency services for people working locally.
Their aim is to make the best use of the money available to improve health in your area.
Health authorities will be funded according to the size of their local population, with allowances for their age and health, and the relative cost of providing services for them.
Your local health authority will then use its allocation of money to arrange the services needed.
The health authority will make agreements with a range of hospitals and other units in order to provide comprehensive services for the local population.
These agreements will match a specified level and quality of service with a specified amount of money.
Target to reduce waiting times for operations will be build into these agreements.
Choosing where to go for treatment
How will your choice of where to go for treatment be affected by the new arrangements?
Your needs and wishes and the preferences of your GP will be taken into account by your local health authority when making agreements with hospitals on the services to be provided.
Health authorities will do this by asking local people what they think of the services on offer and by discussion with local GPs.
You and your GP will be involved in making the decision about where you go for treatment.
The choice should be greater because your local health authority will not be restricted to making agreements on services with hospitals within its own boundaries.
It will be able to make agreements with other hospitals if better quality or quicker treatment can be obtained there.
Your doctor will be aware of the range of hospitals offering services, and will be able to recommend to you the hospital where you will receive the best and most appropriate care.
Each health authority will retain some money to pay for referrals by GPs to hospitals which are not covered by existing agreements on services.
Can you still have treatment at a local hospital?
Yes.
The new arrangements will not force anyone to travel further for treatment.
They will simply give you and your GP more choice if another hospital can offer better quality or quicker treatment.
Choosing where to have your baby
Will you still have the choice about where you have your baby?
Yes.
As now, you will need to decide with your GP and midwife where best to have your baby.
Your local health authority will be responsible for making agreements for the provision of maternity services with local hospitals based on the expected referrals by local GPs.
Accident & Emergency services
In an emergency, treatment will always be provided immediately and without question.
Travel costs
The Ambulance Service will transport free of charge those patients whose doctor has decided that such transport is medically necessary.
For other journeys to and form hospital, the Hospital Travel Costs Scheme is available to help people in families receiving income support or family credit.
Other people on a low income may also be able to get help with the costs of travelling to and from hospital.
IMPROVED SERVICES IN HOSPITAL
Putting patients first
The NHS reforms aim to provide an environment in which you feel welcome and where you can be confident that you are being cared for as an individual.
That means a high standard of clinical care and a personal service.
In particular, your hospital should aim to offer:
good reception and admission arrangements so that, as a patient, a relative or a friend, you are properly welcomed and given any necessary help and advice;
pleasant waiting areas with comfortable seating and adequate facilities;
individual, reliable appointment times which minimise the time you have to wait for your consultation and for any tests resulting from it;
clear signposts and directions which help you to find your way around the hospital easily;
clearly written leaflets available before you go into hospital that describe what will happen to you in hospital, what you need to bring with you and so on;
Making complaints
If you are unhappy with the treatment you have received from the NHS — from a family doctor, the local hospital, a dentist, a high street pharmacist, or an optician — what should you do?
As a first step, you may like to discuss the problem with the health professional concerned.
This will often clear up the particular concern.
If you are still not satisfied, the next step depends on which part of the NHS is involved.
Complaints about family doctors, dentists, chemists or opticians
General complaints should be made to your local Family Practitioner Committee (FAC).
Their address is in the telephone book, or your can ask for it at your local public library.
Some complaints will lead to a formal investigation by the FAC as to whether or not the health professional complied with his or her terms of service.
If necessary complaints will be decided by a special committee (called a Service Committee) made up of an equal number of health practitioners and members of the public, with a chairman who is not a health practitioner.
A number of improvements have recently been introduced to FAC complaints procedures, including:
informal investigations for less serious cases;
more time for patients to decide whether to make a complaint (up to 13 weeks after the event);
if you have difficulty in reading or writing, your FAC will accept an oral complaint.
Complaints about hospital and community health services
Your hospital has a specially appointed officer who deals with all complaints.
The name and location of this offer should be easily available in the hospital.
Complaints should be made as soon as possible after the event.
If your complaint is about the actual treatment you have received from a doctor or dentist — a clinical complaint — the officer may refer it to the Regional Medical Officer for you.
You will receive a written reply from the officer once your complaint has been looked into.
If you are still not satisfied you may send your complaint to the Health Service Commissioner (Ombudsman), at Church House, Great Smith Street, London SW1P 3BW.
The Commissioner will let you know if he can investigate your complaint further.
You local Community Health Council — who play a part in representing the interest of local patients — can provide help and advice if you need it.
Their address should be available from the hospital or you can find it in the telephone book.
How you can help others
Carry a donor card
If you carry a donor card, it means that you want your organs to be used for transplantation after your death to help others.
What are the benefits of transplantation?
heart, liver and lung transplants can save the lives of those whose own organs have failed;
corneal transplants can help someone see again;
kidney transplants can free a person from spending many hours every week on a machine which cleans the blood (dialysis).
Donor cards are available from many places, such as libraries, chemists and doctors' surgeries.
Remember, it is most important that you let your relatives know your wishes.
Give blood
The patients of the NHS rely on the willingness of thousands of donors to give blood.
The National Blood Transfusion Service is entirely dependent on voluntary blood donors.
Anyone can start giving blood as long as they are between 18 and 60 years old and in good health.
No patient and no hospital will be asked to pay for the blood you donate.
If you are willing to enrol as a blood donor, telephone free on 0800 300 333.
The NHS reforms and ethnic minorities
Everyone, everywhere in the country, should have equal access to the health care services they need.
Health authorities are encouraged to arrange for the services which ethnic minority communities need and which reflect cultural differences.
The NHS reforms should help to ensure that these needs are taken into account at every step of planning and providing health care.
Your local health authority may arrange for the following:
link workers in hospitals and health centres;
information in your first language about staying healthy and the local services available;
catering services to meet different dietary requirements in hospitals.
The changes aim to improve the high quality of our health service for everyone now and into the next century.
The National Health Service is there for the benefit of all the people who live in this country.
The Open University Education for all
A lifetime of opportunity
Education no longer ends with schooldays.
Today, you can enjoy the challenges and benefits of learning at any time.
The Open University offers you a lifelong opportunity to continue your education — to whatever level you want, and in a way that fits in with the rest of your life.
Your age, occupation, and background do not matter.
You don't need any previous qualifications, because the Open University really is open to all.
You simply have to be 18 or over, and living in the United Kingdom.
All you need
What you do need is the desire and determination to learn, and if you have that, you are well on the way to joining more than 100,000 men and women from every walk of life who will be studying with the Open University next year.
You can work towards a degree or diploma over a period of years — or choose single courses lasting a few weeks or months, from an enormous list of topics ranging from childcare to computer science.
Changing lives
For 21 years, the Open University has been changing people's lives.
Education can be a discovery of new interests; a matter of personal development and a pleasure for its own sake.
It can also help you keep up with the rapidly changing world of work.
You can learn about the place of new technologies, acquire new skills and update old ones.
You can help yourself change jobs, get promotion or develop a new career path.
A University for everyone
Over the past two decades the OU has developed a worldwide reputation for the quality of its courses, teaching and research.
Its degrees, diplomas and other qualifications are equal to those of any other university and are recognized as such by employers and professional bodies.
It is a truly national university, working for students in every part of the United Kingdom through a network of regional centres and local study centres.
Study at home
You fit Open University study around the rest of your life.
You can study at home or wherever else is convenient to you, at the time and pace you choose.
Most of your study materials are sent to you through the post.
As well as textbooks and other printed matter, courses may include television and radio programmes, video and audio cassettes and other study aids.
Computers and scientific experiment kits are used in certain courses.
Local support
But you don't need to feel isolated.
A great strength of the OU is its network of thirteen regional centres and more than 250 study centres throughout the UK.
These are the bases for some 5,000 tutors and counsellors, who are there to guide you through your studies.
You can meet other students at tutorials and in informal groups at your study centre.
Choose from more than 200 courses
The OU offers an enormous range of subjects at many different levels.
Courses can last from a few weeks to several months depending on what you want to achieve.
Some courses can be bought off the shelf as self-contained study packs.
From health and nutrition to high energy physics, from caring for babies to the latest manufacturing techniques — the choice is yours.
Perhaps your interests lie in the more traditional university subjects such as history, chemistry, mathematics, psychology, economics or literature.
But again, flexibility is built in to the system: you don't have to register for a degree in just one subject area, but a free to mix and match your courses to build a degree that is tailor-made to your own requirements.
The OU offers —
Degree level courses —
A wide choice of subjects in the arts, sciences, technology, mathematics, education and social sciences.
Each course lasts nine months, from February to October.
You can take these courses either as an undergraduate and build up your degree over a few years or pursue a particular interest by taking these courses on a ‘one-off’ basis as an associate student.
The Open University degree is called a BA (Bachelor of Arts) irrespective of whether science or arts courses are included.
It takes a minimum of three years to qualify for a BA, but many undergraduates choose to spread their studies over four, five or six years.
If you wish, you can go on from there to gain an Honours degree.
If you start as an associate student, the courses you successfully complete can be counted towards a degree should you choose to transfer to the undergraduate programme.
For information about the degree programme, tick box BA91 on the coupon.
If you prefer the idea of studying a single course as an associate student, tick box OO91.
Management courses —
The Open Business School is already the biggest provider of management education in the UK and growing fast.
You may be a newly appointed manager who needs to acquire management skills quickly.
You may be an experienced manager seeking to update your knowledge through formal training.
Course subjects include effective management, managing people, finance, marketing, design, retail management and information technology.
Taking a series of such courses enables you to qualify for the Professional Certificate in Management, the Professional Diploma in Management or the Master's in Business Administration (MBA).
For more information tick box SOB90 on the coupon.
Professional updating & training —
A wide range of courses and study packs for people in the education, health and social welfare professions.
Some are designed to update existing qualifications and knowledge, so assume previous knowledge of the subject.
Others are intended to introduce new skills and knowledge for these demanding professions.
For more information tick box OO91 on the coupon.
Technological updating —
Short practical courses and study packs designed to enable managers, engineers and researchers to update their knowledge of a range of new technologies.
These include artificial intelligence, software engineering, microelectronics and telecommunications as well as modular courses covering a range of topics in manufacturing technology and computing in industry.
Many are funded and developed in conjunction with the Science and Engineering Research Council and may be used to qualify for postgraduate diplomas or an MSc.
For more information on Manufacturing and Industrial Applications of Computers tick box SER90 on the coupon; for information on other packs tick box ITU90.
Personal, family & community topics —
A wide and varied range of study packs and short courses on general interests including babycare and parenthood, health and diet and the environment.
The Leisure Series offer study packs on understanding paintings, music, poetry and the countryside.
For more information, tick box OO91 on the coupon.
Higher degrees —
If you already have a first degree, the OU offers the opportunity to take a higher degree — MKA, MBA, MSc, BPhil, MPhil or PhD — either taught or by research.
For information on research opportunities tick box RD91 on the coupon.
For taught higher degrees tick box TM91.
Please send me the publication ticked below as soon as it is available.
(Please tick only one box.
If you change your mind later we will be glad to send more information.)
Guide to the BA Degree Programme Available all year BA91  
Multi-media teaching materials from the Open University enable you to study at home, in your own time and at your own pace.
DUSTBIN DAY IS CHANGING!
From Monday 25 September…
YOUR COLLECTION DAY will be WEDNESDAY
HOUSEHOLD WASTE COLLECTIONS
FOR A CLEANER ENVIRONMENT
OXFORD CITY COUNCIL
PLEASE HELP US……
BY PUTTING YOUR REFUSE IN AN APPROVED BIN OR TIED PLASTIC SACK
WE WILL HELP YOU……
BY COLLECTING FROM YOUR BACK DOOR — IF ACCESS IS SUITABLE
PLEASE CARE FOR YOUR ENVIRONMENT……
BY NOT PUTTING YOUR BINS OR SACKS OUT ON THE STREET EARLIER THAN THE EVENING BEFORE COLLECTION DAY
See inside for details…
PLEASE KEEP FOR FUTURE REFERENCE
APPROVED CONTAINERS
If you live in a flat provided with chutes or containers in a bin store you MUST use them.
Other householders MUST put refuse for collection into:—
TIED PLASTIC SACKS which must be strong enough and large enough for the purpose.
(The Council does NOT supply sacks.)
DUSTBINS WITH LIDS
Dustbins (either metal or plastic) must be to British Standards — look for the ‘kitemark’.
‘Sackholders’ which look like dustbins but lack proper handles which can be grasped are INADEQUATE for loose refuse and MUST NOT be used except to hold tied plastic sacks.
GARDEN WASTE SACKS
Garden waste is only collected in special sacks bought at the Town Hall or most Council Sports Centres.
They cost 50p each including a charge for collecting them with your refuse.
We can only collect up to 2 sacks each week from your house.
BOXES, SECURE BUNDLES AND SMALL BULKY ITEMS are acceptable occasionally, in limited quantities.
COLLECTIONS TO SUIT YOU
You can help to make the service more efficient by putting your refuse out at the front of your house.
However in order to avoid creating unsightly surroundings, obstructing the highway, and to reduce scavenging by animals please DO NOT put your refuse at the kerbside earlier than the evening before collection day.
The Council will collect refuse from your side way, or from your ‘back door’(if that's at ground level) but the distance must be no more than 25 paces from the kerb and access must be adequate and safe for a refuse collector carrying a bin or sack.
COLLECTIONS ARE NOT MADE FROM LANDINGS IN BLOCKS OF FLATS.
RETURN OF YOUR DUSTBIN
Your dustbin will be returned near to where you left it, or if possible to a convenient point just inside your gate if you left it on the pavement.
ACCEPTABLE AND UNACCEPTABLE WASTES
The service is for the collection of HOUSEHOLD WASTES such as paper and packaging, ashes and cinders, food scraps, dust and normal household rubbish.
Broken glass etc must be securely wrapped OR put into a container clearly labelled GLASS.
You MUST NOT put these things in your refuse:—
Animal carcases
Excreta (except disposable nappies sealed in plastic bags)
Paint, oil, and other liquids
Trade, DIY or building waste
Dangerous substances.
THE BULKY WASTE COLLECTION SERVICE
We will collect up to 3 large items (cooker, sofa, mattress, fridge etc) FREE OF CHARGE (Tel.
Oxford 725912).
WASTE RECYCLING FACILITIES
look out for new sites too!
BOTTLE BANKS are at:
The four Park & Ride Car Parks
Headington Shoppers Car Park
Summertown Shoppers Car Park
Sainsbury's on the Ring Road
ENGINE OIL DISPOSAL POINTS (in normal working hours) are at:
Swan Motor Centre, Between Towns Road
A J French, Cumnor Hill
City Motors, Woodstock Road roundabout
North Oxford Garage, 280 Banbury Road
East Oxford Tyre Service, 50 Hurst Street
Hartwells Garage, Kidlington
Headington Service Station, London Road
J D Barclay, Botley Road
City Works Depot, Marsh Road, Cowley
PAPER SKIPS are at:
The four Park & Ride car parks in turn (clockwise round the Ring Road) on Saturday mornings: 9 am–1 pm
Redbridge (South)— 1st Saturday
Seacourt (West)— 2nd Saturday
Peartree (North)— 3rd Saturday
Thornhill (East)— 4th Saturday
Northern House School, South Parade
Ferry Centre 9–4.30 Monday–Friday 9–12 Saturday
No collection on any 5th Saturday in the month
ONLY LEAVE PAPER IN THE SKIP!
These collections raise funds for OXFAM recycling projects abroad.
Other collection points are in Summertown:—
DO NOT LEAVE PAPER AT OTHER TIMES!
YOUR NORMAL COLLECTION DAY FOR HOUSEHOLD WASTE WILL BE DELAYED BY BANK HOLIDAYS…
Normal service resumes WED 2 MAY
If you want any advice on waste collection or need the FREE BULKY HOUSEHOLD WASTE COLLECTION SERVICE:
Please telephone Oxford 725912 or telephone Oxford 249811 and ask for CITY WORKS CLEANSING SERVICES
COMMERCIAL WASTE COLLECTIONS
If you are looking for a service designed to suit you , telephone the CITY WORKS TRADE WASTE OFFICER on Oxford 725912, and ask for details of our current special offers for new contract customers.
This leaflet is issued to householders by Oxford City Council as a notice under Section 13 of the Control of Pollution Act (1974)
YOU CAN RECYCLE MORE OF YOUR WASTE!
Not all waste has to go into the dustbin.
By recycling you can:
save energy
reduce pollution
conserve resources
support charity
SEE INSIDE FOR DETAILS OF…
BOTTLE BANKS PAPER SKIPS and ENGINE OIL DISPOSAL POINTS
For information about WASTE RECYCLING Telephone Oxford 249811 Ext 2821 or 2822
Published by Oxford City Council Printing Services Tel: Oxford 249811 Ext 2387
CHERWELL District Council
Owner/Occupier
Bodicote House, Bodicote, BANBURY, Oxon, OX15 4AA
Telephone (0295) 52535 Fax No. (0295 270028
A.M. Brace, F.C.I.S., F.B.I.M. CHIEF EXECUTIVE AND SECRETARY
Dear Sir/Madam
Town and Country Planning Act, 1971.
Land at — Land at rear of 11, Yarnton Road, Kidlington.
Proposed Development — Erection of 9 no. two storey dwellings each with garage/parking, vehicular access and ancillary works including removal of 11, Yarnton Road (outline).
Application Reference — CHS.800/87
DoE Appeal Reference —
Appeal Starting Date — 25th March, 1988.
Appellant's Name — Kibswell Homes Limited.
I am writing to let you know that an appeal has been made to the Secretary of State in respect of the above site.
The appeal follows the refusal of planning permission by this Council.
The appeal is to be decided on the basis of an exchange of written statements by the parties and a site visit by an Inspector.
Any comments already made following the original application for planning permission (unless they are expressly confidential) will be forwarded to the Department and copied to the appellant and will be taken into account by your Inspector in deciding the appeal.
Should you wish to withdraw or modify your earlier comments in any way, or request a copy of the appeal decision letter, you should write direct to the Department of the Environment, Room 13/16, Tollgate House, Houlton Street, Bristol, BS2 9DJ, within 28 days of the appeal starting date (above) quoting the appeal reference number.
Yours faithfully, A. M. Brace
CHERWELL District Council
OWNER/OCCUPIER
Bodicote House, Bodicote, BANBURY, Oxon, OX15 4AA
Telephone (0295) 52535 Fax No. (0295 270028
A.M. Brace, F.C.I.S., F.B.I.M. CHIEF EXECUTIVE AND SECRETARY
Dear Sir/Madam
Town and Country Planning Act, 1971.
Appeal by: Kibswell Homes Limited
Site: Land at Rear of 11, Yarnton Road, Kidlington.
Proposed Development: Erection of 9 No.
Two Storey dwellings each with garage/parking, vehicular access and ancillary works including removal of 11, Yarnton Road.
(Outline).
Application Ref: CHS.800/87 and CHS.202/88
Department of the Environment Ref:
I hereby give notice that an inspector appointed by the Department of the Environment will attend at Bodicote House, Bodicote, Banbury on Thursday the 9th of March, 1989 at 10.00 a.m. to hold a local Inquiry into the above development which was refused for the reasons stated on the attached sheets marked ‘Notice of Refusal of Permission for Development’.
The Appellant's grounds of appeal are also attached.
I am to inform you, that you may, if you wish, attend the inquiry, and at the Inspectors discretion state your case in person or through an accredited representative.
If you cannot or do not wish to attend, but wish your views to be put before the Inspector, will you please send them in writing to reach the Department of the Environment, Room 13/16, Tollgate House, Houlton Street, Bristol, BS2 9DJ, before the 23rd February, 1989, quoting the appeal reference 
Any views given in writing will be disclosed to the parties to the appeal and are liable to be read out at the hearing.
Copies of letters which have already been received have been sent to the Department of the Environment and to the Appellant.
If you wish the Department to notify you of the result of the Inquiry please state this in your letter.
The Council's Statement is available for inspection at Cherwell District Council Offices, Bodicote House, Bodicote, Banbury, during normal office hours.
Yours faithfully, N. Slattery Solicitor
CHERWELL DISTRICT COUNCIL
TOWN AND COUNTRY PLANNING ACT 1971
TOWN AND COUNTRY PLANNING GENERAL DEVELOPMENT ORDER 1977
REFUSAL OF PERMISSION FOR DEVELOPMENT
Kibswell Homes Limited, c/o.
Associated Design Partnership (Oxford) Gordon House 276 Oxford Road OXFORD OX2 7HA
Brief particulars of application
Date 7th December 1987
Location of land to which it relates
Land at rear of 11 Yarnton Road, Kidlington
Brief particulars of development
Erection of 9 No. two storey dwellings each with garage/parking, vehicular access and ancillary works including removal of 11 Yarnton Road.
(Outline)
The Cherwell District Council as District Planning Authority on the 11th day of February 1988 refused planning permission for the development described in your above-mentioned application and the plans accompanying such application.
The reasons for the Council's decision to refuse permission for the development are set out in the attached schedule.
Dated
Bodicote House, Bodicote, Banbury, Oxon OX15 4AA
Chief Executive/Secretary
NOTES
1.
If the applicant is aggrieved by the decision of the local planning authority to refuse permission or approval of the proposed development, or to grant permission or approval subject to conditions, he may appeal to the Secretary of State for the Environment in accordance with section 36 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1971 within six months of receipt of this notice.
(Appeals must be on a form which is obtainable from the Department of the Environment, Tollgate House, Houlton Street, Bristol BS2 9DJ).
The Secretary of State has power to allow a longer period for the giving of a notice of appeal but he will not normally be prepared to exercise this power unless there are special circumstances which excuse the delay in giving notice of appeal.
The Secretary of State is not required to entertain an appeal if it appears to him that permission for the proposed development could not have been granted by the local planning authority, or could not have been so granted otherwise than subject to the conditions imposed by them, having regard to the statutory requirements to the provisions of the development order, and to any directions given under the order.
He does not in practice refuse to entertain appeals solely because the decision of the local planning authority was based on a direction given by him.
(2)
If permission to develop land is refused or granted subject to conditions, whether by the local planning authority or by the Secretary of State for the Environment, and the owner of the land claims that the land has become incapable of reasonably beneficial use in its existing state and cannot be rendered capable of reasonably beneficial use by the carrying out of any development which has been or would be permitted he may serve on the Council, a purchase notice requiring the Council to purchase his interest in the land in accordance with the provisions of Part IX of the Town and Country Planning Act 1971.
(3)
In certain circumstances, a claim may be made against the local planning authority for compensation, where permission is refused or granted subject to conditions by the Secretary of State on appeal or on a reference of the application to him.
The circumstances in which such compensation is payable are set out in section 169 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1971.
APPLICATION NO.
CHS.800/87
REASONS FOR REFUSAL
1.
That, having regard to the limited area of the site and the relationship to existing residential properties, the proposed development of nine houses would be a cramped development of the site which would be detrimental to the amenities of those surrounding residential properties.
2.
The proposal would constitute an unsatisfactory form of backland development which, together with the incidental use of the proposed means of access, would be unneighbourly and adversely affect the privacy and quiet enjoyment of neighbouring properties.
Grounds of appeal
This must be a clear and concise statement of your full case.
1.
The Appellant does not believe the proposal is a cramped development of the site, nor will it have any significant harmful effect on the amenities of surrounding residential properties.
2.
The Appellant does not believe the proposal would constitute undesirable backland development.
The dwellings will be so designed to provide a satisfactory level of privacy for adjoining residential properties.
3.
There is no highway objections to the proposal.
4.
Reference is made to Circular 14/85 — paragraphs 3.4 and 3.5 It is submitted that the appeal proposal would not cause any demonstrable harm to interests of acknowledged importance, therefore the general presumption in favour of development should prevail in this instance.
NB The Appellant will wish to comment on the Council's written statement.
CHERWELL District Council
Bodicote House, Bodicote, BANBURY, Oxon, OX15 4AA
Telephone (0295) 52535
The Occupier 9, Yarnton Road, Kidlington, Oxford, OX5 1AT
A.M. Brace, F.C.I.S., F.B.I.M. CHIEF EXECUTIVE AND SECRETARY
Dear Madam
Planning Application No.
CHS.800/87
Your representations in respect of the above-mentioned planning application were reported to the Council's South Area Planning Sub-Committee when they considered the application at their recent meeting.
The Sub-Committee, after bearing in mind all the relevant points, have refused the application.
A copy of the formal decision notice is enclosed for your information.
Yours faithfully,
A. M. Brace
CHERWELL DISTRICT COUNCIL
TOWN AND COUNTRY PLANNING ACT 1971
TOWN AND COUNTRY PLANNING GENERAL DEVELOPMENT ORDER 1977
REFUSAL OF PERMISSION FOR DEVELOPMENT
Kibswell Homes Limited, c/o.
Associated Design Partnership (Oxford) Gordon House 276 Oxford Road OXFORD OX2 7HA
Brief particulars of application
Date 7th December 1987
Location of land to which it relates
Land at rear of 11 Yarnton Road, Kidlington
Brief particulars of development
Erection of 9 No. two storey dwellings each with garage/parking, vehicular access and ancillary works including removal of 11 Yarnton Road.
(Outline)
The Cherwell District Council as District Planning Authority on the 11th day of February 1988 refused planning permission for the development described in your above-mentioned application and the plans accompanying such application.
The reasons for the Council's decision to refuse permission for the development are set out in the attached schedule.
Dated 24 FEB 1988
Bodicote House, Bodicote, Banbury, Oxon OX15 4AA Chief Executive/Secretary
NOTES
APPLICATION NO.
REASONS FOR REFUSAL
1.
That, having regard to the limited area of the site and the relationship to existing residential properties, the proposed development of nine houses would be a cramped development of the site which would be detrimental to the amenities of those surrounding residential properties.
2.
The proposal would constitute an unsatisfactory form of backland development which, together with the incidental use of the proposed means of access, would be unneighbourly and adversely affect the privacy and quiet enjoyment of neighbouring properties.
CHERWELL District Council
Bodicote House, Bodicote, BANBURY, Oxon, OX15 4AA
The Owner/Occupier Telephone (0295) 52535 9, Yarnton Road, Kidlington, Oxford, OX5 1AT
A.M. Brace, F.C.I.S., F.B.I.M. CHIEF EXECUTIVE AND SECRETARY
Dear Sir/Madam
Town and Country Planning Acts
Proposed development at land to rear of 11 Yarnton Road.
An application for planning permission to carry out development at the above-mentioned site has been received.
The proposal is: 9 dwellings, garaging etc.
(Outline)
A copy of the application may be inspected in my Department between the hours of 9.00 am and 5.00 pm from Monday to Thursday and from 9.00 am and 4.00 pm on Friday, or may be available on request from the Clerk to the Parish Council or Parish Meeting.
(Copies of applications for sites within the former Banbury Borough Council area may be inspected at Borough House, Marlborough Road, during the above-mentioned times).
Any representatives received cannot be treated as confidential in view of the provisions of the Local Government (Access to Information) Act 1985, which makes available such documents for public inspection.
Any representations which you may have on the proposal should be sent to me within the next 10 days.
Yours faithfully,
Chief Planning and Development Officer
Department of Social Security Overseas Branch Newcastle upon Tyne
IMPORTANT
COLLECTING NATIONAL INSURANCE CONTRIBUTIONS BY STERLING REMITTANCE IS AN EXPENSIVE PROCEDURE FOR US; AND PAYING A LARGE LUMP SUM ONCE A YEAR MAY NOT BE CONVENIENT FOR YOU.
IF YOU INTEND TO CONTINUE PAYING VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS FOR AT LEAST A FURTHER YEAR FROM APRIL 1989, WE WOULD PREFER TO COLLECT THEM BY DIRECT DEBIT, MONTHLY.
IF YOU ALREADY HAVE AN ACCOUNT WITH A BANK OR BUILDING SOCIETY IN THE UK OR THE CHANNEL ISLANDS, PLEASE SUPPLY DETAILS ON THE ENCLOSED FORM CF351.
OTHERWISE WE WOULD BE GLAD IF YOU COULD MAKE ARRANGEMENTS TO OPEN SUCH AN ACCOUNT AND RETURN FORM CF351 TO US WHEN YOU HAVE DONE SO.
THIS ARRANGEMENT WOULD CONTINUE UNTIL YOU TELL YOUR BANK TO STOP PAYMENT.
IF THE CONTRIBUTION RATES CHANGE (USUALLY ANNUALLY IN APRIL) THE NEW AMOUNT WILL BE DEBITED FROM YOUR ACCOUNT.
ANY DIRECT DEBIT ARRANGEMENT WILL CONFORM STRICTLY TO THE TERMS OF THE INSTRUCTION ON THE FORM CF351.
IF A MISTAKE IS MADE, AND YOU PAY A WRONG AMOUNT, WE WILL GIVE YOUR LOCAL BANK AN INDEMNITY WHICH WILL ENABLE YOU TO GET AN IMMEDIATE REFUND.
MEANWHILE, YOUR CONTRIBUTIONS NOW DUE FOR THE YEAR ENDING 5 APRIL 1989 SHOULD BE PAID BY REMITTANCE AND RETURNED WITH THE ENCLOSED FORM RD427 TEAR-OFF.