

POWDER Equipment for the deep LATE SKIING Spring destinations, back-country INVENTIONS & TECHNOLOGY Brainwaves, breakthroughs WIN!
SKIWEAR & ACCESSORIES FROM OLYMPUS SPORT News from Scotland, Racing
SPECIAL FEATURES
COMPETITION
Win skiwear and accessories from Olympus Sport
POWDER DEDICATED
Do you float or plummet offpiste?
The right ski might make all the difference.
David Goldsmith explains why
BEFORE AND AFTER THE GOLDRUSH
There is more to mountains than crashing down them.
Stephen Lee takes a retrospective look at Alpine life
WHOSE IS WHOSE
Despite many brands and designs, skiing hardware companies are owned by a few umbrella companies.
David Goldsmith spells it out
KNEE INJURIES
Rosemary Burns has been there, done that and got the T-shirt.
She gives fellow sufferers her sympathy and sound advice
RESORTS
OFFPISTE, LATE SEASON AND EASTERN EUROPEAN RESORTS
Now is the time when everyone is off skiing (instead of dreaming about it).
So we have a mixed bag of destinations and holiday choices for you.
Remember, if you've already had your trip, it's not too late to book another.
We feature guided offpiste and day tours in the Chamonix valley; serious ski touring in the Himalayas; spring skiing in the Tarentaise region of France; summer skiing on Austrian glaciers; heliskiing in Gudauri, Russia plus an insight into Romania and Czechoslovakia
WHO GOES THERE
List of tour operators featuring the above resorts (where applicable) and their telephone numbers
REGULARS
INNOVATIONS
David Goldsmith treats us to a bumper four-page collection, including matting, bindings, boots and bleepers
SCOTLAND
Elaine Cooper has sent us a double dose of news this month
SNOWVIZ
David Goldsmith bares all
LES CARGO tastes out the restaurants at Courmayeur, Italy
CLAMOUR
What really makes a ski resort’ top’?
Adam Ruck has fun finding out
POCKET CLINIC
Spring snow  supersedes powder for some skiers.
Ian McGarry gives guidelines for getting the most out of it, whilst Tessa Coder urges us to relax our skilegs
SKI MEDIC
Dr Michael Turner gets to grips with your problems
FASHION In action.
Claire Selman selects functional skiwear which will work in extreme conditions
FREESTYLE
It's not one long ski holiday for the team.
Julia Snell describes promotional and other activities filling their diaries
RACING
DOWNHILLER'S DIARY
Martin Bell is pleased to be back on the circuit, despite disappointing results early on after his knee operation
RACING
John Samuel reports on the start of the season
PEOPLE
Julia Snell writes about the brother and sister team who influenced British freestyle skiing
DEPARTMENTS
LEADER
Elisabeth Hussey revels in the joys of fresh snow and the season is in full swing
UPDATE
The cream of the news (and all of it good)
REVIEWS
We advise you which books and videos to choose
LETTERS
We air your views
SMALL ADS for late bookings 
P 12 Resorts — Offpiste, late season and East European
P.24 The latest technology
P.40 Alpine life
P.48 Fashion and function for action
BRITAIN'S ORIGINAL SKI MAGAZINE FOUNDED 1905
Leader
THE RETURN OF THE SNOW
It was a crisis situation.
Tour operators were cutting their allocations on planes and in hotels but even this did not save them from bankruptcy.
Ski equipment importers had big stocks of last year's skis and boots still on their hands and ski shops were desperately running sales and searching for other sports to make up for the fact that no one was buying skigear.
True, the recession has something to do with it but far more important was lack of snow.
Who wants to spend money on a ski holiday and find themselves going for walks?
Who buys new skis to go out to slopes where rocks shred the soles within a couple of days?
Worse still, the new skiers — beginners — who should have been making up for those who stop because old age or the arrival of infants stops ski holidays — were simply not attracted to a sport when everyone was complaining about bad conditions.
Now all that has changed.
A shift in the weather pattern, bringing low pressure systems across the Alps in December laid down a firm base.
Cold weather enabled the resorts to operate their snowmaking machines and ensure a solid white carpet back to the village which survived a warm patch over Christmas and is predicted to last long through the months ahead.
Early skiers reported back that powder coated the empty slopes and bookings flooded in to the tour operators.
They went swiftly into operation, scrambling for seats on planes and pillows in resorts, while shops reordered from importers as their stocks of ski equipment sold out.
This turnabout is affecting the whole ski business in Britain, not least the magazines.
For do you bother with magazines if you are not going skiing?
And resorts, tour operators and shops cannot afford to advertise if they are on the breadline.
With no revenue, many magazines cut down on their pages but we are glad to say that the Ski Club of Great Britain, who publish Ski survey backed us to produce the usual number of editorial pages, so we could fit in all the information you need as committed skiers.
With snow in plentiful supply we have a special section in this issue for those of you who want to get off the piste.
It is difficult to define this kind of skiing which ranges from skiing down the edge of the piste in the powder which the pistemachine does not reach, to touring from hut to hut far away from ski resorts.
Should we call this off-piste skiing?
Boring came the reply.
Touring perhaps?
Gives the idea of slogging uphill all the time on skins.
Wilderness skiing?
In the Alps you are nearly always close to civilisation.
On the cover we used the American word — backcountry skiing.
It is appropriate enough in that country where skiing is often confined to one side of the mountain and if you go over the back you must have special permission and be accompanied by a guide.
But in Alpine resorts the back of one mountain is often the front of another.
Whatever we call it, skiing off the piste is getting more popular again.
Skischools nearly always have classes for expert skiers which explore the mountains with their instructors.
It is not difficult — though may be expensive — to hire a guide for a day (or a week) so that you find the best snow available at each time of the day and each season, whether it hasn't snowed for a week or is blizzarding as you start the day.
We make some suggestions in the resorts section of the magazine from writers who have kept away from the pistes and enjoyed it.
And David Goldsmith has also sorted out the best buys in powder snow equipment, so you are prepared for the exhilaration.
This our end-of-season issue of Ski survey.
Look out for us again in September.
Elizabeth Hussey.
UPDATE
USA Award
This years' Ski USA Award for excellence in Ski Journalism went to John Samuel,Ski survey 's Consultant and Racing Editor.
Tracy Taylor from Killington (left) and Bill O'Connell from Vail (right) proudly present John Samuel with an engraved crystal decanter.
He also received £1,000 to donate to the charity of his choice, Back-up, for spinally-injured men and women.
Constructive conversations
In September Ski survey we reported on the BASI v ESF battles of last season.
And in November Adam Ruck covered the subject in his controversial column ‘Clamour’.
It seems that it's all change now.
At the time of going to press, Kenny Dickson brought us up-to-date with developments:
‘The outcome of a meeting with the ESF was that BASI should be brought closer to the European equivalence.
BASI Trainers will work in conjunction with ENSA and Monsieur Pinquet (the Secretary-General, who is tasked with pulling the member states of the European Community plus Austria and Switzerland together) to formulate a European equivalence (Chamonix, January 1991).
A more in-depth offpiste and mountain safety aspect will be introduced in 1991 to all BASI grades.
Slalom will be re-introduced to Grade I syllabus with Grade II running gates to a lesser degree and at Grade III level a pure and simple gate introduction.
It's all looking much healthier now but time is still a major factor.
Only after February will we have a clearer indication of the European equivalence.’
A new BASI Constitution is being formulated and a new chief executive, Bob Kinnaird was recently appointed.
In the meantime the French police will be patrolling the slopes again this winter.
BASI News warned members that they would be working against French law and could be heavily fined.
Any instructors wanting more information on the equivalence test should call ENSA on 010 33 50 530 444/553030…and speak in French!
AA to Innsbruck
After a 28-year break, Austrian Airlines are flying direct to Innsbruck again.
The flight is conveniently timed so that you can be in one of the many resorts surrounding Innsbruck by lunchtime.
Departure is on Saturdays, departing LHR at 0745, arriving Innsbruck by 1035.
The return journey leaves Innsbruck at 1120 arriving back at LHR at 1220.
Standard return fare is £169.
Call 0071–439 0741 for details.
Lamentable & Extraordinary Fatality
That was the headline in The Times of 23 June 1865, with an account of Alice Arbuthnot's death.
In April that year she married William Arbuthnot and during their honeymoon they walked up the Schilthorn from Murren, accompanied by a guide.
Alice was tired and sat down to rest some 300m below the summit while the two men walked on.
The sky was over cast and suddenly there was a violent thunder storm.
They ran back and found Alice had been struck dead by lighting.
William Arbuthnot erected a monument on the spot.
In the area there are only limestone rocks which splinter easily and so are unsuitable for an inscription.
A granite rock was carried up the mountain but over the next 120 years parts of the inscription did get broken away; the climate at 2,700m can be very severe.
Arnold Kaech, chairman of the Schilthornbahn, decided to replace the monument.
He wished, in his own words: ‘to honour the memory of the early British travellers and in view of the special relationship which has subsequently developed between Murren and the tourists from Britain’.
On 27 September the new monument was unveiled by Arnold Kaech and Sir Keith Arbuthnot, whose great-grandfather has been a first cousin of William Arbuthnot.
The new monument is more robust than the original and also far larger.
Arnold Kaech did have one advantage denied to William Arbuthnot; his monument could be landed on the spot by helicopter.
Travel Hints
This is a very informative leaflet produced by Dover Harbour Board, with details on which dock your ferry or hovercraft departs from, travelling to your resort by car, rail or coach plus a list of essentials to take.
Distances to resorts, information on speed limits, tolls, accident procedure and useful telephone numbers are also mentioned.
Don't go abroad without one — ring 0304 240888 for a leaflet.
Land Races
The 1991 British Alpine Ski Championships are being sponsored for the 13th consecutive year by The British Land Company plc.
The championships will take place in Tignes, France, 9–16 March.
The competition is open to all British racers registered with the British Ski Federation and aged 18 and over.
There will be four disciplines: Downhill, super G, giant slalom and slalom.
The SAF is expecting nearly 200 British racers, as well as a strong field from Europe and North America.
If you are unable to complete, why not support the racers by going to watch?
Virgin winners
The prize winners from the Lillywhites ski evening held for Ski Club of Great Britain members on 14 November, were presented with a two week skiing holiday in California plus £500 spending money from Virgin Holidays.
Left and right, prizewinners Rosemary Smith and John Clyde; centre left and right, Ashley Meyer — Managing Director of Lillywhites — and Ally Tidbury — Ski Club of Great Britain.
Look out for this years' Lillywhites evening in November, and see if you can be a lucky winner.
Freestylers Flying Start
Jilly Curry started the season off by winning a gold medal in the combined event in La Plagne, followed by a second in Tignes and a fourth place in Zermatt.
Julia Snell, our freestyle correspondent, came fourth in the Ballet event in La Plagne, eighth in Zermatt and sixth in Piancaballo.
Quintessential skiing
‘OUR APPROACH IS RADICALLY different’, promised the invitation.
‘We cut through the crap that exists in ski teaching.’
Ski survey couldn't resist, and sent Tessa Coker off for a day's coaching with Developments at Profiles Ski Centre.
If you think you know it all and feel you are a good skier, Kevin Batchelor and Tony Ball are probably not for you.
Do you, however, feel you cannot progress with your skiing due to interferences, such as fear?
Are you stuck on a plateau and frustrated?
Have you had lots of instruction with each new teacher seeming to contradict the one before?
Developments will revolutionise your attitude.
They won't teach you anything.
You will learn how to learn.
It is a method that needs to be experienced to be believed.
‘I have never seen you so enthusiastic about something’, commented Tessa's husband.
‘It's like a religion’ confided a Developments disciple on the day.
Kevin and Tony have taken it all beyond the slopes and use similar methods, often combined with the skiing experience and teaching languages.
They can be hired by individual groups with specific needs/goals or you can join them for days on plastic or longer courses on snow.
Even though you are with a group, it is all one-to-one in order to meet individual needs.
Killington, USA, 3–13 March, £860 + £150 course fee; Hintertux, Austria, 4–14 September, £375 + £150. 9–10 February, Rossendale; 6–7 April, Southampton; 13–14 April, Hemel Hempstead.
One day £50; two days £85.
For more details call Kevin or Tony on 0303 851175.
VIP treatment pre- and apres-ski
The Executive Health Centre in Harley Street might sound plush (the carpets are!) but anyone can use the facilities.
They have developed an intensive 6-week pre-ski training programme (£23 per session) for all levels of fitness and skiing ability, specially designed and supervised in groups of up to six, featuring weight training, aerobic machines, flexibility and plyometrics.
So if you are skiing late season, now is the time to get moving.
Anyone with a history of injuries (or if you have already been skiing and suffered one) will benefit from a session on their Cybex analysis machine (£30) which sagely tests joint and muscular strength at different resistances.
Both sides of the body are compared, as well as the balance between front and back of thigh.
Even if you have no noticeable problems, a test would be an advantage as it pinpoints areas of potential weakness which are therefore injury-prone.
If necessary you would then follow-up with physiotherapy treatment (if referred by a GP this can be claimed back from health insurance) and remedial exercises in the small but well-equipped gym.
Many other treatments are available from stopping smoking to post-cardiac surgery rehabilitation.
A 10% discount on injury assessment by Cybex analysis is being offered to Members of the Ski Club of Great Britain, as well as special rates for all fitness assessment and pre-ski programmes.
Further details from Simon Brookes, Executive Health Centres PLC, 48 Harley Street, London W1N 1AD; 071–323 9292.
Meltdown mayhem
When the season is over you need not say goodbye to all your friends.
The Ski Club of Great Britain is organizing the ultimate apres-season bash in Battersea Park from 8pm to 2am on 11 May.
Those who have worked in resorts during the season are expected to be there in force.
We are promised the last word in London nightclubs, BBQ, dancing, live bands, cabaret, live band karaoke, mystery entertainments and a huge amount of fun.
Ask your Ski Club Representative or Party Leader for vouchers or get them from the Clubhouse.
The price will be £30 for members, £33 for non-members.
Tickets can also be obtained from the Ski Club Meltdown office at 77 Church Road, Hove, East Sussex, BN3 2BB.
Absolute Beginners
The Ski Club of Great Britain is not just for good skiers.
Your friends and family can learn to ski safely, in a friendly environment, and most of all quickly, with the SCGB's Beginner's Party.
Novices will enjoy being with people their own standard, getting all-day tuition with English mother-tongue instructors in small groups.
In the evenings they will socialise with another Ski Club party for early intermediates and swap notes and jokes.
Lo Rosiere has been selected for its gentle runs where progression is without fear.
There will be video feedback too, and those who feel up to it can go in for the local skischool giant slalom race.
It is a fun trip and there are still a few places.
Beginners and 2-week skiers (led by Tessa Coker), 9–16 March, from £355 halfboard (including travel and instruction); 2nd-4th year skiers (led by Kate Adamson), 9–23 March, from £515.
Call 071–245 1033 for further details.
Safe offpiste
Sermatt's new initiative is to follow Austria and America's example and create patrolled, marked runs which are never pisted (other than by skiers themselves between snowfalls).
This will rival the USA's back bowls and the Arlberg's skiroutes.
Marked yellow on the map and called ‘downhill runs’, some replace existing black runs and others are new.
By the way, the wide yellow markings indicate slopes with snow cannons.
There is a new two-stage covered chairlift from Furgg to just above Trockener Steg and up on the glacier (summer ski area) a new T-bar runs parallel to the existing Plateau Rosa one.
This will eliminate possible holdups.
There is a Ski Club of Britain Bank Holiday Blast party to Sermatt 23–27 May, led by Tessa Coker.
Cost: £375 includes halfboard 3* accommodation and travel.
Call 071–245 1033 for details.
Create Future Champions
Britain's ski charity, The British Ski Educational Trust Ltd, was founded in 1966, soon after the British Ski Federation was set up by the Ski Club of Great Britain.
Its objectives are to promote education in skiing at schools or recognised youth organisations as part of the general framework or programme of educational physical activities.
It also supports the advancement of education by payment, in cases of genuine need, of part of the school fees of children interested in skiing, at ski academies throughout the world.
Ski coaching schemes run by schools and youth organisations are legally charitable and also come into the remit of BSET.
It also aims to fund research into the geographical characteristics of ski areas, study all aspects of safety in such areas and encourage proficiency in skiing among the Armed Forces.
Now they need your help.
Having been dormant for a while they are looking for funds to give Britain's young people the opportunity to realise their full skiing potential.
You can help by giving a donation: through a charity payroll scheme if you company has such a thing; by leaving a gift in your will; through a 4-year covenant.
Under the present law charities benefit through receiving refunds of the tax paid by the donors, which increases the individual gift by 30% or more.
Tax benefits also accrue to you.
Some of the skiers who have already  benefited from this charity are Martin Bell, Deidre Angella, Michael Dixon, Louise McKenzie, Brynrefail School and  Barnardo's Homes.
For donations and information write to: The Secretary, BSET, 28 Featherbed Lane, Addington, Croydon, CRO 9AE.
Buy and Invest
Here is just one of many properties for sale in the hands of Rutherfords.
They say the trend is towards outright purchase now rather than leaseback.
Le Domino at Les Coches consists of 23 apartments, on the slopes connected by chairlift to the whole Le Plagne area.
Studios are available from £48,000, 2-bedroom apartments from £66,000.
If you have more to invest, a duplex penthouse with two bedrooms and a loft in La Tania (the new resort between Meribel and Courchevel) costs from £100,000.
Ring Rutherford's on 071–351 4454 for details of these and other properties.
Looking for an investment in a sure snow area, you could well consider Morillon which links with Flaine, Samoens and Les Carroz.
This property has been built with properly sloping roofs and mountain architecture.
The combination of village atmosphere with an enormous skiing area must be a winner.
You can either buy outright, or join in a coop ownership scheme.
For these apartments and many others, ring International Property Shops on 0392 211022.
Special Deal at Highlands Hotel
Ski survey readers have been offered a reduced rate at the Aviemore Highlands, a 4* luxury hotel in the town centre (with a skibus stop right outside).
Stay there for five nights for £125 (includes welcome glass of sherry and refreshment tray, full English breakfast and 3-course dinner).
Accommodation is in a room with private bath and colour TV.
Skiing in Scotland is best towards the end of the season (even into May) when it is less cold.
If you live too far away to drive up for the day why not go for an extended weekend?
Call Aviemore Highlands on 0479 810771 for further information.
Don't forget to say you saw it first in Ski survey, February/March issue 1991!
Photocredit
We missed the credit to the photographer who took our Japanese pictures in the December issue.
It was Jean Pestell who captured the mysteries of the oriental snow for us.
Invicta's Winners
The winning entries to the Invicta Competition (Ski survey, October) each won a pair of matching gloves and rucksack: P Robinson, Powys, Mid Wales; Louise Blake, Poole, Dorset; Rex Maples, Blackpool; Ian Smith, Normanby, Middlesbrough ; Sally Robson, Henley-on-Thames, Oxon and Margaret Blaikie, Glasgow.
Northern mists
Improvements at Rossendale Ski Centre (near Manchester) include an undermat misting system which is far more efficient than the old sprays that tended to take skiers by surprise, drenching them from head to foot.
The snack bar has been extended and redecorated.
It is now run by a local catering college providing a very friendly service with limited but tasty dishes ranging from an English breakfast platter to good old jacket potatoes (well filled) or steak butty.
The views from this slope are wonderful.
What a pity the management allows bombers to ski out of control and spoil serious skiers' pleasure by crashing into them!
Ski Rossendale, Haslingden Old Road, Rawtenstall, Lancs BB4 8RR; tel 0706 228844.
Step onto your edges
A great home-use exercise machine which is good for all skiers is the BH Sherpa Steppa.
It will work primarily the quads (front of thigh) and glutes (buttocks) as well as improving aerobic capacity (stamina).
It is the best choice for tourers and cross-country enthusiasts because of the kicking heel-raise which can be accentuated to help with climbing on skins and increase elan when gliding across flat sections.
Perfect for year-round general fitness, the Steppa costs £257, is sturdy, compact and goodlooking.
Further details from Bolton Stirland on 0564 779321.
Skier's Edge is a machine from the USA now available in the UK.
It has received good reviews (not tested by Ski survey) including a study by Liverpool Poly.
Its applications go beyond pre-ski conditioning (eg racquet sports, waterskiing, golf).
It is quite an investment at £599 so you would want to get the most out of it.
See before you buy — get a copy of the promotional video which is very convincing.
Call 021–631 2373.
Failing that you could check out your bank balance and treat yourself to a stay at Champneys health resort which has recently installed a Skier's Edge and where they gear workouts to your ski-specific needs.
Details from Champneys, Wiggington, Tring, Hertfordshire HP23 6HY; tel: 0442 863351; fax 0442 872342.
The Ski Club of Great Britain (Eaton Square, London) has bought a Sherpa Steppa.
Viewing and test free.
Exercise on it for £1 for ten minutes (followed by a drink at the bar!)
Call 071–245 1033 for details.
Hemel Ski Centre
Although it has been operational for a while, it was only recently that Ski survey visited this slope, to attend a Peter Lightfoot ski course.
We were impressed (with both!)
It was a busy Saturday.
Trevor Barrett-Boyce was also holding a clinic and there was a good sprinkling of small children.
But the liftsystem (button tows) was so efficient that there were no queues and the slope never seemed overcrowded.
The main slope is 180m with a respectable gradient which stops skiers who are better off practising on the trainer or nursery slope, where there is room for up to 100 skiers.
Hemel's skischool has a good reputation.
Better skiers will enjoy the mogul slope (100m) where one side offers gentle undulations whilst the other is more like jumping the waves on a Windsurfer.
There's a bar, barbecue and slope shop.
Open practice costs from £4.50/hr (adults).
It's floodlit so you can ski during the week until 10pm.
Get there by car on the M1, exit 8 or train to Hemel and taxi costing £2.50.
Call 0442 241321 for details/brochure.
Sport-watches
Divers will be pleased to hear that Fila have introduced a watch water resistant down to 330 feet.
Powder skiers will also welcome it.
It comes in bezel and different coloured strap combinations such as; neon yellow, pink, black, red, blue, white, grey, aqua or turquoise.
The kits required to change the straps and bezels cost £7.50.
Model F16 costs £79.00.
Further details ring 071–281 8472.
Are you articulate?
The latest boardgame to hit the market, Articulate, requires not only general knowledge but also an ability to verbalise.
It is a team game played by picking cards and describing as many entries before the timer runs out.
While your team tries frantically to guess the answer, you struggle to find a better description.
It's more intelligent than Trivial Pursuit and noisier than Charades.
The idea was conceived in a Supertravel chalet and for this season anyone staying at selected Supertravel, Bladon Lines and Ski West chalets will be able to play Articulate.
Special price of £24.95 for Ski survey readers inc. p + p, cheques should be made payable to ‘William Maclean Ltd’ and sent to: SCGB Special Offer, William Maclean Ltd, PO Box 1324, London SW6 5BX.
Dream Sunspecs
Cost Del Mar, America's No 1 polarised sunglasses are now also available in Europe.
Skiers need sunglasses which not only look good but which actually work.
They must be optically correct, virtually unbreakable, a comfortable fit, lightweight, scratch-resistant and, above all, cut out maximum reflected glare.
Costa Del Mar frames are handmade, adjustable (ie they can be bent to fit your face) and have a tapered groove to prevent lenses being driven into the eye on impact.
It is the lenses, however, which are critical.
Most sunglasses have moulded, tinted plastic lenses (eg polycarbonate) which cannot be relied upon to eliminate peripheral distortions.
Others use ground glass which, though optically correct and absorbent of UV and IR rays, are ultimately breakable, heavy and more likely to steam up.
Costa Del Mar use ground CR-39 plastic lenses which satisfy all of the above specifications.
Polarisation is the most effective way of reducing or eliminating reflected glare.
Put simply, polarisation works like a venetian blind to cut reflection from above and below yet still allow clear vision.
Choose from 27 frame styles in 25 colours/finishes and 14 lens options (which exceed BS2724 standards and are guaranteed for life).
Prices from £69 to over £100.
Prescription polarised sunglasses can be made to order.
Dream International Holdings Ltd are offering Ski survey readers an exclusive 20% introductory discount until 31 March 1991.
Call 081–563 0300 for details.
Which?
The club is continuing its association with the Consumers' Association's annual resort guide, the incomparable Good Skiing Guide, and is again cooperating in gathering skiers' reports on the resorts they visit.
These reports are a valuable aid to our Information Department in answering Members' enquiries about resorts, and to the guide's editor, Chris Gill, in compiling the new edition.
Report forms can be obtained from the Club.
Or you can write on plain paper, focusing first on what you particularly liked and disliked about a resort; what surprises it held for you; who it suits and who it doesn't suit.
Beyond that, tell us what you thought of all the obvious aspects; lift queues, skischool, mountain restaurants and so on.
RESORTS
Shepherds in Chamonix
Last March a small flock of advanced to expert skiers were herded down the most terrifying terrain in Chamonix by Nigel Shepherd.
Leslie Brown lived to tell the tale
The leaflet promised six days of intensive, action-packed skiing in Chamonix with Nigel Shepherd (UIAGM), International Mountain Guide and Andrew Lockerbie (BASI), a British Grade 1 Ski Teacher.
Nigel and Andrew are both amongst a growing number of British guides and ski instructors who offer special holidays for intermediate and advanced skiers.
Their leaflet featured a photograph of powder tracks flowing down the mountainside — just the sort of thing good skiers all dream of being able to do effortlessly.
I was unprepared for the exhausting and at times terrifying reality which lay ahead…
We were based at Nigel's chalet on the edge of Servoz, a small, sunny village just a few kilometres down the road from Chamonix, conveniently placed for visiting other resorts covered by the Mont Blanc skipass, including Les Contamines, Argentiere, Le Tour, Les Houches and Megeve.
Day one — a trip to the top of the Grands Montets (3,300m)— set the scene for the rest of the week.
All the skiing from here is on glacier and although there is one marked black run, the most exciting skiing lies among the crevasses and ice cliffs.
It was a relief to have a guide.
We managed to get in two dramatic runs under the Aiguille Vert and a great run down the Italian Bowl before lunch, finishing off the day by skiing the famous and steep Pas de Chevre.
This legendary descent begins from the Grands Montets and goes down to join the lower part of the Vallee Blanche.
Nigel coaxed us towards wide open slopes beside the towering peaks of the Vert and Les Drus.
I found this section ego-boosting.
The slopes were steep but easy to turn on.
Soon, however, we were midway down and into a steep, narrow, rocky section, where it was turn now or go straight into freefall.
Matters were sufficiently serious for us to be called forward one at a time.
I dropped down the slope through a mixture of snow and rocks.
The run culminated in open, undulating slopes towards the Mer de Glace.
After skiing the last section of the Vallee Blanche Nigel decided we could avoid a walk into Chamonix by skiing down a snow chute filled with avalanche debris.
As I looked down I couldn't believe I was being asked to attempt it.
The first section was hardpacked snow where I was supposed to do shortswings.
I sideslipped most of the way.
It wasn't fun.
Then I reached a narrow alley full of large snowballs.
Luckily Andrew appreciated the state I was in and carried my skis while I walked down.
Finally, there was a fast, unforgiving ice path.
One false turn and I would have been lost among boulders of ice and snow, rocks and fallen trees.
We came to the chute a few days later.
I was surprised at my eagerness to get back in there.
I even managed some shortswings at the top.
Other skiers who were walking along the path above us towards Chamonix watched in disbelief.
No trip to Chamonix is complete without skiing the Vallee Blanche.
The topstation of the cablecar is spectacularly located, perched on the top of the Aiguille du Midi (3,842m).
To reach the glacier you have to walk through a tunnel, then down a narrow ridge with Death on one side and a very steep drop on the other.
I was relieved to be roped up for this.
We didn't do the easy, excursion route, of course(a 20km trail).
Oh no!
Nigel chose a more exciting variant, the Envers du Plan — a spectacular run, steep in places with intricate route-finding through ice falls and crevasses.
The day we did it, however, the snow wasn't brilliant — windblown in the steep sections making turning difficult.
At other points I broke through the top surface into icy, powder snow below.
Halfway through the week Nigel and Andrew convinced us that it would be worthwhile to expend some energy skinning uphill in pursuit of good snow and a sight of the enormous snow-filled valleys that lay beyond the Chamonix liftsystem.
They were right.
At the topstation of La Flegere (2,450m), a south-facing ski area in the Chamonix valley, we all donned skins and special binding adaptors which enabled us to lift our heels in order to walk uphill.
We climbed for an hour-and-a-half and I can tell you that going up a mountain on skins is not as easy as it looks.
I found uphill kick turns particularly tricky.
Nigel was sufficiently worried about my feeble attempts towards the top of the ascent that he got below me each time I had to turn and pushed me forward into the slope.
For the last, steepest section we all had to climb up a couloir on foot.
This was unnerving and by the time I got to the top I was exhausted.
After lunch we began the descent from the top of the Vallee de Berard on wide open, empty slopes.
The first snow bowl was cruddy and difficult to ski.
Soon, however, we were into long stretches of powder and spring snow where Andrew videoed us in action.
We then came to a stream and followed this to the little village of Le Buet, returning to Chamonix by train.
That evening I managed to stay awake long enough to watch the video.
Andrew played back sections so that we could take a long, hard and critical look at our technique.
Italy is only a short distance away from Chamonix through the Mont Blanc tunnel.
From the top of the Italian side (the Helbronner, 3,466m) you can ski the Toule glacier or the Vallee Blanche back into Chamonix.
To get onto the glacier you first traverse the top of the mountain, then sideslip into a gully hanging onto a thick rope.
This was far more tricky than it sounds.
After this first sideslip there are 200 steps down a steep metal staircase to a second rope-assisted sideslip.
With legs slowly turning to jelly, I skied down hard, icy snow, followed by spring snow, then slush.
We went back to the top and made fresh tracks towards Chamonix through windswept powder snow on the Glacier du Geant.
It was wonderful skiing on this warm, sunny day amongst the crevasses and ice cliffs, then onto the classic Vallee Blanche run at the end of a perfect day.
Austria
Steve Pooley visited Kaprun where he enjoyed skiing on the Kitzsteinhorn glacier in the mornings followed by leisurely lunches and active afternoons — a perfect family holiday for those who love mountains
It doesn't have to stop at Easter.
The higher resorts in the Alps usually have good snow well into April and there is skiing throughout the summer on glaciers but summer skiing should be combined with other activities to make the most of a holiday.
Austria is probably the best bet for summer skiing because, as the skiing is only possible until about 2pm, the prettiness of the villages and the gorgeous, unspoilt alpine meadows give plenty of scope for non-ski activities.
White-water rafting, walking, climbing, tennis, golf and swimming either in pools or lakes are all available and if you want to travel with your family, there is genuinely something for all ages.
We visited Kaprun last June and, with the snow on the Kitzsteinhorn glacier slushy by midday, we had a wonderful time in the afternoons following a picnic lunch in a meadow or dining on a terrace across the lake from Zell am See, 15 minutes away by Post Bus.
Kaprun's Optimum Sports Centre has two pools, one indoor and the other outside, as well as a sauna, restaurant, sun terrace and a water chute infested with chortling children.
On a sunny afternoon, most people prefer to use the outdoor pool so that if you want some serious exercise you can swim indoors without too many hazards.
Many hotels have steam rooms or saunas.
We stayed at the Hotel Abendruh where there were both, along with a sunbed which massages you as you lie there.
It is an excellent place for families as the staff are friendly, relaxed and attentive.
We arrived quite late on our first night and, when I went downstairs the next morning the waitress showed us to our table and said: ‘Good morning, I think you were arriving at eleven o'clock last night.’
I was dismayed that we had disturbed her and apologised for having made a noise.
‘Oh no,’ was her reply.
‘I was just going out then and I was not coming home until nearly 7am.’
By the end of dinner that night the poor thing was slumped against the bar but had provided excellent service to the merry throng of diners.
Our visit coincided with the World Cup (football, not skiing!) and a multinational throng of British, New Zealand, German and Norwegian guests settled down in the lounge to watch the occasional match amidst much merriment, fuelled by the occasional incursion by the proprietor carrying trays of schnapps.
We travelled with Crystal Holidays, whose local rep, Harvey, is enthusiastic and efficient.
He constantly wears a hat decorated with watches and is a local institution — once a week he and a colleague put on a show, with participation encouraged, at Zell am See.
Of all the sporting activities available during the afternoon, one pleasure is walking through alpine meadows.
The Maiskogel cablecar gives access to lovely countryside with cattle and sheep grazing all around and there is a little restaurant with gorgeous views across the valley.
An afternoon should be spent in Zell am See.
The Post Bus service is very efficient and the tranquillity of the restaurants on the other side of the lake, served by a regular ferry service, are in sharp contrast to the bustling little town which has some excellent shops as well as lively coffee houses.
There are organised excursions to Salzburg, Berchtesgaden , the Grossglockner, the Liechtensteinklamm Gorge and the Krimml waterfalls.
Crystal offers other glacial skiing areas in its Mountain Action programme.
Hintertux us used by several national race teams for summer training because of its size and variety of terrain.
I was there in September and our group miserably went up the valley from Mayrhofen in the rain and was even more miserable when we reached the summit to find ourselves in a blizzard.
Taking the initiative, I led the way, following three skiers who looked as if they knew where they were going — they didn't, and we found ourselves poling for quite a long way before a unanimous decision to have an early lunch was taken.
The shivering group was quickly fuelled by big bowls of soup and glasses of wine and then, very suddenly, the sun beamed through and the cloud disappeared — everyone scampered for the lifts and we had the most wonderful afternoon imaginable.
Hintertux is a tiny hamlet and offers little in the way of nighttime activity but Mayrhofen, 15 minutes away, positively buzzes in the evening.
The Stubai glacier is another good bet for summer skiing.
Again, there is a sizeable skiing area and non-ski options include tennis, squash, swimming, hiking, cycling, mountain biking, rafting, free guided walks and golf at Igls and Seefeld.
Innsbruck is close by and the city is worth visiting just to meander in its lovely mediaeval streets with mountains soaring above while the Italian border is close by and there are excursions to Lake Garda, Merano and Vipiteno.
Accommodation is at Neustift, a pretty little village 20 minutes from the glacier, or Fulpmes further down the valley.
For those who like access to a big town for sightseeing as well as mountains for skiing and other sports, Pitztal close to Innsbruck would be the better choice.
Russia
Caroline Stuart Taylor came back full of the joys of midwinter from her heliskiing trip to Gudauri
I could hardly contain my excitement.
Heliskiing in Russia — not only helicopter skiing but also a glimpse of the USSR.
So, bathplug at the ready, I was off to Gudauri, Georgia, via Moscow and Tbilisi.
The bathplug (which legend says is nonexistent in Russia) wouldn't be necessary at Sporthotel Gudauri itself, a new 4-star hotel with tennis courts, sauna, jacuzzi, swimming pool and bowling alley.
It is a joint venture with the Austrians.
A couple of setbacks on the journey kept our group of five wondering if we should really be going.
‘Gorbachev sends troops to Georgia’ was The Times headline that day and the hotel manager greeted us with news that one of the two helicopters had crashed last Friday, leaving three people in hospital.
The MIR 8 helicopters were hired from Aeroflot with Aeroflot pilots.
They can take up to 30 people — we were normally a maximum of 12.
So there was only one helicopter instead of two, which meant less heliskiing than we had hoped for.
The journey itself was pretty tiring, taking 21 hours in total and we arrived at the hotel at 5am.
But the exceptionally beautiful sunrise in the morning soon got us all up to try out the skiing in Georgia.
Four Dopplemayr chairlifts take you up from the hotel at 2,000m to the summit at 3,000m.
They are highspeed ones but run slower than in Europe.
With the temperature at -15°C maybe it is no bad thing to run them slowly.
The Georgians tend to start the lifts only when they have to, so if you are first up each lift, you ask them to open the next one!
Once running, no problems — unless they break down, which resulted in a very short first day for us.
On day one Viktor Ovoyaykov, a nuclear scientist from Leningrad, took us under his wing, giving us what we called ‘chewing-gum wine’ which is a thin sheet of chewy grape (you will have to go there to try it) and insisting we all skied with him and his family.
The equipment and clothing of the Russians and Georgians was very old-fashioned by our standards but the hotel skis and boots for hire were excellent.
The four chairlifts give access to some very pleasant intermediate pistes but the best skiing is offpiste from the very top, with a short climb onto a ridge, giving good long stretches of powder, all above the treeline.
Also two tours from the top take you down offpiste to the road, where by arrangement the hotel bus will pick you up.
These give lovely powder runs (and a but of crust) but be warned, the bus won't come unless you go with a guide.
Kurt from Schladming and Peter from Carinthia took us, both of whom spoke very good English.
The third tour takes you to Kobi, a tiny village in South Osetia.
Here we were greeted by the farmer and his wife, whose sheep and pigs were wandering around the road and the village.
The farmer's wife invited us in and gave us cheesy, potato turnovers — it would not be polite to refuse.
On the way to the little bar, serving only sardines and vodka, Fenella Lees (group leader) was hugged and kissed by a very bristly local.
I am not normally a vodka drinker but well, why not, it slipped down very easily with the sardines!
The South Osetians, we were told, can live to the ripe old age of 140 years or so, due to lack of stress in their lives…a far cry from London living.
Finally Friday came.
Having been at the end of a queue of Germans and Austrians all champing at the bit to go heliskiing, it was our turn.
Up in the MIR 8 — very noisy, very exciting.
Relief came when it flew away and left our little group in the quiet on the top of the mountain range.
Ten lifts in the helicopter later and with 7,500 vertical metres under our skis we were tired and satisfied.
We skied runs — mostly above the treeline and some in the trees — called Lomisa, Merab, Miketi, Tschirdilli and a mountain range as yet unnamed.
Sadly the weather was not good enough to fly the next day, so we decided to visit Tbilisi, the capital of Georgia, for a taste of real life.
Tbili means warm, so Tbilisi means warm place — it's a spa.
We visited the public baths (hot springs) and walked around the different quarters of the very pretty old town.
We rubbed shoulders with a bride and groom at a local wedding, as anyone was allowed to wander round the church while the marriage was going on (it was a tiny church).
There were some uneventful demonstrations going on but we never felt threatened.
Dinner at the Intourist Hotel, however, was eventful.
One restaurant closed at 7.30pm, the other, designed as the interior of a ship, didn't have much food to offer (even when we tipped the waiter to take our order).
Well, it was Russian New Year's Eve — 14 January.
The five of us ate Jonjoli (which tasted like seaweed with onion) and chips and drank lots of Russian Manavi wine and chatted to several rowdy locals, who gave us bunches of flowers and told what they thought about living in Georgia.
It was an interesting, memorable evening and the wine kept coming even if the food did not.
Our Aeroflot plane stopped on the journey home to refuel in the Ukraine.
It was -20°C in Moscow — freezing as well as beautiful at the Kremlin.
Sadly, we had no time for Red Square.
There are four types of package at Gudauri: Superheliski (12,000m); Heliski (2 or 3 tours plus 2,000m of Heliskiing) Heli-schnupper (once up in a helicopter for a taster) and Non-heli (hotel accommodation only.)
The food at the hotel is mostly flown in from Vienna, so staying at Fudauri is Georgian extra-extra luxury.
It is well worth the visit.
The skiing can be excellent, the scenery is beautiful and the whole experience unforgettable.
Himalayas
John Hayward was awarded the Kenneth Smith Scholarship last year and sent us this report about the Eagles in Kulu
Himalayan skiing has had a long and painfully slow gestation period beginning with the activities of various Indian Army Officers in the early part of the century.
It has continued in fits and starts ever since.
Today Gulmarg in Kashmir is the only reasonably developed ski area.
A few have skied in various other parts of the Himalayas.
On the whole though, very little of this massive chain of mountains has been touched by the ski-tourer.
The prospect of a three-week trip to the Kuly Valley was, therefore, extremely enticing.
I was lucky enough to be given a Kenneth Smith Scholarship for the 1990 Eagle Ski Club Expedition.
The Kulu Valley is one of the major valleys in Mimachal Pradesh: the source of the Beas River and one of the ancient trade routes into Lahual, Zanskar and Tibet.
Manali — the last town in the valley — was to be our base.
Surrounded by apple orchards and huge cedar forests, the older parts of the town looked like parts of the Alps must have appeared sixty years ago.
The newer parts are hideous.
Sixteen of us flew into Delhi — and a fifteen hour bus journey took us up into the mountains.
A short stop in Delhi, but long enough to enable several sets of Rohan travel kit to get splattered with dye in the Hindi festival of colours, Holi.
Some of us left Delhi sadder and wiser.
We stayed at John Bannon's Hotel in Manali Orchards for rather more time than we had intended.
After a couple of days to sort kit, we headed up onto the hill in two parties of eight.
Rob Collister led a party up towards the Rohtang Pass at the head of the valley.
Dave Walsch led a group up the Solang Valley.
It was a long hot skin up to our campsite at Dhundi, just below the treeline in the Solang.
The whole valley was dominated by the towering massive craggy bulk of Hanuman Tibba (5,928m).
We had two perfect days skiing, early morning climbs being rewarded by long sweeping runs back down to the valley bottom on sun-softened neve.
We were caught on our last night at Dhundi by the first of seven days bad weather.
The prospect of a gentle ski out disappeared with the arrival of a metre of glutinous snow.
A rather unpleasant and damp flog came in its place.
The next week became one of increasing frustration.
We were snowed into Manali.
Hopeful forays onto the slopes above the town produced poor snow, wet people and a complete failure to find the mysterious Notch.
The Notch came to assume the importance of the North West Passage to 16th century sailors.
This route to the Jabri Nullah proved elusive and highlights one of the problems of doing anything in the Himalayas: poor maps and strange local information.
On the seventh day the sky cleared: a mysterious property of seventh days.
Rob's group had to walk the long way round into the Jabri Nullah and was rewarded by several days of good skiing.
Dave's party headed up towards the Rohtang in a fleet of hired Morris Oxford taxis.
After stops for punctures we got up to the snow.
The following few days yielded two magnificent ski peaks and some superb skiing.
Some of the tree skiing was particularly exciting: rather breakable crust.
Rupert Hoare excelled with a double forward roll on ski, complete with pack and no broken bones, during a particularly tight run down.
The last few days passed horrendously quickly — except for the bus ride down to Delhi at 3am on the last day of March.
I waved goodbye to the rest of the team.
They returned to Heathrow.
I stayed on in India.
Tarentaise
Alex Berrill visited three French purpose-built resorts in the Tarentaise — the area to host the 1992 Winter Olympics — finding them quite diverse
Keen powderhounds traditionally look high, or head off early, to chase the light white stuff.
However, for the last three seasons they've been disappointed — unless like me, they were lucky enough to chance a late holiday and hit the best powder of the season.
Les Arcs
In April, I was taken on a tour of three of the modern French resorts: Les Arcs, Valmorel and Les Menuires.
We all arrived anticipating the worst but were greeted warmly by the manager of the Hotel du Golf in Arc 1800, with a Kir Royale in the American Bar.
We instantly felt the week was getting off to a good start, a feeling reinforced by waking up the following morning to new, slightly heavy snow.
The offpiste fiends chased our hostess, Lotta Tichter, through bowls of knee-deep spring powder (more like cement in places).
We were relieved to stop off at the Hotel de la Cachette in Arc 1600 for a delicious buffet lunch.
The afternoon was spent following Divina Galica through the trees and down any difficult, fast run that she could find.
The following day, we were shown the new Flying Kilometre course at Arc 2000.
I came to the rapid conclusion that anyone tackling it must be either incredibly brave, extremely stupid — or both!
Looking down towards Arc 2000, the course appears almost vertical and very long.
New records are expected to be set at next year's Olympics, where speed skiers will possibly exceed 150mph.
A much appreciated lunch in Arc 2000 at Saint Jacques, with a good choice of menu, and a warm friendly atmosphere, gave us the strength to ski the powder all afternoon.
Les Arcs is quite often underrated by British skiers looking for more extensive and challenging terrain.
It is definitely suited to family skiing as is Valmorel, the next resort we visited.
Valmorel
Valmorel is effectively the fourth of the Three Valleys and is approached from Aigueblanche, just outside Moutiers.
First impressions were favourable, as we rounded the last of a succession of hairpin bends.
For a modern, purpose-built resort it is surprisingly attractive, with its wood-clad buildings and cobbled shopping precincts.
We stayed in the Hotel du Bourg, which offers two-star accommodation on a bed-and-breakfast basis.
A short bubble-ride up to 1850m brought us to L'Altipiano, where we fortified ourselves for the afternoon's skiing with a lengthy and very enjoyable lunch.
Our first run was a bit more of a struggle, as we tackled the biggest mogul slope in Valmorel!
A long chairlift took us back up to the Col de la Madeleine, with its spectacular view up to Meribel.
There are proposals to link Valmorel's skiing area to the Three Valleys, although we weren't given a definite timescale.
At the end of the day, we were glad to put our feet up outside the Ski Roc bar and take in the charm and friendly atmosphere.
Snow was falling heavily as we entered La Galette, for a gastronomic dinner with Jacques, marketing director of Valmorel.
The next day we headed over towards St François Longchamp, in the Maurienne Valley, discovering that the area is a lot larger than first meets the eye.
We found some superb powder — all to ourselves, until we stopped at another excellent mountain restaurant at Le Prariond.
Before taking a reluctant leave of Valmorel, wee were shown around the kindergarten, La Saperlipopette.
We were extremely impressed by the efficiency, cleanliness and the imaginatively-designed rooms of what is, in effect, a school for all ages.
Staff are required to speak English and the children are looked after all day.
Les Menuires
Les Menuires was our next stop — widely considered to be one of France's ugliest resorts.
However, after two days at Reberty's Altea Hotel, we were less inclined to take this view.
The hotel was extremely comfortable and offered all guests free entrance to a health and fitness club, including the outdoor swimming pool, which some of us tried out, while others preferred the bar overlooking the pool.
People staying in Les Menuires are spoilt for choice when deciding which direction to take for the day's skiing.
We headed off for the north-east facing slopes of La Masse, hoping to find the best snow.
We did.
Our instructor took us off into the unknown for the next few hours, where we experienced ice, spring snow, powder and crud.
It took some effort to stay upright with such variations in terrain.
Then we were confronted with a cornice.
I jumped last!
The following day was a total white-out, although this did not stop the intrepid skiers, as we headed to the top of Roc des 3 Marches and down into Meribel Mottaret.
We could vaguely make out a few buildings as we caught the bubble up to La Saulire, and then headed down into Courchevel.
Feeling rather ill due to lack of visibility, we stumbled into Chalet des Pierres, just above Courchevel 1850, and were disheartened to feel that justice could not be done to such a fantastic display of food.
The final morning brought even more snow, so much so, that I spent 2 hours digging my car out.
It seemed such a waste to be driving back to England and leaving it all behind.
Never think that April is not a good month for skiing, as it has repeatedly been proven to have the best snow.
Czechoslovakia
Roberta Etter went to extreme lengths to meet Krakonosc, the Patron Saint of Czech skiers
Hitchhiking across Czechoslovakia during a snowstorm, wearing a hot pink Luhta skisuit, has to be one of the memories that will remain with me forever.
We had spent anxious weeks in Prague watching each puffy, white cloud that graced the azure sky with the hopeful eyes of a child waiting for Christmas.
Nothing.
Absolutely nothing.
The weekend of the Krakonosc Festival was so near, and yet premature buds were starting to pop their curious green heads through the earth's surface.
Late Wednesday night the mist seemed to freeze around our nostrils and form halos made luminous by the garish neon lights on Wenceslas Square.
By Thursday heavy, grey clouds enshrouded the city and the queue at the central bus station snaked in and out of piles of colourful bags, trusty, slightly outdated skis and laughing Czechs of every age.
As the lights blinked in the overhead monitors we could see more and more buses were sold out.
We inched our way slowly forward and finally reached the harried, unsmiling agent.
Krakonosc?
Sure, next spring!
Undaunted we looked at every conceivable, available destination.
Spindleruv Mlyn!
It was still sixty-odd kilometres from where we wanted to be but we were obsessed with our goal — Krakonosc, the Patron Saint of Czech skiers.
The Krakonosc Mountains are a deep range of steep slopes and dense, all but impenetrable forest.
From the 13th century they were inhabited by a sensitive, hardy, mountain folk full of merriment and superstition.
They spent their long winters under a deep blanket of snow, singing and creating ghost stories.
They also created a mythical patron, a just ruler who rewarded the good and punished evil doers by unleashing massive snowstorms.
They named him Krakonosc, and gave this giant the appearance of an old man with long, flowing beard, dressed in forest green, with a moss-woven hat.
The snow didn't slack off for 36 hours.
Fat, white flakes piled even higher and the extra 60km seemed like 600.
Nothing in my upbringing had prepared me for the weather, much less the absurd notion of hitchhiking.
I thought my friend, Irena, was joking when she dragged me, sloshing and sliding, towards the highway.
Truck drivers hooted, children stared, and just about everyone laughed or waved.
However, all the cars were already jam-packed and had skis strapped in every imaginable position.
After three hours and as many rides we slid, half numb, into the Harrachov Ski Centre.
Someone slapped a couple of hot killer grogs into our frozen hands as a ragtag band marched in confused circles.
A naked man covered in tar and soot slithered by in pursuit of three young, giggling girls.
Slime green goons with tentacle-like fingers danced with skiing mushrooms.
All of a sudden thousands of people cheered as red devils skied crazily in and out of precession and a horse-drawn sledge appeared magically through the whirling snow.
There he was, the legendary Krakonosc had arrived with his green jacket flapping in his wake.
Like magic, laughter and dancing broke out everywhere and the 60 treacherous kilometres were all but forgotten.
Romania
Roberta Etter continues her adventures in Eastern Europe, this time visiting Poiana Brasov
The driver didn't have to point out the bullet-riddled windows of the coach as we lurched along from Bucharest airport to Poiana Brasov.
In the 23 hours we had been in transit on a scheduled 32-hour flight from London Heathrow, we had become fairly observant.
Not to worry, we were assured.
We had been invited to Romania to show us how safe it was and how much fun the skiing could be in Poiana Brasov.
It was true on both accounts.
Poiana Brasov is a skier's oasis in Romania just like the small glass balls that you turn upside down and watch the snow fall on the perfect setting.
While the rest of Romania was in utter chaos, Poiana Brasov was one of the few snowcovered ski-bargains around.
The greatest danger we found was the distinct possibility of repetitive overeating.
The ski runs are very limited, to be sure, but excellent for beginners and new intermediates.
The Carpathian mountains receive powdery Russian snow from the north and have had the best European snow record for the past three years.
Poiana Brasov offers two main cablecars plus an open gondola and seven draglifts.
There are over 17km of marked piste.
Rumours of old had said that Poiana Brasov shut down its discos at 9pm.
We found they didn't really get jumping until closer to midnight.
Life there is so inexpensive that it just takes longer to get it all done.
By the time you finish your £3 massage, £2.50 champagne and five-course dinner including sleighride, all the wine you can drink and a ‘scintillating’ cabaret show for £12.75, it could be pretty late.
Of course that's if you exchanged money at the regular exchange rate of 12 lei to the pound.
The rampant black market ranges anywhere from 80 to 130 lei to the pound.
Life, at that rate, becomes downright decadent.
The near vicinity offers excursions to the legendary Bran Castle for a haunting encounter with Count Dracula's past, or dining and dancing in the nearby mediaeval town of Brasov.
A sheepfold in the village has folk evenings with cheese-making and Romanian wines.
The ski instructors and hotel employees are bursting with enthusiasm and a wonderful open friendliness.
The only occasional gripe was the random shortage of hot bathwater and the lack of understanding that some people actually prefer coffee to tea.
Not bad considering the average package price per week is £230.
As for safety, well I did have one fairly close encounter when I was visiting the ladies toilet in the basement of the hotel.
Two young Romanians came and stood on either side of me at the mirror.
Had it been the London underground I might have panicked.
Then one of the girls demanded: ‘Give us your mascara!’
I don't think that really classifies as a terrorist threat.
Innovations
David Goldsmith looks at the latest developments in equipment technology
Japanese Carpet
The Japanese are building artificial ski slopes in a new material which is claimed to closely simulate the sensation of snow.
A carpet of polyethylene ‘tufts’ is sprinkled with polypropylene beads.
The combined use of the matting and beads, when misted with water, produces a spray effect as skiers come down the slope and the continuous surface is claimed to have safety advantages.
A novel factor in the structure of these slopes is a 20mm cushioning layer under the slope which absorbs impact and produces a comfortable gliding sensation.
As the main photo shows, the Japanese are getting serious about plastic slopes, with plenty of attention to landscaping and good uplift.
Three other forms of Astro Gelande are being manufactured to produce artificial nordic ski jumps, cross-country ski tracks and  tobogganing slopes for children.
More information
Manufacturers or distributors of the ski matting mentioned on these pages are Ski Tech Systems (0633 896363), Bowmat (0227 273140) and Astro Gelande (Creative Leisure Associates 05434 506733).
British Piste
The equivalent of selling snow to eskimos must be the British selling ski slopes to the Swedish, but it happened two months ago at Ullna outside Stockholm.
Phil Judd, of Ski Tech Systems, pulled off the deal which involved supplying enough matting to lay a 200m piste.
It's the first major plastic slope in the country, and is on the site of ski area that used to offer reliable snowcover until the greenhouse effect got to work.
The irony is that the matting was being laid on a fresh carpet of 3 inches of snow at the beginning of December!
An unusual aspect of this slope is its snowmaking system.
The only other artificial slope I've encountered with snowguns was the mad project at Merthyr Tydfil in South Wales three years ago.
Anyway, the Club that runs the slope — Sweden's largest skiclub — is reported to be enthused with its British bristles and will, no doubt, want to shut down its snowguns for good .
Plastic Moguls
For over 15 years, artificial slope designers have attempted to reproduce that unique phenomenon of skiing, the mogul.
Many plastic slopes now feature bumps in one form or another, and often it's a rather sad effort.
Dendix and Ski Teck, the materials that cover most slopes, are made in large mats with a fairly rigid stainless steel grid.
They are therefore difficult to mould into the tight curves that typify a mogul shape.
They work best when curved into rolling waves (the skiing equivalent of sleeping policemen?) and these demand most of the technique that figures on real bumps.
Bowmat is a new artificial ski surface, moulded in polyethylene, which offers flexibility in more than one direction.
It comes in interlocking 22cm square pieces and will shape itself around bumps in the terrain which can be made with earth-moving equipment before the slope is laid.
Don Bower, the inventor and manufacturer of this material, recently took me to his test slope near Whitstable in Kent.
It's laid out in the middle of a large, hilly orchard and features its own little plastic mogulfield.
I spent half an hour skiing Don's bumps, and found they interesting and realistic to ski.
They are spaced 3m apart, but he reckons 4m will be the optimum distance between centres, with a modest height of 45cm per bump.
Don claims that his material runs with less friction than normal matting because it contains a silicone additive.
It is best lubricated with wax, rather than a water misting system.
On the other hand, like any moulded surface of this type it has fat needles, rather than the brush-type filaments of a normal plastic slope.
These give less edge carve.
Don is involved in plans to build a large plastic slope, and golf course, at the site I visited, and has also applied to build a slope at High Wycombe.
Higher Lowa
Lowa must rank as one of the smallest ski boot manufacturers in Europe and have produced some fairly dull products over the years.
On the other hand, they were the first boot makes to promote the idea of air fit and they are now the only people still putting little air pumps on their boots.
This year, however, Lowa have produced a remarkable ski boot range.
The models are based on very slick-looking matt shells with controls that are neatly incorporated into the overall design, rather than tacked on.
Unfortunately, this is the first winter for a long time in which Lowa has no distribution in Britain but I dare say someone will fill the gap before long.
SOLAR FLAIR
This development in ski goggles from Solar is not going to change the world, but it's interesting nonetheless.
The headband is attached to the frame of the goggle by a link that allows a much freer range of movement than usual.
The overall curved profile of this goggle is refreshingly different too.
Spy in the Sky
Avalanche rescue is a matter of speed, effective communication and urgent detection at the point of the accident.
One problem with avalanche transceivers to date has been that their transmission range is only effective for other members of a group surveying the snow at the surface.
The French manufacturers Arva, who have been making an interesting alternative range of transceivers for some years, have now developed a system of amplifying the radio signal so that a ski patroller in a helicopter can home in on a buried skier.
The system is called the Arva 8000 and when I get round to absorbing some technical literature on the subject I'll bring you more news.
Surf Sure
The most feverish area of research in snowboarding for the past few years has been the quest for an improved binding system — in particular a releasable binding that works.
Although many snowboarders use standard ski boots or ski touring boots, the designs of conventional ski bindings do not work properly on snowboards.
There is also every snowboarder's nightmare of having one foot in, one foot out.
The most viable release binding I've seen recently is this model from Swiss manufacturer Meyer.
It is based on a ‘plate’ concept, with a large socket in the centre of the plate that locks on to a post mounted on the deck.
Meyer are claiming that a number of competitive snowboarders are switching to this binding this winter.
If this is the case, and if they work, it could be a breakthrough.
Up until now most advanced snowboarders have firmly resisted anything except a non-release binding.
NAVA NO MORE?
Readers of this column who can cast their minds back to 1984 may remember a piece of equipment called the Nava Skiing System.
Nava was a truly radical concept: a soft skiboot (an enhanced moonboot, in fact) with its own binding system that incorporated an arm that wrapped around the lower leg to transmit edging movements to the ski.
The key advantages were a very comfortable boot, with a grippy rubber sole and a dramatic reduction of the weight of boot and binding combined.
Mana put a huge amount of money into their boot and binding, but it flopped in the market.
Many experts, however, reckoned they had the germ of a brilliant idea.
The French magazine Sport Premiere, recently speculated on what might have happened to Nava, had it continued — in particular an enhanced wrap for the leg.
I fear, however, that the Nava is now well and truly buried.
FINDERS BLEEPERS
Finding a ski lost in powder is one of life's more aggravating hassles.
An effective solution to the problem may now be at hand.
The first viable electronic device for locating a lost ski has been launched by a German manufacturer of avalanche transceivers, Ortovox.
The ski is mounted with a device called the F-plus ‘ski mouse’, which is powered by a battery and transmits continuously.
The skier carries a new model transceiver, the F1-plus, which can either be used for avalanche rescue, or switched to a lower frequency to receive the signal of the buried ski.
The system is available at approximately £200.
Details from the importers, Ardblair Sports on 0250 3863.
SCOTLAND
Now that the ski season is well underway, Elaine Cooper has sent us a bumper news bulletin from the Scottish slopes
Great White Hopes
Skiing started early in Scotland this year, much to the relief of hard-pressed ski area managers, ski equipment retailers and everyone connected with the industry in Scotland.
The top lifts at Cairngorm were opened on Friday 23 November with 300–400 earlybirds turning up on each of the first few days.
By the beginning of December, it was possible to ski all the way down to the Coire Cas carpark.
Cover was admittedly thin at lower levels, about 6 or 7in, but it contrasted markedly with recent seasons when skiing to the carpark was a rarity even in mid-February.
Higher up, there were already drifts of between 4 and 5ft.
Skiing in November is not unheard of in Scotland: last year it snowed heavily in the west Highlands in October but the warmer weather in December and January put paid to any hopes of building up a decent depth of snow pack.
But this year it was Cairngorm, further east, which got off to the flying start.
Glenshee and Glencoe all had cover but not enough to justify running the lifts.
Glencoe were still putting the finishing touches to their new chairlift.
The new area at Aonach Mor joined the fun in early December, a fortnight before they had intended to open.
The early snows this season brought other problems in their wake.
There were three avalanches on the first weekend of skiing, not on the skiing area itself but in adjacent coires.
No one was hurt, though several climbers were involved in the slide in Coire an Lochain, with one being carried down some 400ft.
Only three avalanches have ever been recorded in Scotland in November since 1925 when avalanche recording was started.
Avalanche experts were predicting that the prolonged spell of sub-zero temperatures above 2,500ft after the snowfalls could lead to problems later in the winter as new snow falling on top of the frozen snow pack would not bond easily to the lower layers.
Nordic start gets cash boost
One of Scotland's most promising young Nordic skiers has won an award from the Highlands and Islands Development Board to help her pursue her career.
And her father, no slouch on the Nordic circuit himself, has agreed to let her take five years out of education to become a champion.
Fiona Lowe, 18, from Inverness, won the silver medal in the British ladies junior championship biathlon last years and is a member of the full British ladies biathlon squad.
She is about to compete in the British championships in Bavaria.
The award from HIDB enabled her to go to a FIS training camp for lowland skiers at Kiruna in northern Sweden in December.
It is part of a wider scheme set up last year by the social development department of the HIDB to enable talented youngsters in the area to achieve sporting and artistic excellence.
The board has encouraged local clubs to nominate particularly talented individuals for the fund.
In Fiona's case it was the Inverness Nordic Ski Club which put her name forward.
The club believes she has real Olympic medal potential.
Jim Lowe, Fiona's father, used to be chairman of the club and is also on the Nordic committee of the Scottish National Ski Council.
He welcomed the award.
‘It takes some of the struggle out of raising funds’, he said.
‘But at the end of the day it's only £600.
I reckon by the time we finish this year, we'll have spent £4,000 on training and equipment for Fiona.’
Jim competes as a veteran in Nordic events in Scotland and still manages to come in 3rd or 4th overall.
‘She hasn't beaten me yet’, he says fondly of his youngest daughter.
You get the feeling he'll be only too happy when she does.
More prizes for Aonach Mor
The much-praised new ski area at Aonach Mor near Fort William which opened last season has picked up two more awards in the close season, including one for architecture.
It picked up joint third prize in the British Tourism Awards made annually by the British Guild for Travel Writers.
The Guild consists of around 140 writers and winning projects have to be environmentally sound as well as contributing something to the local economy.
You would not, in other words, get the prize simply for being a good hotel.
This year's overall winner was the reconstruction of the Kennet and Avon canal from Bristol to Reading.
Significantly, it was for its year-round contribution to recreational development in the Lochaber area that the guild favoured Aonach Mor.
The gondola which takes skiers from load level up to the skiing area proved as popular with visitors last summer as it had in its first winter, with tourists of all ages and states of infirmity able to enjoy the marvellous view along Loch Eli and the Great Glen.
Carol Wright, travel editor of House and Garden magazine and current chairman of the Guild, presented the award to Nevis Range's Cally Fleming at the World Travel Market back in November.
For a skiing development to win architectural prizes really is extraordinary, particularly since the tough conditions often mean the buildings have to be brutally functional.
In fact, it was the very ruggedness of the wooden building which houses the top station of the gondola, restaurant and day-lodge facilities, which won the development the top award from the Association for the Protection of Rural Scotland.
Lord Arbuthnott, who presented a plaque and scroll to the Nevis Range directors, said that the decision had been unanimous.
‘The judges felt that in this wild and exposed situation only a very tough and challenging building both in design and construction would be appropriate.’
Reminding visitors that the whole thing had been lifted onto the mountain by helicopter, Robert Smith, the director of APRS said: ‘If you are going along the way of more leisure time then this building is the shape of things to come.’
The building was designed by Crear and Partners, architects, of Edinburgh.
David Meek, one of the partners, was naturally delighted with the recognition.
He explained that the wooden-clad, metal-roofed construction had been designed to withstand winds of more than 100mph.
THE FED GOES NORTH
The British Ski Federation is now well-established at its new home in East Calder, just outside Edinburgh.
The offices, in an old registry office, are still being worked on.
Minor planning difficulties had held up the second phase so the Federation has to start with just three finished rooms.
But the remaining five are now well underway.
‘It's a bit like moving house’, explained Mike Jardine, the chief executive, ‘only worse’.
Mike reckons that it makes sense to be nearer the only regular snow skiing in the British Isles.
’ The French association is in Annecy, not Paris, the American one is at Park City’, he points out.
‘The Sports Council were also very supportive, very keen for us to get out of the south-east.’
The offices used to be in West Byfleet in Surrey.
Mike himself used to work in Kendal, Cumbria for Europa Sport, the big equipment distributors.
He says he wouldn't have taken the job if it had been in the south.
‘Here, we're just 10 minutes from the airport, 5 minutes from the motorway and we have a view of the Ochils (a range of low hills just north of the Firth of Forth which are often dusted with snow in the winter) to remind us what we're here for.’
Doubtful development
Future skiing development in the Cairngorms and elsewhere in Scotland now looks even more uncertain than it did after the Secretary of State's unhappy intervention in the Lurchers Gully dispute last autumn.
Lord James Douglas Hamilton, the Scottish environment minister has allowed the Cairngorms to go forward for nomination by UNESCO as a World Heritage Site.
And all the current ski areas come within the areas proposed for a new species of national park in Scotland in proposals form Scotland's Countryside Commission.
Scotland does not have national parks at the moment, and many see them as a nasty English invention.
But increasing pressure from recreation and development of all kinds on the delicate mountain areas has led to renewed attempts to set up some kind of planning scheme to protect them.
Not surprisingly, the mountain areas concerned include all the available skiing in Scotland.
But each area is subdivided into concentric circles (except of course they're not circular!).
The suggestion is that the central core area should be absolutely sacrosanct with slightly less stringent restrictions as you spread outward.
Planners are not skiers (unfortunately) and they don't seem able to read a map either because some of the lines defining their concentric rings go right through the middle of existing ski areas, particularly at Glenshee.
This could lead to different planning approaches being applied within the same area.
The Scottish ski areas now speak as one voice on these matters and are pressing the commission for further explanations and the chance to have their voice heard in the planning process.
As Tim Whittome of the Cairngorm Chairlift Company points out, skiing represents one of the few forms of sustainable development in these thinly-populated and sometimes remote areas.
Not all the ski areas are in the most sensitive ‘mountain core’ areas.
But the companies are having to point out once again the tiny fraction of land they take up on relation to the whole.
The national park proposed for the Cairngorms, for example, covers an area of land big enough to include not only the skiing at Cairngorm, but also that at the Lecht and Glenshee as well .
The World Heritage designation has no statutory authority in Britain.
It amounts to a pat on the back.
But if it were granted it would significantly strengthen the conservationists' hand politically.
The world heritage programme depends not just on what the sites represent but also the way they are looked after.
UNESCO can take away the award if the standard of care drops.
Conservationists feel that if the nomination is accepted, they would be able to argue that any new ski development would make UNESCO take the accolade away.
No government likes to lose face like that.
There is one brighter note, though.
Scotland's two government-backed countryside bodies, the Nature Conservancy Council and the Countryside Commission are being amalgamated under the chairmanship of Sir Magnus Magnusson.
Tim Whittome thinks that they will help to make matters a bit easier.
‘There is an indication that under Magnus Magnusson, people will at least talk’, he said.
‘Having one body will make things clearer if they are not actually less hostile at the moment.’
ARTIFICIAL SNOW INITIATIVE
Snowmaking has come to Scotland.
Despite what are usually considered to be marginal conditions in the Highlands, Nevis Range, the operators at Aonach Mor, and Glenshee have both invested considerable sums in the new equipment.
Glenshee has four cannons and Aonach Mor now has one on a one-year trial basis.
With the high pressure pumps and piping required, the initial outlay at Aonach Mor on their one cannon is £35,000.
The machine comes from Michigan, USA.
The company is hoping for grant aid from the Scottish Sports Council.
Improvements in the snowmaking technology both in the USA and Europe mean that the high levels of humidity which previously hampered artificial snowmaking in Scotland can be overcome.
For the new machines to work, temperatures of -3°C are required in humidity levels of 60% or less.
Night temperatures in Scotland on the hill frequently fall to that level particularly in spells of high pressure when it does not snow naturally.
There is, of course, no shortage of water flowing off the hillsides.
At Aonach Mor there is a small dam which provides all the fresh water for the day lodge facilities and which will give a good head of pressure for the cannon at night.
The artificial snow is destined for the beginners area alongside the day lodge where there is a new baby tow this year.
At Glenshee, they will be used for patching access runs and tows, especially on the Cairnwell Side.
The Way We Were
In 1910 a dispute arose in The Ski Club of Great Britain as to whether ladies qualified for membership.
A cartoon appeared in the 1910 edition of The Yearbook of the Ski Club of Great Britain with a paragraph as follows:
‘On the very eve of going to press we are happy to be able to announce what promises to be a satisfactory solution of the lady member problem which has been troubling us.
A strictly impartial sub-committee, composed of two committee members and four non-committee members, is to be appointed when the winter is over to examine carefully and report on the entire difficulty.
All parties interested will be given an opportunity of stating their views before the sub-committee.
This is, we think, both a sportsmanlike and a businesslike way of dealing with the matter, and will, we feel sure, meet with the support of everybody.’
In the 1911 edition the following solution was reported:
‘At the Special General Meeting held on Nov. 14th, the first resolution proposed by the committee as the outcome of the deliberations of the Commission on the Status of Lady Members, was accepted; this restored ladies to the position which they occupied before November 9th 1910, as a first step towards reconsideration of the question.
A second resolution resolved that the commission be requested to settle the question of the status of ladies in the Club and that the Club should accept and abide by their decision.
It is eminently satisfactory to record that these resolutions were adopted without discussion or dissent and that this source of controversy has been stopped.’
snow viz
NAKED APES, HAIRY SKIING
This month's Snowviz is devoted to ways in which you can use your own hairstyle to improve ski performance.
To explore the potential of this idea further, we sent these leading hair stylists to the Alps.
Here are some of their exclusive tips for hairing down mountains with minimum control:
Shave your head.
Baldness is not only sexy, it is aerodynamic.
Hot wax your head for maximum performance.
Don't be embarrassed by your dandruff problem.
Ski in a blizzard.
Don't worry if you don't have a hairy chest, buy a suitable wig or other rug.
This is a lot more effective than a ski jacket.
Environmental note
Over 30% of body heat is lost from the head.
Reduce global warming by wearing a woolly hat.
Anti-fog goggles are recommended for embarrassing facial hair or false eyelashes.
This is Mike Jardine, one of Scotland's leading extreme skiers, proving that naked apes are better off with one-piece skisuits.
Mike's pre-ski exercise is based on a scene from King Kong.
SIBERIAN SUMMER SKIING
Minimalist skiwear is the answer for an all-over tan.
This ski destination is a favourite for naked apes.
It's the resort of Dombai in Russia and this couple are enjoying an invigorating stroll at -2°C (true caption, except it's a lot warmer than Siberia!)
HUMAN TOOTHBRUSH
Glen Plake's hair has been standing on end ever since he started watching his own ski movies.
Half his hair then fell out when he raced an avalanche down a Chamonix couloir.
His remaining hair is modelled on a Dendix ski slope.
This skier is being overtaken by her own hair, which can be very hazardous.
Avoid this problem with a streamlined Glen Plake haircut — see other photo.
The Pudding Trail
Les Cargo crawls round Courmayeur's less well-known gastronomic restaurants
Eautel Perrier, Courmayeur Wed.
 Dear Beth,
At last a real winter, just like the ones we used to know.
Grey breath in the air, snowmen on the heath, pub bores droning on about how typical it is that a few inches of snow throws the whole country into chaos when the Swiss handle metres of the stuff without missing a beat.
They may be interested to learn that snowstorms in the Alps have been known to throw a spanner in the clockwork of everyday life too.
On 10 December, for example, Geneva airport was closed by snow.
I would have savoured this piece of news with greater relish had I not been booked on BA724 to Geneva at 0845 that morning.
Courmayeur-bound for a quick snort of the much-hyped early Alpine powder.
First reaction was to reach for the hotline to Swissair but no, the airport was definitely shut and we were indefinitely on hold.
The traveller in a hurry does not take this kind of thing lying down.
I probed for information about flights to other Alpine gateways.
As luck would have it, Turin was open and BA had a flight leaving at ten.
I seized my chance and checked in immediately, feeling pretty good about all the sheep in the departure pen until further notice.
How many of them would have thought of the Turin option?
Not to mention the chance, which I rated high, that with Geneva snowed under, the Mont Blanc tunnel would be closed.
Happy musings along these lines were soon interrupted by an announcement that BA724 was leaving after all, and would passengers kindly proceed etc.
Frantic attempts to have my bags recalled came to nought and by half-past-one the Taiwan Timberland lookalikes hit deep slush at Torino after a salivating glimpse of Monte Bianco and blanketed environs a few feet to the left wingtip. 10 December must have been a great day for skiing.
It was not a great day for public transport in the Val d'Aosta.
Turin to Courmayeur took seven hours, with nothing to read but English newspapers full of jolly witty articles about how pathetic we are at coping with snow.
Actually the taxi/bus/train marathon was Turin to Morgex, where the Pre St Didier rapido terminated without apology.
Luckily Ski West sent someone to pick me up.
The Geneva flight had been half-an-hour late, he said.
And no problems with the tunnel.
Skiing had been brilliant.
Ski West had decided on a theme visit.
The theme was an intimate understanding of Courmayeur's extensive snowmaking capability.
In the circumstances this was a poor joke and Ski West sensibly switched the emphasis of the visit to a failsafe reserve theme, intake.
Courmayeur is a purpose-built resort for intake travel.
I knew this already, but it bore rediscovering.
Not just any old intake, mind.
The subplot was eating and drinking in places other than the familiar punctuation marks on the Gorblimey-by-Nite tour for chalet girls' nite off.
Ground rules as follows: no Bar Roma, definitely no Maison de Filippo, and no grolla anywhere.
I kept quiet about my sneaking affection for grolla — the grappa-laced coffee they serve in rustic wooden loving cups — and the Bar Roma's wonderfully enveloping sofas, and tagged along.
First stop the elegant Cafe Posta on the main shopping street just opposite a window display of smiling pig's head, resting peacefully among mountains of salami, mortadella, prosciutto and other cuts.
To do the Cafe Posta properly, one repairs to the antique-filled back room; front parlour strictly for tourists.
We took a scented white sylvaner from Friuli, far away near the Yugoslav frontier.
Valdostana whites best left to the animals, according to Gioachino, Ski West's man on the inside and our gastro guida for the duration.
Turn right near the pig window for the snowy alley to the Cochons' place.
Pierre Alexis, quite the finest trough in town and with an outstanding collection of runs if you're into that kind of thing, as Gioachino is, quasi unquenchably.
I took his word for it and concentrated on enjoying the substance of Ino (for Serafino) Cosson's offerings.
Yes, Cosson: a sensitive forebear deleted the offending CH from the inscription on the pillar in the restaurant, which now reads CO ON and the Cossons lived happily every after.
Ssamois with polenta the centrepiece of the Menu Gastronomico Valdostano, so I gave that a wide berth.
Likewise the Apple Menu, which sounds more like a computer programme than dinner.
A la c, I opted for the DIY antipasto buffet, then manzo alle quattro salse — like a pre-cooked beef fondue, which suits me fine — and finally Panna Cotta which the menu translates with pinpoint accuracy as Type of Pudding.
Baked cream, literally, so piggy type of pudding would be about right.
We were well stuck into an excellent local red type of mouthwash, Donnaz, when Ino insisted on our sampling a white Pinot Noir from one of the localities I remembered crawling through in the train.
This is the exception to prove the rule.
Much too good for the animals.
Last night was the zero option.
Menu gastronomico valdostano or zero.
The venue was deep in the heart of crosscountry country, a snowy woodland idyll called Planpincieux, a few ks and many slithery hairpins from town, guaranteed punter-free.
A few years ago the French would come through the tunnel for an evening at Filippo's, said Gioachino.
Now they come to the Chalet Proment at Planpincieux.
Say no more.
The meal bore some resemblance to Filippo's formula; after about six courses you realise you're still in the thick of the antipasto.
Fat bacon and honey on toast will not go down as one of my all-time favourite local specs, but I had no complaint about the others, nor the ensuring risotto and gnocchi, nor even, amazingly enough, the inevitable chamois.
And when I say I asked for more polenta, you will know that we were dealing with an intake situation of Road to Damascus proportions.
This was not the end of things.
Chalet Proment's Type of Pudding is possibly the most sinful offering since Eve opted for the Apple Menu in the Eden Giardino Trattoria.
As well as Panna Cotta they do a wicked creamy chocolatey spongey thing called  Tiramisu , literally translated pull-me-up, which was very much to the point afterwards.
Rounded off the evening at the world's most civilised truckstop, called the Va-cherie (think about it) on the road to Morgex, where we let it all settle in front of cognac and a roaring fire until Gioachino braved the juggernaut slalom back to Courmayeur.
I suppose he's used to it.
Snow good, but skiing satisfaction seriously compromised by pre-season rifugio conditions; widespread closure.
For future reference, Gioachino says the only place for real lunch is Chateau Branlant on what passes for a nursery slope at Plan Checrouit.
We settled instead for a three-hour five-course fish lunch at the Mont Frety in town, not far from the cablecar station.
One could do worse.
Arrivederla-cherie, Les
Clamour
PULSERATES AND LIFTLINES
How do you rate the perfect resort?
Adam Ruck knows when his heart quickens that the standard is high
My New Year resolution is to make the postman's lot a more fulfilling one by reading press releases.
In the twilight of the old year I tried a sneak preview by dipping into an offering from Ski Alternatives steamily entitled ‘Charlotte's Verbier’.
If Charlotte's Verbier is anything to go by, 1991 could be a long year.
Charlotte's Verbier turned out to be not an unputdownable Mills and Boon ski title but an announcement that the debate about the world's best ski resort has finally been settled.
By Charlotte.
‘Charlotte Graham-Watson was almost born on skis in Verbier and probably has more experience of skiing there than anyone else!’
I read, particularly enjoying the exclamation mark.
‘Charlotte can think of just a handful of resorts that offer the best skiing for all standards…’ etc.
For her just-a-handful, Charlotte is not afraid to admit she has a fave.
‘Verbier really is the first among equals.’
Well, she would say that, wouldn't she.
Having been almost born there on skis, she is not the most objective judge.
I have a pretty good idea what Charlotte's just-a-handful of also ran last-among-equals might be, although the press release does not name them for fear of diminishing the glory of Verbier's triumph.
I'd lay odds Zermatt is one of them.
One could argue it's no good for beginners and, God, the walking — getting to the lift in the morning qualifies as ski touring.
But then one could say same of Verbier and she has not ruled that out.
And it would be hard to pick any other nits in Zermatt except the exorbitant cost of everything.
Squalid centime-counting would not be top of Charlotte's list of priorities.
The point at issue is pure quality, not the dreaded-value-for-money.
The Three Valleys are bound to be in there too, with Charlotte's vote probably going to Meribel because it's in the central valley of the three and not what is invariably described as a concrete jungle; Val d'Isere because the skiing is just so brill and Tignes is, well, a concrete jungle really.
And then you've got to include St Anton haven't you, now that they've solved the puking Swede problem.
There are queues, of course, and Nasserein is definitely a no go area.
But, done properly, there is no denying St Anton is a happening place.
These are the contenders, the hardy perennials of quality skiing for discerning Brits, the so-called top resorts which tour operators will tell you they could sell twenty times over if only they could get their mitts on more beds.
The basic qualification is a big lift system and altitude.
I have nothing against these resorts, but my own shortlist of best resorts would not include any of them.
What criteria would I apply, you ask?
Personal preference, of course.
The ability of a resort to quicken the pulse as I approach.
It would no doubt be possible to devise a more scientific approach than this.
As was recently reported in Ski survey, a German magazine recently drew up a top fifty.
The proceeded not by touring the Alps measuring skiers' pulse rated, but instead made two simple mathematical calculations: the size of the resorts (in beds, or perhaps pillows) divided by the capacity of the lift system, to measure queues; and the cost of a lift pass divided by the aggregate piste length, to produce a pfennigs — per kilometre gauge of value for money.
Pure cold science, unarguable.
Fact.
Being that sort of person.
I first looked to see where came bottom of the chart: Arosa.
Then to the top.
The winner was the Pongau ski area near Salzburg, where lifts more or less link.
Altenmarkt, Wagrain, Flachau, St Johann in Pongau and a few others.
Small resorts, lots of lifts.
320km of pistes, a reasonably priced lift ticket.
A winner.
The world's top resorts — Trois Vallees, Val/Tignes, La Plagne, Portes du Soleil, Dolomiti Superski, Verbier — did not do well.
Of our handful of favourites, only St Anton came out of the chart with its pride intact.
So should we all be deserting the Tarentaise and Verbier for outstanding value and queue-free skiing in deepest Pongau?
I fear the discerning British skier would not be unreservedly impressed: no skiing above 2,000m, bus rides to and from skiing, a motor-was along one of the valleys at the heart of the lift system.
No pubs and no chalet holidays.
The conclusion I drew from the chart is that, if it demonstrated that St Johann im Pongau has a better system of queue prevention than Meribel has, there is clearly something wrong with the demonstration.
Away, pseudo science.
Much better to rely on the pulse rate method of evaluation.
The feedback I get from my heart is that the best skiing is to be found not at big resorts but small ones.
I say the light on this about 11 years ago to the month.
For a variety of reasons, I wanted a holiday at 48 hours notice in deepest January.
I say a Supertravel ad for a ridiculously cheap week and phoned to find that the price applied not to St Anton, Val d'Isere, Verbier or any of the top resorts I considered worthy of my attention, but to a place called Argentiere which had only seven lifts.
A mistake surely.
A resort with seven lifts in the Supertravel brochure?
Seven lifts would keep me amused for about two hours.
But at the price it was on offer I could not refuse.
On the first morning I stepped onto the chalet balcony and looked up at the mountain.
Now I was impressed: I not seen a ski hill like this before.
A speck on a rock halfway to heaven was the top cablecar station, I was told.
The skiing arrangement is simple: you take the cablecar from the bottom to the top, then you ski from the top to the bottom.
No need for a piste map.
What, no poring over a damp dog-eared artist's impression in a white-out?
No setting off home straight after a quick lunch to be sure of catching the last lift?
None of the frustration of seeing a great-looking slope from the chairlift and not having the time to ski it because of a lunch date in the next valley?
No.
There is only one place for lunch on the hill, and all the main runs end up there.
It all sounded wonderfully simple.
Why had I not thought of this before?
By the end of a day I was shattered and exhilarated.
By legs told me that I had skied more that day than in a week on previous holidays.
Of course, it helped that this was January.
In high season you can spend hours waiting in line at Argentiere.
This I was to learn later, too late to recapture a heart irretrievably lost during that first week.
It was not a case of being almost heaven on skis at Argentiere but reborn.
Then there were no queues at all.
A group of Canadian skibums were taking the mountain at speed and skiing 100,000 vertical feet a day: 16 top-to-bottoms.
A pisteur outdid them on his day off by skiing the top section of the mountain nonstop all day and notching up at least 130,000 vertical.
I have since found a few other resorts like Argentiere.
Andermatt, La Grave, Murren, Telluride, Taos.
Days are not spent zigzagging across the mountain from one lift to the next.
You go up to the top, then ski back down to the bottom.
It may not be your idea of skiing, but it is mine.
The villages are interesting too.
I other day I tried to work out where my favourite resorts would come in the German magazine's top fifty.
To my great delight they all did comfortably worse than Arosa.
The number of pillows divided by the capacity of the lifts to measure queues; and the cost of a lift pass divided by the aggregate piste length.
Equipment
POWDER DEDICATED
Specialised equipment can be easier, more effective and more fun in powder, as David Goldsmith explains
Has the ski industry forgotten how to make — and sell — real powder skis?
I pose this question because anyone who skied before the days of highbacked boots (up to the early 1970s) will recall skis that became cult objects for their qualities in ‘cheating powder’.
The legendary Miller ski, made in the USA, was one of them and it became a rather hot seller in the upmarket ski boutiques of London.
The years may have rolled by, but the relationship between skis and soft snow has not changed.
It remains very different to their relationship to hardpack.
If you really want to make light of powder you are better off with specialised hardware.
Am I arguing the case for a send pair of skis?
I certainly am, especially if your secondary pair is drilled to the identical screw positions of your primary pair so that you only need one set of bindings.
If you know how to use a large screwdriver you can swap over the bindings yourself.
Your powder skis should be shorter, lighter and wider, with a more flexible front and (ideally) a larger tip.
The explanation follows.
WHAT MAKES A SKI WORK IN POWDER?
A ski cruises through deep snow best when the tip floats and the tail sinks.
The floating action has as much to with the stiffness of the tail as the flexibility of the tip.
The overall objective is to make the ski rock backwards slightly.
The front of the ski needs the opposite virtues to the back: wider, softer and more of it.
The overall surface area of the ski is also important.
The ‘compact’ skis of the 1970s that were such a wheeze (as opposed to a sneeze) in powder were up to 10% broader than the skis we use today — they had typical sidecuts at the waist of around 70mm, compared to the slimline (63mm to 66mm) skis that are more common today.
This meant that the 5% to 10% cuts in ski length that people took were compensated by increases in width — the surface area stayed the same.
The tails, however, sank more easily because the bindings were nearer them.
Other people have sworn by the virtues of Figi or Scorpion skis (only around 65cm long) but these sink too much at slow speeds, though they're great fun for the occasional skirmish.
Overall, I recommend a 10cm to 15cm cut from your normal ski length on today's models, but make sure that the manufacturer allows this.
There are other ways to make the tail sink.
Mounting the bindings 1cm (or a maximum of 2cm) further backwards can help.
Atomic or Ess bindings offer the facility to shift the boot.
Buying a ski that is relatively narrow behind the bindings is also effective.
Another lesson from the 1970s that has been sadly lost is the ‘spoon’ tip, a generous rounded or blunt shovel which compares with the skimpy shallow tips that are found on skis today.
These spoon tips provide really effective uplift for the front of the ski.
The longest-running powder ski of this type was the Fischer Future Extreme, which only went out of production a couple of years ago.
The ultimate surface area available in skis is obtained by combining two skis and adding the space that normally exists between them — i.e. the monoski.
Monoskiing is a more accessible sport to skiers than snowboarding, because the adaptation in technique is more natural.
The floating qualities of monoskis and snowboards are both outstanding in powder.
My specialised equipment for the powder has always been a monoski.
If you're buying one, take a generous length — no shorter than 10cm less than your regular ski length — with a soft tip and tapered tail.
Good monoskis have quite a different sidecut to normal skis — the narrowest point is the very back, and not the waist.
RECOMMENDED SKIS
Whatever the claims, there is no such thing as the perfect all-snow ski.
The best powder skis are softer, lighter and wider than those which carve ice.
Here is a shortlist of recommended powder skis.
They're selected, at different price levels, from our annual survey of skis available in Britain:
Atomic Tricomp 537 £250
Dynamic VR17 Ceramic £189
Dynastar Vertical Assault£290
Elan Ultimate Mogul £239
Fischer SC4 Vac Tech £209
Head Radial Elektra £230
K2 Gyrator £230
Rossignol Quantom 969 £229
Volkl Comp Renntiger £235
ONE TURN PER SECOND
This article is not really about technique, but there are one or two golden rules that any good instructor will impart.
Powder skiing is something to learn in a small private group with a maximum of two or three friends — big classes are far too cumbersome.
The first essential is to be light on your feet, because your unweighting keeps the skis floating.
Commit yourself straight down the fall line to pick up enough momentum to turn with minimum effort and use a vigorous down — and up (unweighting)— motion to turn.
Constant bouncing of the feet, through springy legs, is the essential rhythm of powder skiing.
Remember that a ski can't skid in powder because the wall of snow at its sides prevents it.
Because many skiers rely on skidding, they come unstuck in deep snow.
Learn how to ride a ski on a carving edge — a course of lessons may be necessary — and you should automatically grasp the rudiments of good powder technique too.
Good powder skiers turn at a rate of about one turn per second.
SHOULD YOU SIT BACK ON YOUR BOOTS?
The answer is no, but the high-backed boot has certainly helped everyone ski the powder because it provides that little tweak of leverage that helps pull the tips of your skis up.
Don't rely on it though — ski with your weight centred on your skis and make your up motions more vertical than backward.
WHAT TO WEAR
The one-piece suit is not mandatory for powder skiing, but it has the significant advantage of guaranteeing no snow penetration at the waist.
For the past seven years I've skied in a selection of one-piece uninsulated shell suits and I doubt if I will ever turn back.
If your skiing tends towards the spring rather than the bleak mid-winter, the versatility of a shell is preferable to a padded suit.
Depending on the weather, you can layer anything from a vest and roll-neck shirt, up to five or six layers (to include a close-knit wool sweater) for icy weather.
Good gloves are crucial.
The ones with long wrist cuffs are not everyone's favourite, but I insist on them.
It may be difficult to read your watch, but the protection is far better.
LOST SKIS
See this month's ‘innovations’ for information on a new electronic transmitting device from Ortovox.
Much more rudimentary (and cheap); are 3 metre cords tied to your heel binding and tucked inside your ski pants.
Long safety straps are a more practical choice if you don't mind being connected to your skis.
SUB POWDA
A snorkel and diving goggles have often been recommended for the deepest powder snow.
This is great in theory but your visibility under the snow can be very poor.
I've always found a periscope to be a very useful accessory in these conditions.
BEFORE AND AFTER THE GOLD RUSH
Stephen Lee takes a look at Alpine life over the ages
In the beginning were the mountains.
‘Everything in the Alps is frozen fast’, wrote Silius Italicus in about 60 AD.
He would be unlikely to find employment as a copywriter for a modern advertising agency; a lousy salesman, that Silius.
Men in Roman times did not venture into the mountains unless fleeing for their lives, under orders, or for gain or reward.
Sport and recreation were strictly confined to the amphitheatre.
Well into the seventeenth century, the Alps were seen as a place where the only activity was shovelling snow from the 45° pastures.
Little did the inhabitants know that they were shovelling gold, ‘white gold’, and that the ensuing gold rush would one day change their lives and their mountains for ever.
The pressures of urban living had not yet become such that men wished to flee, as they do now, to the mountains.
They fled from them.
The crossing of Alpine passes was frequently accomplished only at night or blindfolded, as if ignoring the view would somehow make the journey safer.
Gradually the ideas of clean air, the fascination with glaciers, and the concept that the mountains were ‘God's country’ began to catch on.
In 1775 Goethe, while recognising this, found the people to be dominated by the immensity of their landscape.
‘You call the Swiss free?…in their mediaeval inward looking towns?
These poor devils clinging to their rocks and cliffs, when half the year the snow imprisons them in their hovels like marmots.’
It was the climbers who pushed back the frontiers of exploration and taboo, but within a short while of the conquest of Mont Blanc in 1786 we already hear complaints about ‘touristes inutiles’ clogging up the Chamonix area.
In the meantime, the Alps as the ‘playground of Europe’ was only just around the corner.
The heyday of Alpine life, arguably, was in the period when the mountains were still undeveloped for tourism and when traditional lifestyles — such as the mountain guide, the crystal hunter and the Alpine shepherd — were the rule, rather than the exception.
Before tourism, Alpine life was undeniably hard.
Alpine pastures may look very pretty, but the grazing and growing season was agonisingly short, and profitability was low.
Agriculture lost out in competition with the more fertile lowlands, prompting the flight from the villages as employment was sought far afield.
By the eighteenth century, the Alps were practically bankrupt, especially the Swiss Alps, so much of whose terrain was Alpine.
The work of the pre-electric era was the work of preservation: drying and smoking meat, making cheese and hard bread to survive a long winter huddled in a chalet above the animals.
It was a far cry from the modern chalet party.
One can only wonder what kept Alpine dwellers pinned to their meagre existence beyond habit, tradition and nowhere else to go.
The vocational profession of Alpine shepherd is on the wane, an arduous life with unreliable income.
Perhaps nomadic by choice, a typical shepherd would have had few possessions, would not own the flock, the pastures or a house.
Valley markets are visited in the spring to buy stock to be fattened on lush summer pastures (‘alps’— which give the range its name), and sold in autumn.
The shepherd spends a solitary summer with a couple of dogs, a few hundred sheep and goats, sleeping in a tiny wooden cabin.
Shortly before the first autumn snows the flock is brought down from the high pastures.
This traditional migration to the high pastures freed by summer is called transhumance.
Animals still travel up to the high pastures, but today the migration is by truck, and not on foot.
The shepherd's skills and patience are still needed today, although barely a thousand shepherds work the summer Alpine pastures.
In the search for work abroad, the Swiss became famous as mercenaries, and sent money home to their families.
Chamois and crystal hunters began to convert their mountain skills into hard cash by becoming mountain guides for the more adventurous tourists.
Today the once new but now traditional occupation of mountain guide is one of the most respected in the Alps.
This was not always the case.
Saussure, third on Mont Blanc, had to turn back from a surveying expedition when his 17 guides mutinied, throwing his food down the mountain!
But today's guides retain their individuality in an age when individuality is a rare quality.
Their way of life has always depended on the snow, the weather, the clouds and the human strength and frailties of their clients.
The guide's place of work is an elemental world where man's passing is no more permanent than tracks in the powder snow and he is glad of his unimportance.
The mountain guide, the leader, the teacher, the Alpinist, is the prime working exponent of enjoying the mountains for what they are.
Then came skiing.
Snow, once seen as the bane of winter life, suddenly became the ‘white gold’ which was to change the face of the Alps in summer and winter.
The ski trade and associated hotel and travel industries have brought a massive influx to Alpine villages which a century ago were deserted.
Today an Alpine village with an indigenous population of 5,000 might easily accommodate three times that amount in peak season.
Not everyone can live in quaint wooden chalets.
In stark contrast to traditional buildings are the vast satanic tower blocks of the purpose-built skiing industry, which scar the landscape but nourish and shelter inhabitants and visitors alike.
The profits are as likely to fill the pockets of a developer in Paris or Lyon as those of the local community.
In God's country, the inhabitants have thanked God for tourism and skiing.
One would not seek to reverse the course of history.
But how can traditional forms of Alpine life survive in the face of the rich pickings and bulldozings of tourism?
Pressing the ‘fast forward’ button on the video of Alpine life, the transhumance of the shepherd has been replaced by the seasonal migrations of the ski bum, tour company rep and plongeur.
If the earth was a year old today, the ski industry would be 0.3 seconds old.
In this short time, traditional Alpine life, even flora and fauna are almost only seen in museums or protected areas.
Are the Alps to end up like the Joni Mitchell song?
‘They took all the trees and put them in a tree museum and charged the people a dollar and half just to see them’.
in these 0.3 seconds, skiers and the trade are already complaining about the ‘pattern’ of winter weather which has tarnished the last three seasons (0.03 seconds of the earthly year).
It may be a pattern, it may not be.
How can we draw valid conclusions from such an instant of time in our planet's history about mountains and weather which were here long before and will be long after us?
In the meantime the by-products of tourism, which rescues the people from starvation, have plunged the Alps into a vortex of development and progress.
Ski resorts have expanded so much in some countries that there is hardly any habitat left for the wildlife.
Pistes are crowded.
Heli-skiing is seen as the answer, and even more virgin terrain is opened up.
Now even this is banned in many areas for ecological reasons.
The canons of snow cannons are a riddle.
Some countries boast of massive coverage, with the resultant summer ugliness.
Others boast that they have limited snow cannons to lower access slopes on the basis that tourism stops where destruction starts.
I wish the skiing industry and skiers every success for many seasons to come, but I do not think that the last few indifferent seasons have a timely message.
It may be a heresy to say that poor snow forces people to explore facets of the mountains which do not involve skiing, but it is true.
The mountains will always be there, the seasons will come and go, the snow will be good again and it will be bad again.
If these variations remind us of the history of the Alps, then so much the better: we may find a better balance to the continuing battle between development and conservation.
After all, not all development is bad, and not all conservation is good.
The Alps would indeed have starved without tourism.
In return, the mountains have become the raw material of the ‘product’ marketed by the tourist industry.
It is only fair that tourism should not, like ivy, choke the Alps, since if the ‘product’ is not looked after it may slip well past its ‘sell-by date’.
Let me leave you with one of my favourite pieces of Alpine observation.
‘There was something subduing in the influence of that silent and solemn and awful presence (the Jungfrau)…one had the sense of being under the brooding contemplation of spirit, not an inert mass of rocks and ice — a spirit which had looked down, through the slow drift of ages, upon a million vanished races of men, and judged them; and would judge a million more — and still be there, watching, unchanged and unchangeable after all life should be gone and the earth had become a vacant desolation.’
Mark Twain,A Tram Abroad .
The Alps by Stephen Lee is published by Batsford in February 1991.
Stephen Lee's Alpine Landscapes will be exhibited from 4 February until 18 March at Lillywhites, Piccadilly, and thereafter at the Ski Club of Great Britain (until 30 April).
TECHNIQUE
POCKET CLINIC
Spring Snow
Spring snow, as you might imagine, occurs late in the season when the offpiste is covered with a fall of snow too heavy to ski as powder, which remaining untracked, freezes into a firm — but not rock solid (because it has not been compressed by skiers)— cover.
Spring snow has a low-friction surface which opens up acres of gentle offpiste perhaps not steep enough to ski when powder-covered.
Should your powder technique still leave room for improvement, offpiste thrills can be provided by waking up to clear, blue skies and spring snow.
Skiing spring snow can be a terrific confidence booster, with its even and predictable surface — it offers miles of often empty slopes for fast or slow cruising.
If you don't time it right, however, spring snow can ski like ice or lethal crud, so here is a guide:
Don't forget that altitude is also a factor, and the higher you go the longer into the day a slope of spring snow will remain hard.
If you're on a long run conditions may change from the top to the bottom; and when you feel your skis biting through the top surface it's time to head back to the piste before you break up the snow too much.
Breaking up the surface is well worth avoiding, firstly to save it and give yourself another heavenly run tomorrow, and secondly because when your edges start to catch it's not much fun to ski and can be dangerous.
Spring snow needs the precise, perhaps even delicate use of the ski.
Actions that are too heavy will break through, yet too little pressure will result in skiddy, poorly-controlled turns (although skiing ‘light’ can still be very enjoyable, particularly if you're skiing quite fast).
Once in a while why not take advantage of the smooth, even surface to concentrate on your control and technique?
It is here that you can try things out and work on your whole repertoire of turns (refer to previous Pocket Clinics for inspiration).
Ski with a friend and make some fairly short-radius turns which the second skier will try to emulate at exactly the same moment (ie turn at the same time rather than follow the same track).
Try keying in to your edge set or pole plant to co-ordinate timing.
You can use your voice to help with key words like ‘pole’ as you both finish off each turn.
This kind of synchronised skiing is called shadowing.
It's terrific fun and great for your skiing, improving timing, control, rhythm and your social life all at the same time!
Finally, a note to those contemplating summer glacier skiing: get up early and a few glorious runs of spring snow will make it all worthwhile.
Skilegs relax!
Skiing spring snow is utterly euphoric if you are able to let yourself go.
Relaxation is an important and often ignored component of both physical and mental fitness.
It is a vital part of sporting performance.
Recreational skiers tense up when they encounter fear, be it due to difficult snow conditions, moguls or gradient.
Offpiste spring snow is easy to ski and smooth so concentrate on regular breathing (in as you start the turn, out as you complete it), think ‘light’ and fly like a bird.
You may even push your critical steepness up a few degrees!
After skiing, a stretch and relax routine works wonders.
Remember to stretch while the muscles are still warm from working or directly after a bath and hold each position statically for at least 15 seconds.
Gentle swimming provides a more active relaxation.
If you haven't enough energy left, wallow in a jacuzzi, sauna or steam bath instead.
Treating yourself to a real massage is, of course, the ultimate indulgence.
Some people are able to crash out completely after skiing.
This is fine, provided you are able to rouse yourself again for dinner!
SKI MEDIC
QUESTIONS FROM THE POSTBAG
Dr Michael Turner responds to a variety of questions posed by you
I suffer from asthma but would like to go on our school skiing holiday.
Will it affect my asthma?
Asthma is due to spasm of the airways that lead to your lungs.
An attack can be brought on by sudden exposure to very cold air but as long as you take your usual medication/inhaler (with a spare refill) along with you, there is no reason why you should get into any trouble.
The air is dry and clean so you may in fact be better off over there.
Discuss this with your doctor but my general recommendations are — have a routine puff with your inhaler every morning and always carry it in your pocket when you are skiing.
My feet and hands get very cold and go numb when I am skiing.
Am I in danger of getting hypothermia or frostbite?
Hypothermia is the cooling of your whole body which can eventually result in death.
Unless you fall into a frozen lake or get left on the mountainside overnight, this will not happen to you.
Frostbite is the effect of ice crystals forming within the skin.
The area of skin actually dies and looks white and initially feels numb.
If you are wearing gloves and boots, this will not happen while you keep moving but it can easily affect the exposed parts of your face/nose when the temperatures are below freezing and the wind is strong (the wind-chill factor).
The wind in your face produced by fast skiing has the same cooling effect and can result in frostbite.
get out of the cold and have a hot drink.
cover your face/nose with warm hands (yours or a friend's)
warm your hand in an armpit (preferably yours)
take your boots off (if indoors) and rub your feet with your hands or warm them on someone else's tummy (this really sorts out your friends and don't worry you can't catch verrucae this way).
don't rub snow into any part of you
don't get close to a fire — you can't feel the heat and it can easily burn you.
Tight boots lead to good control of your skis but poor circulation to the toes.
If you suffer from cold toes, loosen the clips on the lifts, in queues and in restaurants.
There is no substitute for good clothing with appropriate insulation (see my article in the October 1990 Ski survey ) and always be prepared for the weather to change.
An injury or being stuck on a stationary chairlift can be a very frosty experience.
How late in pregnancy can I ski?
When is it safe to fall off a horse?
Skiing is a sport that involves certain hazards and there is no established medical deadline for skiers.
As a general rule, the last three months are associated with weight gain, your centre of gravity is affected by the baby and your breathing is difficult because of upwards pressure on the diaphragm/lungs.
Skiing is best avoided then.
However careful or expert you are, other people can still injure you, so if you want to be a pregnant skier, ask your doctor/specialist and then assess the risk — holiday vs baby.
When I injured the ligaments in my left knee last year, the doctor said I didn't need an operation but it would never be 100% again.
Should I try skiing with a brace?
The knee mechanism is very complicated and I'm afraid that a perfect recovery after major surgery is just not possible.
If your knee is still unstable (ask your specialist, GP or physiotherapist) then you may benefit from using a Lenox-Hill brace but remember:
you still need to have very strong quadriceps, so exercises are absolutely vital;
the brace restricts your knee (to stop unstable movements) and it will NOT function like a normal, uninjured knee joint;
the brace will NOT stop your knee getting injured again, and indeed the US studies indicate that brace wearers have a higher incidence of injury.
I don't know any advanced skiers who ski better with a brace than before their injury, so don't push your luck.
Have a wonderful holiday and stay injury-free — The Doc.
Equipment
WHOSE IS WHOSE
Ski equipment manufacturers are combining forces to succeed in the 1990s.
David Goldsmith reports
A combination of stiff competition and stagnant sales in Europe and North America have resulted in many changes in the ownership of ski equipment manufacturers.
Several of the 30 to 40 significant ski, boot or binding factories are changing hands annually.
The past few months have seen the surprise break-up of the Sport AG group in Austria which owned Fischer, Dynafit and Kastle.
Dynafit has gone to the Swiss boot company Raichle and Kastle is currently for sale.
Italian fashion group Benetton bought Nordica two years ago.
The equipment industry in Switzerland is re-awakening after 15 years.
Ebel, famous for the Swatch watch phenomenon, bought Authier skis from Rossignol.
They then acquired Look and Geze bindings from French industrialist Bernard Tapie.
The universal DIN-standard boot sole continues to allow independent brands to prosper but Salomon's move into ski making has forced a new commercial challenge.
As equipment becomes less distinguishable technically, it becomes more important to match cosmetics.
Hence the fact that single-brand ski/boot/binding systems are imminent from Atomic, Tyrolia and Rossignol.
A number of well-known independent brands such as Marker and Volkl continue to play for time, while others are doubtless praying for the white knights of the ski business.
WHO OWNS WHAT
This chart indicates the ownership of equipment as we went to press in January 1991, but the pattern is developing every few months as companies change hands.
ACTION!
Changeable conditions and the active nature of skiing make it essential that designs should not only look good but also be functional.
Claire Selman selects fashion for action
Skiing poses exceptionally extreme demands on clothing.
Sunny conditions in temperatures below zero can suddenly turn to biting conditions in a strong headwind.
If your skiing is anything like as extreme as the conditions you will need to be well prepared.
Protecting the body against overheating is just as important as preventing hypothermia.
Such are the demands of the modern skier, for quality classic winter garments for all occasions and high-tec skiwear combined with comfort and ease of movement.
There are suits that are better equipped for the more demanding skier and manufacturers who specialise in this end of the market include Nevica, Berghaus, Phoenix, Degre 7, Powderhorn and SOS who say they are not interested in following ski fashions: ‘We make heavy duty workwear for people who spend their winters in the mountains.’
Shown here is a selection of high-performance clothing on which no detail has been overlooked.
Improved ultra-breathable fabrics, low-bulk insulation, high-tec linings and fully-taped seams abound.
These are suits you can push to the limit.
FREESTYLE
JUGGLING ATHLETES
Freestylers' lives are many-faceted.
Julia Snell describes some of the functions they have to perform off the slopes
The New Year always brings a certain amount of relief after the exhausting overdose of social events during Christmas.
Every year I am faced with a barrage of questions from family and friends about my sporting career.
‘Still on an extended skiing holiday are you?’ is the most common question, asked half derisively, half enviously.
‘It's alright for some’, they say, as if my fairy godmother has miraculously waved her magic wand and offered me a real life Martini advert on a plate.
I won't deny that there are quite a few ‘Martini’ moments in a freestyler's life, when you find yourself in breathtaking surroundings, thinking ‘it's a hard day at the office’.
Our office is indeed the Great Outdoors for a good part of the year.
There is a lot more to being a national team member, however, than just sliding around on skis.
Above all you learn to juggle — with work, training, finances and personal life.
You take on commitments and learn skills which have little to do with flexing muscles and heaving lungs.
Whether classed as amateur or professional, full-time sportspeople must have a good head for business and develop basic marketing and PR skills.
Commercial sponsorship is constantly gaining a higher profile in marketing policies.
As a sponsored athlete you become involved in a variety of promotional activities, from press conferences and hospitality functions, to launching new products and public speaking.
The search for personal sponsorship teaches you many business-related skills.
You have to research and target the right companies, draw up proposals and outline promotional ideas, work out budgets, develop an agreeable telephone manner and give presentations.
It can be intimidating at first walking into smart offices and facing slick-looking executives across a boardroom table.
I manage to calm my nerves by remembering how I feel before a World Championship run with twisting somersaults and double axels ahead of me.
Somehow balding businessmen don't seem quite as daunting.
Confidence is one of the key qualities you acquire from being on a national team.
The obvious confidence needed to overcome fears, learn difficult manoeuvres and perform under pressure, transfers surprisingly well to the world of business, where targets and deadlines have to be met.
Jilly Curry, Britain's top all-round freestyler says, ‘Competing at top international level teaches you qualities such as self-discipline, concentration and motivation — all essential attributes in any future career.’
Dealing with the press also helps boost confidence and self-expression.
In today's world of ever-expanding audio-visual communication, media skills are becoming more and more useful.
Television interviews are usually fairly brief so you have to put your points across succinctly and in an engaging manner.
The juggling becomes most precarious when you have to combine regular work with maintaining a training programme, and fitting in commitments to sponsors and the press.
British Mogul Champion Neil Munro sums up the problem.
‘I am virtually unemployable as I am rarely in one place for more than two weeks.
I would be nice to have two clear months in the calendar to be able to lead a more settled life, but training and PR commitments make that impossible.’
Fellow mogul skiers Hugh Hutchinson and Mike Liebriech have had to compromise and combine a serious career with freestyle.
Hugh, an officer in the army, is given leave to train and compete and Mike, who last year graduated from Harvard Business School with honours, works part-time for a management consultancy firm.
Other team members seek more temporary work.
Jilly Curry uses her bilingual secretarial skills in London and Simon Baynes combines freelance photography with working as a telephone engineer.
There are benefits to being free from the constraints of full-time employment.
Many of the more glamorous film and photographic opportunities crop up at short notice, so you have to be flexible.
These vary from working as action ski models, to taking part in television programmes such as‘Run the Gauntlet’, ‘Blue Peter’ and ‘The Clothes Show’.
This summer members of the team promoted the UV Ski sponsorship by demonstrating exercises in the video ‘Fit to Ski’ and taking part in a photoshoot on the glacier at Tignes.
My most valuable experience was a few years ago when I was living in a dingy student room in Grenoble.
A telegram arrived saying I was booked on a flight the next day, to be filmed at Pinewood Studios for the title sequences of the James Bond film ‘A View to a Kill’.
Schoolgirl fantasies were fulfilled when I was given my own dressing room and bathrobe.
However, the reality of this ‘glamorous’ experience was having my face covered in black paint, sweating profusely on a narrow indoor ski slope and nearly going up in flames, when a wind machine blew a lighted torch onto my hair.
All this for a fleeting ten second flash of silhouette on the Big Screen.
The exciting skiing jobs are few and far between.
The bulk of our time is spent training and preparing for the competition season.
Personal fitness levels are tested twice-yearly at the British Olympic Medical Centre to measure aerobic and anaerobic fitness, muscular strength and body fat.
The business of getting and staying fit has become a complicated science and a lot of time spent working out specific programmes for different training phases during the year.
This season all female competitors had to undergo a compulsory sex test, a sad indication of the ridiculous cheating which has occurred in top level sport in the past.
Compulsory drug tests also take place at random and competitors are supplied with copious literature about what medication is and is not acceptable.
I discovered to my surprise that even certain cough mixtures are banned.
An innocent tickle in your throat could have more serious repercussions if you sip the wrong syrup.
The World Cup Tour runs more or less non-stop from early December to late March and involves 14 competitions in 10 countries.
As the summer and autumn months are filled with training camps, testing days, press functions, PR work and sponsorship commitments, you need to have well-organised filofax to stay abreast of things.
Juggling with these different opportunities and commitments means that life is varied and full.
After many Christmases of justifying what I do, friends are beginning to realise that there is a lot more to sport than first meets the eye.
So, when people naively assume we are on ‘an extended holiday’ I wonder if their idea of a holiday involves quite such a hectic schedule.
Knee Injuries
Rosemary Burns never thought it would happen to her.
But it did.
Skiing a bit too fast…possibly slightly unfit — and ping went the strings of her ligaments
Every skier becomes aware, at a very early stage in his or her progress on the slopes, of the importance of the knee.
Ringing in the ears will be an exhortation to ‘bend ze knees’ and an aching in the muscles above and below the joint at the end of the day.
Some of them, myself included, discover just how fragile the nature of the knee joint can be and how extra vulnerable today's sophisticated equipment has made it.
There has been a dramatic increase in knee injuries since the '70s, when it was more common to break a leg; serious knee sprains, probably involving torn ligaments, are at least ten times more likely than broken legs — mainly because bindings now release when they are meant to and boots give greater support to the lower leg and ankle.
This sort of injury can mean permanent disruption of an active sporting lifestyle, especially when the anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) is ruptured.
The ACL has a crucial bearing on the stability of the knee and, while it used to be a relatively obscure injury, this ligament is now often affected in cases of serious knee sprains.
For those who have suffered knee injuries, there are two courses of action.
Either they decide to give up skiing altogether, or they undertake to develop the muscles around the knee (the quadriceps and hamstrings) in order to supplement the weakened ligaments, and — with the advice of a doctor or physiotherapist — ski with a brace or support.
After tearing both my ACL and MCL (medial collateral ligament) in a skiing accident last season, I decided to take the latter course and found that I could ski relatively safely with the aid of a brace.
By avoiding moguls and offpiste, I managed to enjoy two full weeks of skiing with the assurance that my knee wouldn't give way when I put my weight on it.
There are currently two options available on the market, one of which is a truly functional brace and the other merely a support.
The latter is chiefly intended to protect a healthy knee against injury and to give confidence to those with inherently weak joints.
This type of support (made by Gul Sports) is readily available in most UJ specialist ski shops.
It is principally made of neoprene, the material used to make wetsuits, and at the top end of the range will incorporate a hinged system designed to prevent the knee from over-extension.
The main advantage of this type of support is that it keeps the joint warm, but it has to be said that it is not really suitable for more recent or severe injuries.
Relatively inexpensive, it may on the one hand inspire confidence in the wearer and on the other act as a tactile reminder that he/she has a bad knee.
The more functional brace, such as the Lenox Hill Derotation Brace or the CTI/MVP brace, is designed to be a more effective deterrent against reinjury.
I used an MVP brace, which was made of carbon, titanium, graphite, velcro and other highly technical but very strong lightweight substances — it resembles scaffolding, but the Americans wear it as a fashion accessory on top of the trousers!
The fit of this brace was firm and it felt comfortable, despite the fact that it is an off-the-shelf model (its older brother, the CTI, is custom-fit) and I found I was able to ski with some confidence in my otherwise highly unstable knee.
These braces are costly but well worth the outlay if the alternative is to stop skiing altogether.
They are available in the UK from Steeper Orthopaedic Clinic, 59 North Worple Way, Mortlake, London SW14 8PS (Tel: 081–878 8633).
Reviews
TAKE UP SKIING
by Alan Hughes, Springfield Books Ltd, Norman Road, Denby Dale, Huddersfield HD8 8TH. £2.95.
Here is a good £2.95 worth.
Sensible ideas and suggestions (like how to get your ski boots properly dry and warm), and helpful hints in blue boxes.
The book is very well set out and easy to read.
It is small but covers the areas needed by someone taking up skiing — clothing, physical and ski preparation, basic technique and safety are all there.
The Sealink British Alpine Ski Award ‘Star’ tests are clearly explained.
The black and white pictures are clear and relate well to the text.
Read it before your holiday, then pop it in your pocket and take it skiing with you as a handy reference.
Wendy Hutson
THE EASIER WAY TO BOUNCING FITNESS
Video.
Produced by TVS for PT Leisure Ltd, Apollo 4, Olympus Park, Bristol Road, Gloucester GL2 6NF. 40 minutes.
£12.65 (+ £1.15 p&p).
I bought a Bouncer.
It is an excellent way to exercise at home for general fitness and as a preparation for skiing.
But I found it collected dust in a corner.
I wasn't motivated enough.
So I got a manual to help me.
But I had to keep stopping to peer at the pages, so after a few attempts I gave up.
Then I did a day's course in bouncing choreography but never found time to create a routine.
Now there is a video I shall be jumping about in front of my TV on a regular basis!
The programme first of all explains how a Bouncer works on fitness in general and in rehabilitation plus other problems such as arthritis.
It is excellent for skiing since lateral jumping movements can be used, the calves get well stretched and you also develop posture, balance and co-ordination.
The workout is safe and effective.
As you get fitter you can add on for yourself using the examples as guidelines.
The Bouncer is used not just for an aerobic workout but also for creative strengthening and flexibility exercises.
This video is a must for every owner of a Bouncer and I would recommend anyone wanting a pre-ski fitness machine for home use who can't afford one to consider investing instead in a Bouncer and video.
LET'S GO SKIING
with Martin Bell.
Palace Videos, 16/17 Wardour Mews, London W1V 3FF; tel: 071–734 7060. £9.99.
Mail order (+ £1.50 p&p), cheques payable to The Video Palace, 34–35 Berwick Street, London W1, quoting offer in Ski survey magazine.
This video tries to cover too much in just one hour.
Each turn in the progression is demonstrated just once and there is not time to show the beginner Annabel developing any rhythm in her skiing.
Switch your video to slow motion for the sections on Martin skiing in bumps and trees to see real rhythmical skiing.
It is a pity Martin had to teach the basic skidding skiing progression.
With a fit beginner and an obviously hard snow surface, an accomplished racer should sure have been teaching Annabel to use the ski edges throughout the turn.
My friends liked the idea of letting their feet come round naturally by unwinding into the turn and will try that to help their parallels this winter.
The film quality is good but the shots are often closeups of face and chest and miss the ski position.
The pictures taken from the skis are unhelpful.
The evening resumes in the bar have some merit in linking in the activities we do not see on film but had an embarrassing ‘bar bore’ quality.
The advice on choosing boots and skis is clear, but the emphasis on buying rather than hiring is inappropriate in the context of most beginners.
Mending skis should really be kept for an intermediates or advanced video.
Forget the video.
Get Martin's book ‘Let's go skiing’ for sound advice and organise some ski lessons for your technique.
Wendy Huston
SHAPE THE STRUCTURE THROUGH SCIENCE AND SOUND TECHNIQUE
compiled by Tricia Liggett, East Cottage Studio, Ashendene, Bayford, Herts SG13 8PZ.
Mail order £10 (cheques payable to P&P Promotions).
Tricia Liggett got interested in the body's structure initially because she was one of many sufferers from back pain.
She is now a qualified exercise therapist, RSA Moderator and YMCA Course Director (and in tip-top condition).
This little book is the culmination of years of study and practice which she wants to propagate.
She published it entirely by herself so it is a bit makeshift but the advice more than makes up for that.
If you do muscle toning exercises (floorwork) regularly but feel you are not improving in shape or strength it could be due to poor posture and technique.
Tricia describes how you can make simple exercises more effective and progressively more difficult.
If you only have limited time to workout, doing these exercises correctly and combining two or more movements will take less time and show better results.
The exercises in Shape the Structure make an excellent pre-ski muscle strengthening routine.
I really hope Tricia will approach a publisher who will give this valuable work the exposure it deserves with more explicit diagrams of muscles and photographs of the exercises.
Tessa Coker
SKI TIPS 1
Video of TVS series.
Lawrence Spain Video Publishing, Delta V, Laser Quay, Culpeper Close, Medway City Estate, Rochester, Kent ME2 4HU. £11.99 from selected retailers or mail order (call 0634 291 494).
This was better than the book of the same name.
There is information on a wide variety of topics including some interesting background information on the history of skiing…
However, the variety leads to the video being rather ‘bitty’.
The skiing tips were useful but not consolidated by long enough demonstrations and suffered from some strange hand mannerisms of the teacher.
As an intermediate skier I found some of the information (eg buying skis and the extensive section on snowboarding) irrelevant as I will not be doing this for some time.
The sections I enjoyed most were the national ski demonstration teams.
They make everything look so easy!
The frequent cut-ins to people skiing over cliffs had less relevance.
I felt the video tried to encompass too much to be really useful to any one level of skier.
Chris Colwell
THE PARALLEL TURN & MASTERING THE MOUNTAIN
American videos, imported and distributed by Mashed Potato Movies Ltd, 2nd Floor, 602 Bacup Road, Waterfoot, Rossendale, Lancashire BB4 7EU; tel: 0706 210349. £24.95 each inc p&p.
These two videos from Aspen concentrate on skiing techniques.
The teachers demonstrate and explain the progression from basic turns to parallel in the first video and the second covers various types of turn for steeper terrain.
Each turn is covered in sufficient detail for it to be understandable and achievable by most skiers.
The big drawbacks are the blurred speech, tinkly background music and dull presentation.
In addition, the film quality in Mastering the Mountain is poor in parts with indistinct contrasts.
At the end of each film there is a short piece on driving on snow using a 4x4 Jeep.
Here also the content is interest but the voice quality poor.
GLACIER TRAVEL AND CREVASSE RESCUE
by Andy Selters, Diadem Books, Hodder & Stoughton, 47 Bedford Square, London WC 1B 3DP, £8.95
Unlike conquering a major peak, it is an inescapable truth that crevasses are a negative factor in the mountains, the avoidance of which is totally lacking in glamour or dinner party kudos.
But the risks, for mountaineer or skier, are the same.
Crevasses claim lives and the majority of crevasse deaths happen to those who travel on glaciers unroped, closing their eyes or their minds to the risks.
This is the premise on which Andy Selters has written what his publishers claims is the ‘only book devoted to understanding glaciers and how to cross them’.
Indeed, crevasse rescue is usually banished to the appendices of instruction books on mountaineering skills, and it is high time that an entire book be devoted to unravelling the conundrum of the permanent snows.
Selters' book does the job well.
‘Crossing a deceptively smooth glacier surface, the person who breaks into a crevasse suddenly arrives into an utterly vertical world’…makes early the good point that any number of trouble-free glacier crossings teach the skier or mountaineer nothing about crevasse rescue; unless an accident happens, by which time it is too late to start learning.
The book encourages a healthy fear of crevasses mixed with cautious confidence, based on the fundamental principle that in a crevasse accident there is self-rescue or no rescue.
Open crevasses are an obvious danger, but snow bridges are the real evil, luring climbers and skiers by the ‘boon of access’ to the ‘bane of collapse’.
Understanding snow is the key to this, and we are taken through the climatic and geographical background of the world's glaciers.
Roping techniques are explained in clear detail.
Further fuel is added to the great debate of ‘full body versus sit harness’ by the description of improvised chest harnesses which might not earn the unqualified approval of every European mountain guide.
The section on rescue methods is well-explained and illustrated, although the otherwise excellent line drawings were given amateur look by the absence of typeset captions.
Selters describes the three aspects of glacier travel as ‘personal, spiritual and technical’.
His Californian origins explain the more detailed knowledge of American mountains and the emphasis on a variety of international techniques, although the absence of ‘common practices’ is rightly lamented.
On a technical level the book is well-informed, well-presented, and is a valuable addition to any serious mountaineer's library.
By the author's own assertion it is not a final statement, but a reference on which to build, enabling practice and yet more practice to lead the way ahead for safe glacier travel.
THE WORLD ATLAS OF SKIING
by Stephen Pooley.
Published by Hamlyn Publishing Group Ltd, a division of the Octopus Publishing Group, Michelin House, 81 Fulham Road, London SW3 6RB. £16.95.
This is an upmarket book on over 50 resorts throughout the world, ranging from Scotland and Russia to Australia, New Zealand and India.
The introduction is divided into three sections: Europe, The Americas and the Rest of the World.
A very thorough index will save anyone from getting lost.
Careful and thorough research on the history of the resort, its famous races, general skiing area and names of good hotels, bars and restaurants make very enjoyable reading.
The photographs, both colour and mono are excellent, and the piste maps have been carefully designed.
Definitely worth buying, and good value at £16.95.
FIRESIDE SKIING
by Kathleen Cox (Chartered Psychologist) and Norman Gill (ESC Instructor).
£4.99 + 60p P&P from N Gill, 32 Salisbury Road, Dronfield, Nr Sheffield S18 6UF; tel: 0246 418739.
This Fireside Listening tape uses words to create the sensation of skiing.
It is not an instructional tape.
There are some good points — like explaining that everyone knows how to keep their balance and that normal balance should be used when skiing.
It could be quite a useful preparation for a nervous or beginner skier as it relates the feeling of skiing to everyday activities, eg riding a bicycle and driving a car.
It was very relaxing.
The words are spoken very slowly.
I found it a bit too hypnotic for comfort.
The cover does not warn against listening while driving!
Both sides of the Review Tape were identical!
WHEN MEN AND MOUNTAINS MEET
by Dr Fred Auer.
Stiftung fur Hohenmedizinische Forschung und Praventivmedizin, Postfach 382, CH-7500 St Moritz.
Available mail order SFR 15 plus SFR 2.50 p&p.
Dr Fred Auer has written an interesting little book about the health benefits of time spent at high altitudes.
He should know.
He is a GP in St Moritz.
We all know that we feel better after a few days in the mountains but why is this?
Dr explains how the body's natural adaptive reactions to low oxygen levels (20% less oxygen in St Moritz at 1800m than in London), low humidity and low air temperature are all beneficial to health.
This he calls climatotherapy.
Following a period spent at altitude, the blood pressure lowers, the heart grows stronger, the circulation improves, breathing becomes easier and physical endurance is increased.
All this occurs without drugs and in the most agreeable circumstances.
The mind is refreshed.
Psychological revival is assured.
It is easy to dismiss such claims as aspirational and self-fulfilling.
But in this case they do have some basis in physiology.
The rate of production of red cells is increased at altitude in response to lowered oxygen and this can be helpful in some mild forms of anaemia.
Dry air can help in some types of airway disease.
Physical endurance can be increased as a result of the training effect of walking up and down in mountains.
The feeling of psychological revival and an elevation of mood is a common experience in mountains, and this may be related to the euphoric and hallucinogenic effects of low oxygen levels in the brain brought about by hard exercise at high altitudes.
It is no coincidence that the divine visions have often been experienced in these circumstances.
I recommend this book to those who are curious about the medical benefits of a stay at high altitude.
It also contains good advice for those who are not sure whether they are will enough to make the trip or who have to advise others.
John Stephens
LETTERS
MORE ON SPEED
Following the interesting article by Andy Fairgrieve on the realities of high speed skiing I enclose calculated curves which give the order of speeds attained by normal unstreamlined skiers in relation to the distance skied, in a straight line, down slopes at various angles, at about 6,000ft altitude.
The cross-hatched areas give the range of speed for each angle of slope likely to result from variation in snow conditions, wax and weather.
For example, on a gentle 5° slope, the possible speed may range from about 27mph to not being able to move at all .
For the high speed range it can be deduced from these curves that to reach 150mph on a 40° slope the air resistance would need to be reduced by a factor of about 2.70, by streamlining or increased altitude, as compared with normal skiing at 6,000ft.
Altitude along would make this possible at about 24,000ft and the Japanese Yuishiro Miura, referred to in the article, could have achieved this on Everest if he had forgotten his parachute brake.
FUN SKI RELOCATES
Having recently arrived in England I have just seen November 1990's edition of Ski survey which includes a letter ‘Films and Fun’ written by one of our clients, Mr Robin Reid.
This season, Fun Ski will be operating at the pretty Austrian ski area of Altenmarkt/Zauchensee and once again Kevin and I will be offering our specialised ski awareness courses.
Fun Ski and the travel company Made to Measure Holidays Ltd are in partnership, therefore all enquiries and booking can be made through Made to Measure, telephone 0243 533333.
BRECKENRIDGE BANKING
At last!
A long overdue report on Breckenridge where we spent a thoroughly enjoyable skiing holiday in April 1990.
But we have to take issue with Camilla Buxton over her remarks on the banking system.
With our all-purpose Lloyds bankcard (Visa/cashcard/ cheque guarantee card) we were able to obtain up to our daily maximum limit on any one day, in US$, within a few minutes at the bank.
I cannot remember the name of the bank but it was the easiest way I have ever obtained currency abroad and was certainly no expensive.
FAMILIES AT VERBIER
I was interested in the article in your November issue.
We were in Verbier in March 1990 with our two sons aged 9 and 11, both good skiers, and a daughter of 4 who was skiing for the first time.
I do feel it is a pity you sent a single person to test facilities for a family.
Yes, there is a ski garderie in Verbier; unfortunately it is in the centre of the village, and since there was no snow in the village the Mini Champion Club was closed from January for the rest of the season.
This left us with two alternatives for our 4-year-old.
Either she was left with the excellent non-skiing kindergarten, which she enjoyed but where she did not learn to ski, something she very much wanted to do, or she had to be put into skischool.
If she was put into skischool for half a day then one adult had to  forgo any skiing for that period, since after delivering the child to the skischool meeting place in the centre of the village the travelling time to the slopes was too long to be able to go up, ski and be back down in time to pick up the child from the skischool in the centre of the village again at the end of her lesson.
It was possible to pay the skischool extra so that after school in the morning she would be taken to lunch in a local restaurant under supervision, then brought back to skischool in the afternoon, but for a 4-year old learning to ski for the first time to stay in skiboots all day is really very tiring.
A further difficulty for children was the distance of the skischool meeting place in the village from the slopes.
This meant that a large part of the lesson time was wasted getting on buses and to and from the slopes instead of learning to ski and also a lot of walking around in boots and carrying skis.
It is only fair to say that the instruction given to children was excellent, almost the best they ever had and the multi-lingual abilities of the instructors made understanding very easy.
We hope that this year, whether or not the snow situation improves, the Verbier Ski School will revise their arrangements and meet pupils directly up on the slopes, but if not, then any family going to Verbier should be warned of the timewasting and difficulties which arise if the arrangements are left as they were last year.
As we go to press there is good snow coverage in Verbier — Ed.
DOWNHILLERS' DIARY
THE JAGGED GRAPH OF PERFORMANCE
From third place to missing a gate, Martin Bell has experienced the highs and lows of ski racing so far this season, but is optimistic, nonetheless
Because of my knee cartilage operation, I started the 1990–91 season having done no downhill training at all during the autumn, a situation which I had not been in since 1980.
Fortunately we were able to use a FIS race, in Pitztal, Austria, as preparation for the World Cup season.
FIS races are the third tier of international competition, below the world cup and continental cups (Europa and North American) but they still count for world rankings, which are based on FIS points, and can therefore attract good quality fields when their dates do not clash with more important events.
At the Pitztal FIS downhill, which was held on a high glacier, we were up against none other than Peter Mueller, on the road back from last season's devastating knee injury.
On the first official day of training on the course, the snow was soft and the conditions became extremely bumpy during the training run.
Later that afternoon, there was an inspection of the course, and while sideslipping down behind Mueller I was amazed to seen him remove his skis and begin walking down the course, an activity known as ‘bootpacking’.
This breaks up the upper crust of the snow and produces, in the long run, a piste which is firmer, and therefore better able to withstand 140 racers.
Mueller is the oldest, the most successful and probably the best known of all currently active downhillers, so the sight of him volunteering to do the donkey work in a one-horse FIS race was enough to humble me into removing my skis and following him, along with 138 other racers!
Later that week we were given a first indication that the previous three ‘greenhouse’ winters may merely have been within the normal climatic variations and that a better season may be on its way, when the first Pitztal race was cancelled due to extreme cold!
I had never previously been to a race where this had happened but the race jury undoubtedly made the right decision.
They reckoned that, with the temperature at -30° the windchill at 70mph descent would leave every racer needing medical treatment at the finish for frostbite on the face.
The race was successfully held the following day, but with no major success for the British team and indeed that state of affairs was to continue at the world cups before Christmas, at Val d'Isere and Val Gardena, with the exception of my brother Graham's reasonable 32nd place at Val d'Isere, just two seconds down on the winner.
At the top of the results sheets, the story was mainly one of experience victorious over youth, with the veterans Stock, Heinzer and Mahrer winning at Val d'Isere, Val Gardena and Garmisch respectively.
Last season's top newcomer, Atle Skaardal, also kept himself in the news with a victory in the second race at Val Gardena.
The two Super-Gs, in Valloire and Garmisch, were also won be experienced campaigners, Franck Piccard and Gunther Mader.
In the technical disciplines, Furuseth and Tomba predictably exchanged victories (two for Furuseth, three for Tomba whose bandwagon is definitely rolling again).
Marc Girardelli is well on the road to recovery from last season's internal injuries, with consistent top-three placings in slalom, giant slalom and Super-G.
His all-around ability makes him undoubtedly the favourite for the overall world cup if he can once more conquer his inhibitions at high speed in downhill.
Peter Mueller's experience brought him no great success, either racing or on the French roads; the new roundabout in Bourg St Maurice, on the road to Val d'Isere, had nearly caught us out, and later we heard that Mueller had crashed and written off his car.
When asked about it, he replied in his much-imitated growl, ‘Fifteen years I've been coming up here and they have to go and put this lump of concrete in the middle of the road.’
Before the Christmas break, we fitted in two more FIS downhills at Altenmarkt, on a course which had been used for a women's world cup.
It was a typical women's downhill course: relatively low-speed, but extremely technical with tight corners.
These corners are sometimes almost more difficult for the men than for the women, as we use longer skis but I handled the course well and produced a 3rd place, my most encouraging FIS race result for some time.
But the graph of performance in Alpine ski racing does not form a smooth line; in fact it resembles the jagged outline of the mountains themselves.
After the Christmas break I was unable in the world cup at Garmisch to build on my FIS race result.
On race day Graham and I both missed a gate on the steep Troeglhand.
But it is impossible to be competitive in world cup without taking risks, and that tricky gate eluded at least ten other racers.
So we have every reason to feel optimistic about the world championships and the rest of the world cup season.
RACING
Off to a great start
New Norwegians, old Austrians, exuberant Italians and Nice Guy Swiss, as well as many racers returning from injury, made a breathtaking start to the season, as John Samuel reports
Tarentaise and Dolomitan old-timers could not recall a winter with so much snow before Christmas.
Here it was at last.
A European winter where racers could race a sparkling mountainside, not just a dubious pelt of manmade snow.
Quickly the racing patterns emerged.
Italy's Gazza, the irrepressible Alberto Tomba, was back after a season of injury and disappointment.
Three victories took him into the overall lead with 97 points by Christmas.
Just behind on 88 points was Ole-Christian Furuseth, the Norwegian runner-up to Pirmin Zurbriggen last season, either spectacularly in a race or spectacularly out; next on 78 the resurgent Marc Girardelli, barrelling down the slaloms in quest of his fourth title; fourth on 76 points the downhill form man, Switzerland's Franz Heinzer.
In women's events the 1990 titleholder, 21-year-old Petra Kronberger from Austria, ruled like a Habsburg empress.
Four victories and two second places took her to 140 points before the Christmas break, almost 100 ahead of the next best, Switzerland's Chantal Bournissen.
Kronberger's triumph on the Morzine downhill was a reminder that she alone is winning in every discipline.
As a welcome twist, Warwara Zelenskaja gave the Soviet Union is best-ever women's result with third place at Morzine behind Kronberger and Bournissen.
An 18-year-old-German, Kaja Seizinger, the world super giant junior champion, was fourth.
So the World Championships starting at Saalbach on 22 January looked certain to feed the ambitions of champions like Tomba and Kronberger, in search of their first gold medal, and newcomers getting a taste of success in the World Cup.
The opening men's event in Valloire saw France's Franck Piccard winning his first race on home snow while Kronberger stormed ahead with two wins at Valzoldana.
The BBC's Ski Sunday made Val d'Isere its TV curtainraiser, and for once the Criterium of the First Snow could boast a carpet of real snow.
This downhill was set down the long-established OK course from Bellewarde to La Daille; the two in February will be on the new Olympic piste carved down the precipitate north-east face on to the very heart of the village.
Whatever, there was a major gathering of old and new, among them the Canadian Brian Stemmle, Switzerland's 1987 world champion Peter Mueller, Austria's Armin Assinger and Italy's Michael Mair, all returning from serious injury.
Stemmle's return was the most remarkable.
A fall on Kitzbuehel's notorious Steilhang two seasons ago ripped his stomach, intestines and rectum so badly few thought he would ever walk again.
The return of the Fall Guys was a pleasurable part of what proved a stirring downhill pipe-opener.
Every veteran and comeback person on the mountain — the two are perhaps indivisible — was delighted by the victory of the 32-year-old Leonhard Stock.
The 6ft 1in Austrian was derisively known as ‘Laughing Stock’, even by some of his competitors, when he won the 1980 Lake Placid Winter Olympic downhill having displaced the Kaiser, the great Franz Klammer, on the Austrian team in one of Charlie Kahr's infamous eliminator races.
‘That man will never win another downhill,’ vowed the Crazy Canuck, Ken Read, who lost his opportunity when his binding released prematurely.
Read's curse seemed to be following Stock until, at Laax in 1989, the Austrian won his first World Cup downhill.
Now at Val d'Isere came his second victory, from start number 27.
No man better mastered the Compression, restored to all its former threat by a combination of wind, snow and course structure.
Stock's 70 top-ten places in downhill, super giant and giant slalom have never been properly honoured, even among his own countrymen.
Here was just reward.
The first 15 included ten starting outside the top seed and nine different nations.
A following wind which chilled the snow and made life complicated through the Compression troubled some of the top seed.
The 1990 titleholder, Helmut Hoeflehner, made one of his rare visits to the netting.
But the 28-year-old Heinzer hung in for second place and another Austrian veteran, Peter Wirnsberger, for third.
The younger fancies, Norway's Atle Skaardal and Italy's Kristian Ghedina, were out of it in 21st and 22nd places respectively, but, significantly, Norway had four men on the top 20.
Dieter Bartsch's Norsemen were not leaning on their oars.
The British were modestly pleased.
Graham Bell and Ronald Duncan were two seconds off the pace, about 60 yards, and Martin Bell, still working up snow time after his knee operation, three seconds.
In the Toviere, the Mark Warner hotel overlooking the finish, Hans Annewanter, their new Austrian team chief, welcomed girlfriends aboard, but strictly as members of the party.
The British were clearly a much happier group than the previous year, not least because Annewanter has a great deal of experience with smaller teams.
Nor are the British unaware that when he looked after Andy Wenzel and Paul Frommelt with Liechtenstein he was in charge of world beaters.
The ‘British Blizzard’ which raged through Val d'Isere overnight blew away the super giant slalom and started many wondering how Albertville would cope with the 1992 Winter Olympics schedule if there was a repeat.
‘I think this will concentrate minds,’ said Gian-Franco Kasper, the FIS secretary-general, but no amount of concentration does away with the fact that an autoroute from Albertville to Moutiers still leaves mountains to climb if spectators or media want to see alternately men's Alpine skiing at Val d'Isere or women's events at Meribel.
Sestriere, 40 miles to the south-east, was reachable in five hours by a horseshoe valley route, mainly because the snow turned to rain long before the valley floor.
For Italians, more important things were afoot than Francophobic Olympic conjectures.
Alberto Tomba, after a fall in the Valloire super giant slalom, ducked Val d'Isere to prepare for the home snow of Sestriere, one of the toughest slalom slopes in the world.
Now it was time for Tomba, 25 the following week, to resurrect his career and reputation with a World Cup slalom victory which could not have been more thrilling.
A devastating second run worthy of Ingemar Stenmark in his prime reversed the one-second lead of Ole-Christian Furuseth for victory by half a second with a two-run aggregate of 2 minutes 7.41 seconds.
The sullen slopes, made murky by the driving snow, erupted into life.
Fans waved ‘Fantastico Alberto’ banners stored from the glory days of three years ago, when he won ten times in the season, beginning here at Sestriere.
Then, as their  reanointed Caesar climbed to the podium, they offered the final slopeside accolade: they pelted him with snowballs.
Furuseth's first-run lead of a full second looked unassailable save for major error.
Not for two years had Tomba won in Italy.
But between runs he made a brave gamble.
He swapped his skis for a pair with sharper edges.
Furuseth was furious with himself.
He should not have lost with such a lead.
The second run was too defensive and it let Tomba in.
Both have major ambitions for the overall World Cup title.
Both recognised the importance of slalom in deciding it.
Pressed to say whether this would be the start of a new Tomba era, the Bomba was more reticent than of old.
‘It would be great, but I don't feel as comfortable in giant slalom.
In slalom I know I can win every race if I make no mistakes.
I hope to have a safe season and be more consistent than in the past two years.’
He has also declared ambitions for the World Championships at Saalbach, where two falls cost him the World Cup overall title in his great year of 1987–88, and for the overall slalom title he has lost twice to the German, Armin Bittner.
Slalom challengers, though, are many and varied.
Marc Girardelli, six weeks out of training after a knee operation in September, was a pleased fourth at Sestriere.
Rudolf Nierlich, double gold medallist at the Vail World Championships, was third.
And a new threat emerged with the 19-year-old Norwegian Lasse Kjus, who came from 32nd start to eighth.
At this point Kjus (pronounced Shoes) alone had scored in every discipline.
Tomba was mighty pleased to have trained off 12 pounds.
Waterville Valley and the World Cup finals in late March was going to be a long haul.
On went the Circus to Val Gardena and its double downhills.
Instantly there was controversy whether the movement forward of the second of the three Camel Bumps, the one bolder skiers use as a launch pad to clear the third, had neutered the course.
‘Changed — not neutered.’ said Hoeflehner.
‘There is still plenty left.’
By and large so it proved.
Heinzer, the Mister Nice of the Swiss Team, exploiting an avowed intent to turn Mister Ugly —‘I want to go for the big wins’— won the first race.
Then to the consternation of the Alpine countries, Norway took the second through Atle Skaardal.
Heinzer's win followed second place to the Austrian veteran Leonhard Stock at Val d'Isere and second to Frenchman Franck Piccard in the Valloire super giant slalom.
The toothy grin of this naturally modest farmer's son was less than villainous at the finish.
His comment —‘I skied a great run — almost perfect’— was not exactly vintage Billy Johnson but the Swiss fans ecstatically tolling their cow bells were beyond caring.
Skaardal, well recovered from an ankle problem bothering him at Val d'Isere, was 43 hundredths of a second behind Heinzer and Lasse Arnesen, eighth the previous weekend, 52 hundredths from 19th start number.
‘We are very supportive yet competitive with each other,’ Arnesen said at the finish.
‘We can now judge ourselves knowing the standards are some of the best in the world’.
Val Gardena often gives second-rank skiers a chance of top 15 because the sun pops out from behind the huge massif of Sassolungo and warms and quickens the piste.
Organisers delayed the start to avoid that, but nine outside the top 15 finished among the points.
The next day belonged to Norway.
Atle Skaardal's victory in the second Val Gardena downhill to follow his third place the previous day must have persuaded the most recalcitrant langrenn devotee that Arnold Lunn, arguing devotedly for downhill rules sixty years before, was not so wrong after all.
Not many Norwegians would have failed to join in the weekend rejoicing as Skaardal pillaged the two-mile Sasslong course with a time of two minutes flat.
He started and finished Number One.
With the exception of the consistent Heinzer, finishing fifth, traditional Alpine Europe was nowhere.
The Vancouver based Rob Boyd duly added to his record here — a second to go with the two wins and a third.
Third was a 25-year-old Frenchman, Luc Alphand, starting 30th, who had never bettered fifth.
A new ski order was in the making.
Eight different nations were represented in the points-scoring first 15 compared with nine the previous day.
The Norwegians showed unexpected depth.
Sponsorships by the Bergeson shipping line and Norwegian Salmon  has given financial security.
Their media package is the smartest of the lot, and a travelling public relations man is a formal team official.
Salmon?
Why not, they asked.
Skiing involves the survival of the fittest.
So does being a salmon.
Skaardal's victory on Saturday, the third of his career, proved his capability on a classical long course.
Kitzbuehel and Are, his earlier successes, were hardly that last season: Kitzbuehel was truncated because of poor snow and Are's fine course was reduced to mashed potato by wind and rain.
It is part of familiar White Circus paradox that an Austrian Kurt Hoch, launched the Norwegian assault then retired to his native land to remotivate veterans like Helmut Hoeflehner and Leonhard Stock.
Only, of course, for the deposed Dieter Bartsch to take charge of the Norwegians and reduce Wien Kurier's headline writers to cries of ‘Debakle’.
‘We are a team and we motivate each other,’ said another Norwegian hero, Lasse Arnesen, fourth both days.
‘No,’ says Bartsch.
‘Each man runs his own race.
That has to be so.’
The British also spoke as a team, though with less conviction.
‘Never have we had such a feeling of back-up and understanding,’ said Martin Bell.
Yet Martin was 54th, fourth from the last man, one J Gasperoni of the republic of San Marino.
Graham was 47th, 4.32 seconds back of the winner, while Ronald Duncan sky-gazed into the netting with bright and beautiful bruises to show for it.
Equipment?
Fitness?
Technique?
There was genuine puzzlement.
The Canadians, after all, were racing two-year-old skis.
‘Sometimes it's only the clock which tells you a good run from a bad,’ said Martin.
‘On the course it doesn't feel any different.’
Norway's Christmas tree was further adorned by Furuseth winning the Madonna di Campiglio and Kranjska Gora slaloms.
At Alta Badia and Kranjska, Tomba won his first giant slaloms since Calgary.
Girardelli smoked along with mean and menacing third places.
At the highest, the World Cup slump was over.
People
SIBLING STRENGTHS
Julia Snell writes about the careers of Rob and Sarah Morrison, the brother and sister team which forms the backbone of British freestyle
The success of a sports team or personality often relies on the hard work of those unseen figures behind the scenes — the manager and the coach.
They may not bask in the limelight when results are good, but their vital contribution to organisation, sponsorship and training are a key factor in sporting success or failure.
Rob and Sarah Morrison are two of those shadowy figures who have contributed so much to the growth of freestyle in Britain.
They know what it's like to stand on both sides of the competitive fence and have now been involved with the sport for well over a decade, first as top international competitions and then as manager and coach of the national team.
Their love of skiing and the mountains sprung from their father who was a fanatical mountaineer, but sadly died in a climbing accident in the Himalayas when they were teenagers.
This tragedy, however, did not dull their passion for skiing and Sarah remembers the early rivalry for supremacy on the slopes.
Rob inched ahead in the race when he discovered freestyle.
‘From the moment I first saw freestyle I knew it was the sport for me — there was so much more to it than ordinary skiing — it was beautiful and the ultimate in skiing athleticism.’
Sarah was keen to catch her brother up but didn't really get involved in the sport until a few years later whilst studying at Nottingham University.
She too was immediately smitten.
‘It encompassed all the things I love — skiing, trampolining, music and dance.’
When Rob broke a leg she was able to make up a lot of lost ground and was selected to the British Team two seasons before him in 1981.
Both their competitive careers, however, were cut short by injury, after promising top ten results at international level.
Sarah retired in 1983 with a slipped disc and was frustrated at having to leave the competitive arena before achieving her sporting ambitions.
She soon found a new challenge when she took over as British Team Manager in 1985.
The sport was still very much in its infancy and needed considerable administrative changes to help develop a well-structured training programme and selection process for serious competitors.
As team manager she often found it hard being the middle person, caught between the demands of the team and the bureaucracy of a committee in England.
A clear head and diplomacy were vital as well as endless patience.
Her love of coaching was developing at this stage too.
‘You have to be able to put yourself in the place of the athlete and work out what they need’, she says.
Rob retired from competition in 1986 with a minor injury, but was quite happy to change his focus to coaching.
Like Sarah he found it strange at first having to change roles from competitor to coach.
‘It was important to respect the independence of older team members who had been used to me as a competitor and find the right balance between coaching and friendship.’
Sarah also had to adjust to Rob's new role and admits she had to change her approach from being the ‘bossy older sister’ to treating Rob as an equal.
She says, ‘I found it difficult at first having to relinquish the coaching responsibilities, but it was great working with Rob.
We could bounce ideas off each other and share problems.
He was very supportive and we learnt a lot from each other.’
This positive working relationship helped to strengthen the foundations of the sport, especially when Sarah moved on in 1987 to become a senior staff coach at the English Ski Council and Development Officer for freestyle.
During her years as team manager she had set up a good system for running the team, organising training camps and equipment sponsors and felt that her energy could now be better spent on developing the sport at grass-root level.
Her aim was to develop ballet-skiing at artificial ski slopes around the country, including training programmes for instructors and judges.
With the help of Steve and Rachael Dalton, from the Southampton Ski Stylers, and moral support and advice from John Shedden and Denis Edwards, at the ESC, she set about creating a well-organised path for young freestylers to follow to international level.
At British level Rob was finding his feet as a coach, but found the initial lack of funding frustrating.
‘Coaching needs to have a much bigger presence if we are really to make a big impact.
Lack of funds in the past meant that I wasn't always able to see the job through.’
He believes that the new sponsorship from UV Ski will make a big difference.
‘UV Ski's support will mean we can send a coach on tour with the team for the first time in two years, which will boost team morale.
Financial security will help the athletes to focus on their performance and lead to better results.’
Life on the road can take its toll.
Rob's car is his only base and he finds the sense of homelessness hard to cope with at times.
Sarah is glad to lead a more settled lifestyle now and is following a teacher training course in Birmingham.
However, she looks back on her nomadic years with fond memories.
‘Being involved as a competitor, administrator, and coach gave me a unique insight into the world of top international sport.
Freestyle is a multi-faceted sport in a multinational environment — unless you have been there and experienced it yourself it is hard for people to understand the very special experience you gain.’
I have known Rob and Sarah for ten years and their constant support, encouragement and friendship have been invaluable.
Sarah's bellowing voice shouting ‘Go for it’ as I wait at the top of a World Cup Course and Rob's quiet and steady presence epitomise their deep enthusiasm for the sport.
British freestyle would certainly not have developed its strong backbone without their commitment.