

The Baines Report
by Chris Baines
Wait.
That lump of food on your fork…
It started out as a miracle of nature and was enhanced by the fine art of cultivation.
It's got a pedigree as long as your knife.
How come the label didn't tell you that?
Big is brutal.
That is the lesson at last being learned by the international aid agencies.
New highways through the rainforest lead to boom-town development, destruction and dereliction; reservoirs from flooded valleys (intended to generate clean, cheap electricity) silt up, thanks to the soil erosion caused by clearfelling of the protective forest cover on surrounding slopes.
I recently spent an inspiring two weeks in discussion with Third World specialists, at the Global Change Institute, in Aspen, Colorado, in the US.
One message came through loud and clear.
Small is beautiful, but sustainability is vital, and success is very rare.
The grand title of the seminar was ‘Biodiversity and global change’, and the driving force behind the discussions was a shared recognition that the world's natural resources and, more particularly, its complex global web of life, were being rapidly eroded.
The ecosystems on which we all depend have reached a disastrous stage in their decline, and their destruction is accelerating out of control.
Two issues seem to underpin the problem.
First, there is a general lack of appreciation of just how critical to us the Earth's biological resources are.
There is a vague realisation that extinction is forever, and that the species we are losing may have great potential benefits for mankind, but the conservation response, even now, is largely based on preservation of a few charismatic species.
Any broader benefit to less glamorous plants and animals is often no more than a happy accident.
The second basic issue is the short-term vision of local people.
Whether driven by greed or starvation, the result is the same.
Complex natural ecosystems are replaced by unsustainable simple ones, with a resulting loss of biodiversity — and that applies as much in the de-natured agricultural prairies of Alberta and East Anglia as it does to the hamburger ranches of Brazil.
The urgent challenge now is to educate worldwide, to bring the relevance of gene-pool conservation down to earth, and to harness the energy of economic forces and team them up with long-term conservation.
The peasant farmers of Chile are getting the idea.
They are custodians of a vast variety of potatoes — hundreds of genetically differing kinds, no doubt containing between them the secrets of natural disease resistance, tolerance of climate change, chemical-free extended shelf-life, frying without fat absorption and who knows what other desirable characteristics.
For a plant breeder or genetic engineer, the current price of a stud spud is $2,000 and rising fast.
The sad thing is that most of us have never considered the humble potato as a precious gift from nature — so how about a run down of its amazing, exotic origins on the back of crisp packets?
The cornflake packet is an even more appealing platform for the gene-pool conservation message.
This must be the most widely document in the world, and yet for most breakfasters, the story behind its contents remains a secret.
Maize has its roots in Third World America too, but you'd never know.
Surely it's time its story was  cerialised ?
Crisps and cornflakes are cornerstones of the multinational mass market, and maybe they could be a route to worldwide understanding, but they have little to contribute directly to the second problem — that of the short-term habitat destruction, which is now a worldwide epidemic.
Here the answer must be found through small-scale sustainable business initiatives — difficult to foster without the huge scale of corporate funding so often avalanched into the developing world, but modestly emerging never the less.
Costa Rica is a case in point.
This small country in Central America was one of the first to seize the opportunity to write off international debt by trading a commitment to large-scale national nature conservation, and that good start is being taken much further.
Having realised that conservation is always likely to fall victim to local poverty, great efforts are being made to set up small-scale sustainable industries which depend on the long-term well-being of the rainforest and other natural ecosystems.
The businesses are village based, and guided by a few extraordinary enablers, one of whom I met in Aspen.
At the simplest level, the forest around a village is being gently ‘harvested’— there is a scheme for gathering seeds of shrubs and climbers, for export to the garden-centre pot-plant nurseries of the US, but that is just a start.
Enhancing the value locally is one key to economic success, and so there is a move to teach propagation skills, and to export small seedlings at considerably greater profit.
The real breakthrough will come when the pot plants grown from rainforest seed are sold as such — when customers in down- town LA choose their purchases for the help they give to commercial community-based conservation as much as for their leaf colours.
It's high time the label told us something of the state of a pot plant's native habitat, as well as which windowsill to grow it on.
The same idea can applied to food.
All the major supermarket chains are selling strange exotic fruits.
Whether pink or stripy, or black and hairy, they are almost all first generation wild fruits from endangered habitats in the Third World, though some of them so now languish in the hot-houses of New Zealand or the Channel Islands.
Sainsbury, Tesco, Asda — they all provide expensive glossy leaflets aimed at helping us to slice our treasures — interestingly into fruit salads — how about a bit of background, or best of all, a direct link back to the people who have been eating guavas and passion fruits for ever.
We could go even further in the drive to influence the influential and make the global links for world leaders.
Honey is one sustainable product being harvested by village cooperatives in Costa Rica.
What a waste it is to depersonalise it.
Honey should be packed in jars that name not only the countries of origin, but also the beekeepers, and the endangered tropical flowers the bees were pollinating.
And why not serve it to breakfasting passengers on airlines as the top people's alternative to the cornflake packet.
We have to make world conservation real, and we have to do it urgently.
Hunger and profit are the two great forces for change in the world — and there is a desperate need to turn them to the Earth's advantage.
A monthly nature almanac compiled by Michael Clark of the Mammal Society, Chris Mead of the British Trust for Ornithology, Trevor James of the British Naturalists' Association, and Richard A Jones of the British Entomological and Natural History Society.
Wildlife gardening notes by Chris Baines.
NEW MOON IN DECEMBER
New moon on the 6th.
Foxes become vocal as the mating season begins.
December moths now flying.
Alder cones shed their seeds.
Thrushes guard berry-bearing bushes.
Full moon on the 21st.
BIRDS
Some people worry that feeding the birds is somehow unnatural, but gardens are No more unnatural than much of the British landscape, and the birds which visit our gardens are merely demonstrating the natural behaviour of flocking to exploit the sudden abundance of a source of food, whether it's a heavy infestation of caterpillars or seeds and nuts put out on the lawn.
Peanut feeders with a strong fine mesh ensure that the birds must scrape and chip away at the nuts, avoiding the problem of nestlings choking on whole nuts in spring.
Orange or red nut feeders are especially attractive to siskins, but if there are squirrels around it may be worth the extra expense of a tough model such as the Gilbert squirrel-proof feeder, which has a nut basket surrounded by a mesh which will only allow the birds through.
Some of the commercially available plastic sunflower-seed feeders look as if they have been designed by someone made redundant from the spaceship industry, but they do keep the seed dry and let you see when to refill.
Two excellent types are made by K Feeders and Droll Yankee .
Coal tits are among the birds which will feed from these, but they do cache seeds, and so be prepared for sunflowers germinating all over your garden and beyond.
If you scatter seed on the ground you will build up a substantial clientele of birds such as chaffinches which do not readily come to hanging food and birdtables.
The Birdfood Standards Association has, with the help of the BTO and the RSPB, agreed a series of birdseed mixes with a balance of ingredients which common garden birds will relish.
You should be able to obtain suitable birdseed and feeders from petshops and garden centres, but if you experience any difficulty, try one of the specialist suppliers, such as C J Wildbird Foods, the Rea, Upton Magna, Shrewsbury.
Don't forget the birds which don't eat seeds, such as dunnocks, robins, wrens and pied wagtails.
Dried fruit, such as sultanas, and finely grated hard cheese can save these birds at a time when they are unable to find their usual insect food.
Be sure to scatter this kind of food thinly in the places where these species normally forage — a heap of cheese in the middle of the lawn will just attract the attentions of your local starlings.
Among the mid-winter visitors to British gardens are increasing numbers of blackcaps.
Many feed on berries and the arils of yew, and when these inevitably run out, garden feeding stations become increasingly important.
Ringing studies have shown that our blackcaps come from breeding populations in middle Europe.
Professor Peter Berthold, of Radolfzfell in Germany, has bred together birds reared from parents caught in winter in Britain, and has shown that these have an urge to migrate towards us.
He has now released some of these birds, and a large reward awaits any ringer able to catch one of them in Britain or Ireland, and so substantiate they experimental results.
The study blackcaps wear two coloured plastic rings and one metal one; if you see one, please contact Chris Mead, BTO, The Nunnery, Thetford, Norfolk IP24 2PU.
INVERTEBRATES
Leaf-fall has left the trees and bushes bare, providing ideal conditions for hunting for galls.
These peculiar growths are plants' responses to the presence of insects or mites (as well as nematodes, fungi and bacteria) within their tissues.
It is not quite a parasitic relationship; rather, the plant produces extra, and usually extremely characteristic, growth in order to contain the invader, and limit its damage.
One of the best known is the hard brown ‘marble’ or ‘bullet’gall, about 10–15mm in diameter, found on oak trees.
This is caused by the gall wasp Andricus kollari .
Marble galls are still to be found now, attached to twigs or fallen among the leaf-litter, each with a minute 1mm hole from which the tiny cynipid wasp has emerged.
These gall wasps show an alternation of sexual and non-sexual generations — a feature of many groups of insects, including, for example, the aphids — each generation often adapted to a different plant species.
The adults which emerge from marble galls are invariably females, which then fly off and lay their eggs in the buds of Turkey oaks.
These eggs give rise to completely different galls, tiny pale oval lumps like ant pupae.
From these, both males and females emerge; they mate and the females lay their eggs in English oaks, and the two-generation cycle begins again.
A. kollari first appeared in Britain in the 1830s, after galls were brought from the Middle East to Devon, where they were used to make dyes for the woollen cloth industry.
The true oak-apple gall is fleshy, and green and red in colour, and is caused by an entirely different gall wasp.
Biorrhiza pallida .
Microscopic Eriophyes mites cause many of the leaf galls, such as the tiny green pustules on elm leaves, caused by E. campestricola , or the equally tiny red warts on sycamore leaves, caused by E macrorhynchus .
In fact, almost every type of tree has a species of Eriophyes associated with it, and the galls they produce can usually be found on the leaves even after they have fallen.
A particularly handsome gall-inducer is the longhorn beetle Saperda populnea , which produces conspicuous knobbly swellings on the twigs of aspens.
A single grub feeds on its gall for two  years before emerging, and as the beetle is a scarce and secretive creature, it is often only the galls which reveal the species' presence.
MAMMALS
In a month of little daylight and with our minds on Christmas coming up, we may forget that many of our wild animals are still very active.
For foxes, the long nights are a time of great excitement.
Dog foxes will be seeking out vixens, and associating closely with last year's partner.
Short days mean that out traffic rush hours coincide with the peaks in activity in the daily rhythms of wild mammals.
Normally cautious foxes may be distracted by courtship and follow a mate across a road and into danger.
Also at risk are the larger deer; their ruts are now over and fallow deer, for example, gather in herds of does and young males, which may follow the old lead doe across roads and into the path of oncoming cars.
Badger road mortalities, however, are reduced now as badgers have put on weight for the winter and venture out from their setts less and less.
For them it is ‘stay at home’ time for the next couple of months — as long as they are left in peace by humans.
The sows commence pregnancy after a delayed implantation of fertilised eggs of anything up to nine months.
Cubs will be born around February.
It is curious that such a close relative of the hibernating hedgehog, the mole — which also feeds on earthworms and insects — remains as active as ever during the winter.
The frosts and lack of plant growth will serve to make molehills stand out more, and as moles thrive in light soils, their mounds are a good source of clean local earth for potting up a floral arrangement or a small tree.
Rabbits also betray their presence with freshly excavated soil outside their burrow, but they will still be cautious and elusive at this time.
Hunting stoats, polecats and weasels are a particular threat to them.
If disturbed by a predator within its burrow, a rabbit will often thump its hind foot on the tunnel floor to warn the others of danger.
You may be lucky enough to hear the sound, coming up from the very earth beneath your feet.
Walks across December fields on crisp, bright days should produce good views of hares, but you'll need your binoculars for these shy animals.
Small rodents such as voles and mice keep active over the winter but decline in numbers — through predation by weasels and especially owls — to a spring low.
The real puzzle is how shrews — which have such a rapid metabolism — manage to find a constant supply of worms and insects when the ground is frosted hard.
When the snow comes, this will insulate them from the cold air and allow them to tease out woodlice, spiders and other invertebrates from leaf-litter or plant roots.
PLANTS
As winter really begins to set in, flowers are not the most obvious things to look for, and so the curious botanist turns to related interests.
Some fungi succumb to the first heavy frosts, but there are others which seem to thrive in cold, wet weather.
The yellow brain fungus Tremella mesenterica is conspicuous on dead twigs and branches at this time.
It is rather unexpectedly glutinous and flabby to the touch — all-in-all rather unpleasant, if it were not for the splash of vivid yellow it gives to an otherwise sombre winter hedgerow.
Another related fungus in similar situations may not be so conspicuous: the even more unpleasant-looking ‘witches butter’Excidia glandulosa grows in somewhat similar convoluted lumps on dead twigs, but is dark brown or black in colour.
It too is gelatinous, and the upper surface if finely felted in texture.
No doubt its humorous common name has more to do with the countryman's enthusiasm for worrying the gullible, than with the local wise woman's magical powers.
A spell of early winter rains will have encouraged the development of really wet and rotted deadwood, such as the bright-yellow, little forked spikes of the fungus Calocera cornea , or the clusters of small globular spots of the similarly coloured Dacrymyces stillatus , both of them very common at this time of year.
All of these fungi are, of course, very important in the process of decay and recycling of nutrients to the soil.
Lichens are also good subjects to study now.
These are really the products of symbiotic relationships between forms of fungi and either blue-green or green algae.
The resulting ‘plant’ has its own habitat requirements and unique reproductive structures, as if it was a single biological entity.
In the west, lichens are taken for granted — bushes and trees are often festooned with them — while in the drier east, fewer species survive, partly also because of acidic air pollution.
Even in these areas, though, you may find the pale-yellow, irregularly rounded patches of Xanthoria parietina growing on walls and roofs, especially near the sea or where birds deposit their droppings.
On closer inspection, you'll find that the lichen is organised into an outer ring of lobed segments surrounding an inner patch on the surface which develop low cup-like structures for releasing spores.
On trees, in areas free from heavy air pollution, look out for the wispy tufts of the beard lichens Usnea spp.
Mixed up with these, you'll find the strap-like, grey-green fronds of Evernia prunastri , the so-called ‘oak moss’.
There are still a few late flowers out this month.
Often these are members of the daisy family — Composites — such as the ubiquitous groundsel and the pineapple weed Matricaria matricarioides , with its dense heads of yellow, petal-less flowers, which smell of pineapple when crushed.
This grows everywhere on muddy farm tracks, having first invaded Britain from Asia about 200 years ago.
Wildlife Gardening Notes
It's here again.
Present time has arrived, and the desperate search for ‘something different’ for those difficult friends and relatives is on.
One gift that is cheap, cheerful and charming is a window bird-feeder.
There are several models on the market — in fact, I've got quite a collection outside my office — but I think the best ones are those made of clear plastic, with a couple of suckers for sticking to the glass and a removable tray for easy cleaning.
They make particularly good presents for people in flats, for elderly or housebound relatives, or for a child with his or her own bedroom and an interest in wildlife that needs fostering.
Supply a starter bag of peanuts, and a list of luxury suggestions, such as grated cheese (for robins) and soaked raisins, and with luck, turkey won't be the only bird your friends and family enjoy on Christmas Day.
A powerful torch is another ideal gift for the wildlife gardener.
For most people, the garden after dark is a treat still undiscovered.
So many of our wild creatures are nocturnal and never seen, but tiptoeing out after dark with torch in hand, can open up a whole new world.
March is probably the most exciting time of all, when the frogs and newts return to family ponds to breed.
You can hear the frogs, of course, revving up in the shallows, but not the rare great crested newts, which occasionally turn up in garden ponds all over the place.
They only come to the surface after dark, and so you'd never know you had then without a torch.
The third of my wildlife gift ideas is a magnifying glass, or better still, one of the new battery-powered pocket microscopes, no bigger than a couple of fountain pens.
So much of the wildlife s and crannies in old tree bark and brickwork, or the undersides of fallen leaves, and even in the depth of winter, you can take a mini-safari wherever you care to look.
On the sidelines
by Richard Mabey
Twenty years ago this autumn I finished work on my first full-length book, a guide to edible wild plants called Food for Free .
It was a modest success in its own way, enabling me to risk becoming a full-time freelance, and I shall always be grateful for that.
But it also had the kind of oddball subject matter that gets one typecast.
A few years after publication I was introduced to a well known photographer at a party.
‘Ah yes,’ he mused, peering closely at me, ‘you're the man that eats weeds.
What an interestingly earthy face.’
This, I felt, shrinking with embarrassment, was taking the idea that you are what you eat a sight too literally, and ever since I have distanced myself slightly from that early guide to greens.
I still enjoy feasts of seasonal crops: samphire from the north Norfolk marshes in summer, wild raspberries from my own wood, local hazelnuts for Christmas.
But for the most part I have become a rather precious wayside nibbler, indulging in what the 1930s writer and fruit gourmet Edward Bunyard christened ‘ambulant consumption’— single wild gooseberries (squeezed to test for ripeness first); sweet cicely seeds on walks before dinner, a kind of herbal aperitif; squidgy dewberries eaten on the stalk, like cocktail cherries.
But this year, with an anniversary to celebrate and an odd pattern of weather whose  effects on normal fruiting patterns I was curious to explore, I felt inclined to go for a proper, inquisitive foray, a working lunch, so to speak.
So I map out a route over familiar country near home which takes in some old hedges and one-time mushroom pastures, hoist a gathering bag over my shoulder — and then curse the fact that the mid-October day that I have carefully planned for this expedition turns out to be the most dismal of the autumn so far.
But half a mile on, I find I am quite enjoying the mist and fine drizzle.
The berries on the trees, dust washed off at last, have an inviting dewy sheen.
On the grassland, now thoroughly moistened, patches and rings of darker green grass that may be signs of underground fungal growth are materialising like watermarks.
I start browsing out of a sense of duty to begin with, and drench myself with showers of settled rainwater every time I reach into a bush.
Things are already remarkably ripe, even though there have been no air frosts yet.
I nibble a few agreeably soft haws, whose flesh always reminds me of slightly overripe avocado pear, then start on the blackberries, which are still swelling in good numbers, despite all those saws about not picking them after Michaelmas.
Even berries from adjacent bushes can taste quite different, with hints of grape, cherry, plum, and subtly varied textures, reminding you that there are 400 micro-species of bramble in Britain.
But I draw a blank with hazelnuts.
It was not a good year for them to start with, and this year's explosion in grey squirrel numbers seems to have put paid to the few that did form.
I try a few tricks, such as getting inside the bushes and looking out, hoping that any clusters will be more visible against the sky.
But all I find are a few rather stale cobs already fallen to the ground.
I munch some elderberries for consolation, but overdo it, and that slight cloying sensation, of having sucked fruit-flavoured frog-spawn, won't go away.
But there are clusters of miniature wood puffballs on the tree-stumps, and I find that chewing some of the white flesh takes the elder aftertang away.
My route takes me up into the Chiltern foothills, and a labyrinth of green lanes.
Long-tailed tits are dithering through the hedges, and the first chaffinch flocks gathering — though there is no beechmast either for them or me.
I am heading for a wilding apple tree I discovered last year — sniffed out, actually, since its lemon-yellow fruits smelt deliciously of quince and scented the air for dozens of yards around.
(They were too hard and acid to eat raw, but were spectacular roast with meat.)
The tree has fruited quite well again, though it is too early for the fruits to have taken on their heady aroma.
But there are plenty of other wilding apples about.
I bite into one and it has the bitter-sweet, almost effervescent zest of sherbet.
On another tree in the same hedge the apples are like miniature pippins.
A third has long pear-shaped apples that have an extraordinary warm, smoky flavour behind the sharpness, as if they had been baked.
I ponder the huge genetic storehouse represented by these wayside wildings, all sprung from discarded cores and may crossbred with true crab-apples.
But I must be disappointed at how few fungi there are yet in the hedges and copses, as I start hallucinating them.
A promising mound under an oak turns out to be a toy bubble-car, and every white flash in the field is in fact an upturned flint.
But as I turn for home through the valley meadows, with rooks massing above the woods on either side, I begin to strike lucky.
There are freshly sprung field mushrooms, pink-gilled and unsullied by insects.
There are fairy rings of eight-inch-diameter horse-mushrooms and of shaggy parasols (no good for eating raw, but I pick a bagful for later.)
And in the ridgeway hedges on the last lap before home, the wild damsons are perfectly ripe and beginning to drop from the trees.
The bushes line an old orchard and were, I guess, originally planted as a combination windbreak and pollinator for the cultivated plums.
But they have spread some way beyond their original site, and suckers and seedlings (including a wonderful cherry-plum with round, thick, orange fruit) crop up for hundreds of yards along the hedge.
There is one new taste sensation here.
The hedge was cut in the summer with the fruit already formed, and the trimmings lie beneath it, covered with dry, wrinkled damsons that taste exactly like thin-fleshed prunes.
So this was my midday meal, ambulantly consumed but in strictly correct order: young field mushrooms and a few soft chestnuts, finished with wild plums and strips of lemony apple.
After three hours of continuous nibbling it seemed, I will confess, rather on the acid and insubstantial side, and I began to yearn for a bowl of pasta.
But never believe anyone who says there is not such thing as a free lunch.
BREAKTHROUGH
The latest revelations from the natural world
The Brock bonanza
Few biologists, quite rightly, have dug out badger setts, and so we know very little about these elaborate burrow systems — except that, until recently, the biggest one known had no less than 360 metres of tunnels, with 38 entrances.
So, when a group of setts near Brighton was to be partly destroyed by a new road, Dr Tim Roper and colleagues David Fee and Sean Christian at the University of Sussex got together with Dr Alex Tait of East Sussex County Council to carry out a ‘rescue excavation’.
The complex of setts, perhaps a century or more old, occupied a stretch of 250 metres along an old wooded bank.
The researchers dug out 50 metres each day, working from the threatened end with the aim of ‘persuading’ the four members of this badger social group — successfully as it turned out — to move to the part that would survive the road construction (Journal of Zoology , vol. 225, pp 115–24).
The dig revealed a complex of three separate setts within the 2m-deep soil.
The two smaller ‘outlier’ setts would have been completely destroyed by the planned construction work, and so were completely excavated, while the third was only excavated at the end to be affected by the construction.
The first had 16 metres of tunnels, with three open and two old, now blocked, entrances.
The second had an impressive 140 metres of tunnels and 26 entrances, 10 of which were blocked.
But it was the main sett that broke all the records.
It was enormous, with 354 metres of tunnels, 50 open and 30 blocked entrances, and 20 sleeping chambers.
And this was just in the excavated part; by extrapolation, the researchers conclude that the total sett consisted of about 880 metres of tunnels, with 124 open entrances.
Yet no part of this extravaganza appeared to be derelict.
There was ‘an impression…of cleanliness and order: tunnels and chambers were dry, sweet-smelling and free of fallen earth or any other kind of obstruction.’
The soil in this area is light and workable, and so it's easy to understand how generations of badgers have managed to dig such an impressive complex.
But why should they bother, when small setts would appear to be perfectly adequate for breeding and overwintering?
What evidence there is on sett size suggest that it doesn't necessarily increase with group size, and certainly the four individuals in the Brighton group would hardly seem to need a complex consisting of more than a kilometre of tunnels.
Various explanations have been put forward for the existence of such large, complex setts and the presence of outlier setts.
One suggestion is that badgers take advantage of the different temperatures and humidities at different times of the year, and support for this has been provided by Dr Roper's latest badger research, a radio-tracking study with colleague Sean Christian.
This showed a very clear seasonal trend in the use of annex setts.
As Dr Roper told BBC WILDLIFE, ‘In the winter, most of the badgers slept together in the main sett, while for the rest of the year they often slept apart in one or other of the outlier setts.’
Another suggestion, favoured by Dr Roper on the basis of the radio-tracking results, is that in a large sett badgers benefit from being able to move from one sleeping chamber to another to escape fleas.
‘Within the main sett, the badgers moved around an awful lot, rarely sleeping in the same place two nights running.’
Other possible explanations are that badgers simply like large setts because they are better ventilated, and that subordinate females benefit from being able to breed in remote outlying chambers, well out of the way of dominant breeding females.
The researchers concede, though, that none of these explanations seems adequate to account for setts containing hundreds of metres of tunnels and dozens of chambers, which are ‘amongst the largest and most enduring artefacts constructed by any non-human mammal species.’
They can only conclude that ‘Either badgers waste energy with the continued digging or very large burrows confer an advantage that has so far eluded us.’
MIKE TAYLOR
Going steady
For most snails, courtship is a fairly straightforward affair; the two snails meet and, being hermaphrodites (each individual having male and female parts), exchange both eggs and sperm, before going their separate ways.
The African land snail, by contrast, is now known to be much more choosy, with a complex courtship in which suitors are often unceremoniously rejected.
Kiyonori Tomiyama, of Tokyo Metropolitan University, has studied a wild population of the African land snail Achatine fulica , which was introduced more than 50 years ago to the Ogsawara islands in the North Pacific.
Courtship, he discovered, typically involved several stages, and can take up to five minutes.
First, one snail approaches and mounts the other.
To indicate acceptance, the lower snail bends its head backwards.
This prompts the upper snail to bite the body of the lower one, which then extends it tentacles and penis.
Both snails rub their penises together, and finally insert them into each other.
If the courtship is successful, the two snails will fall in their sides, and copulation may then last for up to four hours.
The real surprise was just how choosy these snails are: 90 per cent of observed mating attempts failed, usually because the lower snail rejected its prospective partner by moving away during the courtship phase.
Generally, it was the smaller snail that climbed on to the back of the larger one and actively courted it, while the larger snail was passive, simply accepting or rejecting the advance.
The greater the size difference between prospective partners, the more likely the pairing was to fail.
A larger snail produces more eggs, and so more young.
If there's a choice, then, it makes sense to mate with the largest available individual.
But smaller subadult snails have another drawback: they begin to produce sperm before they have finished growing, but don't produce the more energy-expensive eggs until they are full size.
Thus a subadult can only deliver half the goods in any exchange; to avoid being short-changed, a large snail should avoid a subadult's advances unless no older snail is on offer.
But it's still in the interests of a subadult to try to mate with any snail that passes, in the hope of getting a bargain mating.
Sometimes, though, an adult gets its own back on such short-changers by accepting their sperm, not for fertilisation, but as a welcome snack.
MILES BARTON 
Multi-storeys.
As the digger moved south, along the badger sett, an extraordinary complex of tunnels was revealed, on several different levels.
Grand plan.
The excavated third of the sett was carefully mapped, but the details of the rest of the sett — which continues south for another 65 metres and now houses all badgers — can only be guessed at.
A sense of proportion.
When it comes to courting, an African land snail is likely to think big.
Eye-opening disguises
Most animals need to keep watch for predators, even when busy feeding.
But it doesn't pay to be too jumpy, and run away from every approaching shape, or there'd be little time left for anything else.
So an animal needs to distinguish between a dangerous predator on the lookout for a meal, and a harmless one just passing by.
But how do you assess the risk?
There are a number of cues to watch for: how the predator is moving, whether it is coming straight towards you, how big and how close it is.
For black iguanas, at least, it seems that the eyes have it, according to Dr Joanna Burger of Rutgers University and colleagues, who studied these lizards in Guanacaste, in Costa Rica (Animal Behaviour , vol. 42, pp 471–6).
Throughout their range black iguanas are hunted for the pot; their meat not only tastes good, but is also reputed to cure impotency.
Not surprisingly, when a person comes too close, an iguana will make a quick get away.
But just how close is too close?
To find out, the biologists decided to play the role of potential predators.
In each test, one of them would don a mask painted with either normal-sized eyes or extra-large ones, and then walk directly towards a basking iguana.
The difference in response to the two eye masks was dramatic: when the approaching person appeared to have large eyes, an iguana tended to flee sooner, and to run further.
Though the result were decisive, the reason for them is rather less clear.
Perhaps, say the researchers, a large-eyed person is assessed by an iguana as being nearer or larger than he or she really is, or perhaps a large-eyed person simply looks more threatening.
Apart from following general rules to distinguish more threatening predators, it may also be useful for an animal to learn to recognise particularly dangerous individual predators.
And this, according to Constantine Slobodchikoff and three of his colleagues at Northern Arizona University, is what Gunnison's prairie dogs in Arizona do (Animal Behaviour , vol. 42, pp 713–20).
These rodents have the double misfortune of being regarded as edible — both the Hopi and Navajo Indians have recipes for baked prairie dog — and as agricultural pest, subject to a hunting and poisoning programme for at least the past 150 years.
It's hardly surprising, then, that when a person walks through a prairie dog colony, one or more animals will give the alarm call, causing the others to take to their burrows.
In this research study, too, the biologists had various roles to play.
First, each donned sunglasses, jeans and a white laboratory coat and then walked through a colony of prairie dogs while an assistant tape-recorded the resulting alarm calls.
By analysing element of the calls back at the laboratory, the biologists were able to show that the prairie dogs distinguished between them reasonably well, effectively creating a distinctive call for each person.
Next, the biologists discarded the sunglasses and standard laboratory coats, and each wore a t-shirt of a different colour.
With this aid to identification, the prairie dogs were much better at distinguishing between the four biologists.
Nonetheless, it seemed that they could do perfectly well without the aid of colour, providing they could see the general shape of the person.
The final test was carried out with just two biologists.
One did her ‘walkthroughs’ first with a yellow t- shirt and then with a white one; then the other did his, with the same yellow and white t-shirts.
In this experiment, say the researchers, ‘the discriminatory ability reached its highest level.’
The two biologists were never mistaken for each other.
In these experiments, humans were used for convenience, because they're good at following directions.
And given that humans have been predators of prairie dogs for at least 150 years, the researchers argue that they are perfectly legitimate to use in such a test.
It does seem likely, though, that the principle could apply equally well to other predators.
Identifying particular individual predators may be useful given that certain animals might hunt regularly at the colony, and that some might well be more experienced and effective hunters than others.
Some predators might also have a fairly regular path and type of approach, as well as an individual hunting style.
A prairie dog that knows what it's up against may have a better chance of getting away safely.
ANGELA TURNER
Ant headaches
It's long been known that the British yellow meadow ant suffers from the attention of a parasitic mite.
But the horridly fascinating subtlety of the mite's means of infestation has only just become clear, thanks to Dr Nigel Franks and colleagues at the University of Bath, who have been studying infested colonies in observation nests.
The mite Antennophorus grandis depends totally on the host ant.
When an ant comes near it, the mite will strum vigorously with its long front legs.
This stimulates the ant to lean over, a posture usually employed to solicit grooming from a nestmate.
The mite then seizes the chance to lever itself on to the ant's head, where it hangs on, upside down, with its hind legs.
As the mite is much the same size as the ant's head, the ant suffers a considerable burden.
But despite much grooming it can't dislodge the mite, which will move only when it's ready (generally in a day or so) to transfer to another host.
It won't just choose any individual as a host, though.
In some yellow meadow ant colonies there are two sizes or worker: the smaller ones specialise in larval care and stay in the nest, where they are fed by the larger workers, which presumably do the foraging.
The mites tend to go for the smaller workers, probably because of their safer and passively fed lifestyle.
What the mite is after, though, is not the blood of its host, but rather the regurgitated food usually produced so that the ant can feed each other and the ant larvae.
Since the mite demands food more than three times as often as the host would usually offer it to the larvae, it's no surprise that an infected ant abandons all its usual duties in the nest while carrying the mite.
And the mites are even more devious: somehow, they persuade other ants to feed the host ant more often than usual, and sometimes even manage to intercept this food before the host can swallow it.
The failure of ants to come to the rescue of an infested colleague may be the result of the mite successfully mimicking the smell of an ant larva.
If this is the case, then an infested ant may appear to its colleagues to be simply carrying an ant larva, something it would regularly do as part of its nursing duties (Journal of Zoology vol. 225, pp 59–70).
On average, only 15 mites were found per thousand ants, but the researchers say that the mite's habit of moving from one host worker to another, possibly because it quickly exhausts each host, means that it may have a greater impact on the colony than its apparent rarity first suggests.
MIKE TAYLOR 
Chinstrapped.
When a mite climbs on to a worker ant's chin, it expects more than just a free ride (photographed at about 20 times life size).
Spreading concern.
How does a black iguana respond when confronted with a wide-eyed researcher?
Treasure Island
Darwin's theory of evolution incorporates the principle of natural selection, which suggests that animals change according to their surroundings, developing adaptations — over several generations — which enhance their ability to survive in particular habitats.
A study conducted by Drs Anita Malhotra and Roger Thorpe, of the University of Aberdeen, not only provides a first-class example of natural selection at work, but also shows that it can occur very much faster than most people obviously imagined (Nature , vol. 353, pp 347–8).
Some 20 years after Darwin published his theory, an amateur ornithologist called Ferdinand Ober visited the West Indian island of Dominica and collected, among other species, a small lizard.
His collection was presented to the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, DC, and the reptiles in it were named by Professor Edward Cope of Philadelphia, who gave the lizard the specific name oculatus because of the black-edged white spots on its brown body, which resemble eyes.
In the 1960s, Skip Lazell, an American herpetologist, made a study of the lizard, the Dominican anole Anolis oculatus , and found it to be strikingly different in appearance in different parts of the island.
In fact, there were four distinct varieties, which he regarded as separate races, of subspecies, which had over a period of time become cut off from each other and ceased to interbreed.
Drs Malhotra and Thorpe, though, took the view that the differences between the anoles were probably related to the differences in their environments, rather than to reproductive isolation, and they set out to prove it.
For their experiment last year, the biologists collected lizards from each of the four groups: one from the research base in the arid north-west of Dominica, to serve as the control for the experiment; another from the moister south-west coast; a third from montane rainforest at relatively high altitude; and, finally, one from the wind-blown scrub on the wet north-east coast.
The lizards were examined for a number of morphological characteristics such as body proportions and colour, weighed, and released into four adjoining enclosures, one for each group.
After two months, the surviving lizards were re-captured and examined.
The survivors from the north-west coast, and thus on ‘home ground’, had thrived and put on weight, but were morphologically similar to the lizards of that group that had not survived.
The ‘foreign’ groups, though, had all deteriorated in condition, and there were subtle but discernable differences in morphology between the survivors and non-survivors in each group.
The extent of these differences was found to correlate with the extent of the differences between their natural and artificially enforced habitats.
The researchers were therefore able to show small changes attributable to natural selection in as short a time as two months, a truly remarkable discovery.
KEITH HARDING
Child care turns fishy
The cuckoo's lazy tactic of leaving the hassle of child care to others is well known, but given the chance, fish will also attempt to cash in on others' parental efforts in various ways.
The Japanese freshwater perch Siniperca kawamebari is a model father.
During the breeding season, a male will establish a territory of less than a metre in diameter in a stream, and aggressively repel all intruders.
Within this territory, he cleans the surface of several reed stems for use as spawning sites, or nests.
One or more females will then lay their eggs on these stems and promptly depart, leaving the male to fan the eggs with his fins, and to defend them against other fish.
The perch's efforts are often disrupted though, by an invasion he is powerless to repel — mass spawning schools of up to 20 minnows Pungtungia herzi can descend on his territory, lay their eggs alongside his, and then depart.
To find out what effect this has on the perch's eggs, and how much the minnows gain from the ploy, Reiko Baba of Japan's Osaka City University spent up to six hours a day face down in a stream, armed with a snorkel and face mask.
During the May to August breeding season, she found that three quarters of perch nests along a 150-metre-long stretch of the stream were parasitised by schools of minnows; during the same period, she only once saw a minnow laying its eggs away from a perch nest.
Nonetheless, minnows were quite fussy about which perch nest they chose.
In three quarters of cases, they laid their eggs, which take about 11 days to emerge, in nests containing perch eggs that were still white, and therefore less than six to eight days old (at which time they rapidly turn much darker), with at least another week to go before hatching.
This preference was even stronger when minnows were offered plastic models of nests — they invariably laid in nests containing white eggs, a habit which tends to ensure that the minnows' eggs hatch before the perch's do, and therefore while he is still on guard.
To find out how effective egg guarding was, Baba removed the resident perch from three nests; within two hours all the eggs, minnow and perch, had been eaten.
But do the minnow eggs also benefit from the male perch's fanning of the nest?
It seems not.
When she placed eggs in closed plastic bags in the stream, the minnow eggs still hatched, but the perch eggs did not, proving the main benefit to a minnow is protection, rather than fanning.
Meanwhile, how does the perch fare once his nest is invaded?
Not very well, it seems.
Once a nest was parasitised, mortality among the legitimate nest occupants was generally higher, especially just about the time that the minnows laid their eggs.
At this stage, Baba uncovered that the drama contained yet another player: the chub Zacco temmincki .
Taking advantage of the diversion created by the school of minnows laying their eggs, this predatory fish would enter stage right and gobble up the perch's eggs while he was desperately trying to evict the minnows.
MILES BARTON 
Waterworks.
To find out what her research subjects were getting up to, this scientist took the direct approach.
Colour code.
Take a Dominican anole from the south (left ), move it to the north, and chances are it will soon turn into a genuine northerner (below ).
Ergo: evolution in a trice.
Batty habits brought to light
There's undoubtedly a great deal still to be uncovered about the behaviour of Europe's rarer species of bats, but even its common ones have secrets.
Take, for example, Sweden's most common bat, the northern bat Eptesicus nilssoni .
So that he could find out just what environmental factors decide where and when individuals hunt for insect food, Jens Rydell, of the University of Lund in Sweden, drove once or twice a week along a 27km route through the countryside, in the south of Sweden, starting a few hours after sunset.
This sample transect went through forest, farmland and woodland, and also through five small villages, four of which had mercury vapour street lights.
Dr Rydell's car was fitted with a bat detector tuned to this bat's echolocation calls, enabling individuals to be located up to 50 metres away.
He found that the bats' activity was clearly related to the air temperature, but also that at certain times of year they were crucially influenced by the street lights (Holarctic Ecology , vol. 14, pp 203–7).
As far as temperature went, the cut-off point was 6°C — when the temperature was below this no bats at all were detected, presumably because they would have needed to use more energy keeping warm than they would have got from the relatively few insects available for food.
When he checked the effects of the street lights, Dr Rydell found that, averaged out the whole year, there were about five times as many bats in the villages with street lights as in the dark areas of countryside and the one unlit village.
And in spring and autumn, when the bats were most active, densities in the illuminated sections were about 20 times those in the unlit areas.
In fact, in April and May, 95 per cent of the bats were clustered in areas with street lights, and in September and October, 87 per cent.
From mid-May to late June, though, the bats were nor particularly concentrated round the street lights.
Other species of bat have been found to exploit insects attracted by street lights, for example, in Israel (see BBC WILDLIFE, March 1990, p 144).
In fact, the possibility that mercury vapour lights attract more insects than sodium lights has led to concern from bat enthusiasts when a change to sodium lighting has been proposed in some places.
These Swedish bats seem at the moment to be unique in apparently losing interest in the street lights from May to late summer.
Dr Rydell points out that this coincides neatly with the bats' occupation of maternity roosts, most of which are in more or less isolated houses in areas without street lights.
Also, the summer nights are shorter and lighter, and so the street lights probably provide a less effective lure for insects.
The gradual return in late summer may reflect differences in the behaviour of experienced adults, and juveniles learning the best places to feed, and build up their energy reserves for the winter.
Unfortunately, Dr Rydell can't yet test this idea as he doesn't know where his bats roost in the spring and autumn, but his case is supported by the behaviour of another insectivorous bat, the parti-coloured bat, in Denmark.
This forms maternity colonies in the countryside in summer, but for the rest of the year it congregates in cities.
CLARE PUTNAM 
Photographic memory
‘It's a cute bird.
It won't knock your socks off, but any new species of parrot is pretty exciting.’
So says Charles Munn, who made the first known sighting of this small parrot in 1985, at clay-eating cliff in Peru's Manu National Park.
Since then, he has seen the bird many times in the park, though the full extent of its range is not yet known.
Now, Munn and colleagues John O'Neill and Irma Franke have confirmed that it is a new species, and have named it Nannopsittaca dachilleae , after Barbara D'Achille, Latin America's most published environmental journalist, who died two years ago.
Species diversity tends to peak here, at the foot of the Andes, in the western Amazon.
As Munn told BBC WILDLIFE: ‘In the uniquely species-rich belt from Colombia down to Bolivia, the one large area that for historical and geographical reasons was very difficult to penetrate was south-eastern Peru.
It's a wonderful place to work, and we expect more surprises.’
QUESTIONS
Co-ordinated catnaps
Why do domestic cats sleep so much?
Would their behaviour alter dramatically if they were left to hunt for food in the wild?
All species of cats, whether they be lions, leopards or domestic cats, spend a large part of every day asleep.
Lions, for example, may snooze for up to 20 hours a day — and they, after all, can't rely on an owner for some convenient tinned catfood.
Like all wild cats, they have to hunt.
Wild cats prey mostly on mammals, and most mammals are active at dawn and dusk, or occasionally through the night.
So cats coordinate their hunting expeditions with the activities of their prey.
The African serval, for example, hunts vlei rats at dusk and during the night, which is the time when the rodents are active, but it will also hunt occasionally for diurnal Nile rats during daylight hours.
When their prey species are inactive, cats may as well save energy, because they are unlikely to be successful in hunting, and so they rest and sleep for most of the day.
Domestic cats left to fend for themselves in the wild would still spend much of their time asleep, and conserve their energy for hunting at dawn and dusk.
ANDREW KITCHENER (zoologist )
Death in the air
I recently found about 30 dead flies attached to a weed (Chenopodium sp .)
in my garden potato patch .
Each was attached to the leaf by its proboscis.
I garden organically and use no chemicals, and so what had happened to them?
In good organic style, the flies have been killed by a parasitic fungus, probably Entomophthora .
From your photograph, the flies appear to be from the family Muscidae, related to the house flies Musca domestica and Fannia canicularis , but the fungus has bloated their abdomens, making precise identification difficult.
Flies such as these breed in decaying plant and animal refuse, and your ones probably all emerged from the same rotten potato.
These flies are usually quite secretive, living in herbage on or near the ground, and so the fungus has evolved an elaborate strategy to obtain the best wind dispersal of its spores.
Before the fungus kills the fly, it attacks its nervous system, changing its behaviour so that it climbs to the top of the plant, puts its head down to attach its proboscis to the leaf, and sticks its abdomen up into the air, ready for the passing breezes to take the spores away when they are released.
RICHARD A JONES (entomologist )
Saline solution
Do sea mammals drink sea water?
Nobody really knows whether sea mammals deliberately drink sea water or not, but they almost certainly take it when they feed.
Many seals, dolphins and whales can't help taking in the odd gulp of brine as they swallow a fish.
Dugongs feed on sea grasses which have tissue fluids as concentrated as sea water, while baleen whales and crab-eater seals eat krill and other crustaceans, the body fluids of which are also as concentrated as sea water.
Sea mammals can, however, easily cope with an intake of sea water.
Their kidneys are able to produce very concentrated urine.
When a whale drinks a litre of sea water, it is able to concentrate the salt into two thirds of litre of urine — which means it can quench its thirst with a net gain of a third of a litre of fresh water.
We are not so lucky, because our kidneys cannot produce such a high concentration of salt in urine.
If were to drink a litre of sea water, we would actually lose an extra third of a litre of water from our bodies in trying to get rid of the salt, and also run the risk of severe damage to the kidneys.
So, if you are ever cast adrift at sea — never drink sea water.
ANDREW KITCHENER (zoologist )
Good nest-keeping
Why do the starlings in my garden pull up stalks of marjoram and fly off with them?
Is it because of this herb's insect-repelling oils and if so, were the birds attracted by its smell?
The starlings are undoubtedly using the marjoram for nest decoration.
Many birds add a bit of greenery to the nest, usually at the stage when the nesting pair are settling in and during incubation.
In Britain, I have come across two species in particular which do this — tree sparrows, using fresh beech leaves, and buzzards, using green-leaved twigs.
Starlings have been observed using greenery from a variety of sources, as well as flower petals, which are often replaced when they wither.
Hardly any birds have a good sense of smell, so that is not the reason for picking on marjoram.
And I don't think it's the insect-repelling qualities of its leaves, because the habit of collecting leaves stops well before the young hatch, the time when insect parasites are most active.
In fact, nest decoration is a way for the male bird to advertise his nest-site to potential mates.
When he has attracted a female, she becomes the boss at the nest and may throw out the decorations to assert her occupancy.
CHRIS MEAD (British Trust for Ornithology )
AGENT GREEN
The war between the United States and Vietnam will go down in history as, if nothing else, the first instance of modern technology being used deliberately to destroy a country's ecosystem.
The herbicide Agent Orange and all that it represents, from carpet bombing of rainforests to bulldozing them down and removing their topsoil, managed to demolish a fifth of Vietnam's tree cover and to replace it, in great stretches, with a moonscape of bomb craters.
For Vietnam, reconstruction has been very much a matter of the people working together to turn the country green again.
The man who is in charge of that (and who appears in action in BBC's ‘Vietnam — The country not the war’) is Professor Vo Quy of Hanoi University.
Here, he describes his childhood in a forest village, the demolition that the war brought, and the task that Vietnam has had to face.
And on page 832,Elizabeth Kemf , who helped translate the article, introduces this WWF Gold Medal winner from a necessarily less modest, third-person viewpoint, and explains the esteem with which he is regarded both in his own country and in the world conservation movement.
One of my first memories as a young boy is of capturing a small bird and carrying it around the village inside my shirt pocket.
This was a sparrow that I found on the day it was born.
Its eyes were not yet open.
I hid it in my shirt pocket, which I believed would be like its warm nest.
I mouth-fed it as its mother would have.
The first time the bird opened its eyes, it thought I was its mother and imprinted on me.
When I was at home or in the village, it usually perched on my shoulder.
Other times it flew away in search of food.
If I whistled, it would come back to me and rest on my shoulder again.
Whenever I played with other children it flew after me.
It was never far away.
I even took it to school with me.
One time I was in the classroom, and my sparrow, which had been sleeping in my pocket, suddenly woke up and began chirping loudly.
Everyone in the class started laughing and the teacher began searching for the culprit.
It was forbidden at that time to bring wildlife to school.
The teacher punished me, and from then on I had to keep the bird in a small cage which I hung in a tree outside the classroom window.
Every day, after school, I would release the bird and it would follow me home.
My village in central Vietnam is a small one, lying close to a river which winds through the rice paddies.
I was born and grew up here, in the peaceful setting of nature.
In those days, now more than 50 years ago, when I was 12, I was as lively and active as any boy that age anywhere.
After school, I used to go to the familiar places in the forest of my village.
In my region every village had its own communal forest, large or small, depending on the condition of the village.
My village forest was not so large, about 100 hectares, but there were many big trees of more than a metre diameter.
So that the forest could retain its wildness — its original denseness — it was forbidden back then to cut trees or hunt animals, though people were permitted to collect berries, nuts, fruits and medicinal plants.
For me, the forest of my village contained a lot of secret and mysterious things.
In my mind the trees were so large and tall and different.
I did not know how many species of trees there were, maybe more than 1,000.
But I knew very well the ones with fruits that we could eat, that provided food for birds, that had special flowers.
The biggest trees offered us — my childhood friends and me — the coolness of shade during the hot summer.
I also knew the leaves of some trees, plants or grasses that provided us with instant cures for bee stings or bites from centipedes or scorpions.
When my brother or I had a fever, my mother or my grandfather used to come here to find leaves or roots to cure it.
Outside the forest, in the fields, it was hot and full of light, but inside, it was cool and dark.
The lianas climbed everywhere and made the forest difficult to penetrate, but I remember that I loved this forest.
The most interesting thing for me was walking alone and quietly in the forest and listening to the birds singing, watching them make their nest and feed their chicks.
At that time I already knew most species of birds that occurred in my village, at least a hundred.
I knew their form, their colour, their song and voices and their biological characteristics.
I noted the time they woke up every day, the places they fed, the food they ate, the time of year they made their nests, and so on.
I spent many hours hidden in the bushes, silently watching one pair of bulbuls make their nest from beginning to end.
The nest-making was so sentimental and full of love and happiness that I thought if only all people could see it — then they might learn respect and beauty from these enchanting birds.
During those long and enjoyable hours I slowly became an ornithologist.
Years later, I still discuss with my university students the important lessons I learned from the forest while a young boy.
Besides birds, which obviously fascinated me the most, there were many kinds of spiders, ants, termites, bees and other insects in the forest, but the species that we enjoyed collecting were beautiful butterflies, dragonflies and cicadas.
I collected a lot of these insects, but unfortunately I never could keep them long.
(At that time nobody had taught me how to preserve them to keep as specimens.
It was the French Colonial period and we had no science teachers in the village.
There wasn't even a secondary school.)
Not everything in the forest was delightful.
One time my friend and I accidentally kicked a bees' nest, a small, round ball hidden behind the leaves some 10cm above  the ground.
It was the bo ve bee, the insect that we most feared to meet in the forest.
The stink of this bee makes ‘pain to the bone’, and we used to say that bo ve bee sting could break a ploughshare.
That time, unfortunately, the nest was broken, and the bees were flying out.
We ran away, and they followed angrily.
We rushed to the river and jumped in the water, but my friend and I still ended up with stings that made our heads swell up.
During the war, the people in South Vietnam used these bees as a weapon.
They collected the nests in the forest and kept them in their gardens.
They were known as ‘bee grenades’, and just one of them could disperse a big group of enemies, who would flee leaving their modern weapons behind.
Indeed, it could be a non-lethal weapon — one that evicts the enemy without killing him.
In my village there also rice fields, grassland and wetland.
Everywhere there was something interesting.
I learned from my uncle how to catch fish in the wetland during the dry season by using special fishing tackle, and how to release the fishing net during the rainy season when the water came out of the river to the field and wetland.
I learned how to catch birds when they migrated to our part of the country during the winter.
At that time the wildlife in my village — as in the rest of Vietnam — was very rich, and was an important source of food for us.
I will remember forever the satisfying feeling of lying in the smooth grass in the large field, listening to the larks flying higher and higher in the sky and singing the most beautiful song, which made my soul fresh.
Everything that I learned during my childhood in my village has remained sharply in my mind.
My love of nature, of life and of my country took root in these simple but spiritual beginnings.
About four kilometres from my village is the  Thien Tuong mountain, which means ‘the elephant of the sky’.
It used to be a large wooded area, a rich tropical forest with many species, including gibbons, macaques, tigers, panthers, wild boars, deer, bears and several kinds of pheasants, most of which are now rare in Vietnam.
As children, we were not allowed to go there because of the risk of attack from a tiger or leopard, but sometimes, I would follow a group of hunters to trap sambar, muntjac or wild boar.
First, the hunters would set nets where animals usually walked; then they let the village dogs out.
When a dog found the game it would bark, and all the people would run after it, forcing the animals to rush into the net.
The main and the dog who first found the animal would get its head and neck; the remainder would be equally distributed to all participants, including dogs.
As a young man, I hunted birds and other small mammals, sometimes for the family to eat, but mainly for scientific specimens.
Years ago, though, I put down my gun and I am now a conservationist.
I hunt with a camera, to capture images of animals that may become extinct in Indochina if hunting is not either  strictly controlled or stopped.
There are laws against hunting, but they are not yet fully enforced.
It was in this ‘elephant-of-the-sky forest’ that I first saw the beautiful royal blue pheasant with the white tail.
Years later, I described this now-rare bird as a new species Lophura hatinhensis .
During the war, much of its habitat was destroyed, not only by bombs, but also by Agent Orange.
Today, the pheasant survives only in the southern part of my province, Ha Tinh, where I hope we can create a special reserve to protect it from hunters and ultimate extinction.
During the war my village and the wooded area of Thien Tuong mountain were severely damaged by bombs.
The forest was razed and the land was scarred with bomb craters.
Two thirds of my village's houses and gardens were destroyed, and our village forest completely disappeared.
Now there is poor land with young trees that the villagers replanted some years ago or small bushes scattered here and there.
No birds or butterflies.
The Thien Tuong wooded area was denuded, and much of its once-rich fauna became virtually extinct.
The rainwater washed away the topsoil and made it difficult to replant trees.
South of my village — beyond the seventeenth parallel — the environmental war damage was more serious.
In 1971, while the war was still going on, a group of unarmed scientists and I risked our lives and crossed into the fighting zones to check on the environmental effects of the war.
The first place that we visited was Nui Lenh forest reserve, one kilometre north of the Ben Hai river.
There we found a dead forest, without birds and sprouts, lifeless.
This sight made me realise that the herbicides not only caused the trees to lose their leaves, as I had  heard, but also sometimes killed the entire tree.
When we went a little farther to the south, we found a large denuded zone along the seventeenth parallel, the line that divided the country then.
This was called McNamara's Fence, and it stretched for more than 100 kilometres between the two parts of the country.
The combination of bombs, shells, napalm, bulldozers and herbicides had turned our tropical forests into a ‘white zone’.
That first visit convinced us of the magnitude of what lay ahead: the task of regreening our country.
More than two million hectares of forest and land were destroyed during the massive defoliation raids that rained 72 million litres of herbicides on southern Vietnam.
In 1974, during a second visit south of the seventeenth parallel, we crossed into some of the areas most affected by the herbicides, areas such as A Luoi and A Sau, in the west of Thua Thien province, and Kom Tum, Gia Lai and Dac Lak on the high plateau Tay Nguyen.
Once covered in a tropical moist forest with rich fauna, A Luoi and A Sau valley, 60km long and between three and six kilometres wide, was defoliated and napalmed many times.
As a result, the whole area became silent, with all big and small trees dead, many of them burned by napalm and excavated by bombs.
No forest trees could regrow naturally in these areas.
Once the forest cover disappeared, the rain washed the topsoil away, and the land was covered with useless savannah, which we Vietnamese called ‘American grass’.
As the habitat was reduced, many species of animals that were common before the war now became rare, and many, such as rhinos, tigers, gibbons, douc langurs, pheasants and the eastern sarus crane now face extinction.
Since the end of the war, we have lost a great deal more of our forest land.
Today, our country cuts down about 200,000 hectares of forest each year.
Our 65 million people need wood for cooking and building materials.
The extensive practice of slash- and-burn agriculture means we lose at least half of this annually.
The Vietnamese people are trying to re-use the barren land and replant the affected areas.
Every year, some 500 million trees are planted in Vietnam, covering some 160,000 hectares.
Our goal is to mobilise the planting of 200,000 hectares of trees this year, and to reach 300,000 as soon as possible.
The regreening effort is the biggest challenge facing the country since reunification.
The smiling professor
By Elizabeth Kent
Throughout his country he is known as the ‘Professor with the smile’, and when he returns to his village in central Vietnam, children follow him like the Pied Piper and call him ‘Uncle Vo’.
Professor Vo Quy is greeted warmly not only in his native village but also in every corner of Vietnam, where he is hailed as the architect of Vietnam's regreening programme and a mentor who has inspired thousands of students, colleagues and high government representatives to become conservationists.
The country's pre-eminent environmentalist and the 1988 WWF Gold Medal winner, Vo Quy was born in 1929 in central Vietnam, on one of the country's poorest provinces, Nghe Tinh (formerly Ha Tinh).
As a young boy, he planted and harvested rice and tended the family's water buffalo and other domestic animals.
His father, who was mayor of the village, started the first school and installed him in it as its first teacher when he was only 19.
So, while still a teenager, Vo Quy was teaching not only children, but also many men and women much older than he was, how to read and write.
In 1951, during the period of the Vietnamese uprising against the French colonial rule, he walked through his country's rich tropical forests to China, where he and his colleagues set up a temporary university.
Four years later, after completing his Bachelor of Arts degree, he walked back to his village in central Vietnam and taught biology.
People travelled miles to learn from him.
He married one of his students, Thanh, and they now have two sons.
The entire family is dedicated to conservation.
His youngest son, Son, is studying for his masters degree in environmental science.
And Thanh, a teacher of languages, has just translated my book,Month of Pure Light: The regreening of Vietnam , into Vietnamese.
The family's eldest son, Xiang, who typeset the book, is responsible for producing many environmental publications for Vietnam.
In 1956, Vo Quy founded, with a group of other academics, the University of Hanoi and established the department of zoology, of which he became head a few years later.
For years he was the dean of biology, and in 1985 he became founder-chairman of Vietnam's Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Centre.
After completing his PhD in ornithology at the University of Moscow in 1966, he published the Birds of Vietnam , for which he was honoured by his university with first prize for conservation achievement in 1982.
He has also published a children's book on the birds of Vietnam,The Birds Are Our Friends , for distribution in Vietnam's school system.
Thanks to Vo Quy — who led the first team of Vietnamese scientists south of the seventeenth parallel to investigate the environmental damage caused during the US/Vietnam war — almost every student in Vietnam plants one to three trees per year as part of the school curriculum.
Overwhelmed by the damage caused by the massive bombing and defoliation raids from 1961 to 1971, Vo Quy and a team of Vietnamese scientists began drafting a national conservation strategy to put the country back on a firm ecological footing.
He and his countrymen, including General Vo Nguyen Giap, a vice-president of Vietnam, drew up their national plan faster than any of the 30 or so nations that have outlined similar strategies for environmental recovery.
This internationally acclaimed programme has mobilised the Vietnamese people to plant at least 160,000 hectares of trees per year to make up for the loss of some 2.2 million hectares of forest and farmland destroyed during the war, as well as the country's current forest losses.
According to Vo Quy, Vietnam loses nearly 200,000 hectares of forest land annually to forest fires, agricultural clearance, fuelwood needs and timber extraction.
His goal is to cover 50 per cent of Vietnam in forest again.
Cited by WWF International President HRH The Duke of Edinburgh for his outstanding leadership in pioneering environmental conservation and education in Indochina and for his promotion of international co-operation and scientific exchange among all nations, Vo Quy is the architect of a groundbreaking agreement between Laos, Kampuchea and Vietnam, which calls for international co-operation in protecting rare and endangered migratory species and the establishment of transformer reserves, or peace parks, on their shared borders.
In 1987, Vo Quy led an official delegation of Vietnam's top conservationists to the US — the first such visit since 1975 — for the purpose of discussing ways in which American and Asian countries could reopen lines of communication and strengthen scientific exchanges.
In addition, he has pioneered Vietnam's growing network of national parks and reserves, which includes more than 90 protected areas.
In 1988, in the Tram Chim crane reserve near the Cambodia corder in southern Vietnam, Vo Quy and his Wetland and Waterbird Working Group counted more than 1,000 eastern sarus cranes, a bird recently believed to be extinct throughout Southeast Asia, except in its probably breeding grounds in Cambodia.
The birds had vanished from Tram Chim (meaning bird swamp) when their habitat was destroyed in the early years of the war, and restoration of the wetland reserve is one of Vo Quy's highest environmental priorities.
Authors
Professor Vo Quy (profile, page 830) and Elizabeth Kemf have been working together to publicise the plight of Vietnam the country since Kemf, an American, made her first visit there in 1985.
At the time she was on six months' leave from WWF International's Swiss office, where she heads the conservation news service and edits WWF News .
She has since returned 11 times to continue her research on the long-term environmental effects of the US/Vietnam war, and last year published the book The regreening of Vietnam (The Women's Press, £17.95hb).
She was the consultant to Vietnam — The country not the war .
TV LINK
Vietnam — The country not the war is scheduled for 7.15pm on Sunday 24 November on BBC2 as the first of the new Natural World series.
The programme looks at how the countryside was affected by the ravages of war, and how the Vietnamese people are trying to recover from it.
Before the inferno.
When Vo Quy was young — and was the local schoolteacher and an enthusiastic amateur ornithologist — his village still had its own rainforest, one that it was committed to protect.
In the war, that was bombed to nothing.
It has since been regreened, but only by vistas of rice.
Bridging memories.
No matter what kind of horrors you've suffered, as time passes there's only one thing that it's every possible to do: carry on.
That even applies to this place — My Lai, scene of the infamous massacre.
Far left:New beginnings.
It wasn't just forests that the Americans destroyed — a lot of farmland is only now sufficiently drained of herbicides to be planted with rice again.
Left:New concepts.
With a fast growing population, virtually no international aid, and a devastating war to get over, the Vietnamese need to wring as much productivity as they can out of every patch of serviceable land and every drop of water.
In tight circumstances, the only recourse is good management, good ecology: this spot in the midlands supports both farming and forestry.
Waterland.
No element contributes more to the character of Vietnam — particularly in the deltas — than the fact that everything seems to happen on or in water.
The whole population (and the Mekong delta is reckoned to be the most densely populated rural area in the world) appears to be afloat.
The impression is accentuated by a large network of canals like this one, dug during the French occupation.
Living miracles.
Needless to say, an attempt to destroy a country's ecosystem takes a toll in much more than trees and reedbeds, and the fact that Vietnam has any wildlife left at all may seem remarkable.
But not only does it have some, it has some astonishing rarities.
These include,clockwise, from above:1.
Eastern sarus crane.
During the war, the US sprayed and drained the crane's native wetlands at Tram Chim, near Cambodia.
All the birds disappeared, of course, and since this was their last stronghold in Asia, the species was presumed extinct in its original range.
After the war, the local people built some dikes, and as if from nowhere, the cranes came back.
Now there are more than 1,000. 2.
Douc langur.
One of the rarest and most endangered monkeys in the world, it is still most common in central Vietnam.
3.
Javan rhino.
Who'd have believed it?
There were only 50 left in Java, and that was supposed to be it.
Then, in 1988, traces of 10 were found in Vietnam's Nam Cat Tien swamp, where they presumably lived through the war.
4.
White-winged wood duck.
All the books say that there are only 400 left, in India, Bangladesh, Burma and Indonesia.
Then, a few years ago, what should turn up in Nam Cat Tien?
THE WHOLE HOG
Pigs are our chief prey item — half the meat in the human diet, worldwide, is pork, That has to mean that those of us who aren't Jews, Moslems or vegetarians are made up of a large proportion of protein that arrived by way of the animal we most like to sneer at — not to mention mistreat, in the most abominable ways.
What is it about us and pigs?
Why do we do to them what we do?
Tess Lemmon went down to the farm, looked a pig in the eye and, in the spirit of the continuing BBC1 series ‘Lifesense’, went away with a new pig perspective.
She then talked to some pig experts and compiled the following pig compendium.
Muck in.
I've just met a pig.
She lives in a field with some others, and when she walked towards me I realised I wasn't properly prepared, and found myself saying, ‘How do you say hello to a pig?’
‘Scratch her back,’ came the reply.
But her back was out of reach behind her head, and before I knew where I was, I was saying ‘Hello’ and holding out my hand.
The pig turned up her nose.
Some nose it was too.
It didn't exactly touch my hand, but sort of glided over it, wrinkling backwards and forwards.
With one huff it took in things about me I'll never know.
Her ears were also on the go.
When I came out with the next platitude (‘How are you?’) they lifted and turned towards me.
And under her ears were her eyes.
I was expecting to be smelled and heard, but not seen.
Or not seen in the way she seemed to see.
All the books pretty much dismiss the eyes (‘poor eyesight,’‘small eyes’).
Her eyes looked the same as yours and mine, only bigger.
: You can only really see one eye at a time as they're right on the side of the head.
When she turned sideways her eye looked straight at me.
Sideways, I could see the size of her mouth, and her teeth.
‘Watch your fingers.
She'll make mincemeat of them in no time.’
Sideways, I could reach her back.
It felt like a warm scrubbing brush.
The more I scratched, the more she leant against my hand.
When I stopped, she turned her nose to me again and whiffed it across my hand again, huffed, and walked off.
She was the first pig I'd ever met, and she set me thinking, and reading up on pigs.
When you say ‘pig’, does a highly intelligent, social mammal spring to mind?
One that lives in tight-knit family groups with a well worked out hierarchy and a complex communication system?
Is the pig in there with the whale and the dolphin, the dog and the monkey, in that charismatic class of clever animals whose heads we're forever trying to get into?
It should be.
Pigs are sandwiched between rhinos and hippos in the encyclopedia, and kick off the even-toed ungulates —‘The most spectacular and diverse array of large, land-dwelling mammals alive today.’
They began about 55 million years ago and now live everywhere from desert to rainforest.
They include giraffe and camel, deer and antelope, and 13 species of pig — including warthog, pygmy hog, bearded pig, bushpig.
Pigs live in forests and grasslands and spend their time eating (almost anything), sleeping (always under cover) and, if they're female, being with each other.
Several rows (often sisters) live together, and help look after each other 's piglets.
Grown-up sons go off on their own, grown-up daughters stay put or set up splinter groups nearby.
Neighbours share feeding grounds, wallowing holes, and resting  places.
Group members keep up a complicated running commentary of grunts, squeaks and squeals, often huddle up together, and sometimes sleep in heaps.
Trust us to turn them into chops.
We've been hunting them since our cave days, and for nine or ten thousand years, people as far afield as China, England and Polynesia have been keeping pigs to eat.
There are now about 500 million domesticated pigs in the world.
Half of all the meat eaten in the world is pig.
But behind that fact lie a lot of real pigs and real people, and a world of differences in the relationship between them.
There are some cultures, of course— Jewish, Moslem — to which pigs are anathema, and the consequent relationship with humans is nil.
At the other extreme, perhaps, would be certain Papua New Guinea tribes-people, to whom pigs are virtually part of the family.
The Hagerhai people of the Shreader mountains hunt pigs, but they can also be extremely intimate with them.
When the hunt — which is conducted by setting grass fires and spearing the pigs as they flee — separates a sow from her litter, the hunters put the piglets in a bog and take them home to the women, who proceed to raise them as though they were children.
They suckle the pigs and otherwise nurture them until they're mature enough to return to the wild to breed.
The filial bond remains, though, and when the women call, the pigs come.
Another tribe, the Huli Wigmen — who are farmers — keep pigs as other people might keep pampered dogs.
Again, it is the women of the tribe in charge.
They walk the pigs on leads, and when they dig their gardens, the pigs follow and dig, too.
Huli men and women live separately, and so when the women go to bed at night, it's the pigs they curl up with.
This is not to say that, in either tribe, the pigs' ultimate destiny is any different from the destiny of domesticated pigs anywhere.
When it's time for a pork dinner — and pork is practically the only source of protein for these people — the men play their part in the pig/human relationship and make the kill, or several kills.
Though the women accept the necessity for this, they still mourn the pigs' passing, and the men have to make sure that when the meat is served out, the women don't know which pig it came from.
If there is any similarity between their treatment of pigs and ours, that's probably it: we don't know which pig our pork came from either.
In fact, we might have to be reminded that it came from a pig at all.
Our view of the pig/human relationship is that the farther out of sight the living pig is, the better — as though the actual animal is an embarrassing stage that pigfeed has to go through on its way to being packaged bacon.
It's a mechanistic philosophy, with the priority on mass human convenience, and it is appropriate that the places where most of our pigs live out their wretched lives are known as factory farms.
There they are meat machines.
They never see the sun, never have a chance to socialise or act out many of their most basic instincts and often can't even turn around in their pens.
The only mercy is that most of them are put out of their misery before they've lived a tenth of their natural lifespan.
We may think it hard-hearted of a Hagerhai woman to eat an animal that she once suckled, but at least the pig was recognised as an individual when it was alive — was even loved.
Our squeamishness in the presence of our prey animals, our inability to look them in the eye, has condemned a large number of our pigs to nastiest existence imaginable.
The eye I looked into looked back.
People and pigs.
From putting them through living hell to treating them  like babies, just about everything humans can think to do to animals has been done to pigs.
People have worshipped them, made religious sacrifices of them, used them as currency, put them in prison and, once, hanged one for murder.
People fry their dried blood for breakfast, wear their shrivelled guts as necklaces and put parts of their hearts into human hearts.
Just think how tangled up we are with pigs, how we love to hate ourselves as pigs, and how easy it is to turn a pig into a person.
Pigs in distress
The pig most in danger of extinction is the smallest one — the 60cm-long pygmy hog Sus salvanius , of northern India.
There are only two tiny populations left, in two protected reserves in the state of Assam.
But one of these, the Manas (‘by far the most important wildlife reserve in the Indian subcontinent’— IUCN Pig and Peccaries Specialist Group), has for several years been in the hands of armed rebels.
The last guesstimate before the reserve was invaded put its total pygmy hog population at less than 50 (with a small population in the Barnadi reserve), and there has been no indication whatsoever of any concern by the rebels for the animals' future.
But they do have plenty of guns, and it can be presumed that some of their provision comes from hunting.
Other pigs causing concern are the Visayan warty pig Sus cebifrons of Negros and Panay islands in the Philippines, the Javan warty pig S. verrucosus and the extraordinarily different golden-haired babirusa Babyrousa babyrussa babyrussa of Indonesia's Sula islands and Buru.
The main threat to all wild pigs is loss of habitat.
Great-grandfather pigs
The typical barnyard (or factory-farm) pig — whatever its breed — is almost certainly descended from the Eurasian wild boar Sus scrofa , whose natural range covers a broad sweep from south-western Spain to the Far East.
The first evidence of its domestication dates to about 9,000 years ago, but there is also evidence that about 1,000 years earlier, in South-east Asia, the smaller Sulawesi warty pig S. celebensis was also domesticated.
It's possible that trade with China in the Middle Ages and later may have caused the genes of the two types to mix somewhat, but they definitely did mix in another way.
Pigs are good seafarers.
They are also good at taking care of themselves, given a chance.
When, in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, European began to be long-distance navigators, they took pigs with them on their ships.
Whenever they reached an island that was likely to be visited by European sailors again, they would release a few pigs, to run wild, multiply and form a permanent supply of protein — on islands seemingly not well provisioned for humans.
But, as it happened, some of those islands, particularly if they had native people on them, already had pigs too, too — sometimes the small Sulawesi ones.
Inevitably, the two species interbred, and now, in the eastern end of the Indonesian archipelago and on New Guinea there is a new kind of wild pig that is the descendant of two species that were not only domesticated, but were domesticated independently of each other.
Whether that means the New Guinea wild pigs are a new species caused by hybridisation is an interesting question.
Pigs share with dogs (ie, canids: wolves, jackals, coyotes, dingoes et al ) the ability to breed across species and produce fertile offspring.
So, while it's easy to tell one wild species from another, when humans start mixing them up, working out ancestries becomes increasingly problematical.
In other words, a lot of domestic and feral pigs are probably best described, and left, as mongrels.
Modern domestic pigs, incidentally, are pink and hairless and, until relatively recently, obese, because humans have bred them to be.
The pigs the mariners left on the islands probably looked at lot like the ancestral wild boars, and certainly when pink pigs go wild, it's only a few generations before they're muscular, nimble and fierce again.
Globe-trotters
Of course, dropping pigs off on islands was a lot cleverer that it was intelligent.Islands generally support delicate ecosystems that evolved without any need for defence against land mammals, especially ones so big, prolific, hungry and robust.
As a result, pigs are responsible (well,humans are responsible) for a huge number of island extinctions — things they ate up, trampled to death or starved out.
Among the most damaged islands are Mauritius, the Galapagos and Hawaii.
That last archipelago probably suffers the most horrific conservation problems in the world, and pigs are often at the centre of them.
The only native Hawaiian plants and animals that aren't extinct are found on the high mountainsides (yes, a lot of people live their whole lives in Hawaii without ever coming across a native species), and the biggest problem up there is that type of pig that descended from European wild boars and Polynesian pigs.
It eats the native vegetation, spreads alien plants and, by way of its wallows, causes so much erosion that, down in the sea, reefs are dying under the silt.
The only hope is that federal and state conservation officers can, as they are trying to do, shoot them all.
One factor that impedes that aim is the Hawaiian hunting lobby, which wants to keep the pigs as game animals and centrepieces of those Hawaiian barbecues, luaus.
Another opponent of the conservation efforts is the animal-welfare lobby.
Pigs create strange bedfellows.
In Texas, farmers encourage feral pigs (which are also hunted — on horseback, with the assistance of specially bred ‘hog dogs’) because it is thought that they eradicate snakes.
Pig lore
The usual reason given for the Jewish and Moslem strictures against eating pork is that they began a public health measures, to prevent pork-borne diseases such as trichinosis.
But the first evidence of abstinence from pork is absence of pig bones among the bones of cattle and sheep at Egyptian neolithic sites dating from about 4400 BC.
It wasn't as though pigs weren't around to be hunted, because at the same site were boar's-tooth amulets.
One explanation is that, in the demonology of the day, pigs came to represent the underworld.
Anyway, the Bible and the Koran say that pigs are ‘unclean’, a status they share, variously, with rats, scorpions, snakes and dogs.
(NB: It is possible to buy pork in Israel today: you ask for ‘white steak’.)
In Europe, it used to be believed that devils took up residence inside pigs by entering through a tiny hole in the forefoot.
When pigs want other pigs to follow them, they hold their tails erect.
In southern Africa, this has resulted in warthog tails being eaten as aphrodisiacs.
When the Ancient Greeks stopped sacrificing people, the victims' places were taken by pigs.
In the southern US, where pigs often roam far afield during the day, the farmer brings them home at night by means of a hogcall, which goes roughly, ‘Suuuuuuuuuuiii, pig pig pig pig pig.’
The art has become so refined that at state and country fairs, hog-calling contests are held, with the winner being the farmer who summons a pig from the greatest distance.
A champion hog-call is sometimes considered the human voice at its absolute loudest (and using a Latin word, ‘sui’, at that).
‘Poke’ is an Anglo-Saxon word for ‘sack’, and a ‘pig in a poke’was a suckling pig taken to market tied up in a sack and sold that way, sight unseen.
Not all the transactions were strictly honest, though, and sometimes customers got home to discover that they'd bought a cat or a puppy, thus that expression and an expression  bonus: ‘letting the cat out of the bag’.
‘Urchin’ is the Anglo-Saxon word for ‘hedge-hog’, which, as its modern English name also implies, was thought to have some kind of affinity with pigs — undoubtedly because of the way hedgehogs snuffle and root.
Dirty street children were called urchins because they rooted through rubbish like pigs.
The place (and football club) name ‘Everton’ means ‘boar’.
In Ancient Egypt, pig footprints were considered just the right depth for sowing corn, and at planting time, the farmer would walk behind a pig, dropping seeds in the impressions.
One reason given for the pig's bad name (‘pig-headed’ etc) is that it is probably the least subordinate of the mainstream domestic animals (pace cats).
In The Animal Estate , Harriet Ritvo notes that pigs ‘had trouble meeting even the minimal standard of obedience set by sheep and cattle, let alone the high standards of co-operation set by the dog and the horse.
Like disrespectful underlings, they did not adequately acknowledge the dominion of their superiors.
The pig…was routinely castigated as ‘selfish’, ‘sordid’, ‘brutal’, and ‘gluttonous’.’
Don't forget that it was the pigs who led the rebellion in Orwell's Animal Farm .
On the smaller Indonesian islands, where people are afraid of being killed by wild pigs, they have prefixed the names of biting flies and stinging plants with babi , meaning pig.
Dr Pig, Patient Pig, Victim Pig
Pigs are popular in medical experiments because some of their body parts are very much like ours.
These include skin, eyes, liver, kidneys, cardiovascular system and digestive system.
Pigs' skin is used for skin grafts on severe burns, and to test X-rays.
Pigs' heart valves are used to replace valves in human hearts.
Insulin for human diabetics comes from pig pancreases, and the anti-coagulant heparin comes from pig lungs.
Pigs are used in experiments to find out more about gastric ulcers, muscular dystrophy, alcoholism and obesity.
Diseases and parasites that can afflict modern domestic pigs include foot-and-mouth disease, swine vesicular disease, swine fever, swine erysipelas, anthrax, enteritis, virus pneumonia, blue ear, stress-related oedema, Aujeszky's disease, Teschen disease, anaemia, arthritis, rheumatism, metritis, mastitis, roundworms, lungworms, mange and lice.
To test procedures for treating wounds, the US military has shot bullets into pigs.
It has also exposed them to explosions and radioactivity.
Pigswill
Pigs have twice as many taste buds as humans.
Nuts, snakes, frogs, mice, flowers, bulbs and grass all feature on a wild pig's menu.
Pigs in factory farms are fed a ready-mixed compound of grains and proteins, often in the form of dry pellets given in fixed amounts at fixed times.
Until the Diseases of Animals (Waste Food) Order 1973 — which was passed after a disastrous outbreak of swine vesicular disease — a farmer could feed a pig virtually anything a pig would eat.
Now there are restrictions, but among the permitted food items are ‘meat bones, blood, offal, or other parts of the carcase of any livestock or of any poultry or product derived therefrom or hatchery waste [eg, faeces, feathers, dead chicks]or eggs or egg shells.’
Among the domestic mammals that we ordinarily eat, pigs are the only ones that are not strictly herbivorous.
Pigs as Pigs
Like cows, antelopes, giraffes, deer, camels, hippopotamuses and peccaries, pigs are artiodactyls, which means they have four toes on each foot.
They walk on the two middle ones; the outside ones hardly ever touch the ground.
Pigs and peccaries, even though they are similar in many respects — not least their looks — are related only in that they are both artiodactyls.
Pigs are Old World, peccaries New (though the fossil record shows there were once peccaries in Europe).
It's an example of convergent evolution, wherein animals come to be alike because their niches are alike.
The first artiodactyls appeared in the Eocene epoch, 57 to 37 million years ago.
They were the size and shape of rabbits, and escaped their predators by hopping away.
Nowadays, pigs tend to deal with predators by attacking them.
They can indeed, be very dangerous animals.
Wild boars are social animals.
They have large, vague home ranges populated by mother-daughter clans.
Young males roam freely in bachelor herds, and when they are mature, they roam freely by themselves.
Guinness pigs
‘The heaviest pig ever recorded was a Poland-China hog named ‘Big Bill’, who was so obese that his belly dragged along the ground.
‘Bill’, weighed an astonishing 1,157.5 kg just before he was put down after suffering a broken leg in an accident en route to the Chicago World Fair for exhibition in 1933.’
‘The highest recorded number of piglets in one litter is 34, farrowed on 25–26 June 1961 by a sow owned by Aksel Egedee of Denmark…
A Large White owned by H S Pedlingham farrowed 385 pigs in 22 litters from December 1923 to September 1934.’
‘The highest recorded weight for a piglet at weaning is 36.7 kg for a boar, one of a litter of nine farrowed on 6 July 1962…at Kettle Lane Farm, West Ashton, Trowbridge, Wilts.’
The Guinness Book of Records 1992 
New pigs
Minipigs:
Specially bred for use in biomedical experiments, their attractions include ease of handling and low cost, while still retaining their biological similarities with people.
Bubble pigs:
Disease is a big problem in intensive pig problem in intensive pig farms.
One way of preventing piglets picking things up is to have them born into a sterile bubble, and reared in squeaky-clean rooms.
The bubble is put round the sow, and the piglets removed by caesarean.
Woolly pigs:
One of the latest ideas is to make a woolbearing pig.
Pigs breed more quickly than sheep, and produce larger litters.
So a woolly pig would produce more wool and more meat.
Outdoor pigs:
Pigs bred for life inside don't do well outside — so the Pig Improvement Company has come up with a tougher type of pig.
Outdoor pigs are cheaper to run: without buildings, capital costs are cut from £2,000 per pig to £150–200 per pig.
Bringing home the bacon
Pigs are the most efficient sources of animal protein ever domesticated: 35 per cent of the food a pig consumes is converted to meat, compared to 13 per cent for sheep and 6.5 per cent for cattle.
14.2 million pigs were slaughtered in the UK last year.
There are many different ways of killing pigs, including drowning, lung-puncturing and throat-slitting.
According to UK slaughtering rules, pigs should be stunned by electric shock before being killed, but this doesn't always work.
Stress just before slaughter spoils the meat, turning it pale and soft.
Pigs have been bred with an increased number of vertebrae in their loin region, to give more loin chops.
It's a pig's life
The natural lifespan of a pig is 10–12 years.
Fattened pigs are killed at 6–8 months old, breeders at 3–4 years.
A wild sow has one litter per year.
A domestic sow has 1.5–2.5 litters per year, and spends 66 per cent of her life being pregnant.
According to Compassion in World Farming (CIWF), some 400,000 sows (out of 759,000) in the UK live indoors, in individual stalls.
Some stalls are closed in by bars at the back, some are open-ended.
In open-ended stalls, the sows are kept in place by chains over their necks or bodies.
The sows can't turn around.
They can take one step forward and one step back, and lie down.
On 1 October this year, these stalls were banned.
No new ones are to be built, and existing ones are to be phased out by 1999.
CIWF is trying to get the ban to cover the whole EC.
Before farrowing, a wild sow leaves her group and builds a nest.
Sows in stalls often go through the motions of nest-building, nosing and pawing the floor.
Biting the metal bars is thought to be an attempt to gather nesting material.
Sows are put in an even narrower stall to give birth.
They are confined to make sure they don't squash their piglets.
Wild sows appear to be aware of this danger, and often hesitate before lowering each foot to the group.
A wild sow often drops to her knees outside the nest and crawls forward, rooting the bedding.
If she finds a piglet in the way she moves it to one side.
Wild piglets suckle for up to 12 weeks.
Intensively reared piglets are weaned at two to four weeks old, so the sow comes on heat again as soon as possible.
Particular pigs
There are 13 species of wild pig:
Eurasian wild boar Sus scrofus.
This is the pig, and the one almost all the rest of this article is about.
Having a vast natural range to start with and then having been extensively introduced around the world by humans, it is found virtually everywhere, in both its domestic and its wild forms.
The wild boar can weigh up to 200kg and has a short, dense, brownish-grey coat and no facial warts.
Babirusa Babyrousa babyrussa.
A resident of the rainforests of the Indonesian islands of Sulawesi, Buru Taliabu and Mangole, the babirusa may be the only animal in the world that given time, can gore itself to death.
The male has two pairs of tusks formed by its upper and lower canine teeth.
The lowers are simple — they grow straight up.
The uppers, though, curl around grow up through the skin of the nose and, still curling, turn back towards the animal's forehead.
If it lives long enough, its  tusks will eventually reach its cranium and grow into it.
In a zoo, one of a keeper's jobs is to keep the babirusa's tusks trimmed.
In the wild, there tend to be few old-man babirusas.
One of the smaller pigs, it weighs up to 90kg, is either grey with sparse, bristly hair or hairy and golden or creamy white in colour, and has no facial warts.
Bearded pig Sus barbatus.
One of the bearded pig's most endearing habits — at least as far as the human inhabitants of its native Borneo are concerned — is its tendency, in the occasional year, to form huge herds and plunge lemming-like through the rainforest in a desperate craving for a certain food item (a kind of acorn, it is thought), whose supply fluctuates.
When this happens, the people go on a hunting spree.
In 1983, a big pig year (and the Chinese Year of the Pig), as it happened), one group of tribespeople estimated that 95,000 bearded pigs crossed a 6km stretch of Sarawak's Baram river.
In the whole region, perhaps 800,000 animals had been on the move, and about 20,000 were thought to have been killed by the hunters.
The bearded pig, which is also found in the rainforests of Peninsular Malaya and Sumatra, weighs up to 200kg, is dark brown or grey and has a white beard and conspicuous facial warts.
Sulawesi warty pig Sus celebensis.
On the Sulawesi warty pig's native island, which it shares with the babirusa, its fortunes can depend on the religion of the people in the neighbourhood.
In the north of Sulawesi, for example, the people are Christian, and the pigs have been heavily hunted.
In the central and southern parts where there are Moslems, a pig's life is easy — because one of the nice things about being an ‘unclean’ animal is that, not only can you not be eaten, you are not supposed to be killed, even for raiding crops.
So, in Moslem areas, the pigs tend to be larger, and there are more of them.
To people who do eat pork, the  Sulawesi warty pig is so good that it was worth domesticating, and it is the only pig besides the Eurasian wild boar to have become part of the human farmyard.
This also means that it has been introduced by humans to a lot of places it's not native to — Indonesian islands, mainly — and it has widely hybridised with the introduced wild boar.
On New Guinea, for example, all the pigs, wild or tame, are hybrids.
The Sulawesi warty pig is a small, fierce animal, weighing up to 80kg, with well developed facial warts.
Very little, in fact, is known about it.
Javan warty pig Sus verrucosus.
Even though it hasn't been domesticated, it is something of a large version of the pig above, and on parts of its eponymous island it has also hybridised with European wild boars: ie, at one end of Java the pigs are Javan warties, at the other end they're wild boars, and in the middle they're half and half.
The pig's range is usually given as Java, Madura and Bawean, but you can subtract Madura now, since that's been deforested and thus depigged (de-everythinged, in fact).
The Javan warty pig weighs up to 90kg and has red or yellow hair with black tips and marked facial warts.
Visayan warty pig Sus cebifrons.
After much detective work, discussion and hard thinking, taxonomists have effectively promoted the Visayan warty pig of the central Philippines from a subspecies of bearded pig to a full fledged species in its own right.
Not only that, it's a full-fledged endangered species (see ‘Pigs in distress’), having disappeared entirely from the islands of Masbate, Bohol, Cebu, Guimaras and Sequijor, and holding on by the skin of its tusks only on Negros and Panay.
The Visayan Warty pig is enough like the bearded pig to have been, for all these years, classified as one.
Philippine warty pig Sus philippensis.
Ditto all of the above, except not quite so endangered — its islands being Samar and Leyte, Luzon, Mindoro and Mindanao, where populations are healthy.
Formerly, it was regarded as a type of Sulawesi warty pig and, more recently, as a type of bearded pig.
Pygmy hog Sus salvanius.
The smallest of all the pigs, the bullet-shaped pygmy hog lives in the tall grasslands of northern India, where it is highly endangered because of the practice of agricultural grass-burning and, lately, armed rebellion (see ‘Pigs in distress’).
The pygmy hog weighs no more than 10kg, is about half a metre long, is grey-brown and bristly and has no facial warts.
Red river hog Potamochoerus porcus.
A relatively numerous inhabitant  of the grasslands and remaining blocks of rainforest in Africa's western and central parts.
Though it is an everyday part of human diet in the region, its skin, being hard to preserve, has seldom been shipped to museums; scientists have tended to ignore the animal, making it one of the most poorly studied common species in the world.
It is an African equivalent of the wild boar.
The red river hog weighs up to 120kg and has a bright orange hairy coat, a black and white facial mask, warts and pointed ears with tassels.
African bushpig Potamochoerus larvatus.
A lot like the pig above, except that it's found on the grasslands and savannah woodlands of eastern and south-eastern Africa, is slightly bigger, is more bristly than hairy and is a muddy colour.
One of the subspecies has a white face with black eyepatches.
Common warthog Phacochoerus africanus.
Found in savanna woodland and grassland wherever there is such terrain throughout subsaharan Africa, the warthog is one of the classic wild pigs, an animal whose distinctive countenance seems to stick in the mind of anyone who's ever seen one or a picture of one.
It is distinguished from all other pigs in that, instead of building a nest of leaves and grass, it lives in holes originally dug by another animal, the aardvark.
From then on, anything that loiters in front of the entrance runs a risk of being knocked flying by the owner of the den exiting at high speed.
One pig expert has asked BBC WILDLIFE to give its readers this stern warning: never, ever, stand in front of an aardvark hole.
The common warthog weighs up to 110kg and has black or white bristles on grey skin and splendid facial warts.
Cape warthog Phacochoerus aethiopicus.
This differs from the warthog above in the shape of its head and its teeth and the fact that its core population in South Africa has been wiped out.
Very recent taxonomic observations, though, have identified a population of pigs in northern Kenya and Somalia that may match this description.
Giant forest hog Hylochoerus meinertzhageni.
An inhabitant of West African rainforests and the rainforest patches in East Africa, this is the biggest pig in the world.
It lives in large family groups and is said to be as shy as it is fearsome-looking.
The giant forest hog of the central African highlands weighs up to 275kg and can be more than two metres long.
The lowland races, though, are not much larger than the red river hog.
Both have brown and black bristles and facial warts.
Like most of the forest species, it is threatened by deforestation and hunting.
The author and the Editor would like to thank Dr Alastair Macdonald of the University of Edinburgh for his help with this article.
TV Link
The close relationship between the pigs and the Hagerhai people of Papua New Guinea is featured in Partners for Life , the third programme in the Lifesense series, on 25 November at 8.30pm, BBC1.
Author
Tess Lemmon,a freelance writer and regular contributor to BBC WILDLIFE, has a master's degree in anthropology on the way we use images of animals to say things about ourselves.
Just about every attitude a human can hold is, somewhere, held towards pigs — from revulsion and ridicule to, in Papua New Guinea, something like motherly love (they still get eaten, though).
When a warthog's (or any pig's) tail is in the flag position, it means ‘follow me, piggies’.
It is said that, in parts of Africa people so admire warthogs for this feat of sustained erection that their tails are eaten as aphrodisiacs.
The Vietnamese potbellied pig is, as one pig expert puts it, ‘the most appalling ball of grease.’
It's any ancient domestic breed, one of many in eastern Asia, and it main attributes seem to be that it doesn't eat much, it grows up quickly, and it's almost pure lard.
If big cats in zoos are ever offered the meat of surplus pot-bellies, they are said to turn up their noses — which could be another advantage in a pig raised in tiger country.
In Papua New Guinea, the women and the pigs of the Huli tribe dig in the garden together.
And at night — because the men have their own separate lodging — they curl up together and go to sleep.
In the civilised West, pigs are often kept in the kind of compact packaging that they'll still be in when they're sausages and bacon.
When domestic pigs go feral, it's only a few generations before they start to look like the ancestral Eurasian wild boar.
The trouble is, they're usually not where wild boars have evolved to be, and the environmental damage they do is immense.
Here in California, this sow is doing her part for erosion in the West Coast watershed.
Pigs are intelligent, and with a careful upbringing they can sometimes make companionable pets.
This pig in Westport, Washington, likes to take its humans to the beach.
Right : If those were human carcasses hanging there, this might pass as some photograph of Hell.
But rest easy.
They're only pigs, this is only a British abattoir, and they're only on their way to the supermarket.
Above : The many physical similarities between pigs and humans means that people can use the pig body to learn about the human body in ways that, to say the least, would be unethical with the human body itself.
Here, at a Swedish medical school, a pig has just been shot, so that students can practise taking out the bullet.
Opposite left : When the factory pig bites the bar, it may be trying to satisfy its hay-gathering instinct.
Opposite middle : This wild boar is what the factory pig instinctively thinks it still is.
Above : The biggest pig of all is Africa's giant forest hog.
Below : An aging male babirusa that appears near to the day when it slowly gores itself through its forehead.
The bearded pig of Borneo occasionally stages an island-wide stampede.
The fact that the common warthog lives in aardvark holes is a good reason never to loiter at an aardvark entrance.
Above : The red river hog, which is a big part of the West African human diet, is one of the least scientifically studied common animals in the world.
Left : Northern India's pygmy hog, which is about the weight of the average shopping bag, is a whole species being held hostage by armed repels.
Below : The bushpig is East Africa's version of the red river hog.
And the two of them together are the all-African version of the wild boar.
Cull to be kind
There is now no doubt that in parts of Scotland there are just too many red deer, a problem which has many consequences — economic, emotional and environmental.
Michael Scott describes the practical proposals put forward in a new report on this contentious issue.
Wild red deer are perceived as having a special place in Highland culture — as a symbol of Scottish wilderness, as revenue-earners in sparsely populated areas, and as part of the fabric of Highland society.
Deer-stalking estates are regarded as central to local economies, and their lairds enjoy feudal respect.
Their influence is such that during the stalking season vast areas of Scotland are closed off to hillwalkers.
Yet the statistics offer a different perspective on the role of deer in the Highlands.
Of the 50,000 red deer shot annually in Scotland, only 30 per cent are shot for sport and about half of these by paying clients.
With the fees for shooting hill stags currently averaging £200 to £250, the total income from commercial lets is £1.5–£2 million.
Venison sales bring in a further £1.3–3 million, depending on prevailing prices.
Only around 2,000 people a year participate in the sport, which creates the equivalent of 300 full-time jobs.
In contrast, tourism in the Highland region earns £340 million and employs 10,000 people.
Even more significantly, the deer population appears to be out of control.
When the Red Deer Commission (RDC) was set up in 1959, it argued that there were too many red deer in Scotland.
Since then, the population has more than doubled to 300,000 (see BBC WILDLIFE, February 1989), but the RDC has never used its compulsory control powers.
A sequence of mild winters with low deer mortality and declining competition from sheep have contributed to this increase, but the main cause is the consistent failure of many estates to balance the number of stags shot with a large enough cull of hinds — a labour-intensive process with small returns from the sale of venison.
The result is an imbalance in numbers which does little to check the breeding rate.
The high numbers of deer cause damage not only to farming and forestry but also to the natural environment — overgrazing, for example, has almost totally blocked regeneration in many of Scotland's native woods.
The welfare of the deer themselves is also placed at risk, especially in hard winters.
Last May, however, in response to the House of Commons Agriculture Select Committee report on ‘Land Use and Forestry’ and to public pressure, the government announced a review of red deer legislation to bring damage to the natural heritage within its remit.
With this review underway, Rural Forum of Scotland published in October a report — funded by WWF and Highlands and Islands Enterprise — offering a fresh perspective on red deer in Scotland.
Its authors are well qualified: Robin Callander was specialist adviser to the Agriculture Select Committee and is partner in a small estate near Braemar, while Neil MacKenzie has carried out a major preview of Scotland's native woodlands.
Callander describes the report as ‘a contribution to the current red deer debate, setting an agenda for discussion, rather than a formula for future management.’
It offers a detailed assessment of the current situation in its first section, and then goes on to offer options for the future.
These make persuasive reading, not least because they espouse the principles of sustainable management set out in Caring for the Earth (see WWF Page, November).
The report starts with the premise that wild red deer are ‘a valuable national asset that could be managed on a sustainable basis to produce greater net economic, environmental and social benefits than at present.’
Red deer are ideal animals to be considered for such sustainable management, because they are already maintained by human intervention on open hill land, very different from the forest habitat which they once occupied in Scotland and still inhabit in the rest of Europe.
Also, under Scots law, red deer are owned by no one but the ‘community of the realm,’ in practice the Scottish nation.
For three centuries, however, an incident of landownership has been effectively the sole right to shoot deer on that land, either for sport or to prevent damage.
The report interprets this as society granting landowners monopoly access to a common property resource, and it points out that, with this privilege, comes the moral responsibility to manage the resource for the benefit of society.
It advocates reinforcing this responsibility by law, with a system of licences requiring landowners to reach an agreed cull on their land, in return perhaps for rating benefits.
To ensure that estates are motivated to take part, culling targets would be set by local deer management trusts (LDMTs), developed from existing voluntary deer management groups and based around discrete deer populations.
Landowners would be obliged to belong to their LDMT, together with other land-users.
Overseeing the whole process would be a Scottish Deer Commission, replacing the RDC as a credible and contemporary wildlife management agency, with wide responsibilities, adequate resources and meaningful powers.
Population levels, says the report, should be determined according to the condition of the deer's ranges.
This should be monitored regularly, and deer numbers set to prevent further deterioration of the habitat.
Such charges might seem unpalatable to influential lairds, but the report suggests that they represent merely a shift of emphasis, recognising the responsibility for good stewardship long adopted by many Highland estates.
The de facto right to take wild deer would become to right to participate in an LDMT, and so to take wild deer.
And the report also points out that reductions in deer numbers would be achieved mainly by shooting hinds, which could lead to subsequent savings and might, in some cases, result in more stags and so increase potential stalking revenue and the capital values of the estates.
Such abstract economic arguments may seem far removed from the aspirations of nature conservation, but the report's principle that sound management can benefit both wildlife and local people is also central to WWF philosophy.
If the options proposed by the report gain acceptance, then the beneficiaries will be not just the estates and rural communities of the Highlands, but the red deer themselves and the hills and forests they inhabit.
The Management Of Wild Red Deer in Scotland can be obtained from: Rural Forum Scotland, The Gateway, North Methven Street, Perth, price £6 inc p&p.
For more information about the World Wide Fund for Nature, send an sae to WWF Communications, Panda House, Weyside Park, Godalming, Surrey GU7 1XR.
Hind sight.
Left unchecked, herds of female red deer have damaged their Highland home.
PLAYING FAVOURITES
It's the elephant by a nose
Dolphin sunk, tiger third by a whisker…
It's all a bit of whimsy, isn't it — voting for your favourite animals?
Fun, sure — but what could it possibly mean?
Elephants, after all, couldn't care less about winning a BBC WILDLIFE popularity contest.
And you can be confident that no hairy-nosed wombat has lost sleep over the fact that its species got only one vote.
But of course it's not about animals at all.
It's those powerful, dangerous, unpredictable creatures, people, and how they view the world — which actually is something for animals to worry about: if nothing else, it affects what gets what in the conservation stakes.
So here are the results of the big vote solicited in the August issue, and an analysis of them by ethologist James Serpell , director of the Cambridge University Companion Animal Research Group.
The results of BBC WILDLIFE'S favourite animal survey may not be particularly representative of the British population as a whole, but they certainly shed some interesting light on the particular animal characteristics that readers find most appealing.
Unfortunately, previous surveys of people's animal preferences — conducted mainly in the United States — are difficult to compare because, generally, different methods were employed.
In 1980, for example, Stephen Kellert at Yale University surveyed a random sample of more than 3,000 Americans for the preferences from a list of 33 different animal species.
The list consisted of an assortment of well known mammals, birds, reptiles, fish and invertebrates, and also included three domestic species: dog, horse and cat.
According to Professor Kellert's results, the 13 most popular animals in the US, in descending order of preference, were: dog, horse, swan, robin, butterfly, trout, salmon, eagle, elephant, turtle, cat, ladybird and racoon.
Somewhat predictably, the 13 least preferred species consisted mainly of invertebrates and reptiles, but also included bat, skunk, coyote and wolf.
Comparing these results with those of the present survey is decidedly problematical.
For one thing, BBC WILDLIFE readers were not restricted in their choices and, as a consequence, the responses were tremendously varied — even the most popular animal, the elephant, attracted only 9 per cent of the overall vote.
BBC WILDLIFE readers are also more knowledgeable about animals than the average American, and consequently, displayed a number of rather specialised preferences.
These included: long-nosed elephant fish, hairy-nosed wombat, Gloucester old spot pig; one unfortunate individual even voted for the thylacine, probably now extinct.
Professor Kellert used the results of his survey to identify what he considered to be the main animal characteristics that guided North American preferences.
These included large size, apparent intelligence, domestic status, beauty or aesthetic appeal, similarity or evolutionary ‘closeness’ to humans, harmlessness to humans, economic value, cultural or historical associations with people, and ‘cuteness’in the sense of being juvenile or baby-like in appearance.
Other surveys conducted among student populations in the US have more or less confirmed Professor Kellert's basic preference criteria, though they suggest that additional factors such as longevity, slow reproductive rate and rareness also make an important contribution to an animal's popularity.
So, to what extent do BBC WILDLIFE readers conform to these guidelines?
In some respects, hardly at all.
Not surprisingly for population interested in wildlife, domestic status is not an important choice criterion.
Cats are the only domestic animal in the top 10 world list, and this seems to reflect mainly the preferences of female respondents.
(No doubt many of these cat- lovers would claim that the cat is really semi-domesticated anyway.)
None of the favourite animals has any outstanding economic value (unless one counts tourism) and, apart from otters, domestic cats and hedgehogs, none is especially ‘cute’ as an adult, although most are endearing as youngsters.
Gorillas, dolphins and whales certainly have a reputation for being peace-loving and harmless to humans but, on the other hand, tigers and polar bears are both well known as potential man-eaters, while elephants can hardly be described as innocuous, even if they prefer to mind their own business most of the time.
And as far as traditional associations with people are concerned, most of the animals on the world list, aside from hedgehogs, elephants, whales and dolphins, suffered from distinctly tarnished reputations until quite recently.
In other respects, however, BBC WILDLIFE readers do appear to obey the general rules.
The overwhelming majority of world favourites are large or very large in size, and most are thought to be either highly or relatively intelligent.
Many are also long-lived and have relatively slow breeding rates.
Only the gorilla is particularly close to us in evolutionary terms (though all of the top 10 animals are mammals), but many of the other favourites are distinctly humanoid in appearance, either because they sometimes stand upright, such as otters and polar bears, or because they have vaguely human-like faces.
Aesthetic criteria are also clearly important.
Glancing through the list, words such as beautiful, graceful, powerful awesome and majestic spring to mind.
And as might be expected, given BBC WILDLIFE's emphasis on conservation, rarity is evidently a crucial factor.
Apart from the cat, all of the world favourites are perceived as rare or threatened, and many are on the IUCN ‘red list’ of endangered species.
The influence of these factors on British animal preferences are less obvious — despite a certain amount of overlap between the British and world lists — perhaps because the range of possible choices is far more limited.
But the number-one British favourite, the otter, is both rare and probably the most endearingly anthropomorphic of Britain's animals, and most of us have been brought up on nostalgic, humanoid depictions of badgers, foxes, hedgehogs, squirrels and owls in our childhood literature.
The overall popularity of foxes — traditionally regarded as vermin — will be unwelcome news to the hunting fraternity, while the surprising success of amphibians and invertebrates should offer some encouragement to UK conservationists.
Perhaps the most interesting and surprising feature of these survey results is the remarkable preponderance of carnivorous mammals.
Excluding whales and hedgehogs, mammalian carnivores account for roughly two thirds of the top 10 British and world choices.
The reasons for this are unclear.
As predators ourselves it may simply be that we identify more easily with other carnivores.
Or it may be that these animals somehow embody that peculiar quality of untamed wildness that readers admire and appreciate.
The poet William Blake captured the essence of this idea with his imaginary ‘Tyger, Tyger, burning bright, in the forests of the night.’
Perhaps now that the forests and other wilderness areas have nearly vanished, these carnivorous animals burn brighter than ever in our consciousness — solitary beacons of wild nature whose continued survival has come to represent the survival of wilderness itself.
1st DOUBLE FAVOURITE
The elephant not only pipped dolphin and tiger to the post to emerge as overall winner, but also seemed to attract the greatest loyalty in voters.
The vast majority of readers chose to take the option of voting for two favourite animals, but those few who voted for just one (which was then counted twice in the tallying up) tended to favour the elephant, specifically the African elephant, followed by tiger, otter and pig.
BBC BIAS
BBC WILDLIFE readers are obviously easily persuaded to fall in love with any animal — and why not!
Certainly the August cover image is likely to have prompted the three votes received for the king vulture .
HOME-GROWN HIT
The otter was the only strictly European species to make it into the overall ‘Top 10’, though badger, fox and hedgehog all got as far as the top 20.
BIRD SCORES
The barn owl is the only bird to appear in the top 10 lists, at number 9 in the British list.
Though numbers were few overall, males were three times more likely to vote for it than females.
Also much more popular with male readers were the British birds of prey, particularly the osprey and the peregrine falcon.
SEAFARERS
The sea mammals are well represented, with dolphin and whale (especially the humpback whale) in the top 10, and the largest of the dolphins — the killer whale, or orca — also making it into the top 20.
SEX DISCRIMINATION
The sexes differed perhaps most conspicuously when voting for felines, and only the tiger attracted roughly equal proportions of votes from both sexes.
By contrast, the domestic cat ranks fourth on the female list, but doesn't even appear on the male top 10.
DOWN UNDER DOG
The hairy-nosed wombat was one of many rare species to receive a single vote.
Most of Australia's more familiar mammals, including koala, kangaroo and platypus, received votes, though none came from readers in Australia.
The mole received only a handful of votes, but half of those came from Australia.
TV STAR
The only small mammal to make it even to the top 20 was the meerkat , cover star of our February 1987 issue and subject of Meerkats United , one of the most popular Wildlife on One programmes ever shown.
CAT DOWN TO SIZE
The large wild cats, including cheetah , leopard and lion, were all twice as popular with males as females.
Of the small wild cats, margay, puma, cougar and lynx all received votes only from female readers.
EXPLORE YOUR WILD PASSIONS
Now you've found out what animals were voted in as favourites (and if you haven't turn to p849 for enlightenment), how about analysing your own attitudes towards the natural world rather more deeply?
While the BBC series Lifesense continues to present a view of what animals think of us, we present 30 questions, devised by nature writer Robin Robbins , to help reveal what we really think of them.
When did you last take an honest look at your own attitudes to the natural world?
That is, of course , if you are not afraid to acknowledge them.
It may be that you do not recognise the deep-seated reasons why you hold some animals in higher esteem than others.
How do you feel as you swim over that dark patch of seaweed?
And why did you choose your pet — for its own attributes alone, or partly because your choice might influence others' opinion of you?
Our questionnaire is designed to help you to sharp-focus on your own ‘natural nature’.
Read each question, and then choose the answer nearest to your own attitudes.
We know that none of the answers is likely to be a perfect fit, and it will not affect the result if you feel bound to skip an inappropriate one entirely.
But don't mull over your responses, because your first, instinctive choice is the one that is likely to highlight the real you.
After each response is a number, which tells you which box to tick when you choose that particular reply.
When you've completed the questionnaire, you will need to count up how many ticks are in each box.
But don't cheat.
Wait until you have completed the whole questionnaire before you read our analysis of your wild personality.
1 Which of these creatures would you least like to share your life with?
A
A pipistrelle bat.
B
A hamster
C
A goldfish
2 Which of these pictures pleases you most?
3 A fox has dug a hole under your garden fence, destroying your prize flowers.
Do you:
A
Stop putting food out for the foxes.
B
Wonder what the council is doing to control fox numbers.
C
Continue to be delighted because your garden has a resident fox.
4 If you could strike up a mutually trusting relationship with one of the following wild animals, which one would you choose?
A
Lion
B
Chimp
C
Garden robin
5 There's an opportunity to go scuba-diving — something you've never done before — in an uncharted area of warm, unpolluted sea.
What do you think about it?
A
Anxious
B
A little anxious, but still can't wait to get there.
C
Wonder where you can borrow a harpoon gun.
6 You've just discovered an animal new to science.
What sort of scientific name will you give it?
A
One that includes your own name.
B
A name extolling its beauty.
C
A name hinting at its ecological niche.
7 There are some very unusual meats on the menu in this restaurant.
Do you?
A
Choose a vegetarian dish.
B
Ask for calorie counts.
C
Sample the slug mousse.
8 In some cultures, human remains are exposed for vultures to eat.
What is your view of this?
A
It complies with natural laws.
B
No!
Not me or mine.
C
It solves a problem.
9 In a debt-scourged country, you are looking at a formerly beautiful place now devastated by oil-drilling.
What is your dominant emotion?
A
Compassion for the country concerned.
B
Anger
C
Grief
10 Which of these animals would you choose to be with if you were asked to pose for a magazine photograph?
A
Cheetah
B
Bush baby
C
New discovered species of parrot.
11 Why would you want to enter your garden in a horticultural competition?
A
Because you welcome the chance to show off your hard work and success.
B
Because at last you've really got a particular problem licked.
C 
Because it just looks beautiful.
12 You are looking after an endangered animal, which is very  muckily ill.
How are you likely to react to all that mopping and sloshing down?
A
With soft-eyed devotion.
B
Hating every moment.
C
Coping, on behalf of conservation.
13 There's a film showing delighted children watching a performance at a dolphinarium.
How do you feel about it?
A
You can't help enjoying the dolphins' beauty.
B
You wonder how the trainer has achieved such results.
C
You turn the television off with revulsion.
14 You have a little money to give to an animal conservation project.
Which of the following would be most likely to affect your choice of project?
A
The charity aims to help your favourite animal.
B
The species concerned is greatly endangered.
C
The animal concerned has a breathtaking beauty.
15 What is the most important to you of these three aspects of rainforest conservation?
A
The need for endemic people to manage their environment wisely.
B
The desire to see world ecology in perfect harmony.
C
The possibility of medical advance using rainforest species.
16 How do you regard the idea of a moderate and restricted use of animals in medical experimentation?
A
Although animals are wonderful, the needs of people come first.
B
Animals were put on Earth for people to use as well as care for.
C
Animals must on no account be used for experiments.
17 You've been given an award for your services to natural history.
Which of these prizes would suit you best?
A
A cup to put on the sideboard.
B
A large cuddly toy badger.
C
A wildlife water colour.
18 Grazing red deer are preventing pinewood regeneration in Scotland.
How do you feel about controlled culling?
A
It is a shame to destroy such a magnificent creature.
B
You would like the opportunity to join in the shooting.
C
It is all right if you do not harm the fawns.
19 Would you gather and eat wild fungi?
A
Only after a course in fungus recognition.
B
Never — I couldn't be sure I'd get it right.
C
Yes — and I'd like to see the expressions on the family's faces!
20 There's a bluebottle trapped in your kitchen.
How do you deal with it?
A
Squash it.
B
Check that there's no food left out of the fridge.
C
Release it.
21 We know you would never consider smuggling a wild orchid into your home country, but which of these considerations would most tempt you to break your resolve?
A
Fellow orchid-collectors at home have never seen this foreign one before.
B
It might have a better chance of survival at home with me.
C
It's wicked that it should bloom unseen in the wild.
22 Something's just gone down a hole in the skirting board.
What do you fear it might be?
A
A cockroach.
B
A carpet beetle.
C
Your special exotic pet.
23 Whether you are or not, assume you have gone vegetarian.
Would you then continue to wear leather shoes.
A
Yes, wearing plastic would not save a single animal's life.
B
Yes, plastic shoes don't look as good as leather ones.
C
No — I couldn't justify it to other people.
24 Which of these nature books appeals to you most?
A
A coffee-table book with full-page pictures.
B
A key to an animal  phylum of your choice.
C
A book of nature's medicinal remedies.
25 You are shipwrecked on a desert island with these birds.
Only one can be saved from extinction.
Which one would you choose?
A
A wild duck.
B
A bird of paradise.
C
An eagle.
26 You've entered into a bet that you'll sleep alone in the forest tonight.
Which of the following would concern you the most?
A
The unseen something that is tickling your back.
B
Having to explain why you have given up.
C
Not being allowed to bring the dog for company.
27 You are to be imprisoned for life.
Which of these aspects of a country walk would you miss the most?
A
The feeling of relaxation and enjoyment.
B
The excitement of seeing new things.
C
The pride of being part of this beautiful land.
28 You accept that conservation work is often very dirty.
Which of these tasks would you least like to get muddy at?
A
Surveying a dark unexplored cave.
B
Pulling up boring rhododendron roots.
C
Maintaining a sanctuary which must be kept a total secret.
29 Your body is swarming with unseen life — it is a whole ecosystem in itself.
How do you regard this idea?
A
With revulsion.
B
With curiosity.
C
With matter-of-fact acceptance.
30 It's epitaph time.
Which phrase would you choose if you could?
A
…rejoiced in a love of nature.
B
…loved to learn about the natural world…
C
…was in tune with every aspect of the natural world…
When you have answered all the questions and ticked the boxes, check your totals and turn the page for a revelation of your personality.
Now that you've answered all the questions (if you haven't, turn back and do them before you read on), and checked your totals, read on to uncover your own wild personality.
The typical pattern is that one box will show more ticks than any of the others, but there may be one or two further boxes with scores not far behind.
This will mean that you need to read two or three analyses, and to consider how your main personality type is tempered by other important traits.
Of course, our quiz is intended to be light-hearted, so if you disagree with the conclusions, feel free to take them with a pinch of salt.
But you never know, it may be tat all at once you recognise something of yourself that has long been buried in your subconscious.
PIGEON HOLES
Box 1
This box is for people with a practical turn of mind.
If you have a majority of ticks here, you appreciate and enjoy the natural world, but you also look at the way that animals and plants can serve human beings.
You may feel uncomfortable about the views of the animal rights movement, though this in now way implies that you advocate cruelty.
Given a choice, you would like to see compassionate farming, provided that humanity had been well served first.
Be careful not to miss the opportunity to compromise.
There may be alternative ways to solve the human problems that will allow the wild world and humanity an equal two-way traffic in rights and responsibilities.
Box 2
The Old Testament says that human beings were put into the Garden of Eden ‘to dress and keep it.’
If most of your ticks are in this box, then you would probably support this view, whatever your religious convictions.
It could be that your ancestors were among the first to abandon the idea of hunting and gathering in favour of cultivation and husbandry.
On the other hand, your need to be charge of nature may reflect some of your own fears and uncertainties.
In fact, though we hate to suggest it, if nearly all your ticks stopped here, perhaps your desire to dominate is stepping towards the extreme?
Box 3
You put on a good front, and appear to others as an outgoing person.
You are often the first to join societies, to give practical help, to volunteer your practical skills all round.
Everyone can rely on you to give a hand.
But somewhere hiding in the core of you, is there not a little worm of insecurity?
Do you now, just now and then, go ‘over the top’, just to get noticed?
Because you have this basic insecurity, you need other people to applaud what you are doing, and admire you for it.
OK then.
We won't tell!
Box 4
If you are an up-to-date well-read ‘green’ this is probably your box.
You passionately believe that the whole world is an ecosystem linked by interdependence.
For you, it is indisputable that the rights of all its inhabitants are equal, and that human beings do not necessarily come first.
You are tolerant of ways in which the natural world impinges on your life that other people might find a nuisance.
You rarely specialise on one aspect, but are more interested in the way that life links together.
The open air is what you yearn for — a pair of good walking shoes, a green thornproof, and the ability to melt into the undergrowth.
But do take care.
Try to be as tolerant with the views of other human beings as you are with the great outdoors.
Box 5
Perhaps few scientists will bother with our quiz at all, but if they do, then most of their ticks will be here.
This box is for the inquiring mind, the person for whom life's teasing questions never lose their attraction.
You like to analyse, test, and experience things in an experimental situation.
You may specialise in a life-study of just one organism.
The world is a huge and challenging laboratory for your work, and we lesser mortals rely on you for fascinating facts, not to mention fascinating television and radio programmes.
But while you are bumbling about, with your head in the clouds, don't forget to enjoy the likes of the humble common frog, or the mundane daisy in the lawn.
Box 6
For one reason or another, you have a need for nature as great as it has a need for you.
You are emotionally touched by the plight of plants and animals in trouble.
Concerned and caring, and always moved by the underdog, you willingly devote time to the halt and the lame.
There is another side to this, too.
Perhaps you are a lonely person, and find that nature's uncritical acceptance of you fills a gap in your own life.
Never underestimate the contribution you make in this almost parental interchange with plants and animals.
Don't feel insecure about it — your intuitive rapport with the wild world is something that many people would give their eye- teeth just to touch.
Box 7
Fascinated though you may be, your attraction to the natural world includes a large slice of fear, and sometimes even of revulsion.
You may be a little choosy about the kinds of creatures you enjoy.
You may reject tarantulas, in favour of otters, even though both are capable of giving a good bite.
Your fears are not always rational, and you half-believe the horror films you watched in your youth.
You are sure that almost all flying insects either bite or sting.
You may feed safer watching nature at second hand on the television, and would find it hard to rough it in an uncharted forest.
But be brave!
Take just a few more risks and you'll find that the wild world is not as unkind as you may have believed.
Box 8
Beauty is the thing which motivates you.
You admire delicacy, perfect design, subtle colour.
The whole world is your paintbox, and nothing pleases you more than to contemplate exquisite, natural things.
You may be an artist, a photographer, or a skilled embroiderer, but whatever you are, a wonderful sunset will find you watching awestruck.
Because you are an aesthete, some developments in the industrialised world are bound to offend and hurt you deeply.
So be careful not to adopt a too idealised view.
Your environment includes some pretty harsh realities, far divorced from pronking gazelles, or the tracery of veins on a leaf.
WARNING: THIS ARTICLE COULD BE DAMAGING TO YOUR STOMACH IF QUEASY, DO NOT READ (DON'T EVEN LOOK)
THINGS THAT GO MUNCH IN THE NIGHT
Remember the scene in ‘Alien’ where the monster bursts out of John Hurt's chest?
Well, that wasn't all so farfetched, and anyone who'd ever hosted a botfly larva, for example, would surely have sympathised.
Having a parasite is a very special, very intimate experience, as Bill Cater learned when he interviewed scientists and wildlife cameramen who had come back from exotic parts to discover that they'd acquired various new things to share their lives with.
And some of those things make the Alien seem downright companionable.
How about, say, the needle-thin candiru fish, which swims up trails of urine and, when it gets to where it's going, opens up like an umbrella…[that's enough candiru fish — Ed…]
Wildlife film-makers, and tropical biologists have an enviable life.
They spend months in the wild places of the world, they have all the atavistic pleasures of the hunt without the guilt of killing, they see the wonders of the world direct, not on the small screen, and they get paid for it.
On the other hand, they are working among disease-bearing ticks, chiggers, botflies, sandflies, hookworms, leeches and, by no means last or least, the dreaded candiru.
Unlike the creatures pursued by film-makers, which usually can't wait to get away from the camera crew, this lot can't wait to get close.
Very, very close.
Few crews get home without someone becoming host to some parasites.
Here are some of the painful memories.
Boring botflies
Some botflies, deliver their offspring to the chosen host in person, others capture flying insects, such as mosquitoes, and deposit their eggs on them.
The larvae ‘hatch’ in the eggs, and their emergence from them is triggered in some way by the arrival of the insect on the skin of the mammal host.
One botfly known to parasitise humans is Dermatobia hominis , which is found in the warmer parts of the New World.
It burrows into the subcutaneous tissues and spends up to 60 days feeding on them.
Though the moment of penetration is almost painless, the presence of the botfly causes a lot of irritation, and by the time it has been in residence for three weeks or so, the resulting lump is quite painful.
At least, though, the botfly doesn't migrate through the body.
In fact, eventually, it will crawl out of you and drop off, to pupate in the ground.
Mike Linley , Survival Anglia producer and scientific adviser, was filming frogs in Costa Rica when he became host to a botfly larva.
‘I was bitten lots of times by mosquitoes, once just above my navel, where my shirt buttons were bursting open.
I thought nothing of it, but back in the UK I noticed the bite was still bleeding, and as I looked, this little thing came to the surface and popped down again.
I thought ‘interesting’ and kept it for pet for about three weeks; I called it George, and people would give me extra helpings ‘because you're eating for two now.’
‘I was up in Norwich when I doubled over in agony because the thing had moved inside me.
I rang the School of Tropical Medicine in London and told them I'd picked up a botfly, and they said ‘very exciting’ and quoted me some home cures: ‘Keep a raw steak over the hole for a couple of hours and the larva will burrow to the surface to breathe and then you can take the steak away…‘
‘I was staying at a hotel, so I rang room service for a raw steak, which arrived with a flower in a vase and a piece of lemon on the side.
I watched tv for a couple of hours with this steak on my tummy and nothing happened.
So I phoned again, and they said, ‘Try putting a blob of Vaseline over it.’
That's difficult because Vaseline melts and slithers everywhere, and it didn't work.
So they said ‘Paint nail varnish over the hole and it will kill the larva by suffocation.’
The next day I went into the chemist and ordered nail varnish.
‘What colour, sir,’ I was asked.
‘Why, flesh colour of course.’
I spent half an hour painting layer upon layer over the hole and went to bed, and in the morning took two hours picking the varnish off because I'm quite hairy, and then the damn thing moved again.
Eventually, I rang the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital and said I'd got this botfly and really did need a bit of surgery, and they said ‘Come along today.’
‘Doctors, nurses and a surgeon were waiting when I arrived, and the registrar walked in and said ‘OK, Mr Linley, what's eating you?’
Two army medics who were getting ready to deal with such things in the wild were also there, and they kept me laughing so much that I was wobbling up and down while the surgeon was trying to operate.
I had five shots of local anaesthetic, and after about 10 minutes the surgeon pulled out this wriggling black larva and everyone burst into applause, but the photographer said, ‘Oh, I missed that, can you put it back in so I can take a shot?’
‘Now I've got five stitches and there's a one-inch larva covered in spines preserved in a jar with my name on in the hospital.
How do you avoid such things?
Wear a space suit!
Mosquitoes will find a way of biting you in anything else.’
Nick Upton was filming frogs and vampire bats in Costa Rica for Trials of Life in 1989 when, on the side of his head, he found an itching lump which didn't heal, and on his return met a problem familiar to parasitised travellers: doctors don't believe in such things…
‘A week or so after I got back it was still there so I went to a doctor and said I might have picked up a parasite.
He looked at it and said, ‘It's just an infected mosquito bite,’ and gave me antibiotics.
It got more painful — so I went to a different doctor, who said it was an infected sebaceous cyst and gave me stronger antibiotics.
It got incredibly painful, and in bed at night I could hear a munching sound, definitely coming from me, which stopped for a bit if I touched the swelling.
‘I went to a third doctor and said, ‘I've got a parasite, probably a botfly larva, whose life-cycle is…’ and the doctor said: ‘Botfly?
Never heard of it.
It's an infected sebaceous cyst.
You're imagining the noise.
But I can see you are worried so I'll get you a hospital appointment.’
‘At the hospital, the registrar said, ‘No, it's a sebaceous cyst, and we wouldn't normally operate, but since you are worried we'll cut it out,’ and gave me local anaesthetic.
As she was cutting away she said, ‘Goodness me, you're absolutely right, there's something wriggling about…’ and pulled out this horrible, fat, bristly grub three quarters of an inch long.’
It could have been a Texas screw-worm, another cattle pest which occasionally gets people by mistake — the battered remains were hard to identify.
But screw-worms look like normal maggots and usually don't come singly.
In fact, there should have been no doubt about the larva that dined on Robin Prytherch , natural history film-maker and ornithologist.
‘It was when I was working on Wildlife Safari to Argentina , filming in a subtropical province in the north, that I got this lump on my back.
The doctor said it was just a cyst and would go away; two other doctors said the same.
Then, one day, when I was dressing it, I looked in the mirror and could see a small protrusion out of the lump.
I pulled at it, and out came a larva, three quarters of an inch long — and I could see the mouthparts moving…
‘I went to a clinic, taking the larva with me, to get it identified, and 10 minutes later back came a message: ‘I hope you don't mind if I keep it, I haven't got one in my collection.’’
Robert Strachan , wildlife biologist on an expedition to Peru to study nocturnal mammals, had a more painful encounter with Dermatobia hominis and its delivery-service mosquito.
‘I had a bite on the top of my head for more than a month.
Back in Britain, the bump was enlarging and weeping.
A doctor said it was an infested splinter, but I had stabbing pains there — and then, at night, as I lay in bed unable to get to sleep because of the pain, I could hear a munching sound.
‘I got my girlfriend to look at it.
She was convinced something was moving about in there, though when she shone a light on it the little thing disappeared down the hole.
After that, the doctor sent me to casualty, where a surgeon made a two-inch-long incision on the top of my head, but couldn't find the beast.
He was just about to stitch my up again when he saw a movement and pulled out an inch-and-a-half-long botfly larva, at which point the nurse in attendance fainted.’
Horrible hookworms
There are lots of different species of hookworm, but the most common is the dog or cat one Ancylostoma braziliensis .
Its eggs are transported in faeces, and if the ground these land on is sandy and moist, they will hatch.
The resulting larvae sit on the sand or climb up any grass present and wait for a mammal to pass by.
When one does, they will catch hold of the skin and burrow in.
Moving along the bloodstream they eventually reach the capillaries of the lungs.
After burrowing into the lungs, they move up to the pharynx, where they are swallowed.
Having finally reached the small intestine, they sink their hooks into the gut wall and start to feed on blood.
Finally, they lay their eggs, and the whole cycle starts again.
George Monbiot , environmental journalist and broadcaster, played host to what was probably a disorientated Brazilian hookworm.
‘I was kneeling down on the beach beside a lake when I felt this appallingly painful tingling sensation in my knee.
I couldn't see anything, and I thought I'd been stung by ants, but the knee became swollen and blistered and then I noticed tracks like blisters crawling up my leg from my knee, and over the course of months they went crawling up and up and round my leg — terrifying!
When I got back to Manaus someone said, ‘You've got the geography worm,Larva migrans ,’ and went and got some dry ice and killed them.
A couple survived and went on up my leg, but they eventually fizzled out.
‘They are the larvae of a hookworm that inhabits cats and dogs.
You find it all over the tropics, especially in sandy places.
The larvae can dive straight out of the grains of sand into your skin, and for weeks you itch and get blisters as the larvae spiral round and round just beneath the skin, leaving patterns behind.
In dogs and cats, they burrow into the gut and swell into horrible big worms and lodge in the small intestine; but in humans they just go on spreading these spiral patterns for about 18 months and then die.’
Malcolm Penny , a Survival Anglia producer, got hooked by a hookworm and didn't feel any effect, but millions of people in parts of Africa, India, China, South America and some southern states of the US suffer from hookworm and its exhausting effects.
‘I probably got it in the Seychelles, from walking around barefoot a great deal.
Not from the beach — I think the salt there would probably kill hookworm — but in the back streets of the town, where the sewage system wasn't what it might have been, and also walking around on the wooden deck of an old schooner sailing to Aldabra.
‘The larva of hookworm enters through your skin, usually the sole of your foot, and travels up through the lymphatic system, then going through into your lungs.
You cough and swallow, and that gets it into your stomach, and it develops into an adult in the lower bowel.
It wasn't until I had to have a full medical two years later that I found I'd got hookworm.
‘The treatment?
There's this flexible transparent tube, the most unpleasant thing ever done to me in my life…you just have to tell yourself they've seen it all before…
They told me I had such a heavy infestation, all the little worms hooked on to my gut and sucking my blood, side by side, looked like velvet, and I'd got tremendous scarring of the gut.
They gave me a drug which I had to swill down in water.
About 12 hours later, I had the most explosive evacuation, and when they did another test, the worms were gone…
‘Hookworm is supposed to be very debilitating.
It's said it lost the South the American Civil War, because Southern troops didn't have boots.
So they all had hookworm, and they didn't have a good diet, and so they were badly affected.
I felt absolutely no ill effects whatsoever, but then I was very fit, playing a lot of rugby and eating very well.’
Lots and lots of leeches
Dieter Plage , wildlife cameraman, recalls being considerably outnumbered by leeches (of which there are many species) in the Indonesian rainforest.
‘I had jungle-boots on, and we'd been walking through the forest all day.
In the evening I thought, ‘incredible, I've got really damp feet.
There's liquid in my boots.’’
‘When I took them off, they were dripping blood.
I'd about 25 leech bites on each foot, and about 10 leeches in each boot, all absolutely full of blood.
I took a Polaroid photograph and sent it to Colin Willock, our producer — but when I phoned him later, he said, ‘How long did it take you to set that one up?’’
George Monbiot had his share of leeches, too, in the Azmat swamps in eastern Indonesia…
‘It was bucketing rain, and in the rain the leeches had climbed up from the water into the trees as well.
The extraordinary thing was, you could see them coming down on to the leaves as you passed and waving their heads around, sniffing, and when you were underneath they would just drop and go straight down your neck, or on to your ears, hundreds of them.
You could feel them moving through your hair…
‘We'd been walking all day, brushing through great webs of giant spiders, and at one stage I looked back at Adrian Arbin, who I was with, and it was like a horror film — his face was running with blood, blood running into his eyes, down his neck, staining his shirt.
‘I said, ‘My God!’, and he said, ‘What's happened to you?’ because I was covered in blood, too.
Leeches secrete an anticoagulant so that the blood keeps flowing and rain mixed with blood was everywhere.
We must have lost pints.’
Nasty nematodes
River blindness is the result of parasitism by the nematode worm Onchocera volvulus , which is introduced into the body by the bite of a black fly.
Unlike most other filarial worms (some of which cause, among other things, tropical elephantiasis, by blocking up the lymph glands), this one lives within the skin.
In the Third World, more than 20 million people suffer from its effects.
Simulium black flies are blood-feeders with scissor-like mouthparts which chop up the skin and then feed on the resulting blood.
The Blandford fly is the most famous British representative, which though it has a nasty bite, doesn't harbour any nasty parasites.
If a Simulium black fly is infected with nematode  worms, their larvae migrate into its muscles, then into its salivary glands, and finally, when it feeds from a host, pass out of its mouthparts or burst out through them and into the mammal host.
At this point, it is in its third larval stage.
It goes through one more stage in its second host before becoming adult.
It then mates within the skin — in some cases, a nodule forms around each pair.
Finally, it produces thousands of young, which transfer into the next fly that picks them up while feeding on the host.
One of the most disturbing effects of infestation is a thickening of the skin, the result of months — if not years — of scratching.
Actual blindness occurs only after years and years, and is caused by infestation of the cornea — which eventually becomes opaque.
Damien Lewis , environmental writer and film-maker, was filming in the rainforest of Cameroon for four months.
‘My symptoms only became apparent after 18 months — the skin of my bottom broke out in an itchy rash.
The doctor said there was nothing wrong with me, but the Operation Raleigh people rang to warn us: they had been in the rainforest at the same time as us, and 50 to 60 per cent of their people had gone down with river blindness.
‘We used to swim in the river as a way of washing, but there is a small black fly there which can carry a parasite, a burrowing worm which can lie dormant in your body for up to two years, preparing to release thousands of offspring.
‘I went to the Hospital for Tropical Diseases, had several tests.
They had to snip bits of my skin away with scissors — extremely painful — and search under the microscope for these worms, which eventually without treatment can burrow up to your eyes.
They found I did have river blindness.
‘The treatment was two doses of a very potent drug with rather nasty side effects; I also had to swallow a small container on the end of a string and sleep with the string taped to my cheek all night; in the morning it was drawn out with a sample of stomach contents.
‘A month or two later I had another routine test, and had to have two more monthly doses of the antiparasite drug.
The stuff really knocks you out, makes you feel awful — I understand they are trying to refine it.’
Chiggers and diggers
Chiggers — the larval forms of minute skin-burrowing mites, board passing animals, or shoeless people, from the ground or drop on them from vegetation.
The British mite — a tiny red mite — is a member of this group.
They attach themselves with their mouthparts and then release a digestive enzyme secretion which eats into the skin.
The combination of the skin's reaction and the effects of the digestive process results in the formation around the mite's mouthparts of a tube — an eschar — surrounded by scar-tissue and pigmentation which goes down as far as the germination layer of the skin.
This mite feeds for one to ten days and then drops off, spending the rest of its life in the ground eating, among other things, plant pests and hookworm larvae.
Most sufferers don't realise their chiggers have departed because the eschars remain itchy for a long time afterwards.
Often, scratching results in secondary infections.
Gavin Thurston , freelance cameraman, made the acquaintance of the chigger Entrombicula batatas while filming for Trials of Life on Barro Colorado Island in Panama.
But the experts who examined him afterwards almost certainly thought he had been infected by female chiggoe fleas, which attach themselves between the toes or on the soles of the feet.
The eggs are dispersed as you walk.
Chiggers, by comparison, lay their eggs in the ground.
‘The scientists said, ‘Oh, beware of the chiggers’, and the first day we went out, in our shorts and flip-flops, looking up in the trees for these chiggers — we thought they might be big furry things.
It was only three nights later that we discovered they were tiny insects.
‘When you body starts to heal, they can't breathe, so they release a chemical which makes you itch; when you scratch, it takes the scab off the wound so they can breathe again.
‘You spend the whole time itching and scratching, and the wounds become infected.
The only way we could get any sleep was by drinking about a tumbler of whisky every night.
‘Chiggers are not supposed to be able to breed on human protein, but a year after the itching began again on my ankles, though not as bad as before.’
Tenacious ticks
There's hardly a wildlife film-maker who hasn't become intimately acquainted with at least one species of tick, and as ticks prefer the softer, warmer parts of the body, the acquaintance is sometimes very intimate indeed.
Ticks fasten themselves aboard by burying their mouthparts in the skin, and live by sucking the host's blood.
There are three stages — larva, nymph and adult — each of which quite often feeds off a different host.
Usually, the larval stage confines itself to relatively small mammals such as mice, and it is the nymph and adult forms which go for humans, though usually only accidentally.
Some ticks carry unpleasant diseases.
For example, in North America, ‘dog’ ticks —Dermacentor species — carry Rocky Mountain spotted fever.
Alan Hayward , another — BBC1 — cameraman who  worked on Baro Colorado Island, ‘BCI’, recalls…
‘If you go into a Panama restaurant you can always tell the people who've been to BCI — they're scratching like you.
On the island, sensible scientists carry rolls of sticky tape —‘gaffer tape’— which they use to seal their boots to their trousers, their trousers to their shirts, and anywhere else they think ticks can get in.’
Dilys Breese , senior producer in the BBC Natural History Unit, remembers filming feral horses on the island off the North Carolina coast where there were far more ticks than horses.
‘They were very small ticks but very numerous and got all over you.
You spent all your time wondering ‘Did I have a freckle there?’
To have a hundred ticks was not unusual.
In the evening, we were like a tribe of monkeys, sitting around chatting and picking ticks off one another.
We hadn't petrol or anything like that to get them off.
Someone suggested I might have some Chanel No 5 as an alternative, but I didn't, and if I had, it wouldn't have gone very far.
‘We would light matches and while the heads were still hot press them on the ticks — a long job.
The cameraman's assistant used one of his lenses to focus the sun's rays on his — the ones in the more personal places.
‘We didn't know much about ticks, and when we got back to the BBC, we mentioned them to Michael Andrews, author of The Life that Lives on Man , who informed us that, on BCI, ticks carry Rocky Mountain spotted fever!
But, luckily, none of us succumbed to it.’
Petite protozoa
One of the more common diseases caused by protozoa — microscopic amoeba-like organisms — is leishmaniasis.
In Brazil, there are two types.
One is the cutaneous form — caused by the protozoan Leishmania braziliensis — which produces nasty sores and, after a couple of years, secondary sores in the mucus membranes of the lips, nose and genital organs, eating them away.
The other, visceral, type infects the liver, spleen and bone marrow.
This is more difficult to diagnose, and so is more dangerous.
Leishmania braziliensis is carried by sandflies.
Different sandflies of different genera carry the disease in different areas.
All sandflies, though, are poor fliers and inhabit shady places, cracks and crevices.
Film-maker Marcus Colchester worked as an anthropologist with the Yanomami Indians of South America, sharing their lives — and their illnesses, many of which were parasitic.
He returned with ‘about 11 illnesses, apart from ticks, chiggers and so on.’
Among the diseases was leishmaniasis.
‘When the sandfly bites you, it lets in this protozoan, which gets under your skin and eats away the underlayer, after which the top layer breaks away leaving raw, open wounds.
‘I had a great sore on the side of my leg for about 19 months.
It was pretty nasty, and was constantly infected and covered with flies.
The treatment was also rather unpleasant — antimony injections, every two days for a couple of months.’
Candiru (aaorrgh!)
It is hard to verify whether or not this is the dreadful fish it is made out to be or whether the tales are apocryphal, but what is certain is that the species itself does exist.
It is the parasitic toothpick fish, a catfish of the genus Vandelia , also known as the candiru.
Martyn Colbeck , natural history film-maker, had been working by the Manu river in Peru for the BBC's Trials of Life series when he feared one of the worst trials of his life was about to begin.
‘It is tiny, only about two inches, and very narrow, and it parasitises larger fish by entering through their gill openings, or through their cloacas.
Once inside, it puts out a series of spines on the sides of its jaw, which act like arrowheads.
It then uses its sharp teeth to eat its host from the inside.
‘The candiru is reputed to find the cloaca of a host fish by swimming up its stream of urine.
If you are in the river and pee in the water, it can sense your urine and will swim up to lodge in you , swimming up the nearest orifice and sticking out its barbs, which is meant to be excruciatingly painful — and it takes surgery to get one out.
It has to be taken out from the bladder end.
‘We always wore trunks or pants when we went in the river, but just once, I stopped out to wash on one of the river beaches with nothing on, and went in just at the edge to rinse myself down.
‘Suddenly, I felt a tickling at my rear end, and all the stories of the candiru came to my mind in a millisecond, and I thought ‘This is it!
Something's trying to get in!’ and I rocketed up in the air and out of the water.
I stood there on the beach waiting to feel this excruciating pain, but nothing came, so I must have escaped.’
Home horrors
Listening to these accounts from faraway places, it's comforting to believe that, in cooler and better sewered and bathroomed lands, we need not worry about parasites.
Comforting but not true.
Unsuspecting Brits fall victim to head lice (as happy on clean heads as on dirty) and crab lice (which favour hair elsewhere).
We are bitten by mites and ticks, some of which carry dangerous diseases, and by fleas.
We get scabies, and we have internal worms, and for those of us whose interests bring them close to mammals or birds, parasites can be just a part of the job.
Dr Steve Harris , who studies foxes in Bristol, has often picked up scabies, or mange.
This is a contagious infection caused by mites burrowing under the skin (mange is a term used for any condition caused by mites which causes itching and results in a mammal losing its fur).
Scabies mites are best adapted to foxes and goats, but they will infest humans, and like dust mites, to which they are closely related, they cause an allergic reaction.
The symptoms are intense itching and a rash, but because it's an allergy, the rash does not occur where the mites are.
Scabies, which is spread by physical contact and is particularly prevalent in institutions and schools, happens to be on a periodic upturn at the moment.
But just be thankful, says Dr Harris, that you aren't a fox.
‘A lot of foxes have mange, and handling them, you are likely to pick up mites.
You might have perhaps two or three dozen, causing a great deal of itching and red rashes — very, very unpleasant, but easy to get rid of.
The mites are only just beneath the skin.
You stand in the bath and paint the affected areas with something which kills them.
But foxes that get mange die in three or four months — the mites build up to several thousand per square centimetre of skin, and so one fox may have more than a million mites; its suffering must be awful.
In the final stages, foxes can lose weight down to about a third.
They keep scratching until their skin is like crazy paving, and bite their own limbs.’
Chris Mead, of the British Trust for Ornithology, picked up his visitors while working with sand martins and swifts.
‘I went on to a party in Cambridge after I'd been catching swifts, and in the middle of the party a horrible large green thing, a flightless parasitic fly, found on swifts, crawled crabwise out of my hair on to my dinner jacket — it was a dinner jacket sort of party.
They can't bite you, but I was given a bottle of gin and told to go out and sit on the stairs.
‘I've picked up ticks while ringing sand martins, too.
Once, 24 hours after getting back to the office, I fell ill — with symptoms very like scrub typhus, a tick-borne disease — felt rotten, lost two and a half stone in the next fortnight, couldn't eat, had hallucinations.
It's in the same group as a serious disease of human beings called Russian spring-summer fever, whose outbreaks actually correlate with the arrival of migrant birds from further south.
‘Another serious tick-borne disease is Lyme disease.
It is rife round here in Norfolk and the New Forest.
In North America, where it was first identified, it is seriously altering the environment.
The ticks infest deer, and people are so worried by it they are culling deer and stopping vegetation reaching a height where ticks can crawl off on to people innocently walking by or blackberry picking.
If you get a pink rash as a sort of weal which doesn't actually itch, around where a tick has bitten you, then you need to be worried.
You might have got it and should go and get treatment quickly.
[You don't always get a rash, though.
Watch out, therefore, for the other classic symptoms — flu-like aches and pains followed later by pseudo-arthritis, which spreads slowly throughout the body.]
‘Sand martins also suffer from fleas, which wait at the lip of the nest, and if a shadow passes, they leap in the hope that it's a sand martin.
If the shadow is yours, climbing up a ladder to look at the colony, they'll land on you, and you can collect 100 or more fleas.
You can't step back off the ladder — and they don't ‘arf itch!’
But though such temperate-zone parasites can be unpleasant and dangerous — Lyme disease can kill — they rarely affect more than a handful of people.
Ask Dr John Maunder , head of the Medical Entomology Centre at the University of Cambridge, which is the most dangerous parasite we are likely to meet in Britain, and he will say that there is one which afflicts millions of us and has killed 20,000 of us in the past decade.
And few of us, and that includes our doctors, even know that it exists.
It is the house dust mite.
‘It used to live on us, on the surface of our skin, and eventually followed our skin — which falls off all the time in minute flakes — so it now feeds away from us, on those fallen skin scales.
It is believed to be one of the few parasites which has become free-living.
‘It is by far the most common cause of asthma in Britain, the allergy that kills 2,000 people a year, incapacitates hundreds of thousands and costs £450 million a year in NHS prescriptions and billions in hospitalisation and time off work.
‘Ten per cent of British schoolchildren have asthma and five per cent of adults.
And it has to do with bed hygiene, for you don't become allergic to the mite — you become allergic to the mite's dung.
The droppings accumulate in old pillows and mattresses.
We tend to treasure pillows down the years.
But no one with any hint of asthma or allergic rhinitis should keep a pillow more than four or five years.
‘If you start with a new house and new furniture it is usually about five years before anybody can get asthma in that house: it takes that time for the mite dung deposits to build up.
Instead of trying to kill house dust mites, the best things is to throw pillows away and replace them with new ones which won't contain any allergen.
Then, if you want to, you can spray the new ones with special sprays now available to stop the mites from recolonising them.
‘Doctors, who have never been taught medical entomology and don't know what a mite is, would be far happier if asthma were caused by cigarette smoke, pollution, plant pollen or cat fur, but few cases actually are.
The health ministry could have ended the problem a long time ago — it's one of the biggest scandals in public health at the moment.
In the meantime, the pharmaceutical industry naturally concentrates on selling puffers and pills, on the suppression of symptoms.
‘But it is mite dung that people become allergic to, and so the first thing to get rid of is the dung.
The mite lives in carpets as well as beds, but few of us lie on the carpet for hours on end.
But we do spend an average of eight hours every day of our lives with our mouths and noses pressed against pillows full of the mite dung…‘
The author and the Editor would like to thank the scientists who helped keep these tales within the bounds of fact: entomologist Dr John Maunder and parasitologist Dr Ian Burgess, both of the University of Cambridge.
TV LINK
In Lifesense , new close-up filming techniques reveal lice, mites and bacteria stalking the landscape of the human body, and the world of those parasites who prefer our interiors.
Also, don't miss the blood-sucking sand tampan, which can survive for years in suspended animation as it awaits a human victim.
If you think you can stomach it, watch Life of Man , 9 December at 8.30pm, BBC1.
AUTHOR
Bill Cater is a journalist, a former assistant editor of The Sunday Times and a regular contributor to BBC WILDLIFE.
Right : Botfly larvae.
‘As she was cutting away, she said ‘Goodness me, you're absolutely right, there's something wriggling about…’ and pulled out this horrible, fat, bristly grub three quarters of an inch long.’
Head-part of pork tapeworm.
You can tell it from a beef tapeworm by the hooks on its mouth.
It's less common than a beef tapeworm, but more dangerous, because its larvae will settle into almost any part of the body, including eyes.
Once upon a time, tapeworms in general used to be the type of internal parasite that you or your listless friends were most likely to have.
Nowadays, though, meat-inspection laws have made them relatively rare.
(There used to be an old sailor's trick for getting rid of tapeworms, using a raw egg with a pinhole in one end.
The sailor would hold the egg to his mouth and let the albumin form a string that eventually extended to the large intestine.
Then…on second thought, never mind what happened then.)
Top : Botfly larva in natural habitat and,above , after eviction.
‘Then, one day…
I looked in the mirror and could see a small protrusion out of the lump.
I pulled at it, and out came a larva…and I could see the mouthparts moving.’
Right : Dog hookworm.
‘They told me I had such a heavy infestation, all the little worms hooked on to my gut and sucking my blood, side by side, looked like velvet…‘
Above : Leeches in a blood-wallow, on a hiker's foot.
‘I'd about 25 leech bites on each foot, and about 10 leeches in each boot, all absolutely full of blood.’
Left : Leech on forest floor, waiting for supper.
‘…rain mixed with blood was everywhere.
We must have lost pints.’
Above : American argasid tick, full up.
‘In the evening we were like a tribe of monkeys, sitting around chatting and picking ticks off one another.’
Right : A tropical chiggoe flea that has burrowed into the sole of a foot, gorged itself, laid eggs and been squeezed out, having grown from less than one millimetre wide to more than a centimetre.
‘The only way we could get any sleep was by drinking about a tumbler of whisky every night.’
Light micrograph (ie, false colours) of an Ixodes tick, one that happens to carry Lyme disease.
‘If you get a pink rash as a sort of weal which doesn't actually itch, around where a tick has bitten you, then you need to be worried.’
Lyme-disease-carrying ticks in their true colours and against their normal backdrop.
From top : Old familiars. 1.
False-colour electron micrograph of public louse, spread through bedding, clothing and sexual contact, and the cause of an itchy rash.
2.
Bedbug, which is a true bug, of the order Hemiptera, and which lies in wait for warm, still bodies.
3.
Head louse, one of the most common parasites of all and once greatly feared as a vector of typhus.
Left : House dust mite.
‘…no one with any hint of asthma or allergic rhinitis should keep a pillow more than four or five years.’
Wear to go wild
Don't let the elements get in the way of your enjoyment of the great outdoors.
Take advice from experienced traveller Simon Hooton — who's tested for us a wide range of outdoor clothing currently available — and build up (or take off) the layers to cope with everything that's thrown at you.
There are many ways to travel but only two ways to pack.
The ‘minimalist’ manages to travel the world with everything packed into a small shoulder bag, and yet she always seems to have le vêtement juste — be it for a river-rafting trip, an ascent of an extinct volcano or an embassy garden party.
The ‘worrier’ by contrast, is so concerned he might forget something that he struggles through airports with three huge suitcases and a plethora of hand baggage.
I am, by nature, one of the latter, but I yearn to be one of the former, and many years of travelling has led me to a kind of uneasy compromise.
I can now go to Nepal for several weeks with a 12kg rucksack and only one or two things ‘just in case’.
One of the difficulties for the disciplined packer is choosing the right clothes for different trips.
What has been an ideal jacket for the Lakeland fells could be too heavy to take to Africa; what seems like a good buy for walking in the Alps might not stand up to the rigours of a Himalayan winter.
The trick is to be fully aware of the range of conditions one is likely to encounter and then to select the clothes which offer the greatest versatility and which will cope with the harshest of these conditions.
To illustrate the point, and to suggest some possible choices, I shall pack a fictional bag for three very different trips that I have taken recently — a six-week winter trip to Nepal, including a trek to Everest Base Camp, a week's backpacking in North Wales and a camping and birdwatching trip to New England during the Fall.
I have been trekking in Nepal several times, and so I am acquainted with the conditions that I might encounter on a winter trip.
For our latest Himalayan trip, my partner Lynda and I decided to walk to Kala Pattar above Everest Base Camp.
We needed to take with us clothes that were comfortable for travelling in, were easy to care for and were able to cope with the worst of the conditions.
I am an advocate of layering — building up protection and warmth in several thin layers, which can then be varied to ensure optimum comfort for the conditions.
On that basis, let's begin with the base layer.
Whenever you are active in conditions that are cold or windy, it is important that you wear something which will draw sweat away from your body and thus keep you dry and warm.
In recent years, several new materials have been used for base thermal layers which are effective at keeping you dry.
The most comfortable that I have used is a fabric called Rhovyl + Modal , which is used by North Cape £21 and Lowe £27 in their long-sleeved, polo-neck thermal tops.
It feels like a natural fibre yet has all the advantages of a modern synthetic material.
I wore a set for nine days, without having the opportunity for a proper wash, and they were still comfortable and did not smell.
Other fabrics which I have found to be very effective are Polartec 100 , used by Rohan (£27) and Karrimor (£25) and ACL , which is used by Berghaus (£27).
Natural-fibres enthusiasts will warm to the experience of pure silk thermals and may like to try the range from Silking (£20).
For a mid-layer, a woollen sweater has traditionally been the answer but nowadays a range of alternatives are available that are warmer, lighter and faster-drying.
Fleece jackets and pullovers really do offer significant advantages, but there are scores on the market at the moment, which makes choosing the right one a little difficult.
The most popular are made from Polartec 200 or 300 ,Ultrafleece ,Karisma or Sportant .
For trekking, I would recommend a lighter weight such as the Link jacket from Karrimor (£79), which is made from a  stretchy fleece called Polarquest , the Ultralite pullover Calange (£65), which is made from Karisma and weighs only 9oz, or the Panel jacket from North Face (£63).
I like to wear a lightweight windproof while travelling and trekking, only resorting to a waterproof when it is really wet.
For sheer versatility, it is hard to beat the polycotton Pampas jacket from Rohan (£87).
While not as light as some alternatives, it looks smart, is easy to wash and quick to dry and has very useful pockets.
New developments in nylon microfibres have led to some excellent ‘natural-feel’ garments which are a godsend to lightweight enthusiasts.
I particularly like the Windlite from Mountain Equipment (£60) which is part of their Compak range, the New Gobi jacket from Rohan (£54) and the Microlite from Field and Trek (£62), all of which are comfortable, practical jackets that pack down very small.
As an emergency waterproof which packs into the corner of a rucksack, I would recommend the Storm Cruiser from Mont- Bell (£110), which is an incredibly light Goretex jacket.
Weighing in a little heavier is the Spectrum from Sprayway (£189), using a two-layer Skylab Goretex fabric which is sophisticated and performs well.
Peter Storm seems to have broken out of its slightly down-market image and has brought out the Microlite Mountain jacket (£105) using its own breathable and waterproof MVT coating.
The jacket is light, well made and very good value for money.
On a winter's day in the Himalayas, once the sun has disappeared behind the mountains, the temperature drops dramatically.
For sheer comfort and warmth without weight, a down duvet jacket is hard to beat.
I used the Andes, from RAB Carrington (£120), which has a windproof Pertex outer fabric, and it was excellent throughout the trek.
I can also recommend the Annapurna from Mountain Equipment (£189), which has a lightly elasticated lining to give more warmth for less weight.
Following the success of Rohan Bags (£40)— the first really versatile and lightweight travelling trousers — a host of imitators have followed.
Mountain Equipment's Freestyle trousers (£38)— part of their Compak range — have proved both durable and comfortable, as have the Summer Legs from Field and Trek (£36).
Karrimor is promoting its Adventure Travel range, which includes the excellent Tinamou trousers (£33), and Rohan has just brought out the tracksuit-style Gobi pants (£35), which are half the weight of their original Bags.
The choice of footwear is perhaps more difficult.
I wore my trusty Scarpa Trionic Mantas (£106) for the whole trek, as we were expecting snow and would therefore need the compatible Yeti Gaiters that help make the boots virtually waterproof.
In the event, there was little snow and I could probably have chosen a lighter fabric-and-leather boot with a Goretex or Sympatex lining.
There are many available, but among the best that I have tested are the KSB-3 from Karrimor (£95) and the Westwind from Merrell (£89).
Flexibility in the Fall
Last autumn, Lynda and I flew to New England to visit my sister and to take in some birdwatching and camping in New Hampshire and Maine.
New England in the Fall is quite as beautiful as everyone says but the weather is fickle — we arrived in a sunny 82°F and left in a foggy 36°F.
Our clothes also needed to cope with different activities, ranging from birdwatching to cliff walks and from windy boat trips to dining out in local restaurants.
For waterproof clothing, when weight is not a problem, some people still like waxed cotton jackets.
Barbour has brought out the flyweight Durham jacket (£90) which, despite the description, is harder wearing but heavier than most of the other jackets I have tested.
Another very comfortable, though heavy, jacket which is excellent for bird-watching is the Billingham from Billingham (£220), made from a double layer of Ventile cotton.
For a more versatile choice, there are now several makes of jacket using a waterproof membrane (usually Goretex or Sympatex ) which is hung between the outer fabric and the lining.
This allows more scope for using softer materials and complicated designs but it also  means that the outer fabric can get wet, though you stay dry inside.
The styling often means that they are ideal for both casual and serious outdoor use.
I have used the Couloir from Berghaus (£250), the Firefinch from Karrimor (£119) and the Stormbreaker from Craghoppers (£185), all of which performed well.
When less active, I would choose a thicker, warmer mid-layer.
I have tested some excellent Polartec fleeces in this category, such as the Epic from Sprayway (£62), the Coati Pull-on from Lowe (£50) and the Challenge from Vango (£70), though this one has too many seams over the shoulder to make it comfortable while carrying a heavy pack.
Craghoppers has chosen to use a different, more wind-resistant fleece, called Sportant , in its Tarnjacket (£54).
This has a luxurious feel but is more prone to pulling than Polartec .
Rohan makes a smart, casual jacket — the Caradhras (£85)— which has Insusoft filling between two layers of windproof Airlight and performs well in the chilling outdoors.
Hard-wearing outdoor shirts and trousers are something of a tradition in the US and on the Continent and, where weight is not at a premium, I really like to wear slightly thicker fabrics which offer a little more comfort and warmth.
I have been trying a pair of ATP trousers from Calange (£40), which are well cut, extremely comfortable and function well.
The P Jammer from North Face (£26) also provided a very practical and hard-wearing garment for use when scrambling through woods and undergrowth.
When not so active, I like the feel of cotton next to the skin.
There are several cotton shirts on the market which are practical yet stylish enough to wear in the city.
Try the Osprey from Karrimor (£35) or the Great Sandy shirt from North Face (£29).
Mountain Equipment is marketing a ‘Green Cotton’ shirt (£30) which uses cotton grown without the use of pesticides and defoliants and is manufactured in a less environmentally damaging way.
If you are not going to be carrying heavy weights over rough ground, a range of very lightweight boots becomes available for those short excursions into the country.
One of the best known is the Brasher Hillmaster from Reebok (£80), which was designed around a running-shoe last and is incredibly comfortable, while providing a degree of water resistance from its integral membrane.
NeeBee makes a wonderful casual rambling boot, the Pathfinder (£69), as part of its extensive range.
This needs no breaking in, has a waterproof Goretex lining and weighs in at just over a pound a pair.
If you prefer wearing shoes to boots,Mephisto sells a range of suitable shoes, while Mountain Equipment makes the superb Goretex -lined Sandpiper (£55).
Coping with our climate
In between travelling abroad, we spend as much time as possible walking and backpacking in north-west Scotland and Wales.
Last April, three of us had a wonderful five days, walking from Machynlleth to Harlech, taking in Cader Idris and the Rhinogs on the way.
The first couple of days were mostly wet and windy, and then the weather improved — enough for a cold, dry bivouac by Llyn Hywel and a stunning sunset as we arrived at Cwm Bychan.
Hill-walking in remote and wild areas can be risky if you are not prepared, because the weather can change completely in as little as half an hour, and then you can find yourself walking for hours in driving wind and rain.
You must therefore be well protected from the conditions, which demands clothing and equipment that is tough, carefully designed and well made.
Again, fleeces provide the most versatile mid-layer, though few of them are very effective at keeping out the wind.
Consequently, I would often choose a fleece pullover or jacket which has a windproof cover.
The Superlite jacket from Calange (£95) is both stylish and effective, as the fleece is covered with a windproof and lightweight microfibre.
The Reversible T top from Field and Trek (£80) has a Pertex lining to a Polartec 200 fleece, and the whole garment is reversible to leave the windproof Pertex on the outside.
Berghaus has a very comfortable jacket called the Chinook (£140), which has an inner lining of Windstopper , but it is not as warm as an equivalent one with a windproof outer.
Many of the waterproof jackets that are designed for both town and country use are inevitably compromises.
For instance, hoods that roll away into the collar tend to be of fairly simple design but, if you are spending hours in the rain, you may need a more protective version.
Consequently, I like to choose a tougher, more traditional jacket such as the Celestial Peak from North Face (£200), the Typhoon from Berghaus (£87), the Reflex from Sprayway (£139) or the Kintyre from Vango (£149).
The Celestial Peak is an excellent top-of-the-range waterproof with a host of useful extras; the Typhoon uses Berghaus's Aquafoil coating to offer a cagoule-style mid-range jacket, while the Reflex uses  HydroDry Actif to the same effect; the Kintyre was also very practical and performed well, except for the hood, which is now being improved.
Plodding up and down stony paths, crossing tussocky moorland and jumping streams can all make great demands on footwear.
While in the summer you might get away with a pair of trail boots, I would always want to wear something more substantial for traditional British hill-walking.
Ideally, the boots should have a stiffened, cleated sole to cope with uneven ground, and good quality leather uppers to repel moisture and hold the foot firmly.
There are many good makes of boots in this category though I think I would opt for a pair of Scarpa boots because they will accept the wonderful Yeti gaiters (£50) and are excellent in their own right.
Zamberlan also makes superb footwear such as the Trek Lite (£100), which features Hydrobloc leather, a dual-density sole and a Multiflex mid-sole to produce a really well made backpacking boot.
Another boot which I have been impressed with is the Cima Vango , which gives a wide fit across the toes and is now produced with a highly water-resistant Anfibio leather.
Finally, a word about your socks.
Often overlooked in the search for walking comfort, your choice of socks can contribute or detract from the performance of your boots.
Combinations of wool and nylon are usual, with loop-stitching at key points.
I have used dozens of makes of socks and the one that stands out above all the others is Thor-Lo .
They produce about 12 different styles (£7–£13) to suit every activity and weather-conditions.
The guide prices indicated are the manufacturers' recommended retail prices — it's worth shopping around for the best buy.
Flexible responses.
From left to right:Marcus is wearing NeeBee Pathfinder boots, Calange Kingsdale trousers, a Vango Challenge fleece and Berghaus Couloir jacket; Zelie is wearing Calange ATP trousers, a North Face Panel fleece and a Barbour Durham jacket; Simon is wearing Tinamou trousers by Karrimor, and an Epic fleece and a Spectrum jacket by Sprayway; and Lynda is wearing North Face P Jammer trousers, a Berghaus Chinook fleece and the Billingham jacket.
High performance wear on Everest.
Simon is wearing Scarpa Trionic Manta Attak boots, Rohan Bags, a Mountain Equipment fleece and RAB Carrington Andes down jacket, with Lowe thermals as the base layer.
Lynda is wearing Scarpa Trionic Lady boots, Rohan Hot Bags, a RAB Carrington Andes down jacket, with a Karrimor fleece and North Cape thermals underneath.
Ready for the worst of British weather.
From left to right:Lynda is wearing Rohan Gobi trousers, a Craghoppers Tarn fleece and a Stormbreaker jacket.
Simon is wearing Zamberlan Trek Lite boots, Mountain Equipment Freestyle trousers, Berghaus ACL thermals, a Calange Ultralite fleece and a North Face Celestial Peak jacket.
Zelie is wearing Rohan bags, a Lowe Zipped Pullover and a Berghaus Typhoon jacket.
Marcus is wearing Cima Auronzo boots, Field and Trek Summer Legs, North Cape thermals, a Karrimor Link fleece and a Sprayway Reflex jacket.
News of the Earth
Mirage in the Amazon
Concern is growing that the 1985 decree setting aside the Yanomami Park — a large area of Brazilian rainforest inhabited by the Yanomami Indians — faces such massive opposition from Brazil's powerful politicians, rich landowners and the military that it may never be enacted.
There are an estimated 7,500 Yanomami in Roraima and Amazonas states in north Brazil, but their numbers are falling rapidly, as contact with the outside world has brought disease, alcoholism and prostitution.
The biggest problem is gold miners, and the diseases they have brought with them — malaria and TB are still causing high death rates (between January and August this year one Yanomami died every two to five days from disease).
Eight thousand miners were known to be in Yanomami territory in 1989, when they constructed a hundred airstrips to ferry in fuel, food and mining equipment.
Sydney Possuelo, a strong advocate of Indian rights who has recently been appointed head of Brazil's Indian agency FUNAI, has put new impetus behind the massive initiative, ‘Operation Free Jungle’, set up to rid the Yanomami land of gold miners.
Under this, he has blocked off most of the new airstrips, and now only 1,000 miners remain.
He has also published a proposal, endorsed by the Yanomami, to demarcate 9,419,108 hectares of rainforest as the park.
But despite this and the fact that Brazil's President Fernando Collor de Mello strongly supports the concept of the park opposition has been gathering force.
Ottomar de Souza Pinto, a governor of Roraima state, which will lose 45 per cent of its territory to the park, has personally paid bail for the gold-miners jailed under Operation Free Jungle.
Amazonas Governor Gilberto Mestrinho has complained that the park will ‘create an enclave…in the area of the so- called Inca trail…where the Amazon's prime gold deposits are.’
But the most aggressive stance has come from the military.
Antenor de Santa Cruz, commander of the Amazon, spoke on behalf of the military when he pledged to fight any defence of the ‘environment and minorities’ and to ‘occupy the [Yanomami]area, rather than giving it up.’
Those opposing the park have recently resurrected an old but powerful paranoia: the ‘internationalisation’ of the Amazon (see BBC WILDLIFE, July 1990, p483).
A parliamentary commission if inquiry (the CPI) has been set up to investigate any moves to protect Indians or the environment — which the CPI says are ploys to disguise foreign interests in the Amazon's vast natural resources.
According to the CPI, the Yanomami Park is the first step towards creating a separate Indian nation.
Some of Brazil's huge commercial interests support this stance.
Paranapanema, a mining company which accounts for 60 per cent of the country's mineral exports, is trying to gain control over all the gold mines in the Yanomami territory, and dozens of other companies are seeking mining concessions.
Jarbas Passarinho, the federal justice minister and an outspoken opponent of the park, must now agree a budget for the next stage of Operation Free Jungle.
He believes that, because so many of the Yanomami have been killed by disease, they don't need such a large area and has called for a new study of their territory.
And in late September, in a meeting with President Collor, Passarinho insisted that mining should be allowed in the Yanomami Park.
A bill is now before congress to authorise the building of the ‘Transfrontier’.
If approved, this 6,929 km road would run just inside Brazil's border, encircling the whole Amazon and piercing the heart of the park.
Says Davi Yanomami, spokesman for the Indians, it would bring ‘colonists and death to my people.’
A confidential report by the Ministry of Justice, leaked to Brazil's press has confirmed that the government hopes that, by demarcating the Yanomami Park, it will improve its international image, with a view to the June UNCED Earth Summit meeting of world leaders — which will be held in Rio de Janeiro.
Now that opposition to the governor's plan to create the park is growing, it seems likely that, if the Yanomami Park is not created before UNCED, it stands little chance of ever becoming a reality.
DAMIEN LEWIS
Readers wishing to lend support to President Collor's plan to demarcate as soon as possible 94,000km 2 of Yanomami territory, guaranteeing them rights to their land, should write to President Fernando Collor de Mello, Palacio do Planalto, Praca dos Três Poderes, 70.150 Brasilia, DF Brazil.
For updates on the Yanomami situation, contact (enclosing an sae); Survival International, 310 Edgware Road, London W2 1DY.
End of a birthright?
Without the proposed Yanomami Park to protect them, these boys (wearing on their heads, as they do, their pet marsupial rats) could be part of the last generation of their people in Brazil.
As it stands, the force of economic interests against them looks irresistible.
Brazil's proposed 6,929km Transfrontier Road would encircle the entire Amazon region and pass through 22 national parks, reserves and indigenous areas, including the proposed Yanomami Park.
In the early 1970s, the ill-fated Perimetral Norte road penetrated the Yanomami area, and nearby villages were decimated by flu and measles.
That road ran out of money, and only small sections remain.
This road, which serves no obvious infrastructural purpose, appears to be a manifestation, mainly, of military paranoia about attempts to ‘internationalise’ the Amazon.
Its only possible purpose is a strategic one.
Zoo looms for Swedish wolf
Ylva, Sweden's only radio-collared wolf, faces a life sentence behind bars if curators from Skansen Zoo manage to catch her.
Her crime: being seen once too often.
Ylva, a healthy female born in Finnskogen in Värmland, probably in 1988, has a remarkably clean record for a wild wolf.
She has hunted wild game, mainly roe deer and moose, and has had little impact on livestock.
In 1989, she headed south from her birthplace to settle in the forests east of the Värmland town of Arvika.
In February 1990, she was captured and fitted with a radio transmitter (renewed in September this year), and since then she has provided researchers with more than 200 sightings, allowing them to plot an unusually detailed account of her daily movements.
By night she travels widely throughout her territory — often approaching farmsteads and villages.
By day she holes up in remote dens away from human habitation.
But though her well catalogued activities are relatively blameless, she has been seen, sometimes near houses, and with no other wolves to keep her company, she has mixed with dogs.
Her lack of caution led the trackers to sting her with rubber bullets, and since the summer, she has been much more shy.
Unfortunately, however, old-fashioned anti-wolf prejudice is rife around Arvika, and Ylva has made enemies.
In late September, she killed a dog, and 300 local people signed a petition calling for her to be removed.
On 8 October, the Swedish government seems to have side- stepped its own strict wolf protection laws by pressuring the National Environmental Protection Board to issue a licence for her to be taken into captivity.
The protection board's Mats Eriksson told BBC WILDLIFE that he agreed that locals had ‘no reason to fear Ylva.’
But he justified the board's decision on the ground of cost.
Ylva, he said, was diverting scarce funds and manpower from other species that also needed protection and that do not arouse such hostility.
The zoo team, led by Hans Ove Larsson, already has a captive wolf pack but, due to a congenital defect, the animals are blind.
Ylva would bring new blood and perhaps attract new funds to the zoo's breeding project.
It is now the moose-hunting season — not a safe time to be creeping through the woods on a wild wolf chase, and so unless someone shoots her, Ylva has a few weeks grace.
There may still be time to persuade the authorities to relocate her rather than remove her from the wild.
In the meantime, there is good news for Sweden's wolves.
Trackers following the new wolf family in Jämtland (BBC WILDLIFE, October 1991) now believe the adults are accompanied by five pups.
The Ylva case has, however, set an extremely bad precedent for wolf conservation in Sweden.
If the Jämtland pack kills a sheep or a dog, as normal wolves may do, will they too be bustled into captivity because no one in authority has the courage or commitment to withstand ill-informed local pressure?
STEPHEN MILLS
Clearing the cages for needy species
A number of rare animals in the wild are joining waiting lists for zoo cages, and like hospital administrators, zoo directors are having to make tough decisions about who gets the places.
The job of choosing the endangered species to be put on the waiting list belongs to the Captive Breeding Specialist Group, set up by the World Conservation Union — IUCN.
Its tough decisions concern not whether this method of conservation is good or not (and there are those who say that the efforts should be directed towards protecting the animals where they belong), but how to go about doing it.
One problem that has cropped up when trying to turn zoos into arks is that a lot of the exhibits are leftovers from the days when zoos were unashamedly places where people went to look at exotic animals.
Now these animals are, basically, in the way, occupying caged needed for endangered species.
One animal currently under the scrutiny of the Captive Breeding Specialist Group (CBSG) is the gibbon.
All nine species of gibbon are endangered because all live in the rapidly disappearing rainforests of South-east Asia.
Zoos have a good stock of the lar gibbon Hylobates lar but are low on all the others, and so the CBSG is advising zoos to get rid of their lars and replace them with species such as hoolock H. hoolock and concolor H. concolor .
Exactly how zoos are expected to dispose of their lar gibbons is not clear, and it is this which concerns the International Primate Protection League (IPPL).
The wild safari park in Winston, Oregon, intends to export one of its lar gibbons through an animal dealer to a Mexican zoo known to have bought wild-caught gorillas on the black market.
Burnet Park Zoo in Syracuse, New York, has passed one of its lars on to New York State University at Stony Brook for non-invasive experiments on muscle movements.
Other zoos will probably euthanase theirs.
At a recent meeting of the CBSG in Singapore, Marjorie Doggett of IPPL urged zoo directors to honour their responsibilities to the animals they own.
In reply, Michael Hutchins, director of conservation and science for the American Association of Zoological Parks and Aquariums, stated: ‘It is clear that zoos must be concerned about animal-welfare issues.
However, a shortsighted focus on individual animals could prove disastrous for long-term conservation efforts.
There are clearly going to be conflicts between what is good for individual animals and what is good for a population, species or ecosystem.
However, whenever I become confused about what is the highest moral imperative, I am reminded of a quote by conservationist Michael Soule who said: ‘An end to life is one thing, an end to birth is something else!'’
The problem is that, however long term the conservation efforts are, individual animals are always involved.
The zoos' founding stock of lar gibbons came from the wild, and the usual way to catch gibbons is to shoot mothers and take away their infants, many of which die before they reach their destinations.
What IPPL would like to know is how zoos intend to get their new gibbons without encouraging unscrupulous animal dealers who are ever-ready to supply a demand.
According to the Convention on Trade in Endangered Species (CITES), the capture and sale of wild gibbons is illegal, but captive-bred ones may be traded, and so there is a thriving black market in animals with forged captive-bred documents.
Some dealers have even gone so far as to pass off their businesses as zoos (see BBC WILDLIFE, November, p798).
The Koh Kong Zoo in Cambodia, for example, doesn't exist, but has been exporting gibbons, orang-utans and douc langurs.
And recently, a petshop owner in Singapore, whose activities are being investigated by wildlife officials, contacted zoos around the world and offered them lar and hoolock gibbons from Burma.
San Diego Zoo expressed interest in buying two pairs of hoolock gibbons from him — but has since reassured IPPL that the sale will go ahead only if the animals are genuinely captive-bred.
The sad fact remains that, though hoolock gibbons are indigenous to Burma, no one has ever heard of any captive-breeding programme for them there.
TESS LEMMON
THE BIGGEST BURN
Air and satellite surveys detected 50,000–88,000 fires in the Amazon basin in September, says Friends of the Earth, making 1991 by far the worst year ever for this kind of destruction.
Between 6,000 and 12,000 tons of ash were sent into the atmosphere, closing airports and causing respiratory disease.
Meanwhile, the G7's $1.5 billion programme to save the Amazon, announced in 1990, still awaits funding.
Shove off, lar.
All gibbons are endangered, but the lar has got the lion's share of places in the species emergency wards.
Should the zoos get rid of them to make room for, say, concolors?
Namibia tells world: Free fish is off
In the past twelve months, Namibia has confiscated eight Spanish trawlers and their cargo and fined the ships' masters thousands of dollars after they were found guilty of fishing illegally in Namibian waters.
These tough measures are part of a determined effort by the newly independent country to regain control of a resource that has been systematically plundered over the past three decades.
Few countries recognised South Africa's right to rule Namibia, and foreign fishing fleets took advantage of the situation to ignore any attempt by South Africa to regulate fishing in its colonial waters.
As a result, the first independent government of Namibia has inherited fishing grounds with fish populations reduced to ghost proportions.
The icy Benguela Current that flows along the coast of Namibia provides ideal conditions for hake, pilchards, anchovies and horse mackerel, which normally occur in huge abundance and make Namibia's territorial waters one of the richest fishing grounds in Africa.
Local fishermen remember times when shoals of pilchards stretched for miles.
But today, says Carl Schlettwein of the Ministry of Fisheries, ‘pilchard stocks are down to about 15 per cent of their full potential and hake to about 20 per cent.’
Crayfish populations are also critically depleted by overfishing, though naturally occurring environmental factors — such as warm water intrusions and low oxygen concentrations in the water as a result of global climactic changes — are thought to play a part.
Overfishing alone is responsible for the sorry state of the pelagic fish populations.
Records show that, in 1968, 1.4 million tonnes of pilchards were caught; throughout the 1970s, the annual catch fell to an average of 500,000 tonnes, and in 1980, only 11,000 tonnes were caught.
During this time, the 17-member Madrid-based International Commission for South East Atlantic Fisheries (ICSEAF) was supposedly regulating the industry in Namibia's waters.
But quotas set to ensure the sustainability of the resource were widely ignored: Russian and East European factory ships moved in for months at a time, and Spain took the opportunity to develop a host of industries back home — from ship-building to canning — based on the hake resources of Namibia.
Even as fish stocks began noticeably to collapse, conservation efforts made by ICSEAF prior to independence were ignored.
The new Namibian government is, however, determined to rehabilitate its fisheries.
One of its first acts was to declare a 200-mile zone within which all foreign vessels need licences to fish.
It has set a total quota for all pelagic species of just 60,000 tonnes for 1991.
Experts believe that, once fish stocks are back to normal, Namibia's waters should yield 1.5 million tonnes of white fish a year on a sustainable basis.
Rehabilitation will be an uphill struggle.
Government officials say the captured Spanish trawlers are the tip of the iceberg of illegally fishing vessels.
And in an attempt to make the most of very limited quotas, even licensed vessels have been dumping back into the sea all but first-class specimens — an outrageous practice that fisheries minister Helmut Angula says Namibia ‘will not tolerate.’
Some suggest the quantities of dead fish dumped overboard exceed the quantities retained, and a new rule was recently introduced stipulating that two inspectors accompany every foreign fishing vessel within Namibian waters.
Talks on a fishing agreement with the European Community (EC) have been suspended because of the fiery dispute with Spain and because the EC says the quotas are too mean to be worth discussing.
‘Our stringent conservation policy is absolutely necessary to give out depleted stocks a chance to rehabilitate,’ said Schlettwein.
‘We have very limited means to enforce our regulations.
But we would expect potential partners to be sympathetic, because surely healthy and sustainable stocks are to the advantage of everyone with a long-term interest in Namibia's fisheries.’
SUE ARMSTRONG
Japan to aid Cameroon in hara-kiri
The ‘trans-Cameroon highway’— the logging road, which would provide access to a vast tract of pristine African rainforest — may yet become a reality, thanks to Japanese funding, and despite the fact that two of the world's largest financial institutions have refused, on environmental grounds, to back it.
The 600km highway was first proposed in 1987 as a major part of Cameroon's Tropical Forestry Action Programme (TFAP)— a World Bank/United Nations global forest conservation and development scheme (see BBC WILDLIFE, March 1990).
The outcome would have been to open up 14 million hectares of rainforest, so that Cameroon could achieve the TFAP's target of becoming ‘the most important African exporter [of timber]from the start of the twenty-first century.’
But the international outcry provoked by the public exposure of the scheme led to its collapse, and in 1989, the road was put on hold.
But the financial incentive for the Cameroon government to exploit its huge timber reserve remained (see BBC WILDLIFE, November 1990), and so new funding for the highway was sought through the African Development Bank (AfDB).
A precedent for lending money for such a highway existed.
In 1990, the AfDB had funded a 190km road in nearby Sierra Leone, running through one of West Africa's few surviving stretches of coastal rainforest.
The Sierra Leone government promised the AfDB there would be strict environmental protection measures, but despite such assurances, loggers, farmers and charcoal-burners moved in along the new road, eating into the rainforest.
It was this example that the AfDB had in mind when, in 1990, it turned down the Cameroon road project.
Now it appears that Paul Biya, Cameroon's president, head of state and party chairman, has — in the words of a recent article in Japan's Daily Yomiuri —‘decided to do what most of the world's poorer nations do when they need ready cash, and approached [Japan's]Foreign Affairs Ministry.’
The trans-Cameroon road, if built, ‘would jeopardise a vast expanse of Cameroon's rainforest and [those]who live there,’ says the World Bank.
The bank has abandoned all plans to finance roads or logging in Cameroon's forests, in keeping with its ‘stringent policy to protect the rights of indigenous people.’
It is now proposing a $25 million loan to Cameroon under its new Global Environment Facility (GEF), to ‘protect areas of tropical forest,’ though this will be coupled with a $30 million forestry loan for ‘sustainable management’of rainforests — a concept so far unproven in the tropics.
But potentially positive measures such as this will have little effect if the road is built.
As Korinna Horta of the US Environmental Defense Fund points out, no amount of World Bank funding can halt the devastation of the forest and its people if the road goes ahead.
DAMIEN LEWIS 
Public money promotes obliteration of estuary
If you were ever in doubt about the ‘benefits’ of the long-proposed Cardiff Bay barrage, you only need to go to Euston Station and look at one of the walls there.
A huge hoarding, paid for by the Cardiff Bay Development Corporation (CBDC), shows two contrasting images.
At the top is a wide photograph of the bay at low tide — a dark scene of wet mud and dockland dereliction.
‘Dormant,’ says the caption.
At the bottom is an artist's impression of the same view after the construction of the glorious barrage, creating a permanently high water-level and transforming the 600-acre tidal estuary into a 600-acre lake.
It shows a sunny day, sailboats and people enjoying the recreational benefits.
The caption is ‘Vibrant.’
The ad is part of a publicity campaign, costing more than £100,000 a year in public money, aimed at attracting investment in the development, the highlight of which, insists the CBDC, will be the lake, hence the barrage.
The real Cardiff Bay barrage story is rather different from the one on the poster (enough so far for a residents' association, the Cardiff Flood Action Committee, to have complained to the Advertising Standards Authority, and for the RSPB to be considering following suit).
The present tidal estuary is far from dormant; in fact, it's bursting with life.
It is a wildlife site acknowledged to be of world conservation importance under the Ramsar criteria (the Ramsar Convention), which has been signed by Britain, exists to preserve wetlands of world importance) and protected under British law as a 600-acre site of special scientific interest.
Thousands of migratory wild birds, from as far afield as Greenland and Siberia, fly here each winter to feed — hardly the uninspiring, lifeless picture the poster suggests.
The ‘after’ image is also misleading.
With so much pollution flowing down the Taff and Ely rivers, there is little or no prospect of the 600-acre lake being used for contact water sports — the health risks are expected to be far too high.
Even walking along the quayside promises to be an unhealthy and unpleasant experience: smelly and midge-infested, though the CBDC is promising a combination of pumped aeration and chemical sprays to deal with the ‘problems.’
But all that is academic if the barrage doesn't get its parliamentary approval.
On 27 November, for the fourth time since 1987/88, a Cardiff Bay Barrage Bill — a hybrid bill, like the Channel Tunnel Bill, that is promoted by the Government — will be introduced into Parliament.
A coalition of wildlife conservation groups, led by the RSPB and backed by WWF and the Royal Society for Nature Conservation, will once again be arguing against the measure both inside and outside Parliament.
Their objective is not to oppose the area's development, just the actual barrage.
By keeping the tidal mudflats, the conservationists argue, the development will be both more imaginative and environmentally sound.
Amendments to the bill will be tabled — at the last attempt it collected more than 300, and effectively sank under their weight.
Complaints to the European Commission over breach of the EC Bird Directive are also likely.
But the CBDC is nothing if not persistent, and does have cross-party support (the Government is promoting the bill, and Labour-controlled South Glamorgan Country Council backs the idea), in spite of another element of the story that the poster fails to mention: the cost of the barrage.
Some observers estimate this to be as high as £200m of public money — and that doesn't include the prime location advertising space in London, Southampton and elsewhere.
If the conservation movement had the same kind of publicity budget, the public might be given a more balanced picture.
SUE EDGE
All seal culls pointless, workshop finds
When South Africa suspended its proposed seal hunt in 1990, it did so to await the results of additional scientific research into questions about ‘harvesting’ or ‘culling’Cape fur seals (see BBC WILDLIFE, October 1990, p699).
Towards that end, South Africa's Benguela Ecology Programme held an international ‘Workshop on Seal-fishery Biological Interactions’ in Cape Town in mid-September.
A major conclusion of the workshop was that ‘A biological impact by [Cape fur]seals on commercial fisheries in southern Africa has yet to be demonstrated.’
The workshop report also noted that because of the abundance of ‘…stocks of fish and other prey are subject to considerable fluctuations…[a]comparison of fishery yields or stock levels before and after a seal cull would almost certainly not provide a reliable indication of its effect.’
This is an important conclusion because it applies not only to the Benguela ecosystem off the coast of southern Africa, but to all marine ecosystems where marine mammals are perceived to be competing with commercial fisheries.
Whether such findings will cause South Africa's minister of environmental affairs, Louis Pienaar, to revise his opinion that up to 140,000 Cape fur seals may have to be killed annually ‘to maintain an environmental balance’(see BBC WILDLIFE, September, p591), remains to be seen.
But the workshop results suggest that South Africa has little to gain by culling seals to reduce their biological interactions with commercial fisheries.
On the one hand, such action would simply rekindle the international outcry that resulted in the postponement of the ‘harvest’ or cull in the first place.
Only this time, the opponents of culling would be armed with more evidence that such a cull is not justified on scientific grounds.
On the other hand, if the government were unable to demonstrate any benefits of a cull to commercial fisheries, it would do nothing to placate fishermen.
While South Africa ponders the results of its workshop and reevaluates its perceived need to cull Cape fur seals, Namibia would do well to follow suit.
Namibia continues to kill these animals in what is still variously called a harvest or a cull.
This year's quota is 25,400, composed of 23,400 pups and 2,000 adult males.
But even in Namibia, discussions between the government and those opposed to sealing — led by the International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW)— continue.
At a meeting in mid-September, the government indicated that if IFAW were able to increase income from international ecotourism involving the seals and if it were willing to provide for independent assistance with additional research on the interactions between Cape fur seals and fisheries, it too would be willing to consider announcing a moratorium on the killing of seals, perhaps as early as 1 January 1992.
The first griffon vulture to visit Malta in 144 years has been killed.
It had settled in the nature reserve on the islet of Filfla, was spotted by some shooters in a boat and, as it soared back and forth between Filfla and Malta, was shot at until finally it was hit.
It is, incidentally, illegal in Malta to kill any bird or prey or to use the heavy-gauge shot that was used.
Nevertheless, the shooter was offered nearly £4,000 for his trophy, and he got his name in the paper, although police now say they can't trace either him or the bird.
NB: The last recorded griffon vulture in Malta, in 1847, was shot, too.
A Euston view.
‘Dormant’ seems an odd word to apply to a wetland of acknowledged international importance, and ‘Vibrant’an even odder way of describing the possible flooding of that with polluted river water.
It may be only one side of a legitimate controversy, but if so, where's the public money for the conservationist side?
Dirty water.
A National Rivers Authority report, published in November but leaked in October, discloses that the water quality in 5,869km of British rivers (or 15 per cent), 371km of canals and 83km or estuaries declined and was officially downgraded between 1985 and 1990.
Included in the causes were increased farm run-off, drought, acid rain and the Government's relaxation of sewage control standards in advance of water privatisation.
Forest lost in landslide
Brian Leith's job was to film the political campaign of a Sarawak conservationist, when the last thing the campaign needed was Western broadcasters hanging around.
The journey towards Sarawak's forest interior was like opening a Russian doll: cities became towns, towns became villages, villages became longhouses, yet the veneer of civilisation persisted.
A huge new Hilton overlooked Kuching.
A Boeing 737 flew us to Miri.
An air-conditioned 45mph express boat zapped us upriver to Marudi.
Even the remote jungle longhouse turned out to have a clinic, a school, electricity.
I had heard about the new economic empires of the East: Japan, Korea, Taiwan, Singapore, Malaysia…yet it was a surprise to realise how fast these giants are probing their tentacles deep into Sarawak's ‘Heart of Darkness’.
Timber is to Sarawak what gold was to Klondike: the fast track to wealth and prosperity.
Everywhere I looked were logs, millions of them: logs on trucks, logs on barges, logs being lifted, logs being dropped, logs six feet in diameter, logs cut to seventy-foot lengths, logs being dragged out of the forest and spewed downstream in endless herring-bone floats…
Mile after mile of tropical hardwood logs stacked on the banks of the mighty Baram river awaiting shipment to Japan, Korea and Taiwan.
Our destination was constituency 54, Teland Usan, the remote rainforest home of Kayan and Penan peoples, where a Kayan called Harrison Ngau was campaigning in the Sarawak state elections on a controversial anti-logging ticket.
But all I could think was, would we be allowed to film him?
Sarawak is a secretive, carefully controlled state, and out film permit from Kuala Lumpur was crystal clear: ‘Any comments on Malaysia must represent the official views of the Malaysian government…
Issues on racial sensitivities cannot be touched upon…
’ Would we be thrown out if we gave too much exposure to a rebel like Harrison, or if we showed the true extent of the logging?
The problem turned out to be rather different.
My first — secretly arranged — meeting with Harrison Ngau took place over early morning tea.
‘I must be very careful being seen with you…’ said Harrison, ‘or the Barisan [the ruling party]will tell the people that the Western media are manipulating us.’
In Malaysia, environmental concern over the rainforests is now seen as at best a Western fashion, and at worst a cynical attempt by the wealthier nations to thwart Third World development.
Harrison explained that a few months earlier eight European environmentalists had stirred up international press coverage by chaining themselves to a logging barge at Miri.
The ruling Barisan government had accused Harrison and his PBDS Party colleagues of colluding with the ‘interfering Westerners,’ and the episode had damaged the credibility of local activists, including Harrison himself, who had been tackling the logging issue in their own way for many years.
Harrison told me he was now being watched by plain-clothes police, and that the government would exploit the least pretence to discredit him.
We would have to keep a low profile.
For the next week we were to play a game (unheard of in the UK) called Hunt the Politician.
We travelled separately from Harrison, planned our filming with him in secret, and kept our distance, so as not to jeopardise his campaign.
Harrison didn't exactly avoid us, but he made it clear that we were not to hang around his neck.
We got out the 300mm-long lens.
But this is only a tongue-tip taste of the political dilemma Harrison faces.
On the one hand, about 70 per cent of the jobs in his home constituency come from logging.
The Kayan and the Penan peoples are being encouraged — some would say coerced — into leaving their scattered forest homes and nomadic lives to settle in larger communities where they are given schools and clinics and telephones…and jobs in the timber industry.
The fact that they are in effect, being made serfs on their own land, and that the only fortunes being made in logging are by corrupt politicians and businessmen seems by the by.
Many of the native people actually welcome this ‘development’.
Life in the rainforest is brutish and short, and most of the Kayan people I spoke to consider themselves a good deal better off than their forefathers — thanks to the logging.
For Harrison to tell them now that logging should end would be political suicide: ‘Vote for me: I'll send you back to the stone age!’
On the other hand, the current rate of timber exploitation in Sarawak beggars belief.
And cannot last: Reliable figures are had to find, but there is little doubt that Sarawak — an area about the size of England and Wales — is today probably supplying about one quarter of the total raw hardwood exports in the world.
Within seven years, all of Sarawak's forests will have been ‘selectively logged’— ie, stripped of all their best, tallest, most commercially valuable trees.
And, staggeringly, local foresters themselves reckon that within about 15 years Malaysia will be a net importer of timber.
By which time, of course, all forest of this quality, and diversity, will probably have disappeared…along with the native Penan, Kayan, Kenyah, Kelabit and Iban cultures.
I never did find out who the Malaysians were planning to buy timber from in 2005.
Polling took place over two days.
On the Friday, the remote rural constituencies such as Teland Usan voted.
We filmed Harrison's actual canvassing, and then polling in Long Lama.
‘May I ask who you voted for?’
I asked about 20 people emerging from the polling station.
‘Barisan National’ came the unanimous response.
A few wouldn't commit themselves, but not one person said PBDS, or Harrison Ngau.
An ominous sign…or were they just afraid to admit supporting a rebel?
Saturday was polling day in the urban centres.
With growing anticipation we followed Harrison by boat and plane from Long Lama back through Marudi and Miri to await the election results in Kuching.
Harrison met his party colleagues for a celebration dinner on the outskirts of the city.
Most of it was never eaten.
The results came in thick and fast — flashed across the tv screen over some cheap subtitled American B-movie.
Disaster after disaster for the PBDS.
It was all over by about 9pm: the ruling Barisan had scored a resounding thumping victory — 49 out of 56 seats.
The PBDS won the remaining seven — several seats down on the previous election in 1987.
Three minor parties won no seats at all.
Harrison Ngau lost his battle: he scored 2,019 votes against the Barisan candidate's 3,252; only about 5,500 people voted out of a possible 10,000 in Teland Usan.
After the election, the PBDS party was forced to apologise to the electorate ‘for stirring up racial hatred’.
School- teachers all over Sarawak who supported the PBDS have since been threatened with disciplinary action.
A newspaper that dared to carry articles critical of the Barisan now faces a ban in Sarawak.
One logging company placed a full-page ad in The Borneo Post congratulating the Barisan Chief Minister Taib Mahmud on his ‘Victory for Sarawak.’
At 1am on election night I interviewed Taib Mahmud as he relished his landslide (‘…more of an avalanche, really’) victory amid adulation and flashing camera lights.
Outside, his grey Rolls Royce gleamed in the moonlight.
What future for the Penans, I asked?
He paused.
‘They're going to have to come out of the forests…’ he replied, with a grin like a Cheshire cat.
Below:Clear view to the future.
The timber industry, which offers jobs and promises, is popular now, but will it be so fondly regarded in 2005 when all of Sarawak looks like this?
BBC WILDLIFE MAGAZINE AWARDS FOR NATURE WRITING
We present the tenth in a series of essays by winners and runners-up in the 1991 competition.
Pula by Richard Newton
I was upset.
‘What's the matter?’ my friends asked.
‘The duiker is dead,’ I replied.
‘What's a duiker?’ they inquired politely.
Perhaps I could have answered that question directly.
It would have been sufficient for me to say: ‘A duiker is a small antelope.’
That would have covered the basic facts.
Then I could have gone on to explain why it was a duiker no more.
But I wanted to tell them everything.
I wanted to start at the beginning.
And because we were sitting in a bar in central Africa, and there was nowhere else they could go to buy a drink, they had no choice but to sit and listen.
This duiker's story was not unusual.
When he was just a few weeks old, he was stolen from his mother and carried through the bush to the side of a main road.
And there he was he was held up and shown to passing motorists.
Eventually a vehicle stopped, and its occupant, an American diplomat, got out to have a closer look at this strange bundle of fur.
Within minutes money was changing hands and the baby antelope was being placed on blankets on the back seat of the car.
And suddenly he was a duiker with an owner, and a name — Pula.
The American gave his duiker a blue dog collar, and a metal name tag, and the run of the garden.
And for two years Pula lived a luxurious life, safe behind a high fence, feeding on imported peanuts, strawberry yoghurt, and fresh vegetables.
There came a day when the diplomat received orders to return to America.
His apartment in New York would be no place to keep an African antelope, and so he came to the nature reserve where I was working.
‘Can you take it?’ he asked me.
And I said ‘yes’, and I reminded him that it was against the law for him to have possessed a wild animal in the first place, and he shrugged.
So Pula arrived.
We wondered what to do with him.
Should we release him?
Perhaps not.
The African bush was not place for an antelope which had acquired a taste for imported peanuts and strawberry yoghurt.
We decided, instead, to put him in an enclosure and to let the local people come and have a look at him.
‘This is a common duiker,’ we would tell them.
And they would nod, and look closely, never having seen a duiker — even a common one before.
One night some dogs got into the nature reserve.
They found the duiker enclosure and stood next to it, barking.
Pula trotted over to the fence to greet them.
At the American diplomat's house, some of his best friends had been dogs.
But these were different.
They snarled, and tried to bite him.
He wheeled round and ran.
He ran straight into the fence on the opposite side of the enclosure.
The night watchman told me about the incident in the morning.
He told me that he fired his gun at the dogs and they ran away.
But he was worried about Pula.
‘I think he is sick,’ he said.
Pula was limping.
His right hind leg was swollen.
Maybe it was broken.
I needed to take a closer look.
Put Pula was in no mood to allow anyone to come near him.
His canine friends has betrayed him, there was no way he was going to trust a human.
‘Do we have any tranquillisers?’
I asked my colleagues.
They said no.
‘How about a net?’
I asked.
They shook their heads.
Pula was in pain, and so I had to improvise.
I borrowed a tennis net from the local sports club.
We stretched the net across the enclosure.
With a little persuasion, Pula hobbled into it.
We pounced on him, held him still, and I examined his back leg.
It was not broken, just bruised.
I dusted myself down and went to talk with my boss.
‘Pula is very vulnerable right now,’ I said.
‘I think we should reinforce the fence with fine mesh, and we should give him somewhere to hide — a place inside his enclosure where he can feel safe.’
My boss smiled patiently, and reminded me that there was simply no money available.
I wanted to argue.
I wanted to stress how important it was.
But I knew there was no point.
My boss was struggling to finance every national park and game reserve in the country.
The plight of a single duiker was not a priority.
The following morning, as I arrived at work, the watchman was waiting for me.
He was distressed.
‘It is Pula,’ he said.
‘Last night.
Big snake, it came through the fence.
Pula could not move fast.
He could not escape.’
I ran to the enclosure.
At first it appeared to be empty, but then, on the dappled ground, I saw a rock python.
It was more than three metres long, and was lying still.
Only its tongue moved, tasting the air, tasting me.
But I was in no danger.
The python had already eaten.
The bulge in its midriff testified to that.
The bulge was Pula.
There, in the bloated stomach of that snake, Pula's story ended.
My friends shook their heads, and chided me for not telling them a story with a happy ending.
‘Unfortunately,’ I said, ‘I'm a conservationist.
There aren't many happy endings in my line of business.’
We walked outside.
It began to rain.
It had not rained for months.
Puddles were forming on the parched earth.
We were getting drenched, and it made me smile.
Perhaps this was a story with a happy ending after all.
You see, I knew of a place in southern Africa where it hardly ever rains.
Virtually never, in fact.
And in this place the people have given the precious rain a name.
They call it pula .
Richard Newton (professional)
Runner-up for the BBC-WILDLIFE Magazine Award for Nature Writing
‘I have permanently itchy feet — an affliction which I attribute to having spent most of my childhood in Africa.
When I became a freelance writer in 1989, I finally found a career which could accommodate wanderlust.
Before that, I had spent three years as an education officer at Marwell Zoo Park, followed by several months as a wildlife officer at Lilongwe Nature Sanctuary in Malawi.
May essay is based on my experiences there.
‘Working in Malawi allowed me to witness the commitment of that small country to its wildlife.
I was forever having to apologise to my Malawian colleagues for Britain's environmental record.
‘But we are getting better,’ I would assure them.
I'm not so sure now.
‘One morning, shortly after returning from Africa to my home in rural Hampshire, I came across a group of deer standing in a field.
I watched them for some time, thinking smugly ‘Ha!
We do have wildlife in this country.’
But later I discovered that this and the surrounding fields — 850 acres in all — were the proposed site of a 5,000-house new town.
I am now involved in the campaign against this unnecessary scheme.
‘For me, writing is a primal urge.
And, I like to tell people, it is my destiny.
When I was a teenager, I visited an African witchdoctor.
He told me that I would make my living with words.
He also informed me that I would be mad by the age of 21.
I've always suspected that he got one of his predictions right.
Now, at last, I think I know which one.’
REVIEWS
Planet politics
Defending the Future A Guide to Sustainable Development by Johan Holmberg, Stephen Bass and Lloyd Timberlake
The great green myth is that the goals of economic development and environmental protection are at odds.
You see it played out round the world.
The Brazilian government, apparently unaware of the huge unrealised economic asset going up in flames across the Amazon, says it cannot afford to preserve the rainforest because it needs economic development.
India says fighting poverty must come before the environment, while millions of its rural poor flock to bloated cities because miners and dam- builders have flooded and dried out their land.
Environmentalists feed the myth by wanting to fence off nature.
As Timberlake and  his colleagues put it in this brief but incisive review, greens ‘suggest that this thing called the environment is a sacred garden set aside from human activities.’
While Greenpeace tried to save the whales, Timberlake would have raised a ‘Save the Whalers’ banner — and then made most of the same points about protecting whale stocks and keeping the oceans clean.
The environment is not just about animals' rights or aesthetics.
It is the basis of human society and the means to fulfil our aspirations.
It is now more than a decade since the authors of the World Conservation Strategy, an influential report by WWF, IUCN and UNEP, defined conservation not in terms of cleaning pollution or saving whales but as ‘the management of human use of the biosphere so that it may yield the greatest sustainable benefit to present generations while maintaining its potential to meet the needs and aspirations of future generations.’
This statement of the common purpose of conservation and sustainable economic development was adopted in the later UN report Our Common Future and is now the basic text for the UN Earth Summit to be held next June.
The environment is our future.
Sustainable development is the phrase that seeks to make this clear.
This 40-page report explains with chilling clarity how governments are mortgaging their nations' futures.
And it argues convincingly that only by giving economic and political power back to the poor — the people most dependent on the natural environment for their day-to-day livelihoods — can the world defend its future.
There is genuine wisdom here, and humanity, too, especially in the often moving photography by Mark Edwards, who has spent 20 years tilling this rich visual soil.
But it is also uplifting to find a course charted for a better world that combines environmental protection, civil liberties and economic development as three sides of a single strategy, rather than bolted together in disjointed and contradictory declarations.
Here indeed is a manifesto for the planet.
It's a shame we can't vote for it.
FRED PEARCE (environment journalist)
Just published
Arabian Mammals,by Jonathan Kingdon.
Describes every mammal found in the Arabian Peninsula and discusses new conservation initiatives.
Includes 55 colour plates and numerous sketches by the author.
Distribution maps.
Birds: Alternative Names , by Walter Lodge.
Checklist of the world's birds that have one or more alternative English names in common usage.
The Cambridge Encyclopedia of Ornithology,edited by Michael Brooke and Tim Birkhead.
Up-to-date reference book that covers subjects such as anatomy, movement, ancient and modern birds, distribution, behaviour and the impact of humans on birds.
More than 350 colour and black and white photos, and illustrations.
Conservation of Medicinal Plants,edited by Olayiwola Akerele, Vernon Heywood and Hugh Synge.
The outcome of an ‘international consultation’ in Thailand, the book includes papers by both health care and conservation experts.
Examines the problems of conserving medicinal plants, suggests an appropriate national conservation programme and gives advice on international collaboration.
Diagrams.
Dinosaur Stamps of the World,by Stuart Baldwin and Beverly Halstead.
Reviews and illustrates the dinosaur stamps that have been issued by 44 countries.
Includes the UK's recent commemorative series marking the one hundred and fiftieth anniversary of Sir Richard Owen's coining of the word dinosaur.
Colour and black and white illustrations.
The Development and Evolution of Butterfly Wing Patterns,by H Frederik Nijhout.
Explores the way genes control the processes that lead to pattern formation.
Colour and black and white photos; diagrams.
Ducks of the World,by Janet Kear.
Illustrated guide to every known species of duck.
Colour photos; maps.
Environment and Development in Latin America,edited by David Goodman and Michael Redclift.
Looks beyond destructive conventional development and discusses a new economy for Latin America based on sustainable management.
Diagrams.
Esau's Children,by Cliff Forshaw.
A collection of poems, many of which have been inspired by the natural world.
Available from most good bookshops or contact: Johnathon Clifford (0329 822218).
Gravel Pit Restoration for Wildlife,by John Andrews and David Kinsman.
Practical manual explaining how areas dug for sand and gravel can be transformed into wildlife havens with the addition of such features as trees, islands and marshy areas.
Black and white photos and illustrations.
Available from RSPB, Dept 29B, The Lodge, Sandy, Beds SG19 2DL .
The UK Green Growers Guide.
‘A comprehensive compilation of alternative products for gardeners, horticulturalists, farmers and foresters wanting to reduce their dependence on synthetic chemicals’.
Available from CAB International, Wallingford, Oxon OX10 8DE .
Green Your School,by John Howson and Sue Meagher.
Two loose-leaf packs from primary and secondary schools.
Based on the school environment, the packs aim to raise children's awareness of environmental issues.
Includes teachers' notes, and information sheets.
Available from FoE, Publications Despatch, 26–28 Underwood Street, London N1 7JQ .
A History of Nature Conservation in Britain,by David Evans.
Examines what has been achieved since the start of the movement 100 years ago.
Black and white photos.
Madam Dragonfly,by Jane Hayter-Hames.
Biography of the late Cynthia Longfield by her great-niece.
Describes her field trips in the tropics and how she became one of the world's leading dragonfly experts.
Black and white photos; maps.
Memories of Three Lives,by Guy Mountford.
Mountford's autobiography.
His ‘third life’ was after his retirement in 1961, as a WWF founder-member and conservationist.
Black and white photos.
Ocean World,written and composed by Peter Rose and Anne Conlon.
WWF in association with Josef Weinberger.
Vocal score: £7.50, booklet: £1.80, audio-cassette: £7.50.
Musical, for 9- to 16- year-olds, that follows a humpback whale and her calf on their hazardous northward journey from their breeding grounds.
Available (add 20% p&p) from WWF UK Education Distribution, PO Box 963, Slough SL2 3RS .
The Pocketbook of Animal Facts and Figures,by Barry Kew.
Packed with information on the animals we use for food, clothing, entertainment, transport or in scientific experiments.
The River Water Pack.
The Richmond Publishing Co.
Ltd.
‘A three year nationwide survey of the UK's rivers’, organised by WATCH, the junior section of the RSNC.
This first of three action packs includes an information booklet, a data recording form, a poster and tips on what equipment to use to test the health of your chosen river.
Available from the Richmond Publishing Co.
Ltd, PO Box 963, Slough SL2 3RS .
Underwater Guide to Maldives Fishes,by Peter Nahke and Peter Wirtz.
A bilingual (English/German) photographic guide.
Underwater colour photos of 139 species.
Available from Nagschmid Verlag, Rotebuehlstr 87 A, D-7000 Stuttgart 1, Germany (fax 49 761 612323).
When Humans Roamed the Earth,by Chris Madden.
Collection of the environmental cartoons.
The Wild Mushroom Cookbook,by Joy O I Spoczynska.
A guide to the more common edible fungi and ideas on how to cook them.
Line drawings.
Woodland Planting Guidelines for the Urban Forest.
Black Country Urban Forestry Unit.
Poster giving advice on planning, design, site preparation, planting, maintenance and management.
Available from (and cheques payable to) Arrow Direct Mail Ltd, PO Box 17, 406F Hockley Centre, Birmingham B18 6NE .
In this 1990 satellite image, pink and violet represents CFC damage to the Earth's protective ozone layer.
It is one of many graphic illustrations of the damage we are inflicting on the Earth to be found in Jonathon Porritt's Save the Earth (Dorling Kindersly, £14.99).
Chapters by eminent scientists show how existing environmental ‘time bombs’, which are set to cause maximum harm to future generations, can be defused.
The book includes short contributions from a wide range of influential people who care about the environment and, as a precursor to the 1992 Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro, an action pack showing what individuals can do to ‘help Save the Earth.’
Pteridophilia
A WORLD OF FERNS by Josephine Camus, Clive Jermy and Barry Thomas
In 1891, a group of fern enthusiasts met in the Lake District at the height of the ‘fern craze’.
Today, their legacy lives on as the British Pteridological Society (BPS), which this year celebrates its centenary.
Modern fern enthusiasts are no less dedicated — obsessed even — than their Victorian predecessors, but their numbers are small.
This book therefore sets out to win over a much wider audience to the beauty and importance of ferns and their allies.
Its success in this objective is primarily a result of the high quality of the photographs throughout, in itself a tribute to the membership of the BPS, which has donated the photographs to help promote an interest in ferns.
The images say so much, not just about the extraordinary grace of ferns, but about their place in the environment.
I liked particularly the photograph of a seasonal pool in India harbouring both quillwort and clover-leaf fern.
The pool is complete with three water buffaloes whose hooves help to open up the pools and to spread the fern spores — an ecological niche summed up in one telling image.
Superb photographs illustrate the remarkable life-cycles of ferns and their close relatives, and their extraordinary adaptability — for example, ferns growing in impenetrable mangrove swamps or between the boulders of the Mexican desert.
Another two images dramatically portray the venerability of ferns, showing how the sensitive fern of today perfectly matches up with its 40-million-year-old fossil ancestor.
As with the best coffee-table books, much can be gained simply by browsing through the photographs and their informative captions.
But that is to devalue the text, written with evident enthusiasm and delight without ever losing scientific veracity.
One chapter brings the complex biology of ferns vividly to life.
Another, on their economic importance, shows how male fern has been used as a cure for worms or as a love philtre, how clubmosses provide homoeopathic treatments for everything from hiccups to pre-menstrual tension, and how the mosquito fern plays a vital role in rice production.
But the strongest point of the book is how it puts ferns into their ecological context, with successive chapters guiding the reader through the main fern-rich habitats.
These are written with the precision that can only come from deep knowledge.
One paragraph on rainforest conservation, for example, could be quoted more widely — it says all that needs to be said in 15 eloquent lines.
Although not an identification field guide, appendices on further reading and fern societies should ensure that readers, inspired by the book, can develop their interest, and experience the joys of ‘pteridomania’ that fired the Victorian pioneers.
MICHAEL SCOTT (botanist, writer and broadcaster)
‘Superb photographs illustrate the remarkable life-cycles of ferns and their close relatives.’
This one shows the ‘cones’ of a common horsetail,Equisetum arvense .
Looking back for the future
The rise and fall of the third chimpanzee by Jared Diamond 
Jared Diamond wrote this book for his twin sons, when they will be old enough to read.
It is the book that every literate member of my family will get for Christmas, both for the fun of it, and so they can shock their humanist friends with some real news about human nature.
The ‘third chimpanzee’ is ourselves.
Our species differs from the common chimpanzee and the bonobo, or pygmy chimpanzee, in fewer than 2 per cent or our genes.
The main quibble about classing us in the same generic clade is that Homo sapiens was named before the chimpanzee genus,Pan ; in fact chimps should properly be called the other two kinds of human.
Diamond trades our heritage of apehood and our differences from other apes through sexual anatomy; the costs and benefits of polygamy, monogamy or adultery; and the evolution of prolonged parental love and care.
My family will squeak with outrage when he turns a biologist's eye on art and on drug abuse and suggests they are status indicators for age-old sexual selection.
His parallels are drawn not from primates, but from his own work on the advertising art of New Guinea bowerbirds, and the handicap of being a male bird of paradise with a three-foot tail.
The story becomes more profound when that same biologist's eye scrutinises our species' unique trait: language — its role in the Cro-Magnon ‘great leap forward,’ and the triumph of Indo- European languages.
He chronicles our present worldwide contact between human groups, the prevalence of genocide, and our destruction of the environment.
Again New Guinea provides rich examples.
Until this century there were more than 500 languages in New Guinea, murderous xenophobia between adjoining tribes, and 50,000 people in its Central Valley who learned only in 1934 that there was an outside world.
Diamond delights in the rollicking cadences of Pidgin English, New Guinea's lingua franca.
Like other new-minted pidgin languages, it gives insights into the universal linguistic blueprint we may inherit from our sapient ancestors of 40,000 years ago, at the beginning of modern times.
You could read this book as a tragedy.
Our continuing history of genocides could escalate to suicide of the species.
We have no general checks even on preserving our resource base.
History is full of environmental collapses which lead to the demise of societies, from Easter Island to rose-red Petra.
Diamond recognises that if, as adults, his sons go birdwatching in New Guinea, they will find the Central Highlands largely deforested, many wild species extinct, a multiplicity of human languages and customs forgotten.
Paradoxically, Diamond feels this loss of linguistic diversity may be our best hope.
Worldwide languages tell us that we are all human, not merely self-centred tribes.
Worldwide knowledge that we live on Island Earth could help us escape the fate of the Easter Islanders, who died in violence and cannibalism under the sightless gaze of their monumental statues, because they had cut down every tree.
This sweeping view of our species makes it clear that we must urgently learn from our past to plan for our future.
For species actually to act with a sense of past and future history would be a far more radical departure than the first land creature crawling out of the sea.
That is why we need history presented as it is in this book: not just as the brief flicker of time since the industrial revolution or since the invention of writing, but as the 40,000 years of modern thought and language, and the sweep of six million years since we were born as the third chimpanzee.
ALISON JOLLY (zoologist, Princeton University)
Events
Wildlife Photographer of the Year 1991 Exhibition.
Winning and commended entries on show until 5 May 1992 at the Natural History Museum, London; tel. 071 938 9123.
Photographs from the 1990 competition can be seen until 20 December at Nottingham Natural History Museum, Wollaton Hall, Nottingham.
Contact: Karen Barrowcliffe (0602 281130).
Also, until 22 December at the Royal Albert Memorial Museum, Queen Street, Exeter; tel. 0392 265858.
Wildlife Paintings.
An exhibition of the work of Mark Chester.
On show until 14 December at Gallery One Eleven, 111 High Street, Berkhamsted, Hertfordshire; tel. 0442 876333.
Animal Magic.
Exhibition of more than 80 paintings by wildlife artist Margaret Tracey.
On show until 23 December at the Quay Arts Centre, Sea Street, Newport, Isle of Wight; tel. 0983 864084.
Bird Identification.
A beginner's guide to identification techniques.
Talk and slide-show organised by the Avon Wildlife Trust.
4 December at the YHA, Prince Street, Bristol.
Contact: Sarah Townsend (0225 872853).
Tree-planting Day.
4 December.
A practical contribution to National Tree Week.
Meet at the Groundwork Trust Office, 48 High Street, Cleator Moor, Cumbria.
For details of this, and the Winter Tree Identification workshop on 6 December, contact Phil Bradley (0946 813677).
Antarctic Experience.
Illustrated talk on the birds, mammals and scenery of Antarctica.
5 December at the Wildfowl and Wetlands Centre, Castle Espie, Comber, County Down.
Contact: Jennifer Mitchell (0247 874146).
Raptors in Britain.
British Trust for Ornithology's annual conference.
Includes talks on hen harriers, peregrines, kestrels and barn owls, and a film on vultures presented by Dilys Breese from the BBC. 6–8 December at the Hayes Conference Centre, Swanwick, Derbyshire.
Contact: Sue Starling (0842 750050).
E H Shephard: Drawings for ‘The Wind in the Willows’.
To coincide with the revival of Alan Bennett's dramatic adaptation of The Wind in the Willows , the National Theatre is exhibiting the original illustrations from the book.
From 12 December-1 February 1992, at the Olivier Stalls Foyer, Royal National Theatre, South Bank, London; tel. 071 633 0880.
Week of Christmas Walks.
A series of guided walks in England and Wales, organised by the Ramblers' Association and the National Trust.
Some of the walks are suitable for people with disabilities.
From 26 December-1 January 1992.
For details, send an sae to: The National Trust, 36 Queen Anne's Gate, London SW1H 9AS.
Tree Dressing Day, 1 December.
A celebration of trees across England and Wales, organised by Common Ground, 45 Shelton Street, London.
For an events list, contact: Stephen Turner (071 379 3109).
Listings
BBC1
Country File:Sundays at 12.30pm; repeated Wednesday afternoons on BBC2.
No programmes on 22nd and 29th .
Environment-friendly countryside magazine series.
Opposites attract:Saturdays at 7.40am (series ends 28th ).
For younger viewers.
Derek Griffiths investigates animals and their habitats.
Lifesense:Mondays at 8.30pm.
The relationships between humans and animals, from the animals' point of view.
2nd ,Life and Soul:Religion from the animal perspective.
9th ,Life on Man:The creatures that live off our bodies.
16th (last in series),Life in the Balance:How removed are we from the natural world?
Zebra in Your Stable: Christmas-week special (see Radio Times for details).
Desmond Morris interprets the behaviour of domesticated horses, and reveals it as being much the same as their wild ancestors.
SCOTLAND
Landward:Sundays at 12.30pm.
Farming and environment issues.
BBC 2
The Victorian Flower Garden:Thursdays at 8pm; repeated Tuesdays at 5.30pm (series ends 19th ).
Harry Dodson demonstrates the skills of a Victorian head gardener.
The Natural World:Sundays at 7.15pm. 1st ,Arctic Wanderers:The long migration of Alaska's ‘porcupine’ caribou.
8th ,The Wonderful World of Dung:Tony Robinson investigates nature's recycling system.
15th ,Monkeys on the Edge:What can be done to save the rare primates of Brazil's Atlantic Forest?
Nature:Mondays at 8pm. 2nd ,Greenpeace:Has ‘green fatigue’ set in, and is this the fault of the message or the messenger?9th ,Down All the Way:More than one billion dollars is being spent developing the Alps for the coming Winter Olympics, but at what cost to the environment?16th ,(last in series): In Bangladesh, the lives of thousands of children are blighted by iodine deficiency.
Secret Nature of Britain (rep): Mondays at 6pm.
West Country wildlife.
2nd ,Beyond the Barbed Wire:Ministry of Defence land as unofficial nature reserve.
9th ,Wild Game:The deer and other animals of Powderham Castle.
Cats:Fridays at 8.30pm.
The ‘social’ history of the domestic cat.
6th ,The Aristocats:The long-haired Angora, the Siamese and the Japanese bobtail. 13th (last in series)Cat and Supercat:Cat psychologists and ‘designer breeding’.
Environments (OU, rep): Saturdays at 9.50am. 7th ,Danish Energy .
Beasts of the Field (rep).
Tuesday 10th at 4.30pm.
Desmond Morris interprets the behaviour of farm animals.
Dusk — The Badger:Christmas-week special (see Radio Times for details).
Animal drama featuring a year in the life of a male badger.
ITV
Animal Country:Sundays at 6pm, Grampian (4pm), Yorkshire (5.30pm), Ulster (12.30pm), Granada (Mondays at 5.10pm).
Desmond Morris and Sarah Kennedy tour Britain investigating our relationships with animals, wild and domestic.
Go Wild!
Thursdays at 4.45pm.
Conservation news and views, plus reports on positive action taken by children to improve their environment.
Presented by Chris Packham and ‘Fungus the Bogeyman’.
Voyager — The world of National Geographic:Thursdays at 7.30pm, except Central and Scottish Television (Tuesdays at 7.30pm) and Granada (Fridays at 5.10pm).
NB: Scottish Television is running these programmes two weeks behind.
5th ,Across the Jungle Divide:Jon Anderson retraces the steps of the sixteenth-century Spanish explorer Vasco Nunez de Balboa, through the jungles of Panama.
Wot?
No Meat!
Fridays at 11am, shown as part of This Morning.
6th:Substitutes for meat.
13th:A dating agency for vegetarians.
CHANNEL 4
Equinox:Sundays at 7pm. 8th ,Dead Men Talk:New techniques for dating fossils have cast doubt on existing theories of human evolution.
22nd ,Unravelling the Universe:Are the building ‘blocks’ of nature made up of vibrating ‘strings’?
Cutting Edge:Mondays at 9pm. 9th ,Planning:Conservation v development — does North Cornwall really need new leisure facilities?
RADIO 4
The Natural History Programme:Fridays at 11.30am; repeated Sundays at 9pm.
No programme on the 27th .
News and views, presented by Jessica Holm.
Science Now:Saturdays at 4.30pm; repeated Tuesdays at 8pm.
A review of discoveries and developments.
The Mating Game:Mondays at 10am.
Series starts 16th .
Lionel Kelleway presents this new natural history ‘role-play’ quiz.
Hunting the Elephant Bird:Tuesday the 17th at 10am.
Christina Dodwell in search of Madagascar's semi-mythical bird.
WORLD SERVICE RADIO
Global Concerns:Thursdays at 10.05pm; repeated Fridays at 1.45am and 9.15am.
Environmental magazine series.
SCHOOLS PROGRAMMES
RADIO 5
See for Yourself (age 5 to 7): Tuesdays at 9am; repeated Wednesdays on Radio 3 at 1am. 3rd ,Where We Live — Saving the rainforest.
These listings are correct when we go to press, but schedule changes may subsequently occur.
You are advised to check details with Radio Times.
What is life for the 10,000 black rats living in Deshnok temple?
Find out in Life and Soul on the 2nd, in BBC1's Lifesense series.
Cats looks at ‘good breeding’ in The Aristocats , Friday the 6th on BBC2.
Horse behaviour is the latest subject to be given the Desmond Morris treatment.
Watch the Christmas-week special,Zebra in Your Stable , on BBC1.
Just what is our relationship with the Neanderthals? asks Equinox , in Dead Men Talk , Sunday the 8th on C4.
IT'S YOUR TURN
Auto-suggestions
Chris Baines, in his excellent report on the tyranny of the car (October), omitted to mention one obvious solution: to reduce the speed limits to 60mph on motorways, 45mph on open roads and 25mph in built-up areas.
Also, if bus stations were brought up to the standards, with pleasant lounge cafés, attendants to look after luggage and protection for passengers from fumes and the weather, then even the maniacal travelling executive might be tempted to use public transport.
I suggest that we are becoming inexorably more impatient, intolerant and indolent in the race from A to B, and that there is an all-pervasive belief that the world owes each person an ever more easy and wealthy life.
As long as the occasion of buying one's first car is regarded as one of life's momentous landmarks there can be little hope.
Indeed, attempts to reshape the opinions and behaviour of today's toe-happy adults are plainly futile.
But at least the young have education on their side.
With them resides our only genuine hope of frustrating this cancerous growth.
It is all well and good for Chris Baines to talk of office workers who can work at home and use the phone, or executives making better use of their travel time and less use of their cars.
There are, however, many of use who can't be so flexible.
As a nursing assistant working 12-hour night shifts, and given the inadequacies of the public transport system, I have no option but to use a car, which is also, incidentally, cheaper.
I share my car with my sister's family — thus keeping one car off the road.
I am not in total disagreement with Chris Baines, but a great many of use have not choice in where and when we work, or how we travel there.
Traffic planners are liable to forget the needs of disabled people in their proposals for controlling cars.
Many disabled people would lead very limited lives without their cars.
Improved bus services do not eliminate the difficulties of getting to and from bus stops and carrying shopping home.
Chris Baines speaks of ‘switching to the train,’ but stations have endless awkward steps, long platforms and poor seating for people waiting.
By all means let us find ways of limiting the use of cars, but in truth, is the real cause of our difficulties not the dramatic rise in numbers of people in this and other countries over the past 70 years?
Pollution and the destruction of resources are the result of the demands of this increased population.
The pall of the wild
During a recent holiday in Kalimantan (Indonesian Borneo), proposed one-night stay in Pontianak on the west coast degenerated into a forced stop of eight days, due to the closure of the airport because of smoke pollution.
We were told that a previously logged area was burning, the humus-rich soil being deliberately set alight to free the nutrients in the soil for subsequent cultivation, and that the blaze was the size of Singapore.
We were also told that the fire was started in June, and was not expected to be extinguished until the start of the rains, normally in October.
We eventually managed to fly out of the city under a thick cloud of smoke through which the sun was unable to penetrate, and which was present from Sarawak to Kuala Lumpur and Singapore.
The most frightening part of the entire experience was that although people we spoke to in East and West Malaysia and Singapore were concerned about and disgusted by the conditions caused by the fire, locals in Kalimantan complacently accepted the smoke problems as a regular annual occurrence.
Forest fires are also known to be raging in Sumatra, western Java and southern Sulawesi.
Ed 
A cloud on the horizon
I have recently seen reports that an ivory marketing board is to be set up in Gaborone, Botswana.
I share the concerns of eminent conservationists that international opposition to the ivory trade may crumble in the face of the heavy and insidious pressure being exerted by Zimbabwe and its allies against the continuation of the total ban to be proposed in March 1992.
An official trade in ivory can never be monitored successfully, and it will open up the illegal trade once again, leading to more poaching to satisfy those needs.
It should also be remembered that during the 14 years that the African elephant was listed on Appendix II, some 700,000 elephants were slaughtered.
Caledon's other woods
I'm greatly encouraged by the recent upsurge of interest in what remains of the Caledonian pine forest (‘Great Wood of Caledon’ September).
There is a danger though, that the ancient deciduous woodlands, which fall outside the shaded areas on the maps depicting past and present extents of the wood of Caledon, may be forgotten.
All over the northern Highlands are shreds of birch and hazel woodland which are perceptibly decaying under grazing pressure from under-culled red deer and unenclosed sheep.
In these outposts of feudalism there is always enough money to put deer- fencing around plantations of alien conifers while the real forests are considered worthless.
The structure of land ownership in the Highlands that allowed the infamous Clearances, and the extractive economy that was subsequently imposed on the area, are still largely in place today, and have reduced it to semi-desert.
The forests are dwindling, thousands of deer starve to death every winter, and those that survive to be shot by rich outsiders for the profit of absentee landlords are about half the size of their European cousins.
If we are to do better than just preserving a few isolated museum forests, then major land reform is essential.
Coming soon
FROM THE HORSES MOUTH Lucy Rees on the language of Equus.
THE COMPLETE SETT: ALL ABOUT BADGERS Your questions answered by Simon King.
WAR AND PEACE IN THE LAND OF APES Jungle discoveries about chimpanzee society.
DIARY OF A MINK-WATCHER The cameraman's revelations.
SCOTTISH REFLECTIONS Richard Mabey on the future of Britain's wildest places.
Badger-watch Contest: Win a wild night out that you'll never forget
The January issue is published on 18 December 
Tales from the bush
This month's front-lines-of-natural-history dispatch comes from the last stop before the North Pole — Norway's Svalbard island, where assistant producer Amanda Barrett and cameraman Owen Newman — having arrived to shoot a film about arctic foxes — found themselves alone in a cabin outpost many miles across sea, tundra and ice from the nearest point of civilisation.
The first night, there was a knock on the door.
It was night, and as the wind gusted down the iron chimney pipe, a shower of metal flakes spattered on to the wooden floor.
The windows rattled, the walls shook, and the rain pounded on the roof.
Outside, we could hear the sea crashing on the shingle.
This was our second trip to the island of Svalbard, high in the Arctic Circle, and we were battened down in Camp Bell — a small and sturdy hut owned by the Norwegian government.
Miles away from any other human habitation, it sat defiantly on the seashore facing the Arctic Ocean.
Behind it were towering cliffs and wide stretches of boggy tundra broken up by clumps of grey rocks covered in black, curly lichen.
Just a few hours earlier, we had arrived in real twentieth-century style.
Boxes and boxes of very expensive camera equipment and food supplies had been unloaded from a large helicopter in quiet astonishment by the Norwegian crew before they had abandoned us in a flurry of gravel.
Our mission?
To film arctic foxes facing up to the rigours of approaching winter.
We were not, however destined to be alone for long.
After just a few hours sleep, I half awoke to a bang on the window.
Keeping my eyes shut, I tried to ignore the interruption.
But the noise resumed, fierce and urgent.
It was Owen who bravely opened the door to find a very wet and windblown elderly French couple on the doorstep.
Over a cup of tea, much talking ensued on their part, and clutching snatches of half-remembered school French, we eventually worked out the reason for their very unlikely visit.
They were stranded, and wanted to use our radio to get a helicopter to airlift them out.
It was too early in the morning to get a reply from the transport company, and so we continued our ‘chat’.
We learned that they were on their summer holidays, taking their kayak round the outer reaches of the Arctic.
They had coped with the sea off Greenland and Canada, but Svalbard's rough waters had defeated them.
We also leaned that Christian, the husband, was a cake-maker, and that Greenland had a very good cake shop.
Promising to return in the evening, they at last donned bright wet-weather clothes and disappeared into the greyness of the early morning, leaving us — mentally exhausted by our struggles with the French language — to begin the serious work of progressing with the arctic fox film.
In the summer, the cliffs provide nesting ledges for millions of kittiwakes, little auks and Brunwich's guillemots.
On the lower, boulder-strewn slopes, the little auks lay their eggs; higher up are the sheer rock faces where the guillemots and kittiwakes nest.
Their eggs and chicks provide food for the foxes, and over the summer months, their droppings fertilise the flat ground below, encouraging a spongy growth of grass and moss and providing rich grazing for reindeer — a neat cycle of life.
As autumn arrives, the birds migrate south, leaving the foxes to scavenge from the bird and reindeer carcasses and anything that might be washed up on the shore.
For the next five weeks, our world would consist of these cliffs, the tundra below and the seashore, an area that took us about five hours to walk around.
On that first day we set off with high hopes of finding out what the foxes were doing and to work out where to concentrate our filming efforts.
But after an hour or so of trudging into the stiff wind, a slight feeling of despair crept over me.
The sky was grey, and mist clung to the tops of the cliffs.
Being late-August, most of the birds had already flown south, though some pairs of kittiwakes remained, crammed together high up on tiny ledges.
Two hours later, my foreboding proved right: we saw reindeer, as well as some glaucous gulls and eiders, but not a single fox showed itself.
We sat down rather disconsolately on a rock to eat a couple of fun-sized Mars bars while pondering out next move.
It was then that we spotted something white moving high up on the cliffs, under a colony of kittiwakes — our first fox.
After peering through our binoculars, we decided it was on its way to the lowest ledges to scavenge from the roosting sites.
It is one thing climbing up a steep and slippery slope with no weight on your back, and altogether a different thing climbing up with 40kg of camera equipment.
A load of camera gear assumes a life of its own, swinging round at awkward moments, trying to catch you off balance and topple you over the edge.
But we were employed by the BBC to succeed, and so with barely perceptible hesitation we began the ascent.
Unfortunately, Owen was much fitter than me, and he soon disappeared, leaving me with only my gasps and puffs for company.
Up and up, past reindeer antlers coloured pale rose by a gentle bloom of lichen; past a small clump of yellow alpine poppies blowing in the wind; past bits and pieces of long-dead birds.
Then, finally, edging nervously round a bluff of rock, I found Owen setting up his camera on a small, gently shelving piece of grass level with the foot of the colony.
The fox was nowhere to be seen.
I sat down and tried to regain some sense of equilibrium.
Gazing down below me, I suddenly realised that a huge curtain of mist and rain has swept across the water and was fast obscuring the tundra below.
Filming was off.
Repacking the camera gear, we decided to abandon it to the elements in orange survival bags, and bracing ourselves, we retreated down the steep and slippery slope.
As we started the long walk back across the tundra to Camp Bell, we decided that there was nothing for it but to establish a base camp at the foot of the cliffs.
After seven days of climbing up and down the cliff, we did manage to film the fox, amid thick flurries of snow, as it nosed among the nesting ledges, picking up leftovers — a sequence which will last about two minutes on the screen and took some 56 hours to film.
On several days we filmed, on others we didn't.
Eventually, and despite the onset of winter weather, we managed to get most of the sequences we wanted, including foxes scavenging on long, lonely stretches of shingle, male foxes pacing out and marking their territorial boundaries, foxes fighting, and cubs in search of their own territories.
This left up to return to England heavily laden with film and the potential of three more trips next year to finish the story.