

Editorial
No longer‘hidden from history’ women artists and art historians have, over the past decade, been grappling with the thorny question of the feminine aesthetic.
From the unearthing of traditional feminine skills like sewing to works that emphasise the everyday, the domestic existence of women, the debate about gender specific notions of culture continues.
Gender, of course, doesn't give us all the clues.
Individual, social and historical contexts are also key.
Whether or not there is such an aesthetic, there are certainly concerns and issues that unite the new generation of women artists: a new symbolism of the body is one such issue which comes across in several articles in this issue of Women's Art Magazine.
Young women artists today are beginning to see themselves as having a legacy, a past, a history.
The extraordinary collection of 20th century art that opens this month to the public at New Hall, Cambridge gives us all a chance to see how rich this history is and much of what we have been missing.
But over the summer women have been more visible than ever.
It is not the West End galleries however who have been opening their doors to the new generation.
Through the back door — via the Opens, the BT New Contemporaries — women are moving in.
It's still rare to find women artists making it to the top.
The major galleries have few if any on their books and, as the recession deepens, and dealers like Maureen Paley are forced out of the West End, doors begin to close again for women.
Selling direct to the public via Opens is innovative, a financial stop-gap, but the visibility of artists is inextricably bound up with the gallery system.
Galleries are much more than simple exhibition spaces.
They have real power to influence both the market and opinion.
Whilst a younger generation of women artists are getting certain recognition, the artists who have laid the foundation for our young contemporaries should not be erased from memory.
If Alison Wilding wins the Turner Prize this autumn it will be another first for a woman.
Since its inception in 19894, women have made it to the shortlist, but no further.
Both Gillian Ayres and Bridget Riley have now been passed by Turner's Prize.
We have no other prizes in the visual arts of the same standing, no way of awarding those over 50.
The Turner Prize is therefore one of the few ways we have of acknowledging the contribution the visual arts play in our culture.
Its hard to turn your back on that.
Ladbrokes may not be placing bets on Alison Wilding yet, but at WASL we are.
Turner's Gameplan
Maureen Paley, founder of Interim Art, moved into the West End a year ago only to return to the East End earlier this summer as a result of the recession.
A strong supporter and patron of new art, Paley has managed to bridge the gap between the fringe and the centre of the art world.
Her feminism together with her fervent belief in promoting the work of good women artists, as associated her, in the minds of many, with a new generation of women artists.
Here she talks to Sally Townsend about the Turner Prize, to be announced on 24 November and transmitted from the Tate courtesy of Channel 4
Maureen Paley
Shortlist for Turner Prize 1992 omitted
Does the shortlists for this year's Turner Prize — Grenville Davey, Damien Hirst, David Tremlett and Alison Wilding — present any surprises?
In some ways it's a very logical list.
One of the criticisms of the list last year was that it was weighted too heavily towards a younger generation, a generation that overall had not really accomplished very much.
Because of this, it was felt, it presented Anish Kapoor in a position of such seniority alongside all the other three that if he hadn't won it would have been more embarrassing that if he did.
Last year was the first real attempt to recognise the new energy around in the visual arts.
As a result of this it failed to represent artists who, over a long period, deserved recognition.
This year's shortlist seems to have taken account of this problem.
It seems logical.
The real problem, of course, is that with only one prize in the art world it is so difficult to select only four artists who have made a major contribution over a year.
We clearly need more prizes, more acknowledgement.
If you look at the Booker Prize for literature or the film awards, they rarely tell you much about the state of literature or film production.
There is often a hidden agenda operating, an agenda that tells the story of the publicity machine behind culture or the media profile of the individuals being considered.
How would you ‘read’ the shortlist?
I have always looked at the shortlist very much in terms of the dealer presence.
It is clear that, in the past, artists who work independently of the West End galleries have not been taken up in the same way as those under the big dealers.
This year's list changes all that.
Alison Wilding is bound in the direction of Karen Schubert, who felt, last year, that he had come very close to having an artist — Rachel Whiteread — win the award.
Grenville Davey is acknowledging Lisson's presence.
Damien Hirst is the first emergence of the new wave with Jay Jopling as his agent, a new player in the game.
And with David Tremlett, he's represented by Hester van Royen, who now shows works on her own (she was with Waddington).
So two private dealers are gaining recognition through their artists.
What we are seeing them is an acknowledgement that the gallery system as we knew it early in the eighties, has really changed.
Up until now it's been a duet between Anthony d'Offay and Lisson galleries to win the prize.
They have taken turns — almost exclusively — since the founding of the Turner Prize in 1984.
Given the amount of time that Karsten Schubert has been in business and given the new wave of gallery/dealers, this year is going to be the year to break with a much more open policy towards new art, are being seen as central to the contemporary art scene.
You obviously believe that the dealers play an important part in determining the short list.
How do they do this?
It's a chicken and egg situation really.
In Alison Wilding's case, for example, Richard Salmon, Karsten Schubert's backer, actually supported her strongly prior to Karsten playing a role.
It is now realised that by giving an artist the right kind of support, a dealer can increase their visibility enormously.
I don't think it's entirely a question of direct pressure on the part of the dealers.
So public relations wins the day?
Yes.
But if you take the case of Damien Hirst, Jay Jopling is there to feed the momentum which Damien established on his own.
Grenville Davey is another case in point with Lisson pushing him as part of a lineage of artists.
By giving him a place in contemporary history going back to Tony Cragg, Anish Kapoor, Richard Deacon, the dealer enhances his credibility.
In this way, he inherits a legacy which the Tate and others can interpret.
This is what dealers always try to do and this is precisely where women artists so often fall down.
Have we now reached the stage where there is a recognised body of work produced over the 1980s by women artists?
Do we have a recent past, a legacy?
To some extent, but one of the problems is that women of an earlier generation have had to claw their way through the art world in order that a younger generation of women artists today — a generation which is almost gender blind — should have an easier time.
Have you ever lobbied for a woman to win the prize?
No.
I have supported Helen Chadwick.
I was enthusiastic about Rachel Whiteread last year and am equally enthusiastic about Alison Wilding this year.
But the reality is that 99% of artists working in London will not get anywhere near the shortlist.
You have to be both token woman and superwoman to come anywhere  near a shortlist that disenfranchises most of the male population.
What has been overlooked in this debate is that, whilst Gilbert & George or Howard Hodgkin won the prize in the past, neither Bridget Riley or Gillian Ayres for example, will be looked at now as potential winners.
The new generation of women will do better but that's not the full answer.
We shouldn't accept the analysis of the token woman.
But it is quite extraordinary that no woman has won the prize since it's inception.
Alison Wilding
Last year's shortlist with Fiona Rae and Rachel Whiteread, did increase the visibility of women.
But, again, it's the same young generation of women making it this far.
When a new consciousness is brought about it shouldn't bring about historical amnesia as it often does.
In this way the recent history of women artists is eclipsed.
But if we look closely at two of the top galleries — d'Offay and Lisson — you can just see how women have been consistently overlooked by them.
D'Offay has no women artists on his books.
None, that is, who are living, because he did show Gwen John.
Death has a habit of making women acceptable.
Lisson only has two women on his books, although he has shown women in the past.
This is of course, symptomatic of the dealers worldwide but somehow the club here in Britain is so much smaller.
So if we are talking about a woman winning the Turner Prize against this background, the possibilities are very limited.
Alison is an artist who has made an important contribution over a long period
Alison Wilding ‘Bare’, 1989/90 brass, copper tube, and copper braid 51″×55.5″×52.5″
Do you think women artists are drawn to you as a dealer because of your sex?
No.
I am seen to have an open attitude to women but all kinds of power relations often preclude women coming to me.
Often women artists prefer to be dealt with by a man.
I have though had a good ratio of women to men shown in the gallery but I don't think that is what draws women to me.
It is much more to do with the work itself.
If you were selecting for this year's prize who would you put forward?
I am very conscious of what I would not be putting forward but I would include Rachel Whiteread for her contribution to Documenta: I'm watching Anya Gallachio who has just shown at the ICA, and I would include Angela Bulloch who has been understood abroad more than here.
Then I would want to find someone more senior like Hannah Collins or Alison Wilding or Susan Hiller or Helen Chadwick.
(Men find that they are able to be listed over and over again but that hasn't been the experience of Helen Chadwick.)
There is so much strong work around but in many cases the young artists will come up eventually.
The 1980s were crucial in diversifying the art market.
We do now have alternatives, new possibilities.
But the lack of this diversification in the past has rendered a number of artists completely impotent.
That is where the power of the edge, the fringe, shouldn't be underestimated: artists have had to take on a self-sufficient approach which I applaud.
Today in Britain there is no broad gallery base and, in the end, an artist cannot rely on one person's taste, that of the dealer.
Do you go along with the argument that the Turner Prize helps to stimulate public interest in the arts, especially now that it is televised?
I'm not convinced by that.
The media tend to be very short-sighted when dealing with the arts.
Of course it is good to see artists at work and artists discussing their work on TV, but so many of the programmes have been disappointing.
TV wants sound bites buzz words.
It's just too simple.
It's the ugly face of accessibility I'm afraid.
The intensity of the moment is always in place on TV and what gets into the media is going to be the thing in people's minds.
Ladbrokes haven't started the betting yet.
If you were a betting person, who would you put your money on?
It's neck and neck between Alison Wilding and Damien Hirst and, in my mind, that sets up something between Karsten Schubert and Jay Jopling.
Damien, the wild card, has had a very visible year whilst Alison is an artist who has made an important contribution over a long period.
But it is time for a woman: Alison is the choice.
The work of the shortlisted artists will be on show at the Tate between 4–29 November.
Making it Like a Woman
New Hall, Cambridge, will soon be opening its doors to reveal an extraordinary collection of contemporary women's art.
Donated by the artists themselves, Marina Warner unearths our fertile past
In The Book of the City of Ladies, the historian and poet Christine de Pizan defended the cause of female education against fathers, husbands, and brothers who considered that an ignorant woman was a good woman.
Christine de Pizan was born in 1365 and wrote The Book of the City of Ladies in 1405; the battle for women's right to equal education took a long time to win.
Colleagues such as New Hall, founded in 1954, established comparatively recently a female presence in the universities, which is now taken for granted.
As an undergraduate myself in the late sixties, I met two famous pioneer sisters, the Misses Deneke.
In their eighties, they were still living in Norham Gardens, the North Oxford avenue that leads to Lady Margaret Hall, the women's college where they had studied and taught; they had been among the first women students to be allowed officially to take a degree, though woman sat the examinations in order to make the point after the college's foundation in 1878.
The proportion of women in higher education has risen sharply in recent decades — one of the most visible gains in the egalitarian struggle — although in practice young female school-leavers are still less qualified than their male counterparts (and this signifies, in this country, a truly parlous state of readiness for adult occupations); while in the teaching profession itself, women have yet to achieve anything like parity at the higher levels, as college heads, directors of departments and university professors.
The weather in the streets is clearing, but Christine de Pizan would not find herself entirely disorientated.
In her polemical riposte to those scholars and clerics and poets of her time who resisted women's advancement in letters or other learning, Pizan flourishes a dramatic catalogue of female high achievers and heroines, from Judith to Circe.
Among them, she included the daughter of a law professor in Bologna, a certain Novella, who had been taught by her father, ‘not quite sixty years ago’, because he disagreed with his contemporaries prejudice against women's education.
Pizan writes: ‘When he was occupied by some task and not at leisure to present his lectures to his students, he would send Novella, his daughter, in his place to lecture to the students from his chair.’
1
Substituting for the father, Novella exemplifies a certain them in women's history which can illuminate changing attitudes to the female production of art.
Christine de Pizan continues: ‘to prevent her beauty from distracting the concentration of her audience, she had a little curtain drawn in front of her.’
2 Novella wasn't only drawing a veil over her beauty, but over her femaleness, synonymous — in the descendance of Eve — with seductiveness; and, even more fatally, with folly.
Christine de Pizan herself would be veiled: when her Book of the Feats of Arms and Chivalry appeared in English in 1448; her name was erased and the text changed to imply the author was a man.
A study on the conventions of medieval warfare, from the pen of a woman, would not have commanded the same confidence.
Women as authors aren't unveiled any longer; this has been one of the marked developments of the last decade.
The curtains have been drawn  aside to reveal the female subject as she speaks, writes, paints — making and doing, in the original Greek sense of poiein, from which we derive ‘poet’.
In the field of the visual arts, pioneer historians like Germaine Greer shouldered, Sisyphus-like, the great burden of misattribution, neglect, theft and bias, in The Obstacle Race of 1989, and heroically retrieved individual figures like Artemisia Gentileschi and Elisabetta Sirani as proper subjects of critical appraisal.
Landmark exhibitions, like the one held in Los Angeles in 19763, revealed the extent of women's practice, the numbers of forgotten artists, many of them wives, sisters, daughters, mothers — who, like Novella, had disappeared behind the veil of a father/son's name.
The problem was no longer, as Linda Nochlin had famously asked, ‘Why are there no great women artists?’
There were, there are: they have simply been hidden from history.
This approach, which rakes the shadows to find great, forgotten ghosts, has however faded in more recent years, and a different line of argument has developed.
On the one hand, the new art history's commitment to the conditions in which art is produced has influenced a strong interest in women artists' different social and economic position; and on the other, the history of psychology, represented above all by Michael Foucault's studies of sexuality, has fostered a keen awareness, among practitioners as well as critics, that cultural symbolism informs the language of social exchange beyond material, that it expresses sand creates shared ideas about femaleness, about sexual difference; furthermore, these ideas are constantly in flux.
The artist who speaks, works, paints behind the curtain cannot be named and labelled and authenticated — pinned down — as tidily as the academic art historian, identifying a drawing, would believe.
Draw aside one veil to see the woman, to hear her name, but she ‘ll still be wrapped — enmeshed — in history, both personal and remote, and in social context, both immediate and distant, which makes her subjectivity relative, her identity contingent.
Paula Rego ‘The Encampment’, 1989 etching and aquatint 56cm×76cm
the conventional, derogatory association of the female sex with nature and flesh have been reversed, and become instead a newfoundland
This new consciousness of women's different material conditions has inspired powerful vindications of traditional female skills: needlework, ceramics, flower-painting, sewing.
In the seventies and eighties, artists like Rose Garrard combined homages to women artists, whose works she encrypted in her own, with the use of fabrics, dresses, and textiles in tribute to the quotidian boundaries on women's creativity.
Attempts to develop a peinture feminine, on the lines of the écriture feminine proposed by Hélène Cixous (whose rhapsodic feminism has had much greater impact on the Aglophone world than on her own French audience), led to works which sought to represent the very evanescence, immateriality, and ordinariness of women's existential condition and past works, as in Bobby Baker's performance art, in which she makes cakes or reproduces her daily kitchen routines, or, Susan Hiller's cool, barometrically precise account of her own pregnancy, in the graphic work, ‘Ten Months’.
Hiller, who did some of her early studies in anthropology, adapted a crypto-scientific attitude to create what is in effect a modernist celebration of female fertility.
In so doing, she encapsulates the polarity that pulls female artists today: from one magnetic field, the radical difference of the female body tugs at artists' imaginations, while from the opposite pole, the crucial determining role of material and cultural circumstances cancels that radical difference in its foundations and essence and introduces fluctuating criteria.
At one pole, femaleness is determinate, identifiable, clear, marked, and visible (a natural category); at the other, femininity is indeterminate, labile, inspissated, and fugitive (a cultural artefact).
The writings of French feminists, rehearsing this argument about the limits of biology and the beginnings of culture, have been inspirational: not only Cixous, with her rallying cries to women to assert their ‘otherness’ but also Luce Irigaray.
Rebecca Scott, for instance, a young artist who explores the associative and feminine-identified eroticism of flowers in big, richly coloured, sensuous canvasses, came across Irigaray's work by chance recently and found that in its characterisation of female interiority, groundedness, concealed sexuality and dispersed sense perceptions, it spoke directly to her and her work.
Yet this acknowledgement of perennial and fundamental female difference runs counter to the precept — the knowledge — that women's inequality results from disparities before the law and opportunity.
This conflict ends in theoretical impasse.
But it has proved an impasse of exceptionally fertile ground, like the oscillating binary system of a computer, engendering infinite programmes and forms.
When Novella — whose name so aptly means new — discloses herself, we find her looking into a mirror where she is refracted and multiplied, clustered and polymorphous, beheld and beholding in infinite variety.
Recently, I was one of three selectors of the annual New Contemporaries show, chosen from the submissions of art students and recent graduates.4 The works are entered anonymously, and after looking at more than 2,000 images, we arrived at an exhibition of 22 artists — of whom four were men.
My other two colleagues on the selection panel were male: the painter and film-maker Derek Jarman and the critic Guy Brett.
The result dramatically inverts the usual male-female ratio in mixed exhibitions; needless to say, it was unintentional.
What was striking was that the women artists were reshaping an inherited iconographic language and that it had become theirs to stake out as their own: the language of the body.
This is not to say the women artists chosen were only figurative painters — they were in the minority; but many were re-interpreting the system of symbols.
Iconographically, they were reshaping the inherited mythological lexicon, willing changed meanings onto old images, as Maud Sulter has done, in her photographic and textual pieces, like ‘Zabat’ and ‘Hysteria’, which take possession of past fantasies about muses and madwomen, about Vénus Noires and exotic blackness and immemorial whiteness, and fiercely expose the legacy of such cultural values.
Procedurally, in their actual artistic practice, many of these artists have also seized the spurned materiality of the body and introduced it into their work.
The negative value attached to bodily traces, processes, imprints, and the conventional, derogatory association of the female sex with nature and flesh have been reversed, and become instead a newfoundland, a reservoir, a resource.
Ewa Kuryluk, in her study of female creativity, Veronica and Her Cloth, focusses on the saint's veil as a key symbol of the act of representation: she created the vera icon or true image of Christ's face, when she wiped his face and it was miraculously printed on the cloth in blood, sweat and tears.5 The body of art is born of the body itself, and women have a special relation to the fecundity, through their ascribed — and actual — part in the reproductive cycle.
In the eighties, Helen Chadwick's baroque and phantasmagoric vanitas installations, like of ‘Of Mutability’, affirmed in Britain the possibility of celebrating the female body's metaphorical connections with effluvia, fertility, decomposition, cyclicity and transition.
The New Contemporaries exhibitors continued to plot this constellation, using mixed media primarily associated with mutability, with process: substances like water or pastry, hair or wax, sand and vegetables, oil and light and cloth, which imply change over time.
The natural values of such materials were used, in the work of some of the artists, to stir memories of particular female tasks or events: the death of Emily Wilding, the suffragette, is evoked by Josephine  Thom by a rose wreath made of lace and underwear, on a turf sod scored by the hoof marks of the horse that killed her.
The New Hall collection, though primarily painted works made for hanging, extends these preoccupations: Laura Godfrey-Isaacs's ‘Fleshy Face’ meditates on the feminine-coded colour pink with mordant hyperbole; Judith Cowan's ‘Skin and Blister’(rhyming slang for ‘sister’) transforms a common saucepan into an authoritative sculptural form; Maggi Hambling takes a shocking newspaper image of a Gulf woman in a chador wielding a bazooka and suffuses it again with blooming pink, the garish, violated hue of feminine cosiness.
Maggi Hambling ‘Gulf Women Prepare for War’, 1986–87 Oil on canvas 48″×57″
Memory, the dynamic of past consciousness, can translate into resistance in order to shape a new time to come.
Traces, records, vestiges of female experience can appear nostalgic in character; but their witness to a common past is often challenged by present irony and by different, contrary desires to erase such relics or reshape the ground in which they were originally made.
Hambling's painting conveys tragic female heroism as well as fury against the nexus of constraints on her subject's life (as I see it).
Mary Kelly has long contested, with cerebral acerbity, current tropes of femininity, from handbags to nappies; she too, has deeply influenced the present generation of women artists.
Her work in the refectory of New Hall was brought before the formation of the collection, as a result of her residency at the college and it could be said to have struck a characteristic note of stringent inquiry for the collection.
This note is picked up and amplified by Alexis Hunter's donations, the wry painting ‘Fear of the Intellectual Wife’ and the photoseries, ‘Approach to Fear XI — Effeminacy Productive Action’.
The images of jewelled and manicured hands working with machine parts challenges presuppositions about ‘feminine’ handiwork, and by extension comments on the supposed limits of women's art itself.
It would be misleading to corrall all the donated works into feminist questioning of gendered identity; one of the freedoms women have won for themselves over the last 20 years has been precisely those freedoms from conventional definition by gender.
Much of the women's art takes the given map and redrafts it.
Deanne Petherbridge's explosive imaginary architectonics emanate from this artist's acute critical investigations into drawing as a genre and its media; she brought her awareness of the new art history and gender studies to bear on a recent selection of works in pencil, charcoal, pen and ink, etc for a touring exhibition.
The concluding section of the show, ‘The Point of Analysis’, contained drawings by Cézanne, Bomberg, and Victor Newsome which were predominantly concerned with rigorous dissection of form.
However, as Petherbridge points out: ‘It is a common misconception that analytical procedures  are antipathetic to feeling’ She could have continued, ‘and that women are incapable of the former, but apt to the latter.’
Her own artistic discipline demonstrates, with the intensity of its arcs and bridges, the hyphen between intellect and passion that can exist, and by extension, between the mind coded male and the emotions coded female in the creative energy of a woman artist.
Such a practice cuts at the foundation of Aristoteleian notions of male and female difference and constitutes in itself the act of revolt — though the challenge it issues is more veiled than the more overt social questions asked by Hunter or Kelly.
Gisha Koenig ‘The Music Room’ from ‘The Blind School’series 1987 Bronze 14¼″×14¼″
The remarkable quality of the New Hall collection, a voluntary assembly of donated works, and the likewise extraordinary disproportion of successful women artists in the final selection of the New Contemporaries this year seem to me to point to a crucial shift that is happening in symbolic utterance and representation: women's bodies, women's nature have long been ‘good to think with’, their flesh has served artists as founts of meaning, allegorical and personal.
(Some male artists continue to think with images of women — Anselm Kiefer's most recent installation, in London, called ‘Women of the Revolution’, expressed his own painful reckonings of loss, and his nostalgic longing for rebirth, through the names of historical female figures, from Marie-Antoinette to Théroigne de Méricourt; he symbolised them as beds, shrouded in lead sheets, and puddled with pools — reflections of the artist's desires in the traditional manner and wholly insensitive appropriations of lives that have barely been rescued as stories.
In the conventional male mode, Kiefer conjured an opposing ‘other’ in order to define his ‘self’, and women offered him the most adaptable image repertory for his needs).
More sensitive contemporary artists know they belong to a generation which cannot produce imagery in this way any longer; on the evidence of many current shows, young male artists appear to have ceded the territory which they occupied for so long and now find themselves — where?— in a nowhere land where they are no longer the wielder of the language, the focus of identification, the dynamic of meaning, the authoritative producer of shared values.
By contrast, women move into the contested territory of meaning with assurance and inspiration.
Paula Rego's sequence of prints, inspired by nursery rhymes, actually seizes on language itself as a female domain, originating with the mother, in the nursery, and  extended through play and gossip, as depicted in her etching ‘Secrets and Whispers’, and the one she has given to New Hall, ‘Encampment’, which appropriately has been hung in the Senior Common Room, a place to gather and talk, tell stories, exchange ideas.
This transferral of authority for the modes of communication, this claim on the symbolic realm of language, strikes at the core of the psychoanalytic theory of Lacan which has gained great allegiance, as developed by Kristeva, for instance.
It seems to me that the growth of women's art and its imagery wrests a place for female utterance within the symbolic order, from which Lacanian theory on the whole excludes the female.
The female ‘imaginary’ which is often counterposed to the phallic code of the symbolic, belongs in history and culture as closely as the law of the father, and it has been the self-elected quest of women's art to elucidate the character of that interaction, participation and combination.
The works in a collection like New Hall's while they engage with some of these issues about women's lack and absence from history, at the same time abrogate the very claim that women have not and cannot command a semantic field which expresses their own meanings and tells their own stories.
The collection that New Hall has created reflects the fertility of contemporary women's art, and in many cases, the artists also continue the time's characteristic, self-reflexive affirmation of female identity.
It is revealing how generously the artists to whom the college wrote responded to the invitation.
It's improbable that a male college would have achieved a similar effect with men or women.
And the women responded with works that suited New Hall's commitment to women's education, even when they had no connection themselves to the university or the college.
They have been promised permanent showing: they have been given carefully considered hanging, and in some cases have chosen the position themselves; their works are set off with surprising poise by the predominantly green and white college buildings and gardens, a complex severe and playful at once, severe in its geometry and playful in its romanesque quotations.
Their gifts will never be de-accessioned.
Such conditions are all too rare today (works bought for public institutions like the Tate disappear from view for decades together), and it must have been a factor in the decision of some artists to give in the first place.
Above all, the collection came together, it seems to me, because one of the stories which women have learned and passed on concerns the experience of women artists, and it has created a common bond, transcending differences of medium, approach, age, or particular politics or sexuality.
Novella no longer needs to feel gratitude that in her case she has a father who has allowed her to teach in his place; she has parted the curtain and is speaking for herself — in as many tongues as she pleases.
1 Christine de Pizan, ‘The Book of the City of Lades’.
Trans.
Earl Jeffrey Richards, New York, 1983, p154.
2 Ibid
3 Ann Sutherland Harris and Linda Nochlin, ‘Women Artists: 1550–1950’, Los Angeles County Museum of Art.
Catalogue: Knopf, New York, 1984
4 Cornerhouse, Manchester, 27 June — 2 August 1992; Angel Row Gallery and Bonington Gallery, Nottingham 5 September — 11 October; Orpheus Gallery, Belfast, 18 October — 25 November, ICA, London, Spring 1993
5 Ewa Kuryluk, Veronica & Her Cloth, Oxford 1991
6 See Deanna Petherbridge, The Primacy of Drawing: An Artist's View, national touring exhibition, South Bank Centre, 1991
7 Ibid, p56
Jeanie Morrison-Low ‘A Small Piece of Advice’
This article forms the introduction to the catalogue of the New Hall collection ‘20th Century Women's Art’.
New Hall, Cambridge.
The exhibition is on show between 20–27 September.
The Maiden of Kosovo Branka Andjelkovic reports from war-torn Serbia on artists challenging the idea of woman
The position of former Yugoslavia has always been somewhere in the middle between socialist East and capitalist West.
At least it was open country.
Whenever finances allowed,(the only obstacle to international art exchange) shows and exhibitions of importance had been brought into the capitals of the former Yugoslav republics.
Today, all those familiar places have just one thing in common: war.
The borders are finally closed, seemingly for ever.
What of the cultural life of Yugoslavia?
The world had begun ignoring Serbia almost two years before the economic sanctions.
Since the silent imposition of cultural boycott, a visual illiteracy has come into being.
Artists and intellectuals, both prominent figures and less familiar faces, felt it their duty to partake in the ‘salvation of the nation’.
A feeling of the ultimate national identity, even if displaced in terms of a united Europe, does not necessarily imply a negative connotation.
What is truly disturbing, is that by taking it upon themselves to speak of behalf of the nation, artists have collaborated with the regime.
Regardless of their initial intentions, their work has been understood and accepted as an open manifestation of political support.
Most probably, if had not been articulated in times of war these artistic tendencies would have simply been considered marginal.
For the strong propaganda machinery it was almost too easy to transform what had once been marginal into the nearly official.
As a matter of course, nothing had suited Milosevic better than images which had already existed in the past.
All the myths and legends were retrieved in order to become the official instrument needed to establish the kindred of the present Serbian government with the heroic and glorious past.
Portraits of monarchs, warriors and saints, as well as representations of famous battles, have suddenly become omnipresent.
The most popular legends are those inspired by the battle of Kosovo in 1389. when the Serbs were defeated in their attempt to prevent the Turkish invasion further north.
The image which traditionally represents the event is not the whirlpool of flags, horses and brave knights confronting the Asiatic intruders — instead we are given the sentimental image of a young, mournful maiden nursing wounded Serbs.
Through centuries this image has become a Serbian ideal of woman and her part in mens' wars.
The maiden of Kosovo is a myth which supplements the traditionally organised patriarchal society; a myth within which the mother is to be respected, the sister protected and the wife obedient.
The 20th century Serbian history of wars also proves that rooted connection.
The founder of Serbian expressionism was one of the few artists who worked and thought alongside the European art movements of the beginning of the century.
Painter Nadezda Petrovic made one of her most significant paintings after volunteering at the military hospital during the first world war.
The next war brought to light women partisans, decorated and much more self-assured.
With them came the realisation of new opportunities and the belief that higher education was no more a man's privilege.
The significance of equality of sexes was merely advocated by ideological hardliners.
Highly-educated women were able to find a place within society: the silent majority remained silent.
Management, business and politics were still dominated by men.
The few women members of parliament hardly ever raised controversial issues to do with women and the family, instead the principal of equality was ‘officially proclaimed’.
Since the first opposition parties were founded, one of them, lead by a woman, has been a regular target for malicious attack.
But its policies have never been attacked on the basis of her leadership.
Nowadays the most committed human rights and peace activists in Serbia are also women.
At the same time, however, the most passionate supporters of the national socialism of Milosevic are women too.
Behind the front lines a war of emancipation is taking place.
The reactionary tendencies aside, the artistic community did not have to deal with such disputes.
In spite of the fact that women artists never gained a powerful position in the art establishment regarding both the official policy and semi-official theory — if we look at the recent cultural history of Yugoslavia the exceptions can be found to confirm the independence and the distinctive standpoint of women artists.
The period of socialist-realism in Yugoslavia was very brief and ineffective, and by comparison with other socialist countries, far less rigid.
Only a few years after the war the arts became separated from ideology in a way that enabled both artistic practice and theory to gain so-called independence.
The art scene at the beginning of the 1950s already resembled that of contemporary Europe.
However, through the very complex and bureaucratic way that art was financed, those in charge of‘cultural development’ managed to retain a level of control.
Artists were thus spared from the official ‘aesthetic’ interference but they remained financially dependent.
The communist party considered art an appropriate promotional weapon to communicate with the outside world and started patronising certain artists.
This is how the group of ‘semi-official’ artists came into being: those who were provided with very basic conditions, ateliers, commissions.
Only favoured artists and theoreticians could become directors of museums and galleries, editors of magazines and lecturers.
In this way the illusion of control over the ‘sinister pluralisation’ was established.
Western influence was not dangerous sui generis but the rampant spread of it certainly was.
Therefore, some ‘underground activities’, along with the work of the ‘marginal’ artists aside were never allowed to reach the mainstream.
Against this background some of the most influential artists, those who redefined and ‘endangered’ the male-dominated Serbian art scene, include Nadezda Petrovic, who played the most decisive role in the formation of modern painting: Olga Jevric, who was one of the most influential sculptors after the second world war; and Marina Abramovic, definitely the best known conceptual artists from Yugoslavia.
Serbia today is a sad and isolated country.
Artists are deprived of the international connections and the possibilities to follow and participate in current art events.
Instead, they are compelled to choose between passive and silent or following their moral conscience.
When we live with war, under a repressive regime we cannot close our eyes any more.
We cannot escape really by withdrawing into the seclusion of art.
The photographs of Coranka Matic illustrate this enforced switch.
In her previous work, she was concerned with the intimate, subtle, but analytic, correlation with her female ancestors, which was achieved through the presentation of old family pictures, and small, personal objects.
These mementos evoke both respectful memories and an insight into the changes of the woman's role up to the certain ‘decadence’, where the family is slowly fading wither her as a last, childless descendant.
Recently, however, she has become involved in documentary photography which reveals all the anomalies and distortions of the once sick and self-destructive society.
I had hoped to enclose some of her photographs but the collapse of the Serbian postal system prevented me.
My intention was to juxtapose two of her works, both of which are illustrative of different periods.
I wanted to show the break that she made under the pressure which could not be ignored or left without a response.
She belongs to a group of artists and intellectuals who. when threats of war become apparent, joined the oppositional weekly magazine [Vreme: the voice of political and moral conscience.
In the magazine, which undoubtedly proclaimed anti-war and anti-nationalist standpoints, her editorial handwriting is almost the trade mark.
After the 24 hour media coverage of the Gulf War we are accustomed to the pictures which brought war ‘into our homes’.
Coranka Matic's recent works were made behind the firing lines, they deal with images of a ‘small citizen’ in whose name the war is being fought.
They deal with the mothers of ‘fallen heroes’ and with the mothers of draft dodgers.
Disillusionment is what Coranka Matic focusses on — the urban features, still preserved from the direct line of fire but silently undermined and distorted by all other means.
Some of her photographs — especially those taken during the demonstrations and peace marches — are almost on the edge of becoming a political statement.
Marina Abramovic ‘Boat Emptying, Stream Entering’ from a performance for Edge 90
Putting Us All In The Picture Jo Spence will be missed by so many people.
We asked three women what she meant to them
Jo Spence ‘Epic Journey’, 1992 from The Cancer Sequence
Jane Brettle
Like many others involved in photography as teachers, administrators and practitioners, I will remember Jo for her generosity in revealing, and enabling others to understand, the painful processes that have made us who we are.
As a photographer, she was unique and sometimes terrifying in her decision to publicly share her experience as victim of the social discourses of the family, health and the law.
By ‘Putting Herself in the Picture’ she put her audience in the picture, and we are indebted to her for that.
It was in an educational context that I met Jo, inviting her to Scotland to contribute to an annual series of photography events and workshops for women.
These weekends of lively debate, discussion and interaction were always oversubscribed, encouraging new audiences from a variety of practices and a multitude of interests.
The workshops were never long enough, and she generously continued conversations well into the evening.
They were not always easy or comfortable either, despite her infectious humour, but they were empowering — at this she was the best.
She often expressed concern that her work was shown in galleries, and worried that outside the context of its production it would lose meaning and educational strength, becoming art object, consumed and fetishised.
We can re-assure her that like all the very best political art, hers worked more powerfully in this environment.
Visiting the [British Art Show, few expected to come across ‘Narratives of Disease’ amongst the figurative and abstract painting and monumental steel sculpture — but the effect was astounding.
On the day I visited the McLennan Galleries in Glasgow her piece was surrounded.
Visitos studied these tragic, alarming, amusing and disobedient images long and hard; many felt compelled to comment.
A young mother explained them to her daughter, and the rest of the audience learnt from this too.
With great skill, determination and unparalleled cheek, Jo Spence not only insisted on putting the unacceptable face of both our public and private lives onto the art agenda, but into the art institution.
At her memorial service, co-workers and students both young and mature thanked Jo for her generosity in giving them her time until she died.
At the beginning of the 1990s when art practices are moving away from the collective and political, I hope they will find a way to develop her practice further, in their own right, towards the future.
Val Williams
When Jo Spence began to experiment with phototherapy in the early 1980s, she led a radical departure in women's photography from campaigning reportage to narratives of personal history and self image.
Jo first encountered photography when she joined the North London commercial agency, Photo Coverage as a secretary.
She soon became intrigued by the possibilities of the medium, acquired practical skills, and went on, in the 1960s, to establish her own portrait studio in Hampstead.
Making family portraits and documenting weddings, she learned that photographers occupied a special place in the iconography of domesticity.
In the early 1970s, she turned to documentary — she joined the feminist Hackney Flashers, photographed for the Childrens' Rights Workshop and seemed set to  become one of a large emerging group of leftist agit prop campaigning photo-reporters.
It was an invitation to show work in the Arts Council's ‘Three Perspectives on Photography’ show at the Hayward Gallery in 1979 which turned her back towards the family: ‘I have never been asked to produce work for use in a gallery before, and had no idea what to expect when I showed it.
I turned to an investigation of my own family and my class background, and what it meant to be a woman…= This was the starting point of a project on ‘my history’ which I began by tentatively examining photographs of myself and ended by taking control over how I wanted to be photographed.
‘Beyond the Family Album’, which Jo showed at the Hayward alongside the elegant landscapes of Thomas Cooper and the ironic social documentary of Martin Parr, was a turning point in women's photography and everyone took notice.
A compilation of family snapshots, dressing up, deconstructions of the image of women in advertising, and full of highly personal text, it brought populism and humour into a show which otherwise lacked both.
It was Jo's memories of her war-time evacuation from London to foster homes in the country which stimulated her first work in phototherapy.
Impelled to explore her feelings of rejection by her family, she re-invented her mother, dressing up as a war worker, preparing austerity food, attempting to discover her own sense of rage and impotence as the unwanted and unloved daughter.
From then on, Jo's photo series dealt with the pain of being an outsider; they explored prohibitions and phobias, desires denied, family taboos.
She looked at her own body, and exposed its imperfections with both ruthlessness and affection.
When she contracted breast cancer, she used phototherapy to defeat her sense of powerlessness and despair — a mug shot of her damaged breast re-humanised the dehumanisation of the hospital process — and placed herself once more in the centre of her own drama.
Capering through contemporary photography like a mummer gatecrashing the court ball, Jo Spence showed up all the medium's conceits.
And it is as one of photography's great satirists that she will surely be remembered — I never tire of her work, its invention, its humour and its pathos.
On the cover of her autobiography, ‘Putting Myself in the Picture’, she appears as a middle-aged schoolgirl, a sad red ribbon dragging back her hair, an ugly navy jumper over a regulation white blouse.
We ‘ve all got one of those pictures of ourselves, bleak little icons of guilt and hope and fearfulness, pictures which mark one of life's great ‘intervals’.
Jo Spence gave us the courage to open our own family albums, to remember the past, to acknowledge both the pleasure and the pain, and to celebrate the sublime, scruffy, misunderstood mystery of growing up female.
‘People are always telling me I am brave to ‘expose’ myself in the way I do.
I don't agree.
When you act in the light of knowledge which is in your own self-interest or in the interests of your group or class, this is not bravery but absolute necessity.’
Jo Spence
Rosy Martin
No-one will be able to look at a photograph, particularly a family album photo, in the same way again.
Jo's pioneering work has changed the way people view their own worlds, and articulate their own experiences.
She inhabited the ‘body in question’, and the question was cancer.
The underlying crisis was always mortality.
We met in January 1983, as fellow students on a co-counselling course.
Jo was creating her own healing strategies for breast cancer, having challenged medical orthodoxy by rejecting a mastectomy, radiation and chemotherapy.
In one co-counselling session, we worked on how we each had an internalised critical audience of authority figures: parents, teachers, lecturers, experts, peers against whose judgement we failed.
What would it be like to make these conflicting roles, these painful feelings visible; to feel free from the demands to please others?
I had cupboards full of dressing-up clothes, loved to play and try out roles.
Jo had the camera, which she had temporarily put aside: her knowledge of the theories of representation, refined on a highly analytical degree course, had blocked her.
From her years as a high street photographer, she knew well how to create icons.
Yet we began to tell stories; creating narrative fragments starting from tiny half-remembered details of our lives.
No longer hiding behind the screen memories, the stories told to us by others, we began to unpick our social and psychic formations, within the support and containment, permission-giving and encouragement to take risks which we offered to each other.
Anything was possible, we no longer had to hide our shadow sides; we knew that we had, in each other, a positive regard, a nurturing gaze and total acceptance.
In playing together we re-found the freedom and spontaneous creativity of our wise-child-selves.
It felt magical.
We released a healing, transforming power, sheer joy and fun, counterpoised with working through deep, deep buried traumas from childhood.
We made visible to ourselves the complex, multiplicity of our identities.
An image haunts me now: Jo's abandoned child-self, sent away, aged 5, as an evacuee, as if her parents had died for her.
It was Jo who recognised the value of the ‘minefield of memories’ we had stirred up and made visible, and decided to make the work public.
Ever an initiator, Jo took the work out to a range of different audiences.
She had a formidable intellect, she was a brilliant theoretician who could make the most complex ideas accessible.
An incisive and eloquent speaker, she spoke with her mind, her heart, her guts, her soul, clearly and directly and she touched all who heard her.
Jo embraced life with enthusiasm, delight and an openness to new ideas.
She was always true to herself, her working-class identity powered her creative anger, she would never allow ‘class’ to be ignored.
Never an elitist, she wanted to democratise photographic practice, and share all she had learnt.
She had a very strong will and a clear sense of purpose.
I wonder, too, whether she was still powered by the need to make good that sense of loss from her childhood.
I loved Jo: playmate in psychic realities, friend, fellow therapist, mentor and so much more.
I will continue with the phototherapy work, as I believe she would want me to.
Open for Business and Pleasure Fiona Hackney visits some of the London studios that opened this summer and meets fluff collectors, show girls and bag ladies
Surely even the most stalwart art lover must have trembled just a little when, earlier this summer, in conjunction with the four exhibitions organised by the Whitechapel Gallery (featuring 200-odd works) and over 900 artists — 58 groups in 53 locations — opened their studios to the public.
Mind-boggling through the prospect was, the opportunity to visit artists and see work in their studios was not to be missed.
From the studios and shows I visited I spoke to women artists, all of whom graduated in the last 10 years about their work, their experiences with galleries, residencies, organising shows and lecturing, in an attempt to assess current directions in women's work and gauge their position within the art world.
As a recipient of the Delfina Trust Award, Anne-Marie Creamer has worked at Delfina Studios in Stratford, East London, since graduating in 1990 from the painting depart of the Royal College of Art.
She considers the studios a supportive and professional working environment which, with the additional opportunity to make exchange visits to studios abroad — last year she spent several months in Russia — has alleviated some of the immediate pressures on leaving college.
During this period her work has undergone radical change.
Predominantly a figurative painter, she uses ready-made images culled from photography and film as a device for dealing with subjective, personal narratives of a highly problematic nature.
In the series ‘Show Girls’ she depicts the showgirl and stripper with the intention of opening up the debate around the fetishised female image and the male voyeur.
This is extremely difficult territory; negotiating the fine line between the exploration and the exploitation of female sexuality is a project fraught with difficulty.
I am not entirely convinced by Creamer's attempt to provoke a reassessment through formal devices; the female image is trapped within layers of muted, glazed oil paint, while a neutral, opaque band at the base of the canvas reinforces the distance between subject and viewer.
These paintings are somehow too close to their point of origin.
One suspects that, rather than deconstructing the process of voyeurism —‘the gaze’— they succeed very much in the way a faded Edwardian photograph succeeds, transporting us back to a specific moment in time, fixed in the honeyed glow of nostalgia; their presence is reassuring rather than unsettling.
Creamer admits that the work is in a state of transition.
More recently, in a series entitled, ‘Scenes from the intimate life of CMA’ she uses six small-scale canvasses, each focussing on a film still, randomly appropriated from a narrative sequence.
By working the image — enlarging, layering and distorting — she explores the multiplicity of meaning embedded in fragments of reflected reality.
There is no central viewing point; the canvases may be arranged in any number of combinations, creating new sequences and configurations, while suggesting the infinite possible readings within an image; ‘further disrupting the comfortable viewing space’.
These paintings are complex and mysterious.
They present the viewer with a personae which is simultaneously present and absent.
A personae whose presence moves through time and space, whose physicality dissolves and re-emerges under the glare of our scrutinising gaze; completely public, yet retaining its privacy intact.
Concerns with the ‘public’ and the ‘private’are very much at the heart of Anita Ronke's sculpture/installation work.
Entering her darkened studio, the visitor is confronted by three rows of flashing handbags.
Arranged symmetrically, the bags gape open, their empty interiors sporadically illuminated by a hidden internal light source.
Ronke has christened each with its own personalised brand label; names such as‘Claire’, ‘Stella’, ‘Aurora’ signal the anthropomorphism of bag into woman, and woman into light source.
‘Lucia’ is a particularly poignant metaphor.
Santa Lucia, the virgin saint who had her eyes put out, is traditionally invoked against blindness.
‘A woman whose name means light’, says Ronke, ‘but who cannot see’.
On one level the analogy is with the commercial world of fashion and beauty — Ronke currently works with a prestigious fashion house and is continually amazed by the vast amounts of money and energy invested in creating the facade of beauty; ‘the handbags are about the brevity and the illusion of this — one minute you ‘re in the spotlight the next you ‘re in the dark, finished and forgotten.
The spotlight both illuminates and blinds you’.
Simultaneously the work explores the very private, often hidden world of women's personal everyday histories; ‘Each handbag has a particular personality of its own — on opening one a strong perfume filled the air, another was entirely practical, filled with hairpins and half a broken comb, a third contained a funeral card’.
Traces of forgotten lives.
The handbag idea began when Ronke overhead the comment, ‘old bags left on the shelf’.
An eloquent response, Ronke's work illuminates the ‘female condition’ with simplicity, sympathy and wit.
‘Stale Mate!’, a site specific piece, by Tina O ‘Connell, formed the centrepiece of the Whitechapel Open at Spitalfields Market.
O ‘Connell echoes the structural engineering at the marketplace itself in her gigantic display stand on which 220 vibrant red, moulded jellies are ranked in rows; a silent audience waiting for the performance to begin.
An enormous empty black container broods ominously behind the ‘jelly stack’, the ‘black box’ or ‘abyss’into which ‘those who are greedy for excess will fall and finally perish’.
‘Stale Mate!’, with its accompanying text by Caroline Pullee, is a moral fable for our time; ‘In defiance, this barrage of jellies face west towards the City and represent a psychological barrier against creeping metropolis.
The wall of jelly rises up against this army of destruction, whilst protecting its children (the East End), enticing danger with its sickly sweet smell, inviting those who are seduced by the promise of temporal, earthly delights, to climb higher and higher.
Some will stick in the jelly and burn in the flames, while those who are greedy for excess will go further and finally perish’.
Part cool technological fantasy — like the City's macho high tec architecture; part children's tea party — jelly beyond ones wildest dreams; part culinary icon — the associations of mixing bowl factory production line, and market stall symbolise the lives and concerns of the men, women and children who lived and worked at Spitalfields.
Rather than satisfying the expectations of the normal ‘gallery set’, O ‘Connell wished to create a piece for habitual market users; she needed a material and a concept which could equally accommodate skating children, organic vegetable enthusiasts and wandering passers by.
The jelly was chosen as a valid material for various reasons.
Its archetypal shape and colour have universal appeal, evoking a sense of fun and childhood.
However, as they fester and decay, falling prey to temperature changes and the attentions of neighbouring rats, a more sinister side emerges.
O ‘Connell sees the rotting as symbolic of the economic and political changes currently reshaping the East End, yet the metaphor extends beyond any immediate environment.
The liquid and jellied remains stand, mute witnesses to a post-apocalyptic performance.
The overpowering, sickly sweet smell is all that remains of a way of life, or a form of life, which has all but disappeared.
Kate Allen ‘Devices and Desires’, 1992 Plastic/Concrete 180 x×170x×61 cms Photo: Marc Atkins
Laura Godfrey-Isaacs' most recent work is a series of 10 large scale (74″x×78″) oil paintings; ‘Citrus’, ‘Slime’, ‘Fluffy’, ‘Yellow Substance’, ‘Pink Substance’, ‘Juice’, ‘Dirt’, ‘Rubber’, ‘Cloth’ and ‘Purple Skin’.
The names read like a menu of cookie cream sodas, a catalogue of exotic vinyl wall coverings, or a list of items your recommended washing power guarantees to remove without trace.
Since her one-year Fellowship as artist-in-residence at the Liverpool Tate Gallery, in 1990, Godfrey-Isaacs work has focussed on the body; exploring the minutiae of tissue and fissure, she writes her findings large in uncompromising, heavily worked, and brightly coloured canvases.
But while Godfrey-Isaacs exposes the wound she also sees the joke.
Her work refuses any concession to polite conventions of ‘good taste’, indeed her fleshy pinks and pulsing reds make us squirm with embarrassed recognition, reminding us of the ‘nasty’ things we do at home — after the guests have gone.
In the current series she moves out of the body and into its immediate environment, the domestic world.
This is familiar David Lynch territory: beneath the reassuringly kitschy exterior of ‘home sweet home’ lies a potentially life-threatening world of violent urges and toxic substances.
The surface of each painting is tough, coated and  resilient , like a plastic household-skin, but underneath it's alive, moulded and manipulated by Godfrey-Isaacs as she works a lethal cocktail of pigment and corrosive varnishes.
‘Purple Skin’, selected for the second Whitechapel Open Show, has the colour and texture of bruised and damaged flesh; broken skin, scalded in a domestic accident or bearing the marks of repeated labour with scourers and sodas.
Images which parallel food and the body have long been the staple diet of art; as the body became increasingly edible in Godfrey-Isaacs' earlier work, so the current series also has its ‘food appeal’.
The acid-sweet pastels of 1950s' food photography come to mind.
These cotton yellows, peachy pinks and baby blues transport us, delighted, to the land of Tupperware.
Immediately we encounter the little surprises — the fluff under the bed, the dried dog turds under the sofa, the slime around the sink — the magical substances of domestic life.
Our fascination with the minutiae of everyday life, our knowledge of its texture, smell and colour, is the subject of Godfrey-Isaacs' work.
Caught, startled in the glare of these extraordinary paintings, we are simultaneously compelled and repulsed; slowly we drag our eyes away, blink and move on.
Kate Allen's ‘Pubic’, a triangle of springy, soft hair mounted on three hair-coated legs is similarly the result of her obsession with the minute excretions of domestic routine; the waste substances we eliminate.
The idea came from the experience of pulling hair out of the bathtub; ‘this made me think about the things that are worthless, that we want to get rid of, the embarrassing hidden things like body hair, and the things we value and cultivate — in our culture, for instance, the head of hair is usually the first thing people register when they look at someone, a great deal of energy and money is, therefore, expended on hairdressing and styling.
I used to have my hair shaved, now I let it grow — people react to me in very different ways when I have hair and when I don't’.
Allen is a fluff collector.
‘Fluff Collection’ is a wall panel made from compressed mattress stuffing.
‘I'm interested in the small things that gradually lead to the repression of women — I want to make people see these, but be able to laugh at the same time.
Women tend to be able to laugh more than men — perhaps they have to’.
The wall panel ‘Eruption’ is made from fibreglass and rockwool (a loft insulation fibre, composed of crushed glass); ‘the horror of working with such a dangerous and literally painful material was part of the piece’.
Much of Allen's work has a fantasy element, she is continually intrigued by childhood memories, the resonance of children's rhymes and stories; works such as, ‘If it Doesn't Fit’ was inspired by the fairytale the ‘Princess and the Pea’.
Allen's attitude is playfully anarchic; with a childlike spirit she gleefully undermines the serious, ‘male’ pose of the sculptor by knitting socks for her concrete sculpture, or producing what even she describes as ‘grotesque object’.
‘Devices and Desires’, a large concrete and plastic excretion, results from Allen's meditations on the saying, ‘wear your heart on your sleeve’.
An apt metaphor for work which deals with the horrors and the joys of vulnerability and innocence.
Conscious of their position as women artists operating within a patriarchal society none of the women I spoke to believed their concerns were limited to gender; factors of race and class, in addition to those of gender, informed the work.
Humour was central to the work of these women artists, all of whom felt it allowed them to explore and communicate difficult issues which were often very personal.
Most felt that the most important thing was to be making art, and making it on their own terms.
There was an emphasis on the need for women to be confident, to set themselves high standards, to believe in themselves whatever the consequences.
The ‘star system’, promoted and hyped by the media, was seen to be largely a male preserve.
O ‘Connell doubted the possibility of any female equivalent of Damien Hirst; likewise, Godfrey-Isaacs criticised the reluctance of the major galleries to offer leading contemporary women artists shows.
Opening Up The East Josephine Lanyon reports on the second year of East & South which has attracted an extraordinary number of women artists
1991 saw a first for East Anglia — East.
A national open art exhibition which gave 62 artists an opportunity to exhibit their work in the studio and gallery space of Norfolk Institute of Art and Design.
East, conceived by Lynda Checketts, offered an alternative to the London-based open shows such as the Whitechapel whose selection criteria is open to artists living around east London and the rather irregular Hayward Open and the Serpentine Summer Show.
The art school, which has impressive physical spaces and is really where ‘artists are made’, seemed a natural environment to hold such an exhibition.
The organisers used studio spaces that would otherwise have remained empty throughout the summer holidays.
Norwich had rarely seen such a large exhibition of contemporary art involving alternative art practices.
With proposals for an outpost of the Tate Gallery in East Anglia under way and city centre galleries and studio groups becoming established, it was felt that Norwich was ready for such a venture.
Local support for the exhibition was good.
An open meeting was held which was well attended.
A steering committee of students, artists, curatorial staff and lecturers was set up.
Funding was received from one Norwich newspaper, the Eastern Daily Press, who agreed to support the project over a three year period.
With funding, public support and a large space available, the steering committee set about the task of providing guide lines and selectors.
The aim was to have as few restrictive, formal rules as possible — to make this a genuinely open show.
It was decided to have two selectors who have made significant contributions to contemporary art; one artist and one critic.
Any theme or emphasis on medium, subject matter or style was brought out by the selectors and was not imposed by the organisers in any way.
In 1991 the selectors were Andrew Brighton, a critic and art historian who trained as a painter and who now runs the MA in Art and Architecture at Kent Institute and Sandy Moffat, an artists who studied at Edinburgh and now teaches at Glasgow School of Art.
The show was dominated by painting with issued-based and figurative work featuring prominently.
This year, with the help of a development grant from the Arts Council, East joined South, with the Norfolk Institute of Art and Design joining the gallery and fine art departments of Kent institute of Art and Design.
The Arts Council gave a substantial grant to this scheme as it felt that it emphasised artists ‘opportunities and practice, rather than the institution and its curatorial staff.
Funding was also received from the Eastern Arts Board for installation and site-specific work.
The application form encouraged artists to submit proposals for installation, murals, outdoor sculpture.
film, video and performance work.
The two venues held exhibitions simultaneously rather than touring the show.
The sites shared administrative costs, selectors and a catalogue which included an illustration and biographical details for each artist.
In 1992 the show's aim of giving opportunities to young artists were  extended throughout the exhibitions process.
Students and artists were employed in the administration, invigilation and installation of the project.
This year 48 artists work was shown.
The artists were encouraged to travel to the venues to be involved with the installation of their work.
Eight artists were given grants to develop work specifically for sites in Norwich and at the Norfolk Institute.
The installation artists were encouraged to put new ideas into practice and to use the resources offered by the Institute to realise these aims.
The Eastern Daily Press awarded two prizes of £1,000 to Naomi Dines in Canterbury and Victoria Arney in Norwich.
The Eastern Daily Press together with the Eastern Arts Board also gave money for a competition that hoped to find new art critics.
The identity of each years show lies with the selector, in this way it is intended that each exhibition will be significantly different in terms of art practise, medium and ways of thinking.
In 1992 the two male selectors were replaced by two female selectors.
The artist for this year was Helen Chadwick whose exhibition Of Mutability held at the ICA in 1986 led to her nomination for the Turner Prize in 1987/ The critic selector was Marjorie Allthorpe-Guyton, formerly editor of Artscribe International.
Undoubtedly many artists decided whether or not to submit to the exhibition upon the work, reputation and perhaps gender of the two selectors.
 Comparative statistics reveal that the choice of selectors had a radical effect on the total submission and on the final show.
The selectors viewed over 5,400 slides from which the artists were chosen, a statement was optional.
Biographical information including academic qualifications, experience and past exhibitions was withheld from the selectors.
The number of submissions rose from 450 in 1991 to 540 in 1992 and the number of female artists increased from 194 to 270.
The organisers were disappointed with the total submission figures, however a number of males may have chosen not to submit: the proportion of males decreased and therefore another form of selection occurred even before the formal process.
It is also possible that more women were attracted to the idea of site-specific work.
Five of the eight artists to receive installation grants were women.
The selectors in 1991 chose 32% women artists for the final show, whereas this year's show has 52% women artists; although this did not reflect any conscious intention on the selectors part to discriminate in favour of women.
The selectors did know the gender of the artists but they stressed their aim to choose a show that would appeal to a cross section of visitors.
The artists in the show were a young and academic group, many completing or having recently gained postgraduate qualifications.
Furthermore 65% of this year's artists were London based, whereas only 6% were from East Anglia.
The two themes that seemed to flow through the work are that of ‘the body’, images of male and female sexuality and ‘the reappropriation of images’.
Marjorie Allthorpe-Guyton described the artists as ‘taking risks’, ‘working at the…= edge of their chosen languages’.
The exhibition challenges conceptions of high art.
It involves modernist media such as fur, latex, wax and hair and alternative practices such as video, performance and time based pieces.
East is a modern ‘inter-textual’ show.
The spectator wanders through a spacious, eclectic show of avant-garde work.
The foyer of the Norfolk Institute was occupied by Emma Rushton's four portrait wax sculptures of vicars, directly in confrontation with Matthew Stradling's swirling male nudes, which ‘seek to reclaim the spirit of freedom and pleasure of the Renaissance masters’.
It is most unusual for an open show to accommodate site-specific works.
Rosie Leventon's Copper Floor involves 320 textured copper briquettes which could be seen as a woman's reappropriation of Carl Andre's Bricks.
Paul Rodgers’, ‘I never knew you could grow exotic fruits and flowers in this country’ is a fluttering envelope-lined greenhouse lit from the inside by two sunbeds.
Katherine Dowson's giant silicone drip work links the exhibition in its site within the 50-foot stairwell.
East and South restores the balance of exhibitions in terms of gender, the type of work it displays, the cities it takes place in and the opportunities it offers to artists.
Heather Allen ‘Plait’, 1992 sisal/cord
School's Out With the summer degree shows just coming down, Fiona Hackney talks to London students with a view to their futures
Fighting my way through the milling crowds of private view enthusiasts which announce the opening of this years round of degree shows, my curiosity was aroused by the number of women consistently achieving standards of excellence.
This, of course, should come as no surprise; the high standards achieved by women in the arts are now well documented by feminist historians, as are the reasons for their having been ‘hidden from history’.
To explain my curiosity I should perhaps explain my definition of excellence.
The work of each woman I have selected unites a sophisticated understanding of the area in which she is working — and these are always varied, for instance sculpture, metalwork, painting, photography, with a very personal, often critical viewpoint, specific to the woman herself.
Subjectivity and the need to forge a personal identity are aligned with an awareness of cultural context and an overriding ambition to achieve.
'Any project searching for a shared ‘female’ identity in the work may be misleading, yet the shared endeavour by women to succeed in their chosen field and on their own terms is important.
In my discussions with the individual artists, then I have focussed on the ‘particular’, specifically the artist's concerns within their work and their experience as women working within the context of the art college.
Mariko Mori ‘Myth’, 1992
Heather Johnston, a graduate in photography at the Royal College of Art, works at the interface between painting and photography; a point reinforced by the ornate gilt frames which surround her photographs.
Her manipulated images of masked Madonnas are made using a series of complex chemical processes; she experiments technically, working and reworking the image until it has exactly the right feeling, tone or resonance.
Cyanotype produces an aged quality evoking the timelessness of the icon; this is enhanced by the sheet of gold (brass rubbing crayon melted onto the surface) surrounding the mother and child.
Technique becomes expression and, with the addition of props such as paper crowns, masks and banners, relatives, friends and their babies are transformed into hierarchical beings.
The contemporary world is not entirely eschewed; the baby still wears his romper suit.
The paper crown gently mocks the traditional reverence allotted to the image of the Madonna, suggesting the transitory nature of the mothering role in women's lives — holy mother or holy fool?
These pictures are parodies, but there is nothing vicious in them; they are affectionate, yet questioning) explorations into the nature of historical representation and contemporary reality.
Having previously studied in Canada and the US, Johnston felt that there was a need for positive discrimination within UK colleges in order to bring them into line with educational standards abroad.
She considered that women photographers were still very much outside the college system, and that there was little evidence of any change.
Similarly she was disappointed by the lack of any ‘political arena’ in which to discuss work, and found the level of debate and critique poor, the emphasis being rather on the production of high quality commercial work.
In contrast Julie Jones found the RCA embroidery and textile department supportive, if rather bemused by her condom installation, ‘Tea and Sex in the Afternoon’.
With her customised ‘love curtains’ and lampshade, zips and suspenders added; her ‘gardening, washing-up and tea bras’, incorporating spoon and condom, and her erotic tea cosy and hot-water bottle cover, featuring special compartments for condom and vibrator, she aims to ‘eroticise the domestic environment’, but in a very ‘English’way.
Amidst a scene which combines the idiosyncratic humour of an Ealing comedy with echoes of Cynthia Payne's front parlour, Jones, dressed in  bubbling blonde wig and ritualised underwear and accompanied by her besuited colleague, complete with usherette-style tray, distributes free condoms.
Behind the kitsch is a serious message; condoms can be both fun and erotic — use them.
Interestingly she found the most enthusiastic recipients were schoolboys and elderly couples.
Jones makes the important point that sex is used to advertise everything from cars to chocolates; ‘but when it comes to condoms it's all flowers and sunsets’.
A self-confessed ‘condom fetishist’, Jones plans to put sex back into contraception.
Working in metal Farida Khan, a final year student at Camberwell College of Art, has produced a profusion of organically inspired objects and vessels.
‘Vertical Spikes’, ‘Pod’, ‘Spiked Ball’ and ‘Prickly-Pear Dish’all result from Khan's preoccupation with three major themes: tactility, protection and inaccessibility.
‘Pod’(60cmx×27cm), made from two blocked sheets of gilding metal, soldered together and supported on steel legs, appears to float on a brush of spiky copper wire.
The dark lips of the pod open to reveal a saturated red interior, created through the application of heat treatment and halmatite.
The form is essential, a result of Khan's response to the cacti she grows and draws; the Pod, like a cactus, fascinates the viewer, drawing her in while simultaneously warning her off.
Khan stresses that the heat treatment she uses for coloration are natural, and that she enjoys experimenting; combining fine with coarse metal; contrasting cool, white silver with the warm tones of copper wire.
The metalwork department is run by a woman and Khan felt that male and female students received equal treatment, with an even gender balance amongst staff and students; she remarked that this was a relief after school, where it was assumed only boys were suited to metalwork.
The only problematic area was the forge which, with all its traditional associations of masculine strength and virility was an immediate focus for the ambitious men.
The women were more cautious, fearing lack of strength.
However, as they became increasingly conversant and comfortable with workshop techniques the balance was redressed.
Julie Jones ‘Tea and Sex in the Afternoon’, 1992
‘Dust’ is a painting/installation consisting of seven gesso panels (100cm x× 70cm); the surfaces are covered with layer upon layer of egg tempera (150 eggs in all) chalk dust and saturated pigment.
Through a continuing process of addition and subtraction, Melanie Bargh, a graduate of the School of Painting at Camberwell College of Art, has produced colour of a unique depth and resonance.
The result was painstakingly achieved.
Working in the enclosed, whitened space which is integral to the piece, Bargh laboriously applied and reapplied the loaded pigment, sanding the surface between each layer.
Gradually, an expanse of intense colour and velvetine texture emerged; the minute particles of pigment fell and dispersed causing a natural halo of colour to appear at the base of each panel.
The effect is compelling and seductive; the panels hover; deep blue, magenta, violet, umber and cerise, simultaneously absorbing and creating light.
The mood is contemplative and cool, even introspective; associations are immediately religious.
The intimate scale of the space, the nature of the materials used, all suggest the private chapel; the tiny rooms in San Marco, containing frescoes by Fra Angelico and intended for individual prayer meditation, or Giotto's Arena Chapel at Padua.
Bargh acknowledges the presence of a certain spiritual quality in ‘Dust’, but emphasises that the work is also about impermanence.
She considers that the most interesting women artists today are concerned with the nature of ‘process’ in their work, and that the process of creating and the nature of creativity have much in common with religious experience.
Linet Andrea spent several months of her final year in the sculpture department at Chelsea School of Art training as a trapeze artists.
Bargh's linking of creativity with spirituality is echoed in Andrea's obsession with the trapeze.
She parallels her experience struggling to gain control of her body on the trapeze with her struggle with the creative process; ‘working on the trapeze one is continually putting oneself in a position of overcoming fear.
It develops a state of mind which lasts for the rest of one's life; an approach to things.
You  attempt things you previously would not have had the courage to do because you know you possess the power to save yourself’.
Andrea used her skills to create a performance piece, ‘Trapeze’, in which randomly edited and visually degraded news footage is projected over her suspended body.
Entirely encased in a latex bodysuit she becomes anonymous, even androgynous.
Hanging limp as a corpse, or straining to hold complex, delicately balanced poses, the elation of her soaring figure is juxtaposed with the very real pain and physical distress incurred.
The contorted postures provide an eloquent visual commentary to the simultaneously projected ‘real life’ imagery; her video and installation work include fragile, barely existing images (negative or miniature projections) of swinging figures, or herself freefalling from a 200 foot crane, continually repeated, as if caught in a time-loop of seemingly endless motion.
‘Myth’ is the composite title of Mariko Mori's show in the painting department of Chelsea College of Art.
Mori worked as a fashion model in Tokyo during the mid 1980s and ‘myth’ refers to the modern myth of the mass media, advertising and popular culture.
Her work is an allegorisation of art as fashion; entering the world of fine art she found many parallels with the world of fashion.
Large scale cibachrome prints, she poses decoratively before her own painting, wearing a matching outfit created by herself.
Mori ‘the artist’ reappropriates the image of Mori ‘the model’ and vice versa, yet there is no indication of any wish to judge in this cool, ironical work; ‘I collected hundreds of images of myself while on modelling assignments all over the world.
Through this experience I became interested in the mechanisms of contemporary of Mori's ‘composite card’.
Used by agency models, the card shows a photograph of the model with her vital statistics — height, bust, waist, hips, shoes, colour of hair and eyes — detailed alongside.
The term composite means the bringing together of otherwise distinct parts; ‘Market Value’ firmly locates the fetishisation of the woman within both the markets of fashion and art.
Aware of the dangers in imposing an abstract female identity on these student's work, there are certainly aspects common to all.
These threads, gathered together, give us some idea of the current concerns of younger women artists.
Amongst them there was a need to make sense of ones experience through the work, and a desire to communicate this to others.
This was never articulated directly, a variety of subtler means were employed; humour, to engage an audience and convey an important message without alienation; sensuality, in a particular response to materials and experimentation, a need to manipulate materials and accepted methods of doing things in order to extend traditional boundaries, blurring and redefining the nature of art, craft and commercial design.
Theory was a vital factor in several women's work, yet many found the terms ‘feminist art’ and ‘feminist artist’problematic, preferring to refer to themselves as ‘equalists’.
In all cases, however, the work did seem to be informed by a personal identity and experience which is clearly female.
Linet Andrea ‘Trapeze’, 1992
PAULINE BARRIE NEWS FROM THE WOMEN ARTISTS SLIDE LIBRARY
For this autumn session, the Women Artists Slide Library are planning a series of celebratory events up until the end of March 1993.
We have already seen the planning of the Feminist Art Criticism conference which was an extremely successful and well-attended event.
We received many letters of congratulations and we are at present compiling the papers for a future publication.
As well as this, in August we helped orchestrate a series of practical workshops at the London Print Workshop.
At all these three workshops there was a creche.
We wanted mothers with children to go on the various courses and learn new printmaking techniques.
This positive strategy included having an ‘Artist-in-Residence’ for the creche, so that the children also learned printmaking techniques.
The Artist-in-Residence was Marcia Bennett who is herself an accomplished printmaker.
Both the courses and the creche were very constructive.
As we go to press, the deadline for the exhibition, Impressive Women is also coming up and we are hoping that the work which is sent in will provide an enthusiastic and diverse exhibition.
Inserted into this issue of the magazine is the series of talks which has been organised as part of the supportive programme for the exhibition and looks at both individual aspects of printmaking, as well as at business and marketing side of prints.
The Women Artists Slide Library is also being asked to profile its work at the 181 Gallery in Hammersmith in December and there will be more news on this in our next issue.
The International Association of Women in the Arts is also planning a series of events in Madrid in September, as well as its AGM and conference which will take place from the 28 September to the 2 October.
The International Association is presently being run by Eva & Co, an Austrian women artists group who are planning a further exhibition in Graz in May 1993.
The Women Artists Slide Library will be supporting both events in Madrid and in Graz and will be trying to participate in future talks about the development of IAWA and further opportunities for women artists generally.
(See international listings for further information on IAWA).
From September until the end of March 1993 the organisation will be following through a plan of restructuring and its constant search to find future funding for both its core activities and to develop further aspects of its collection and educational work.
More details about this will be available through the AGM which is planned for 24 Oct at the London Print Workshop.
Exhibitions
Raising the Titanic The BT New Contemporaries
When the Titanic was finally located on the sea-bed a crew went down in a tiny submarine to explore the wreckage.
The only traces of passengers and crew were hundreds of pairs of shoes, eerily littering the cabins, passage ways and decks; the treated leather was all that had withstood the salt water.
The poignancy and resonance of everyday objects as symbols of personal or collective histories, as expressions of absence and presence, which this story exemplifies, is central to much of the work in the BT New Contemporaries 1992.
From over 1,000 submissions the three judges, Derek Jarman, Marina Warner and Guy Brett, selected 22 artists, 18 of them women.
The result is a strong and challenging exhibition in which mixed media work predominates.
The use, as materials, of things that have been discarded, abandoned or neglected: from lost shoes and combs to the forgotten histories of women, characterises much of the best work.
There is something familiar about the single shoe in the road or the hoof print in the mud, yet Louise Short elevates these fragments by preserving them as plaster casts and ordering them in installations which trace the passage of people and animals.
Josephine Thom creates quiet monuments to uncelebrated moments in women's history using mundane, domestic materials.
Teabags commemorate Barbara Castle's nomination as a political candidate; waxed and singed bras are transformed into a delicate wreath of roses for the suffragette Emily Wilding Davidson,(the one who threw herself under the king's horse).
Moving into the arena of family history, Tanya  'Ury's' holograms, LED and video works explore her relationship with her name: URY.
You Are Why.
The piece seems rooted in the symbolic, cabalistic use of language as she seeks to reclaim heritage and identity from fragments of text.
More elusive languages, symbols filtered through memory, have been created by Permindar Kaur and Parul Modha.
Kaur's glass and metal sculptures have familiar elements: windmill, cart and sword, but refuse to offer up easy explanations.
Modha's coloured wax casts of tongues are a more playful exploration of the idea of Babel: the same organ being used for so many different languages, resulting in so much misunderstanding.
A new symbolism of the body, and a concern for control of the body in terms of health, are key concerns for several artists, with the strongest pieces rooted in their own lives.
An outstanding example is Joanne Pearson's video ‘All in Your Head’, which bravely confronts her epilepsy and her powerlessness stemming from the fear of the fit.
Ines Rae questions the health service's objectification of the body: juxtaposing highly emotional statements with chilling black and white photographs of medical equipment and treatment rooms from which the individual is absent.
In the video ‘Perfect X’ K Dieroff balances precariously between ideals of beauty and self-mutilation as she takes a knife to her nose accompanied by a barrage of adjectives distilled from women's magazines.
In contrast, Andrea Lansley's richly coloured, monumental compositions celebrate her body and focus on her physical and sensuary experiences, placing them at the centre of her work.
In these intense paintings, she explores a personal vocabulary of forms combining vagina, breasts and thighs rendered in blood red paint.
There is so much good work in this year's BT New Contemporaries in addition to that which I have described.
A lot of it is rather cool and conceptual but, because subject matter and materials are so firmly rooted in direct experience, they cannot  fail to communicate with confidence and clarity to all who see the show.
The BT New Contemporaries 1992: Angel Row Gallery & Bonington Gallery, Nottingham 5 September — 11 October; Orpheus Gallery, Belfast, 18 October — 28 November.
It ends at the ICA in London next spring.
Ines Rae ‘Why Do I Feel So Often Like Crying ‘, 1991 laminated photograph 120 x7times; 90cm
Another Documenta Lorna Green travelled to Berlin to witness an alternative to Documenta in which 70 women from 18 countries participated
MISS-ING ran alongside Documenta 9 late in June in various locations throughout Berlin
In May I received a letter from two curators, Gabriele Horn and Beatrice Stammer, from the Staatliche Kunsthalle Berlin asking if I would like to participate in their room in ‘34 Rooms’, a project ‘realised in direct co-operation with 34 curators, critics and others involved in the production of exhibitions, all currently active in Berlin’.
The rooms were all to be in the Scheunenviertel (barns quarter), near Friedrichstrasse in former East Berlin.
This area was the once flourishing Jewish quarter with its famous domed synagogue and close to the Nazi headquarters, both in Oranienburgerstrasse.
The organisers stated: ‘Our self-set pre-condition to make use of these non-museal living spaces and workshops for our projects is to consider in each of the exhibition concepts the residents and history of this part of the city: former Jewish district which today may be rundown and falling apart, but which, in the long run, will belong to the government district of an emerging capital with modern architecture.’
They intended to link their project with Documenta 9 in Kassel on the other side of Germany by requesting work from women worldwide to ‘point out the problem of the infinitely small presence of women at this year's Documenta, and help to shed light on the increasing number of well received approaches and concepts originated by women artists in a different way.’
This invitation was irresistible.
I offered to make a sculpture which related to the Holocaust but which had elements of hope in it that such an event should never happen again.
It was to be made in whole and smashed bricks, the whole bricks to represent the walls of the world — the Berlin Wall, the Walls of Jericho, the Western (Wailing) Wall, the Great Wall of China and Hadrian's Wall — and the smashed bricks to represent the breakdown of Jewish life and status as they knew it.
It was also to incorporate the sabra or prickly pear, the cactus which is a symbol of Israel, to provide hope for the future not only for Jews but also for all the persecuted people of the world.
The whole sculpture was to be sprayed gold which would symbolise the prosperity to come.
My proposal was accepted, I was offered accommodation with Beatrice, bricks and, due to air restrictions, gold spray paint.
By the time I arrived in Berlin, with a large box of the cactus I had made in my studio from wire, plaster impregnated bandage and nails, it was three days before the private view on 14 June.
The 34 rooms had become 37 rooms!
Beatrice Stammer and Gabriele Horn, the curators of MISS-ING, had invited 130 women from all over the world to take part — at a month's notice!
Nearly 70 women responded from 18 countries including Helen Chadwick from Great Britain, several from the USA including Nancy Spero and Yoko Ono who brought her sculpture to the exhibition, Valie Export from Austria, Helen Escobedo from Mexico and Ana Lupas who showed two sculptures from Rumania.
Ana and I both needed bricks for our work and fortunately we managed to get help to use the makeshift hoist for one load.
The rest we had to transport up to the second and fourth floors, up steep, dark steps!
I was lucky, I was on the second floor; Ana was not so lucky.
It was a fascinating experience to be included in an exhibition of this sort.
Because of the present confusion in East Berlin, the owners of the buildings are unknown and many of them have been taken over by squatters from all over the world who make paintings, installations and sculpture frequently from old junk and scrap metal, create theatre and festivals, run parties and discos, bars etc.
There are still traces of the original area — the ruined synagogue now being restored, old signs up on a wall of the cloth factories of the past and, surprisingly, a new kosher shop and restaurant.
Our exhibition filled two floors in a dilapidated warehouse in which squatters, mainly British, were living in some squalor; the other exhibitions were in houses, old shops, small factory spaces, offices and warehouses.
The show, which ran for a week, was extremely well attended, had wide press coverage within the country and was included in a German-made TV programme on Documenta.
The whole event commenced with a football match between artists and critics on a piece of wasteland that had been turned into a football pitch.
That evening the women artists won.
Jan Hoet, the curator of Documenta 9, does no believe in quota systems.
At the show 25 women exhibited alongside 165 men.
Put another way, 13.5% of the artists were women.
Lorna Green ‘Hope’, 1992 bricks, plaster, nails and gold paint 1.5m x×1.5m x×1m
Dangerous Domestica Annette Messager and Geneviève Cadieux Val Williams
Annette Messager Telling Tales Camden Arts Centre, London 17 July—30 August
Geneviève Cadieux ICA, London 29 July — 6 September
As the first work of Telling Tales, Annette Messager has hung ‘Le Bonheure Illustre/1’ a highly coloured series of drawings.
Like souvenirs from an idyllic past they being a narrative of a journey from innocence to experience.
From the idealised symbols of romance and exoticism, through the agonised posturing of the beauty parlour, Messager's story leads us inevitably to reconstructions of childhood memories, toys stacked and stifled, infiltrated by the fetishism of photography.
Messager's installations are concerned with seminal attractions; the defacement of chastity, naivety violated by culture, simplicity invaded by the problematic.
The vehicle for such moral historiography is, suitably enough, the fabulous narrative, women's ancient and collusive art, but made modern, suggestive and full of pace.
In ‘Le  Bonnheure Illustre/1’, Messager makes references to fantastic adventures, scenarios of solitude and exoticism; she pictures an angler alone in contemplation, an austere eagle, a skater whirling in endless elegance.
Redrawing a comic book, she embarks on a selective autobiography, tense and febrile, which touches on compelling issues.
And it is photography which Messager uses to divert our attention from the sweet nostalgia of an imagined past.
She uses the camera to document confrontations on the street, obscure, elusive meetings — collisions with approaching men whose bodies dissolve into abstractions at the point of contact, talismans against desire and satiric comments on the nature of tangential encounters.
They are perilous adventures with the camera, as Messager's chronicle gathers momentum.
Abandoning the chancy arena of the street, Messager's large photo piece ‘Peche/1’ is a  compilation of body parts, dismembered film stills from a nightmare thriller.
A woman is gagged by a hand, faces scream and genitalia are exposed, as photographed fingers point accusations at the license of pornography.
As women's art regains the territory of erotica, Messager comments succinctly on the debate which ensues.
A small step then to ‘Les Tortures Volontaires’, an obsessive, voyeuristic examination of the bondage of the beauty salon.
Chins strapped, eyes padded, bodies encrusted with mud, slapped by water, encased in rubber, burnt by fake sunshine.
Bandaged and immobilised, disfigured in the pursuit of beauty, Messager's women seek salvation.
But Messager knows that the best fairytales are about girls growing up in the danger of domestica.
Snow White's stepmother plots infanticide, Cinderella becomes a slave to her sisters, Rapunzel is locked away in a tower and denied her adolescence.
Terror and torture are rife in these ancient stories.
In ‘Mes Ouvrages’, an assemblage of antique children's dresses, encased in glass, there is a similar dictum.
Fetishised by her additions — erotic snapshots pinned to a bodice, a pointing finger, a ritualistic series of omens fastened to a skirt — they presage both loss and enlightenment in the cathartic climax of Messager's bleak black comedy of passion.
Annette Messager ‘Mes Voeux’, 1989
A pile of toy animals lies in the corner of the gallery in Telling Tales.
Messager calls the piece ‘Histoire Des Petites Effigies’.
Invaded by photographs the toys are decontextualised from childhood, sinister, tragic recollections of a half-forgotten adventure.
The importance, and the charm, of Messager's work lies in its mannered eclecticism, its precise and worldly transpositions of old stories to a contemporary milieu.
Adventures of a different kind are explored in Geneviève Cadieux's show of photopieces at the ICA.
Cadieux has described them as happening ‘outside  the image’, and they strive to establish a discourse with their gallery audience.
Like Messager, Cadieux is intrigued by encounters, meetings of bodies, embraces.
But her scenarios are without irony, studies of skin as flesh rather than repositories of myth and moral fable.
And, while a viewer must collude in Messager's mysterious confessionals, Cadieux is interested in openness, in presenting ‘very private images in a very public space’.
But, bold as they are, giant colour prints of segmented bodies, rough skins and the centrepiece of a kiss in rich colour close-up, it is difficult to see them as challenges to a visual or a political status quo.
An exciting dynamic, but a confused one, directs these photographs — almost diagrammatic, they seemed to founder on theory.
In a recent interview Cadieux said: ‘I like the viewer to be involved in an image, to have a physical relationship with the work: it is very frontal.
It is important that the viewer is physically incorporated in the work, that he or she is implicated.’
Implications, secrets, intimate relations: for both Messager and Cadieux, these are implicit.
Keynotes in a cerebral relationship with the real world.
Annette Messager ‘Les Piques’, 1992
The Hunter and The Hunted Pauline Barrie goes on a local walkabout around west London galleries
Watermans Arts Centre was one of the last purpose built art centres to be completed in this country.
Built when the concept of arts centres was fashionable, it was seen as an ideal which would forge a cross-fertilisation of art forms, enabling theatre, dance, galleries and workshops to blend with bars, eating places and well-stocked sales points.
Most of these art centres were quickly colonised by the theatre and theatre-based activities leaving all the other arts as poor relatives, certainly not equal partners within the art centre.
In our present recession, we frequently see the gallery space being singled out for a cut and Watermans is no exception.
Recently, the gallery was under the threat of total closure as the centre had lost its local funding.
This was narrowly avoided by producing a new programming scheme, involving local sponsorship as the future funders of individual exhibitions.
New gallery directory, Penny Precious, was responsible for producing this survival strategy.
Her programme links ideas with currency and, to a certain degree, fashion with reality; a contemporary recipe for survival.
Penny Precious is a practitioner with a personal interest in issue-based work and her plans are extremely positive for women artists.
Every show has a strong educational component built into it and Precious is also planning an overall strategy, ‘Art as Education’.
Mary McGowen ‘Shadows’ Ciba-tran
The Last Frontier, Trophies, a recent exhibition at Watermans by Linda Hack, presented 3D work and photography.
Hack is a local artist and a joint head of art at Brentford School.
When I first saw her black and white photographs using animal parts compiled into a series of hunters' trophies, I was certainly put off from visiting this exhibition.
The press photographs show the artist in cowboy hat with a shotgun, surrounded by skulls and horns.
Yet a combination of things, active marketing by both the gallery and the artist herself, made me make the journey to Watermans.
The exhibition could be read on many levels, but the immediate impression I had was of its strong Americanism.
Hack describes her background as small town, Bible Belt, America.
She is slowly coming to terms with her past and exorcising the ghosts.
The result is thought provoking,.
Some pieces possess humour whilst others are sad and full of anxiety.
‘Aphrodisiac’ was a single, but beautiful, horn, hung at belt level by the doorway of the gallery, whilst further down Hack hung a simple, empty wooden plaque entitled ‘Next’.
Each plaque had its own engraved copper name plate, inscribed with a comment and a year.
The trophies were hung according to their comment and how people should read them.
So some were staring down at you and others were well below your eye level, which meant that you were scanning for each piece rather than reading them as a series.
A tactic more familiar to hunters than your usual gallery ‘reading’.
‘Stag Party’ 1992, consisted of a large pair of antlers which were pinned behind a yellow and white cap.
Directly underneath, a pair of binoculars stared out.
Directly underneath, a pair of binoculars stared out.
Each piece is not just the hunters' story traditionally presenting the head or horns of the victim.
Hack weaves objects and memorabilia from her past, the images are loaded with autobiographical  references as the artist retraces the steps of her ancestors and comes to terms with her own past.
The exhibition left me with a feeling that the artist was both the hunter an the hunted, laying open her background in order to investigate, to analyse.
Hack's exhibition was followed by the The Last Man, an exhibition of paintings by Conchita Moore.
The recently published books, The End of History and the Last Man by Francis Fukuyama a The Oedipus Myth are the influences Conchita Moore recognises in her work, yet the exhibition is chaotic and some of the paintings unresolved.
‘Signs at the Crossroads’ was one of the more successful paintings.
Beautifully painted and classically constructed, it presented an arena of objects, a well-drawn foot, bits of furniture and parts of objects which look like studio paraphernalia in the foreground.
‘Prophets’ and ‘Issue’fell comfortably into a well thought out series of paintings.
But the rest seemed to belong to another artist.
Both technically and in their use of colour, these paintings seemed to rely heavily on their statement titles which gave little added insight.
This was an exhibition with great intent but as a whole, it did not hang together well.
It lacked clarity and individual resolution.
Changes are afoot at the 181 Gallery in Hammersmith.
This small but impressive gallery has been a launch pad for many artists over the years and has built up a steady, progressive reputation under the new directorship of Tim Eastop.
In September he will become the new Public Arts Officer for the borough and the gallery will have a new arts coordinator, Philip Riley.
The gallery has built up a well-balanced programme of work offering an annual arrangement of exhibitions clearly influenced by a strong equal opportunities policy.
The recent show of Mary McGowen presented a solid, well thought out presentation of her new work.
With the exception of one piece, all were paintings produced directly onto glass.
McGowen produced these bright images, which at first seemed like silkscreens, by working from back to front in a very direct way.
The use of oil paint on the glass gives the work a very fresh and luminous appearance and the colour combinations are quite beautiful.
Looking at the work as a whole all the pieces had women in them, most of them were nude.
Their faces, stylised with oval, almond eyes and red lips, were disconcerting.
This was the artists concoctions of dream landscapes, borrowed myths, symbolic objects and classical figures of kings and fairytales.
The glass and paint seemed to echo a sense of the esoteric.
The use of the same stylised figure made this exhibition read as a story, the same figure entering into a different tale in each work.
‘Initiation’ was a particularly strong piece, well drawn and lusciously coloured with the woman gazing directly out carrying a severed head in one hand whilst a chubby cupid somersaults in glee.
McGowen also included a ciba-tran called ‘Shadows’ which was a computer-generated image presented in a light box which shows the difference between colour being lit from the back and the direct luminosity of colour when applied directly to glass.
This exhibition was solid and well produced, the images drifting through concocted tales of the artist's imaginings.
Linda Hack ‘The Last Frontier’ at Watermans Gallery
Feedback
VIDEO ART Louise Hill
Animation has a great future.
It is a medium fresh with experiment — both with form and content.
There is a rising interest both at colleges and with general audiences, and it has been recently popularised by television.
Wayward Girls and Wicked Women is a collection of women's animation from the last 13 years — many of which were included in the Channel 4 animations seasons.
It brings together for the first time 24 internationally produced and acclaimed animations, displaying a vast array of styles and experimentation.
Yet, despite the stylistic variety, there is a noticeable abundance of recurrent themes and messages.
From the west, women's issues predominate: themes of domesticity and escapism, taboo subjects such as domestic violence and incest, adolescent insecurities and the injustice of the law in face of all of these issues.
Emotions run high, there is rage, fear and indignation.
Even specific images, such as the blind-folded mother, reappear in different animations.
It is as if women animators are instinctually approaching the backlog of things which need to be said.
The record needs to be put straight on certain issues, and women animators are in a position to do it powerfully and poignantly.
Yet there are humorous topics too, as shown in Candy Guard's well known three minute portraits of female anxieties and delights: the diet, going to the hairdresser, a persistent spot which precipitates the necessity of a brown paper bag on the head, and going to the party, which in the end proves less fun than it was getting ready for it.
Joanna Quinn's animation ‘Girl's night Out’(1987) leaves hubby behind, and takes us out to ‘a quiet night with the girls’.
Two seconds later this transpires into a hilariously raucous hen night at the local striptease.
More wicked women-fun is shown in Nicole van Goethem's ‘Full of Grace’(1987) where two nuns ‘find a new way to feel the love of God after a mistaken purchase from a shop in the wrong part of town’— they buy and ritualistically burn plastic willies.
The humour is reinforced by van Goethem's brilliant use of classic cartoon style animation which retains the slapstick, but dispenses with the childish.
Russian animator is represented by the work of Nina Shorina, who presents a comic allegory on perestroika in ‘The Door’(1986), where the inhabitants of an apartment block continue to use lowered baskets and suitcases and drainpipes as means of entry and exit.
In fact, they use any means they can, so long as it isn't the recently opened door.
The compilation opens with Erica Russell's celebration of African music in ‘Feet of Song’(1988).
Like Kandinsky's jazz-inspired paintings, the animation is infused with energy, yet with a vibrancy he could never hope to achieve with still painting.
This is followed by a triumphant comeback by the acclaimed animator of the seventies, Caroline Leaf, in her work ‘Two Sisters’(1991).
Of all the animations in the compilation, ‘Two Sisters’ seems to perfectly marry narrative with animation technique.
Scratched onto black 70mm film stock, the two sisters are shown bumbling around their home, busy tea-making and typing.
The voices are whisper gentle, the angles though are close and distorted.
But their home habits are violently interrupted by a male intruder, who turns out to be no more than a secret admirer of one of the sisters, writer ‘Viola Ge’.
Called a freak by her sister, the deformed Viola receives her guest's invitation to venture outside, to show her face to the sun.
Moved by the experience, Viola returns to her typewriter and life appears to continue as before.
Several animations use voice-overs which recount real-life experiences and dramas — sometimes autobiographical, as in Karen Watson's ‘Daddy's Little Bit of Dresden China’(1988), or researched and compiled from interviews, such as the story of Josie O Dwyer, an ex-prisoner who was sent to a reform centre at the age of 14 in Marjut Rimminen's ‘Some Protection’(1988).
Although technically and creatively impressive, I found myself being distanced from the narrative in Vera Neubauer's 33 minute epic ‘The Decision’.
My index finger started developing an involuntary twitch towards the fast forward button.
It is described in the press release by Claire Barwell: ‘Nothing is sacred: everything is potential material.
From psychoanalysis, aesthetics and obstetrics to housework, children's games, munitions factories and pinball machines, images which hold the screen for an instant are woven into a rich critique of production line society’.
But the feast for me was too rich, too repetitive and too diverse.
To an extent, I found the other longer animations of Volume 3 ‘Asparagus’ and ‘The Brooch & the Sinful Clasp’also lacking in narrative thread.
Maybe I'm just being traditional in my tastes; it is probably important to watch the compilation in small doses and not sit through the whole three hours as I did.
Small doses are also the intended viewing pattern for the recently produced ‘British Art in the 20th century’ a video programme produced for schools based on the Royal Academy's British Art in the 20th Century exhibition.
Presented by Richard Cork and narrated by Magenta de Vine, the programmes provide a lively, informative introduction to ‘The Modern Movement’, intercutting live footage of events and scenes which inspired the artists.
The women artists are those chosen for the original Royal Academy exhibition: Vanessa Bell, Gwen John, Barbara Hepworth, Bridget Riley, Joan Hills with Mark Boyle and Gillian Ayres.
Women's experimental art of the seventies was left out of the original choice.
The teachers notes suggest discussion themes, such as the ‘Dominance of Male Artists’ and ‘Images of Women in Art’, but not women's images.
It is contentious as to whether such a ‘women's art’ does indeed exist, yet female concerns and experiences evidently do exist, as show so clearly in the ‘Wicked Women’animations.
Wayward Girls and Wicked Women will be available from the British Film Institute from November 
Sarah Pucill from ‘You be Mother’, 1990 in ‘Wayward Girls and Wicked Women’
Books
Destabilising Theory: Contemporary Feminist Debates, edited by Michèle Barrett and Anne Phillips, Polity Press, 1992
This collection of 10 essays is focussed. according to the editors on, ‘such dialogue as can exist between the current work of feminists on post-structuralist and post-modernist themes, and the political project of what for shorthand we call ‘1970s western feminism’.
The formulation doesn't sound too optimistic about the outcome; and indeed the final score appears to be 1970s western feminism’.
The formulation doesn't sound too optimistic about the outcome; and indeed the final score appears to be 1970s: 0, 1990s: 6, with four authors proposing a middle way (which doesn't, of course, place them in the 1980s).
It's true that one or two of the authors are concerned to resist crude caricatures of pre-post-structuralist feminism, but on the whole it has become hard to defend.
This is for two reasons (which, by the way, are often wrongly conflated, including in some of these essays).
In the first place, the universalising tendency of earlier feminist theories has been challenged by those ignored or negated by their categories — working class women, women of colour, lesbians, third world women and others.
The differences among women were obliterated by what turned out to be a feminism of white, western, middle-class, heterosexual women.
This means that the earlier categorisations of feminism (socialist feminism, liberal feminism, radical feminism) no longer work.
In the second place, all theory (including feminist theory) has been shown to be provisional, in the sense that it is a discursive production.
So-called post-structuralist accounts have exposed the myth of theory as ‘truth’, and challenged what Anne Phillips in this volume calls the ‘universalist pretensions’ of Theory.
Feminism has a particular investment in this, since it has also become clear that the dominant theories of modernism, inherited from the Enlightenment (liberalism, marxism, positivism, humanism), are fundamentally ‘masculinist’ or androcentric.
Hence the project of ‘destabilising theory’ is one in which feminists have been enthusiastic to participate.
It all depends what you mean by ‘theory’ though.
There's an important ambiguity in the title of this book, not really acknowledged by the editors (though they discuss other meanings of the phrase).
It can mean that theory must be destabilised —‘destabilising’ as something to be done to theory.
Or it can mean a theory which is ‘destabilising’— the word in an adjectival relationship to ‘theory’.
The editors talk about the first of these, and present the volume as a contribution to the necessary project of challenging theory.
But the book can also be seen as a defence of ‘destabilising theory’ in the second sense: in other words, a defence of post-structuralist theory, which does the destabilising.
To put it succinctly (but confusingly),(traditional) Theory is destabilised by (post-structuralist) theory.
One kind of theory is superseded by another.
One important contribution of these essays lies in showing just why this is necessary, with particularly helpful and clear accounts in essays by Anne Phillips, Moira Gatens and Michèe Barrett.
Some of this material is not especially new, however.
These issues have been debated by American feminists like Linda Nicholson, Nancy Fraser, Christine di Stefano in much the same terms already, and there have been special issues of the journals Feminist Studies and Signs on the topic.
And Rosalind Delmar in this country pointed out the fragmentation of contemporary feminism in 1986.
In particular, Chandra Talpade Mohanty's essay seems odd, devoted as it is to a detailed comparison of essays from as long ago as 1981 and 1984, in which she takes issue with Robin Morgan's universalist feminism.
Biddy Martin contributes a wonderful essay on ‘Sexual practice and changing lesbian identities’, in which she explores the radical and transgressive consequences of the new theory for theories of sexuality and gender, for sexual practice, and for political challenge.
Michèe Barrett refers in her essay to the ‘turn to culture’ in recent feminist work, and Griselda Pollock's long essay in the volume Painting, Feminism, History gives us some idea of why culture (in this case the visual arts) has come to be so central.
If the very categories in play — art, modernism, artist woman — are discursively produced, then the arena for their contestation is, crucially, in culture and discourse.
The political strategy of ‘semiotic play’ evident in the work of some young women artists, operates to ‘destabilise’the hierarchies of gender in which we live.
Despite this, however, I would want to resist any notion that culture has a primacy here, and it's worth recording, I think, the unfortunate trend, especially in the United States, to a textual feminism, in which social and historical issues are increasingly obscured.
More difficult for feminism is the question of how to pursue critique and justify politics in the face of the apparent relativism of a theory which abolishes older theoretical categories — categories like ‘class’ and ‘woman’and ‘patriarchy’.
This is the issue which occupies Anne Phillips, Sylvia Walby and Michèle Barrett in particular, with a certain consensus that, after all, we must hold out for a version of modernism (against post-modernism), and what Phillips calls a ‘middle route’ which retains its aspiration to universalism.
In the end this dilemma — destabilisation versus de-politicisation — is never really resolved.
Barrett's concluding essay merely warns against the wholesale conversion to post-structuralism, suggesting there are good reasons for taking either side here.
What is clear, though, is that we cannot really go back to ‘1970s feminism’, and that inasmuch as we do work with the social and political categories which are the valuable heritage of that period we now do so with a proper awareness of their construction and provisionality.
This, as Biddy Martin and Griselda Pollock both show, is far more likely to be liberating than inhibiting.
 dominant theories of modernism, inherited from the Enlightenment (liberalism, marxism, positivism, humanism), are fundamentally masculinist or androcentric.
Käthè Kollwitz: Essays by Elizabeth Prelinger, Alexandra Comini and Hildegard Bachert, Yale University Press, 1992
The intensity of Käthè Kollwitz ‘representations of the poor, the grieving, and the anger has rendered problematic the interpretation of the objects which she produced and of the subjects under her scrutiny.
Much of the literature about Kollwitz continually seeks a definition of the art object through the biography of the artist.
The formalist critic dismisses her as a serious contender for the mantle of ‘modern artist’ due to a perceived lack of innovation and refusal of the essentialist mandate of formalism.
Equally absolutist are the writers who see in Kollwitz ‘imagery the visual support for their cause, whether socialist, nationalist or feminist.
Käthè Kollwitz, a catalogue with essays by Elizabeth Prelinger, Alessandra Comini and Hildegard Bachert, was recently published to accompany this summer's exhibition of over one hundred prints, drawings, and sculptures at The National Gallery of Art in Washington, DC.
These essays, say the publisher, intend to challenge the view that Kollwitz ‘reputation relies on the ‘social content of her work’; a notion which they suggest is perpetuated ‘often at the expense of her remarkable artistic skills’.
The three authors focus on the artistic mode of production, its socio-historic contextualisation, and its patterns of collection respectively.
Taken as a whole, the authors try to convince ‘the art establishment to recognise fully the greatness of Käthè Kollwitz’.
It is perhaps the imperative of writing for a national gallery with international exposure which prompts this emphasis on ‘mastery’ and ‘genius’.
While this submission to humanist notions of individual greatness by the authors is unfortunate (and rather out-moded by recent historical methodology), it would be unfair to diminish the contribution of these essays, particularly those of Prelinger and Bachert.
Bachert's short survey of collection patterns demonstrates — perhaps unconsciously — a means of moving away from the tendency to create a monolithic interpretation of the ‘artist and her work’.
The quotation above about the ‘greatness’ of Kollwitz was the concluding line to Bachert's essay.
Ironically, this  insistence on ‘greatness’ tends to homogenise the artist's production and denies the very multiplicity of reception which Bachert's research establishes.
It seems more significant that her work was actively collected from the moment of production to the present day.
The differing motives of collectors suggests that for some viewers content does takes precedence over form, and vice versa.
The socialist, the feminist, or the worker who picks up a cheap print of the Memorial Sheet to Karl Liebknecht (1919), is not prioritising the formal elements which attracted Max Lehrs as writing, ‘It would be very regrettable if (Kollowitz ‘etchings) found approval from the public merely because of their social content…= Art should not and cannot serve the changing goals of parties.’
The content-versus-form debate surrounding the historiography of the artist, while in itself a meaningless dichotomy, does raise interesting questions about collection practices.
Perhaps there may be a correlation between the relative costs of the prints, the intended audiences and the degree of specificity of the content.
Which prints were issued in large quantities?
Was the image targeted at a particular group?
It is difficult to assess whether Kollwitz intended to reach any particular market with a specific work because the bulk of information concerning her motives are confined to autobiographical writings.
The unquestioning acceptance of Kollwitz ‘diary and letters as literal transcriptions of events is perhaps the most common presumption in all the literature.
Kollwitz ‘diary consisted of ten books in which she wrote detailed accounts of her artistic practice and other experiences.
There is a curious distancing evident in her descriptions of her work.
After her decision to stop working with a model, she wrote: ‘Through the long time of working on studies, I finally have attained a certain background in technique which allows me to express what I want without a model.’
She writes as if anticipating the publication of her diary.
The notion that the writing is meant to explain her work to others is supported by her use if the ‘revolutionary’ -to-evolutionary’tag which she first used in a letter to a friend (in 1919) and then, quoting herself, she reemploys the phrase in her diary (in 1920, and again, in 1921).
Comini, in a rather bombastic manner, observes that: ‘This voluntary chronicler of the human condition…= had slowly changed from ‘revolutionary’ to ‘evolutionary’in her desire for world reform’.
Thus, the historian inscribes the concept into ‘objective’ text, replacing citation quotes with conceptual quotes; a subtle shift of Kollwitz ‘words from personal to factual.
Surely the diary is always a personal document (evident in her cryptic notes used to refer to an illicit relationship); as such, it is also a consciously worked record of selected memories — memories which serve to reinforce Kollwitz ‘desire to be ‘numbered among the foremost artists’.
Käthè Kollwitz seemingly used her autobiographical writing in letters and the diary to establish a sense of her place in the artistic community.
She facilitated the growth of her public through low-priced prints, donations of work to public galleries, and production of ‘art’ posters.
That Kollwitz is presently regaining the public's imagination as a subject demanding ‘revision’ is testament to the  persuasiveness of her self-marketing in addition to the compelling emotional resonance of the visual objects she created.
Käthè Kollwitz ‘Boy With Arms Round Mother's Neck’, 1931 lithograph