

SPECIAL CHARTER ISSUE Italian Islands Sam Llewelyn's flotilla holiday Wind generators and solar panels Richard Stilgoe on sailing Getting into Russia
CONTENTS FEBRUARY 1991
ON THE WIND
by the editorial team
BY THE EDITOR
Whatever happened to the biodegradable boat?
You remember those things: they littered the creeks and bywaters of harbours, slowly returning to nature, back to the trees and minerals that gave them life.
Once beyond possible resurrection, they melded in with the background and slowly rotted away, enriching the world.
Now look at yachts.
Old glassfibre boats are just about infinitely reparable and even that one-time scourge of the plastic boat, osmosis, is reduced to little more than an irritant.
The second-hand boat market is saturated; yachts seem to drop in value to a level that lasts for decades, never entirely disappearing from the market.
The result is a headache for conservationists and boatbuilders alike.
We are unlikely to follow the example of the Japanese, who tax their second-hand cars so punitively that you would be grateful to buy new.
We couldn't even export boats to other countries.
You can't burn the things — think of the toxic smoke — they won't dissolve or degrade so what can we do with them?
And if you think the standard polyester, uncored boat is bad enough, think of the out-and-out racer, the Admiral's Cupper, the racing multihull.
Their epoxy, Kevlar, carbon and foam construction is virtually bullet-proof; it floats and is all but impossible to dispose of.
We have thought of only one possible method of disposal.
A crushing and grinding plant would reduce the carcasses of all those ancient Centaurs, Kingfishers, Halcyons and Snapdragons to aggregate for surfacing roads or for concrete.
Glassfibre aggregate must be as hard-wearing as anything used now, and wouldn't it give you a warm glow to know that your old Saucy Sal was helping you speed to your new shining craft down the newly laid section of the motorway?
So what will happen to those old boats when we reach saturation point, and, in any case, are we nearing it now?
Dick Johnson
Buoy vandals
Trinity House is becoming increasingly concerned about vandalism to light buoys and beacons in the Thames Estuary and Channel areas and says that damage to navigation aids cost half a million pounds to repair last year.
Bullock Bank station in the Dover Strait, for example, was reported out of position last January and was eventually recovered 61 nautical miles away.
A seven-fathom section of the mooring cable had been removed and replaced with much lighter chain which then gave way during the next storm.
Later in the year the lantern of the Mid Swatch light buoy in the Thames Estuary was found peppered with holes made by shotgun pellets, while the Mucking No 5 buoy was extinguished after being shot at by an air rifle.
Several other light buoys have been extinguished after boats tied up to them and accidentally damaged their cables.
Mick Hardy, Trinity House River Lights Attendant, who is responsible for the seven shore lights along the Thames, has been waging an escalating battle against vandalism which, he says, increases during school holidays.
Trinity House, however, claims that the culprits are by no means all teenage renegades.
‘We want to impress on people that they are contravening the law if they moor or make fast to navigation aids,’ says Howard Cooper, a spokesman for Trinity House.
‘Boats can dislodge a cable and put out a light.
So far there have been no serious incidents as a result of lights that have been out of action, but there is a possibility of accidents occurring.’
Under the Merchant Shipping Act of 1894, anyone found damaging a navigation aid or tying up to one can be fined up to £500, but according to Mr Cooper a fine would be the least of the expense.
‘Anyone caught damaging lights also has to make good the damage, and that can be very expensive.
The large launches sent out to do the repairs cost £300 per hour to run and sometimes they have to do a couple of days steaming to attend.’
Trinity House admits that catching the culprits is virtually impossible.
‘Lights cannot be monitored from the shore — it's too complicated.
We have to rely on reports from passing vessels,’ says Howard Cooper, who has asked yachtsmen for their help in reporting anyone interfering with navigation aids.
Marina interests
Announcements in the city pages of Britain's national newspapers might send shivers up the spines of some yacht owners based on the South Coast.
George Walker, founder and big wheel of the Brent Walker empire, has made use of a refinancing package to save the leisure-based company, but there are rumours that Brent Walker might also have to sell off assets.
What major assets do Brent Walker have?
Why, Brighton Marina and Puerto Sherry Marina, near Cadiz in Spain.
Meanwhile, that well-known buyer of marinas, Marina Developments plc, have announced annual results showing a profit increase of £1.9 million for their last trading year, up from £1.8 million to £3.7 million on a turnover that increased from £8.4 million to £20.3 million.
That profit gives them plenty in hand if they should decide to extend their very considerable British marina interests.
Other interested observers of the business of South Coast berthing might like to read the first letter in defence of the Hamble River Boatbuilders and Marina Owners Association's (HRBMOA) attempts to get the Hamble River Plan changed.
The letter comes from John Harding of Universal Shipyards (see page 14).
You may remember that HRBMOA is also talking about purchasing the lease of the river when it comes up for bid some time hence.
Add to that the attempts by the Crown Estates to increase the river rent for the Lymington river and South Coast boat-owners could be forgiven for feeling a little shell-shocked.
Third party insurance
A new insurance policy launched for the first time at the London Boat Show might be just the thing many long distance sailors are looking for.
Pantaenius Insurance Brokers have introduced a third party only cover that will insure a yacht for damage to other craft or injuries to life or limb.
The insurance will be of special interest to those who might otherwise be unable to get insurance because their cruising ground, manning, or the boat itself might prevent it.
It will also be of special interest to those in cruising areas like Italy where the government requires third party insurance for all boats.
Pantaenius also undertake all other forms of insurance.
Pantaenius have offices in Hamburg and Plymouth.
Black boxes
Discussion in the Yachting World office has taken some interesting turns lately, none more interesting than the campaign for the single black box, or the all-things-in-one instrument.
The idea is to take all the valuable circuitry and electronics from the separate wind speed, water speed, depth sounder, and other instruments, from the Decca, radar, satnav and GPS systems, from the VHF — and perhaps the cellphone and the SSB as well— and integrate the whole thing in one box.
Displays would either flick between functions at the touch of a button or would be like a television screen, showing all sorts of information at once.
Enterprising boatbuilders would build it in the hull and superstructures of their rather than tack things on as at present.
The works could be hidden away, protected from the elements.
It is a good idea, but we believe it will never happen.
The manufacturers might be able to build the black box for a fraction of the cost of separate instruments, but they wouldn't be able to sell as many individual bits, making a profit on each one.
For that reason, rather than the protestations of impossibility or the danger of having all your eggs in one basket, the all-in-one black box doesn't look like being a starter.
Classic yacht paintings
Colin Squire, perhaps best known to the yachting world as crew on many a high class yacht, pops up in a new guise as the representative of marine artist Harry Clow.
So far a series of limited edition prints from 13 paintings are being produced, with the first print being hung in the boat concerned, and the original painting in the owner's home.
The picture we show here is of the wonderful Fife-built Sumurun , racing round the Needles.
Sumurun , with her original rig is leading, closely followed by Sumurun as she was in 1990.
Lovers of classic yachts will be pleased to hear that Sumurun will emerge from the yard in 1991 with her original rig.
Contact Colin Squire on (0986) 894333.
RAF in big league
Service entries in top level yacht racing have traditionally been ridiculed for being under-financed, belt and braces affairs, strong in determination but weak in talent.
However, this may be brought to an end by the RAF's Admiral's Cup campaign.
A fully-fledged sponsorship deal with Oracle UK — the UK division of the world's largest computer software company, not Channel 4's teletext service — has allowed the RAF to commission what should be a highly competitive two tonner from racing boat designer Bruce Farr.
Skipper John Best is nevertheless faced with the tough task of ensuring that his crew are the best for the job.
There are 14 crew altogether.
Four were part of the British Defender Whitbread team, but only two have sailed in previous Admiral's Cups and the team is short of top level round the cans expertise.
They have been campaigning hard in their Sigma 38 Red Arrow and in their chartered Castro two tonner Oracle Arrow , but John Best has wisely imported professional sailors, as he puts it: ‘to help us make the jump from weekend sailing to the big league’.
J/24 national champion Ian Southworth was recently signed up to support helmsman Tim Law as tactician.
RYA keelboat coach Bill Egerton has been advising the team, along with Bryan Fishback of Farr International and North Sails' Neil Mackley.
Project manager Nick Schulkins maintains that, although ten of the crew are from the RAF: ‘if any of the boys are not quite up to scratch, we'll replace them with professionals.’
The RAF are putting their own stamp on the project.
Between October and December when they were not competing in the Hamble Winter Series or jockeying against other IOR racers, the team was out everyday, practising manoeuvres aboard Oracle Arrow on a windward-leeward course at the mouth of the Hamble.
The team was put through a daily fitness programme, starting with a 40 minute run before breakfast and finishing at the nearby police gym where they took in circuit and weight training before going on another one-and-a half mile run.
They were also taking the advice of a sport's psychologist.
After her launch on 5 February, the team's new yacht, to be named Wings of Oracle , will be off to Palma to train up against her Farr 242 design sistership,Larouge .
The pressure will really be turned on if her position as the sole candidate for the two tonner slot in the British AC team is contested by Don Wood, who, it is rumoured, may charter Juno IV .
Feminine forces
Following the success of Tracy Edwards and her Maiden crew in the Whitbread Round the World Race, women involved in yachting are realising that they have a great chance to attain their sailing goals.
Yachting World has long believed sailing to be one of the principal sports in which women can compete directly with men, particularly as, in sailing, brain and not just brawn is of the essence.
Cathy Foster proved that in the Los Angeles Olympics and is out to prove it again in the Admiral's Cup.
In a two-year campaign, a crew based around Cathy will be looking to raise funds for an up-to-date one tonner for 1991 and 1992, following on with a design and build campaign for a full-out Admiral's Cup boat on 1993.
Current team members include some of the Maiden crew, along with Fiona Brown from Blue Water Sparcraft, who is currently treading the sponsor trail.
Women sailors who might not have their sights set on such lofty goals — or, for that matter, those who have — will be interested in a seminar about women's sailing to be held in February.
Gaye Sarma at the RYA has all the details.
Customs complexities
Nowhere is entry documentation as complicated as in the Soviet Union.
Features Editor James Boyd discovered this fact on his recent visit there (see page 94).
Amongst numerous documents, the Soviet customs declaration demands the visitor to fill in a  questionnaire stating: ‘With me and in my luggage I have:(i) weapons of all descriptions and ammunitions (ii) narcotics and appliances for the use thereof.’
The Soviet maritime declaration of health is an equally laudable document which asks the yacht's skipper to state any cases which have occurred on board of plague, cholera, yellow fever, small-pox, typhus or relapsing fever.
It also asks: ‘Has plague  occurred or been suspected among the rats or mice on board?’
The moment that we have the faintest suspicion that the rats or mice on board Silver Salmon have got plague we retire to the golf course for good.
ARC latest
For the fourth time in its five year history, the ARC, the Atlantic Rally for Cruisers, has been bedevilled by light winds on what should be the tradewind route from the Canary Islands to the West Indies.
ARC's leading boat, the Kelsall catamaran Manx Cat completed the 3,600-mile passage in 14 days 17 hr, 59 min 42 sec, but only at the expense of hundreds of hours motoring, arriving on 10 December.
Next in was Ocean Quest on 11 December, with a time of 16 days, 10 hr, 9 min and 22 sec, but they also motored for many hours.
As a result, the Yachting World Trophy for line honours — allowing motoring for only one-third of the elapsed time — went to Speedy Go , sailed by Philippe Barbe, which finished only 10 hours, 11 min. later than Ocean Quest .
Twenty two days after the start, only 25 boats had arrived in Rodney Bay, St Lucia, and radio reports told of many smaller boats running dangerously low on water and fuel.
A full report of the ARC will be in the March Issue of Yachting World .
Mid-Atlantic rescue
ALMOST exactly in the middle of the Atlantic Ocean between the Canaries and St Lucia, the radio net for the Atlantic Rally for Cruisers was brought to life on 10 December with a dramatic mayday from the one-off Chaot owned by Manfred Boschmann.
Chaot had reportedly been nursing a damaged rudder stock for some time, but as water was coming into the boat in increasing quantities, Boschmann decided to abandon ship as soon as other yachts on passage to the Caribbean could come to his assistance.
ARC yacht Tao , an Amel Maramau owned by Heinrich Eldagsen took two of Chaot 's four crew, and the Swan Alexis , on passage to Antigua, not in the ARC, but listening to the radio net, took the remaining two.
Last reports of the yacht indicated that Chaot was still well afloat as the crew sailed off.
Listeners to BBC Radio Solent will probably hear reports of the rescue first hand as yachting broadcaster Dennis Skillicorn's daughter was aboard Tao .
Chaot was racing in the CHS division of the ARC and her slot on the notice board was occupied by ‘DNF’.
Barracuda sell off
With the ending of the BBC television's long-running sailing soap opera, ‘Howards' Way’(sighs of relief all round: the last few have been hardly a glowing advertisement for boating or boating business) comes the announcement that Sadler International are to sell off the moulds and rights to build Barracuda, the prototype of which has been the opening and closing credits' star of the series.
Sadler came unstuck in trying to produce this light displacement flyer alongside their range of production boats.
The successors to Martin Sadler's company have gone for a whole new line of Stephen Jones-designed boats, making the Tony Castro-designed boat surplus to requirements.
Although she is not the best-looking boat in the world, she may, with her radical shape, twin rudders and blistering turn of speed, just survive in the hands of a true enthusiast.
Anyone interested should contact Julian Fawcett on (0202) 67949
Another award
Robin Knox-Johnson has recently been honoured at the Silk Cut Awards for his seamanship in navigating his yacht Suhali one way across the Atlantic with nothing more than an astrolabe, a cross-staff and a lot of skill, and then back without a mast, engine, radio or compass after a battering in a series of storms.
He has also been advised that he is to be presented with an award from the Royal Yachting Association Seamanship Foundations by HRH the Princess Royal on 9 January.
It seems that every time Robin sets sail in his venerable old craft he picks up some award or other.
No wonder he has refused all offers to buy her!
Parisian moods
Year by year, the Paris Boat Show grows steadily.
During the three years that it has been accommodated at the Paris Exhibition Centre at Porte de Versailles — the original venue at CNIT having succumbed to the demolition expert's hammer — the Salon Nautique has expanded by almost 20 per cent.
The four halls covered power, sail and equipment.
Over 9000 square metres was devoted to everything to do with sailing.
The largest hall was devoted to all that floated, other than sailboards and powerboats.
In spite in a slowing in the growth of medium-priced sailing yachts, all the larger were concentrating on this section of the market with new or revamped models of 30 to 35 feet (9.1 to 10.7m).
Several of the smaller companies were attempting to launch production yachts which, they hoped, would blossom into strong one-design classes.
As more companies attempt to take a bite at this particular cake, the market becomes increasingly fragmented and it is very difficult indeed to achieve strong enough support for any particular design though each has its own supporters.
In competition with such manufacturing giants as Bénéteau and Jeanneau, which have very shrewd and able marketing capabilities, the smaller builder, trying to establish a successful one-design on a shoestring, faces very considerable problems.
The most buoyant sector of the market at Paris was that of larger yachts.
Almost all the major builders have launched production models of more than 50ft –15.2m); several are considering extending their range well beyond this.
See our report on page 42.
Solent surveys
Two years ago we reported on the seismic survey work being carried out in the Solent to determine if oil drilling there would be profitable.
We were also glad to report that the lease holders at the time found that it wasn't profitable and relinquished their rights.
With the increase in the price of oil due to the Gulf crisis, however, what was then an uneconomical proposition now looks rather healthier.
Renewed seismic work was being carried out between Hurst and West Lepe in December.
The geologists are looking for viable extensions of the Wych Farm field which has been successfully exploited in Poole Harbour without too much impact on the environment.
We wait with interest to learn something of the results, and hope that in the future we won't be having to leave Beaulieu gas platform to starboard during Land Rover Cowes Week.
D'OLIVEIRA ON NAVIGATION
How abnormal weather conditions can affect tidal predictions
As a result of my article on computer tidal prediction in the December issue, several readers have asked what practical advice I can offer about the effects of abnormal meteorological conditions on tide predictions and when to apply correction to take them into account.
Tide prediction is based on average meteorological conditions and atmospheric pressure and wind.
It therefore follows that any deviation from average conditions will result in a difference between the predicted tide and the actual tide experienced.
Atmospheric pressure is usually the greatest influence.
So how do you define average meteorological conditions in the context of tidal prediction?
A good starting point is to refer to the appropriate volume of Admiralty Sailing Directions .
Taking the Solent area for my practical example, the Channel Pilot gives monthly statistical weather information for Southampton.
The statistical table shows that the barometric pressure at mean sea level varies from about 1014 to 1017 mb This gives an average of just over 1015.5 mb For practical purposes, we can call it 1016 mb
Using 1016 mb as the datum, it is clear that if the atmospheric pressure is higher than the datum of 1016 mb, the practical effect will be to give a lower water level than the predicted value.
One also needs to bear in mind that the effects of a change of pressure may not be instantaneous, but may become apparent later.
For practical navigation, the thing you need to know is how much the water level is likely to vary for different values of atmospheric pressure.
You do need to bear in mind that the figures vary from place to place.
The table below may give some useful general guidance.
With the average pressure hovering around 1030 mb plus for weeks on end last summer, it can be seen quite clearly from the table below that the water level in the Solent area was generally around minus 0.4m lower than predicted values.
On some occasions, the lower than usual level of water at LW springs could actually be seen.
Strong winds will also affect tide levels.
They may alter the predicted times of high or low water by up to one hour, but the effects are much less easy to quantify as winds are very variable and are strongly influenced by the topography of the local area.
Broadly speaking, strong winds raise the water level in the direction towards which the wind blows.
In practical terms, one does not need to consider winds of less than Force 5.
Again using the Solent area as a practical example, we know from experience that strong winds between north and north-east will significantly reduce tide levels.
The longer the wind blows, the greater the effect.
North-easterly winds of about Force 5 will reduce predicted levels by about minus 0.2m, but stronger winds of Force 8 to 10 are likely to double the effect and reduce tide levels by a maximum of minus 0.5m
Remember that it is not unusual for strong winds to be associated with high pressure, although strong winds and gales are more frequently encountered in low pressure systems.
Indeed, last summer there were often winds of Force 6 to 8 in the Solent area with atmospheric pressures of around 1035 mb at the same time.
Under such conditions the total correction required to counter the combination of the effects of wind and pressure meant subtracting 0.6m to 0.7m from the normal predicted tide level.
This correction is really quite significant, especially during LW spring tides.
Such a combination would, for example, most certainly affect your ability to enter the Beaulieu or Newtown Rivers without risking going aground.
Basil D'Oliveira.
LETTERS to the Editor 
To: The Editor, Yachting World, Quadrant House, The Quadrant Sutton, Surrey SM2 5AS.
Letters may also be sent via electronic mail, Telecom Gold 74:SKK864, or Fax: 081-643 2144.
From the Hamble
Sir, Re ‘Hamble Wrangles’(November) I feel a response to clarify some of the complex issues is necessary.
Hampshire County Council's planning department, together with those of Fareham and Eastleigh Councils, have only undertaken the review of the Hamble Valley Plan because pressure was put on them to do so by the Hamble River Boatyard and Marine Operator's Association.
The HRBMOA, which encompasses not only all the major marina and boatyard operators, but a great many other boat-related businesses on the River Hamble, is acting with one accord in this matter, despite the fact that their individual interests and aspirations are all completely different.
Put simply, everyone has come together for the common good and economic prosperity of the river.
The question of the removal of pile and swing moorings to ease the congested fairway is not a clandestine attempt by marina operators for extra berths, but was a matter instigated originally by the harbour master, Captain Colin Nicholl, an employee of Hampshire County Council.
He would like some moorings removed on pure safety grounds and to make navigation by large numbers of boats easier.
Slightly more controversially, both he and we would like a small number of swing and pile moorings removed to enhance the appearance of the river.
We have suggested that the lost berths could quite easily be replaced by a mixture of pontoons, remaining pile berths and by very small additions to existing marina complexes.
This would enable an overall increase in river berths, but obviously, in the context of marina berths, costs would increase.
Existing river mooring prices are artificial.
It is questionable whether river moorings provide inexpensive berths for ‘largely local’ people.
However, under the terms of their lease from the Crown (who own the river-bed) HCC are supposed to run the river profitably.
They choose not to.
They are not charging what they could, and nothing like ‘what the market will bear'; river berth holders are therefore being subsidised by all rate/poll tax payers throughout Hampshire.
Hampshire County Council is not normally noted for its socialist attitudes.
You suggest, in effect, that for some reason it is justifiable for boat owners who, after all, must have some financial resources to have acquired a permanent mooring in the first place, to be supported by ordinary countrywide residents, many of whom genuinely have little or no financial resources and who could not care less about a handful of sailors.
Marina berth charges need to be put into perspective.
I do not have to defend MDL, but the argument must be put into context.
We live in a free market economy which has prospered considerably over the last ten or so years.
The River Hamble is a microcosm of conventional market forces.
Historically and for many years marina charges were too low.
Over the last few years they have simply been brought into line with demand.
Marinas are no different from any other commodity.
If marina berth charges are too high, berths would be empty.
People choose to keep their yachts on the Hamble, probably because it is the pre-eminent yachting river in the country and we wish to keep it that way.
The economic prosperity of boatyards is vital if their future is to be secured.
Virtually no-one makes money doing things to boats.
I accept that few boat owners find the cost of repair or maintenance work cheap, but costs of running these businesses are enormous and the plant and equipment needed expensive to buy and maintain.
The River Hamble is special and we are simply seeking some latitude and flexibility in the future uses of and rebuilding of existing, mainly clapped-out buildings.
In our own case, at Universal Shipyards, for example, we have one of the most unsightly buildings facing directly on to the river.
In its present condition it is unusable.
In due course, when economic circumstances permit, we would like to rebuild it.
Through our planning consultants we enquired of Fareham Council whether we could demolish it without the need to obtain planning permission to replace it (in the same place, size, shape etc).
They replied that not only would we need planning permission, but that they would probably not grant it, and even if hey did, its subsequent use would be restricted to river users only.
It seems to us to contravene all normal rules of equity that they should be able to behave in this fashion.
It is in yachtsmen's best interests that some flexibility is permitted now, otherwise all the wide and diverse skills that prevail on the Hamble at the present time will gradually disappear.
Too Much To Ask?
Sir, In answer to your November article, ‘Are modern yachts too bland?’,
I think the answer is, yes.
It would be nice to see manufacturers taking a lead from some of the very fast but seaworthy one-off designs emerging following the reduction in enthusiasm for the IOR, or some of the superb yachts in the BOC and Globe Challenge races.
Yacht manufacturers should be more concerned with sailing excitement, performance and safety than providing standard internal lay-outs; acres of teak are lavished on hulls which have insufficient ballast, heavy displacement and low ‘sail areas.
I am going to trade up from my Hunter HB31 soon, but I am hard pressed to find a production boat in the 37–40ft (11–12m) range that I would really like to buy, even given the money.
I would like a very fast, light, stiff, slightly over-canvased 38ft (11.5m) yacht with simple, clean and functional accommodation.
The design would be of clean, straight non-IOR lines with an ample, but not excessive, beam running well aft.
The hull should plane easily and give moderate form stability.
Hull and deck construction would be of strong, synthetic core composite, laminated using isophthalic resins with high stress reinforcement from unidirectional or bi/triaxial rovings, rather than woven mat.
The hull would be over-engineered in the floor for keel strength and very light in the non-structural panels.
The keel would give at least 50 per cent ballast ratio, with a bulge/bulb to increase righting moment.
Rig should be a large fractional with slightly swept back spreaders for short-handed security, and single runners.
It should be easily handled by two.
Sail area should be such that you can reef at about 20 knots apparent with a crew of two.
Bulkheads should be cored to reduce weight and the ends kept as light as possible by using lightweight material or bags for furniture and stowage in the ends.
The theme of the interior should be clean, efficient simplicity, using more light or white panels like many North American yachts.
You only need one head on a 38-footer.
There are some yachts which come close to this spec: the FF boats of Holland (only 30 and 35ft); the X119, but I don't think this is suitable for two and its bulb keel with forward protrusion seems to me to be dangerous in our net-infested waters; the Dehler db36 is interesting, though ugly and over-designed.
Boatbuilders would probably say that the 38ft yacht I have described is too expensive to produce.
It requires top quality materials and labour-intensive construction methods.
This may be true, but if the large manufacturers started to build boats closer to the state-of-the-art, the costs would come down.
Puff puff
Sir, Over the past few years the tide of public opinion has been turning strongly against smoking, but this tide of public opinion was stemmed somewhat, albeit inadvertently, by the valiant efforts by tobacco companies.
I know that in professional yachting the attitude is that sponsorship money is good, no matter what the source; after all, the yachting public should be intelligent enough to choose for themselves.
Even if we discount the fact that Rothmans was the British hope in the last Whitbread Round the World Race, it seemed to me that Yachting World took the opportunity to mention tobacco companies wherever possible.
For example, you went to great lengths to point out that Merit is a cigarette, whereas your magazine is available in many parts of the world where Merit is not.
You also displayed disbelief when Australia considered banning tobacco advertising in sports events.
The Whitbread Race has deservedly become a media event.
The organisers should accept their responsibility and ban tobacco advertising.
Yachting World as a family magazine and as the self-proclaimed ‘World's No 1’ should be in the vanguard of this change.
Yachting can survive as a spectator sport, but the participants owe it to future generations not to promote tobacco consumption as part of their lifestyle.
And a little bit more
Sir, What would readers like in a boat?
The answers from me would be quite simple:
1 A strong hull
2 Better cockpit protection.
More effective sprayhoods provided in production boats and good visibility forward.
3 Provision for a generator to allow use of any domestic appliance, plus advantage of battery charging and unlimited lighting.
4 More hanging space than is usually provided.
Racing, of course, is another matter and everything must be sacrificed to the god of speed.
DERRICK STEVENS Boars Hill, Oxford 
Act one, scene one.
A houseboat on Chichester Harbour.
Enter one slightly grubby swan, stage right, to swim nonchalantly beside the boat, incognito.
A large, brown bloodhound, Spot loiters menacingly by the door.
Scene two:enter one cat Fluffy
Chris Williams and Alan Warren from our advertising department raised £350 for the Great Ormond Street children's hospital when they took part in the Round London marathon in March 1990.
They were sponsored every inch of the way and finished a resounding 55th.
Oracle Arrow , the RAF's chartered two tonner, practises in the Solent
First over the line in Class E,Presto's crew receive their ‘welcome pack’
Waving from the shore as Bounder crosses the finish line 
Do Hamble moorings need to be removed for safe navigation?
NEXT MONTH
Contents may differ from those listed below
ON SALE 19 FEBRUARY
London Show report
The Yachting World editorial team reports from the new look Earls Court on new yachts, equipment and the latest in navigation equipment which made the headlines.
1991 Calendar
Yachting World 's popular calendar of events, available with this issue, brings you information on all the top occasions, racing, cruising, shows, rallies and regattas.
ARC report
Once again the Atlantic Rally for Cruisers was bedevilled by a lack of wind, but there was no shortage of incidents including a man overboard, a sinking and a mid-ocean party.
Europa 92
A fleet of 45 yachts left Gibraltar on 6 January to complete 17-stop circumnavigation of the world.
Elaine Thompson reports from the start.
Osmosis — Technology update
New techniques for tackling the problem of osmosis.
Once the bane of those who owned glassfibre yachts, osmosis can now be dealt with using a number of techniques.
Product guide — echo sounders
The humble echo sounder is considered by many as the most important aid to navigation.
Elaine Thompson describes how they work, what they cost and outlines some of the developments for the future.
Around the race course 3: the beat
In short course in-shore racing the first beat is the most important leg of the race.
A bad start can be rectified, a good start can be built upon.
Stuart Quarrie offers some advice.
Weekend cruising guide — Chichester harbour
There are more moorings in Chichester than any other harbour in the UK.
James Boyd reports on the latest developments for yachtsmen including the mooring situation and onshore facilities.
Landfalls — St Lucia
In the third of this series which looks at ports visited by the Europa 92 fleet, St Lucia comes under the microscope.
Jimmy Cornell describes how to approach the island and what to expect once you have arrived.
Boat tests
Peter Milne sails the Bénéteau First 310 and assesses the Sadler 32 in Test of Time.
James Boyd takes a look at the Foutaine Pajot Antigua 37 catamaran.
Premiere
The fourth issue of our luxury yacht magazine reports on the Antigua Charter Show including the new sailing yachts,Signe ,Astral , the classic Windrift , plus motor yachts Destiny and L'Aquastion .
Plus
On the Wind, Racing Round-up, Cruising Log, W.M. Nixon, Bernard Hayman and the rest of our top columns.
SILVER SALMON DIARY
by Dick Johnson
Explaining why Sigma 33's have been testing new genoas, plus we anticipate an engine overhaul
Jack Kelly, chairman of the Sigma 33 class, has responded to my comments in the December ‘Silver Salmon’ column on the Genesis No 1 genoa trials with a full letter setting out his own thoughts and the class thinking behind the trials and consideration of the new sails:
‘I have been asked on many occasions if we could have more modern replacements for our 12-year-old sail designs.
It has always been my belief that a class of our type needs to review its rules from time to time so as not to become outdated.
There is always pressure from newer one-designs.
So far none of these has proved to be as popular in the UK as the Sigma and it is the function of the class committee to ensure that this remains so.
The class is generally resistant to change, but we have allowed a certain latitude in he deck gear on the boats and have tightened the rules when there was a danger of modifications which cause an increase in our insurance premiums.
My expectations when I approached David Robinson of Sobstad Sailmakers two years ago to ask for his suggestions for a new No1 genoa, was that any more modern cut of sail, such as a tri-radial, would be considerably more expensive.
They would therefore probably be unacceptable to the majority of members, but at least we had to do the research in order to be able to give our members some facts and figures.
Recent research has confirmed that view.
At that time Sobstad were introducing the Genesis concept to the UK and David assured us that this hi-tech sail would be available to us as a one-design class for no more than the cost of our present Dacron sail.
He agreed to make two of these sails for us to try and we later purchased a third from association funds.
The sails are currently standing up very well with no evidence of delamination, despite being used by as many as 30 different boats in up to 27 knots apparent wind (purely for research purposes you will understand — not recommended for normal Sigma racing).
Photographs show that the shape of the sails is as good as new, whereas a six-month old Dacron sail has bagged-out and the draft moved aft dramatically.
Most owners at the front of the Sigma fleet will buy a new No1 genoa each year if they wish to remain competitive.
Thus, if a Genesis sail will remain fast for even two seasons there will be a cost saving of nearly £700.
Any racing life beyond that will be an added bonus, and for those who race less frequently the sails should last even longer.
Although the majority of Sigmas race one-design, there are many who race in CHS or IMS, and Sigma 33s form a very large part of the IOR fleet in the Round the Island Race.
For these boats a sail which allows them to compete more evenly under handicap rules has obvious advantages.
It is interesting to note that, because of the computer production technique employed, the Genesis sails should be more accurately one-design than a handmade Dacron sail.
Should the sail eventually be adopted throughout the fleet, speed differences due to tired sails could be much reduced, thus putting an even greater premium on the skills of helmsmen and crew which, we all agree, is what one-design racing is all about.’
Jack makes some valid points for the top racers — and indeed for those trying to fight their way to the top.
I would be interested to hear the thoughts of any other Sigma owners, top flight racers or those who are more concerned with club racing, so put pen to paper.
ENGINE TROUBLE
Hopefully, by the time read this,Silver Salmon will be well on the way towards completion of the major engine overhaul she has been longing for ever since our return from Denmark.
A loss of compression on both cylinders of the Volvo Penta MD7a — plus some very black sump oil — meant that something was happening inside the engine, and certainly 11 years had taken their toll on the paint on the outside of the block.
New valves or rings, an injector overhaul, a good clean-out plus a paint-up are all on the cards.
We went to the Hamble area's Volvo agent, RK Marine, for an estimate of the likely cost and they came up with a worst figure of 42,520 including parts — which for any Volvo is very expensive.
After we got over the shock we asked around for other quotes and came up with an initial estimate of £1,000 plus parts, subject to what is found when the engine is taken out, from John Cutler Marine Engineers who were recommended by Sigma Yachts.
We'll let you know how things work out in a future issue.
While the engine is out of the boat we will renew the sound insulation in the engine compartment, which is very dirty as well as having been superseded by much better materials in the intervening years, and install a much-needed light — have you tried to get a Volvo MD7a dipstick back into its hole, aboard a Sigma, in the dark?
Advantage of the easy access will be taken to have a good paint round with white paint — more light — and to install some exhaust silencing.
The standard water-injected exhaust system isn't too bad, but my bunk is right next to what noise there is and, therefore, you can understand why I am keen on initiating improvements.
RACING ROUND-UP
edited by Andrew Preece
Preece comments
Top level sailors welcome the one design nature of the World Yachting Grand Prix Originally I was highly sceptical of the World Yachting Grand Prix, but I have to admit to something of a change of heart.
It does seem to offer a number of departures from ‘normal’ grand prix racing.
The first is the one-design nature of the 52ft (15.8m) yachts.
Although the concept is proven at club level, it has so far never found favour in international competition.
Now I understand that top level sailors welcome the one-design nature of the Grand Prix, not only because it is potentially inexpensive, but because it offers them an even platform from which to display their skills.
The structure of the Grand Prix is attractive, too.
The fleet will be shipped around the world to venues where the sailing will be just part of a larger event.
Events are managed by a professional management team, unlike the World Match Racing Conference, which is run largely by a group of clubs overseen and interfered with by the IYRU or groups like the 50ft Association where a committee of owners organises racing to suit its needs.
The World Yachting Grand Prix has now gained credibility by attracting renowned and respected sailors.
Dennis Conner, Peter Gilmour and Bernie Beilken have, in my view, lent the final air of respectability to the Grand Prix.
In Britain Eddie Owen is committed to the idea and is trying to raise, or have underwritten, the £500,000 which will allow him to confirm an order.
Club sailors in the one-design classes have long been proving to one another just who's best.
Now the professionals will have their chance.
Dennis Conner will start all square with no technological edge.
Interestingly, this is something Conner usually tries to avoid!
Andrew Preece.
Spanish launch
A cold wind blew and the rain fell in torrents as the Spanish launched their first IACC boat.
The bottle of champagne took five attempts to break, the roses dropped, out of the two passing aircraft, missed the ceremony by 200 yards and the balloons drifted off downwind, unnoticed.
Raul Gardini and his skipper Paul Cayard grinned complacently.
Their grand Venetian launch was not being upstaged.
However, the America's Cup is not about launches and, as even Gardini could see, the boat hanging from the crane could take the Spanish far.
Designed in the main by the late Pepin Gonzales after the group had studied an off-the-shelf Farr package,Espana ‘92 is the fourth IACC boat to be out sailing.
Pedro Campos, project manager said, ‘We are aware that a country going into the America's Cup for the first time has never done well, but at the same time we are going there to win; no-one knows about the class.’
His theory is that, as they were fourth on the water, the Spanish are at least fourth favourites to win.
He rates only the Nippon Challenge and the New Zealanders ahead in his own group and feels that, although the French show promise, they are dogged by lack of funds (it was subsequently announced that French funding by the City of Paris was likely).
The Spanish budget is set at US$35m of which $10m is in place.
Though reluctant to disclose figures, Campos revealed that, of the total budget, more than $20m will eventually be spent on research and development.
‘The most important aspect of this America's Cup will be boat speed, not crew work, said Campos.
The building of the second boat — the Spanish feel they have not time to build three — will begin in March with a launch date set for the autumn.
Although many of the main ingredients for a successful first challenge from Spain are clearly in place, a question mark hangs over the afterguard of the boat.
Campos, who last year won the Three-Quarter Ton Cup in the Farr-designed Lone , would like to be skipper, but is realistic: ‘I will be the skipper if I feel I am the best.’
Another contender for the post is Antonio Giorusteggi, who has campaigned a Star for Spain in the past, as well as sailing in Spanish IOR teams.
At present, though, Spain's leading sailors are unavailable because of Olympic commitments.
Both Alesjandro Abascal and Jose Luis Doreste are campaigning Stars and Luis Doreste is campaigning a Flying Dutchman.
America's Cup deals
Crucial elements are dropping into place in the build-up to the 1992 America's Cup,writes Keith Wheatley .
One change that traditionalists will notice is the sail designation on each boat.
All boats will now carry three-letter designations using standard Olympic abbreviations.
Thus Great Britain will be GBR and New Zealand, NZD.
The only objection came from the Nippon Challenge who were unwilling to go to sea with JAP on their mainsail.
They will be permitted to use JPN.
According to Tom Ehman, executive director of the America's Cup Organising Committee (ACOC), the problems over Soviet access to San Diego are virtually over.
‘The local navy wants the entire restriction waived, but there's still a tiny bit of ‘cold war’ mentality,’explained Ehman.
Meanwhile, the Soviets have decided to forsake San Diego itself for nearby Mission Bay where the Nippon Challenge and a joint de Savary/Iain Murray operation are likely to be set up.
Although the ACOC has hired Mark Mac Cormack's fiercely commercial Trans World International to sell television rights worldwide, Ehman insists that deals will be signed on the criterion of the best coverage, rather than most money.
In Perth during 1986/87 there were concerns that many countries, including the UK saw little Cup action.
Dickson deposed
There were two big stories running at the World Championship of Match Race Sailing,writes Keith Wheatley .
The first was the return to devastating form of Peter Gilmour, who blitzed the best-of-three final against Rod Davis 2–0.
The second was the swift and inexplicable fall from grace of Kiwi superstar Chris Dickson who, with only four wins out of nine round-robin races, failed to make the semi-finals at an international event for the first time since 1987.
With the Regatta being held in Auckland, a city where, during the 1986/87 America's Cup, the young Dickson was widely believed to walk on water, the latter story was bound to make the biggest impact.
What surprised this observer was the extent to which Dickson — admittedly an aloof and irascible young man — has become unpopular with the New Zealand yachting community.
Dickson now lives and works full-time in Japan, where he is designated skipper of the Nippon Challenge for the America's Cup.
On the aeroplane from Tokyo to Auckland he was chirpy and sociable, amiably demonstrating his knowledge of conversational Japanese and chatting about the syndicate's progress.
Once back in his hometown, however, he became edgy and defensive, especially with the local press.
One can possible understand his attitude when skippers like Rod Davis were saying publicly before the event: ‘It doesn't matter who wins as long as it isn't Chris Dickson.’
Dickson duly complied with their wishes with an appalling 1–4 record on the first day.
In this race against Gilmour, Dickson collided with the Aussie skipper on the first downwind leg.
‘Almost full-on catastrophe’, said Gilmour with memories of his own dismasting in the penultimate race of the 1989 Lymington worlds.
Dickson then managed to bounce off an umpire boat while doing his 270 ° penalty turn.
Exasperated beyond measure, the now balding wünderkind threw his chequered protest flag into the tide.
The anti-Dickson camp chortled for hours in the bar about how the boy ‘spat the dummy’.
‘The thing I like about working in Japan is that they are not part of the New Zealand yachting soap opera,’ said Dickson over a post-race Steinlager.
‘If I came back and trained and lived here again I would probably go back to being the blue-eyed boy.
But I'm an international performer in an international sport on an international stage.
Unfortunately, a lot of the people in the little club called ‘New Zealand sailing’ can't accept that.
They haven't got anything else to talk about.’
What Dickson did do, along with almost everyone else in the event, was beat Jochen Schumann and Thierry Peponnet.
Winning Soling regattas with a match racing component had given these two Olympic gold medallists enough points in the rankings table to be invited to Auckland.
What everyone else wanted to see was how gold medal standard stacked up against professional match racers.
Tactically, both skippers were able to hold their own in the starts; indeed, although Schumann did not win a race, he was ahead in the weather mark in four of his matches.
‘This was a good achievement for us; we watched the top guys and learned a lot,’ said Schuman.
‘We were only four wins behind Chris Dickson so we cannot be too bad.’
The German skipper ascribed most of his problems to his team's unfamiliarity with a boat as big as the 33ft (10.2m) Farr MRX used.
The last day of the finals was blustery and cold.
After the laying of a few ‘experimental’ courses with due consideration for commercial shipping, wind direction and a fleet of local Finn sailors competing for Olympic squad selection, racing, finally, got under way.
Despite input from the tactician, David Barnes, the local team led by Rod Davis was always wrong-footed by Gilmour's ability to get to the left hand side of the course (favoured all day) and defend it.
He won the first race by 27 seconds and the second by 33 seconds.
AC update
Contenders for the British Admiral's Cup team will now be able to use the German 50ft regatta at Travemünde or the Two Ton Cup in Keil in place of the weekend in Hayling Bay, as the final trial for selection.
Announcing the change, the RORC stressed that ‘the schedule of trials is mandatory for all boats and will be the sole criteria for selection’.
The two German regattas will give British sailors better match racing practice.
Despite the RORC's statement, Michael Peacock has been given dispensation to miss the first trial in Spi Ouest — as his boat will be en route to Britain from the Miami 50ft regatta in March.
Peacock's new Juno was given early sailing trials in late November, in England, before being shipped to Key West to join the 50ft circuit.
Skipper Mike McIntyre has yet to nominate a second helmsman, although the early favourite was Jo Richards.
Ian Southworth has been formally appointed second helmsman on Wings of Oracle , Oracle UK's Two Tonner.
Oracle have stressed that, although their campaign began firmly under the umbrella of the RAF, any steps would be taken to ensure that the best crew is provided with the best resources to gain selection for the British team and become top Two Tonner at the Admiral's Cup.
Wings of Oracle is the first sponsored boat likely to sail in a British Admiral's Cup team.
Eddie Owen has signed up for the 1991 season with the Japanese and will sail aboard the 50-footer Will at the Key West and Miami 50ft regattas as tactician for Terry Neilson.
He will then join a new 50ft Farr-designed Will for the start of the Japanese Admiral's Cup campaign.
Meanwhile, Coram have announced that they will support the entire French Admiral's Cup team, the first time that all three boats in a team will have been sponsored by a single company.
Coram's existing Two Tonner and the 50ft charter Capricorno will be augmented by Mean Machine , chartered from her new Belgian owner.
Marc Bouet, Marc Pajot's America's Cup tactician, has been asked to skipper one of the boats, but is considering the offer in the light of his America's Cup commitments.
Current estimations reveal that the Admiral's Cup may attract just eight teams, from Britain, America, Australia, Japan, Germany, France, Denmark and Italy.
Matador 2 on form
With one race in hand in the final leg of the three-part world championship series, Bill Koch's new Matador2 , designed by a team led by Bill Cook, took the Maxi World Championships in style, three 1sts in six races,writes Malcolm McKeag .
She was apparently able to win at will, despite a strong challenge from Raul Gardini's Passage of Venice .
‘Matador has been two and three tenths (of a knot) over every boat here’, said Dennis Conner, summing up both the last regatta of the series — the Moët & Chandon Grand Prix in St Thomas, Virgin Islands — and the two previous regattas, in Newport (RI) and Miami.
Although the maxi fleet was numerically small (six boats raced the Moët series), the quality of effort was intense.
More than half the fleet were syndicates-in-waiting for the great America's Cup circus which begins next March in San Diego.
Conner himself — now ranking only third in America — was sailing the French Emeraude , with a core crew including Tom Whidden and Bill Trankle.
But Conner does not see Matador 's dominance of this year's maxi fleet as indicative of America's Cup design performance — the Cook team will design Koch's America3 Syndicate's putative defender.
‘All the maxis except Matador are two and three-year-old designs,’ he said.
‘For the America's Cup we'll all have new boats.’
Most of Matador 's Moët Grand Prix was spent fighting Paul Cayard in Passage for the world position.
leaving Gianni Varssi's Longobarda (the in-shore version) a free hand to win the regatta.
Around again
Twenty-two syndicates have paid the £500 registration fee to enter the 1993/94 Whitbread Round the World Race.
Of those 22, 12 have entered the maxi class and seven the new 60ft Whitbread class.
Presumably the ‘don't knows’ will see how far their funds will stretch.
At a Whitbread meeting at the Paris Boat Show in December, 14 potential French skippers ‘allowed their names to go forward’ as interested parties.
Of these, three already have backing.
Operation Cargo, which last time round built a ULDB which was eventually renamed Charles Jourdan , is to build a Farr maxi.
Jet Services, which has been at the forefront of French multihull sailing, will build works skipper, Serge Madec a maxi likely to be designed by Gilles Ollier.
The French post office whose workers struggled round last time in a 50-footer (15.8m), has chartered Belmont Finland for crew training.
Bénéteau will build a maxi for them for the race.
Five of the women who sailed aboard Maiden have teamed up to put together a 60-footer.
Mikaela von Koskull, who had originally been selected to sail on Martela OF but who eventually sailed with Maiden , will lead a group that includes Dawn Riley, Claire Russel, Jeni Munday and Nancy Hill.
‘Although I will skipper the boat, we decided to do this together and we will continue to make communal decisions,’ said von Koskull.
In brief City stockbrokers James Capel, sponsor of the NYA National Match Racing Championship since its inception two years ago have been forced to withdraw their support in the light of the current financial climate.
The event, which has been one of the most successful new launches in recent years, is now in jeopardy for the coming season, although both the RYA and James Capel are seeking a last minute sponsor.
Following a season largely of in-shore racing, the Offshore Maxi Yacht Association (OMYA) is to have a transatlantic race from Bermuda to Southampton, beginning on 1 April, 1991.
Class news
Top sails
Banks Sails.
One of the quandaries for a CHS owner is how to get top performing sails without incurring a CHS penalty.
Banks have come up with a development of their IOR Checkmate sails, which were Kevlar and Mylar, and now build CHS Checkmate sails in a special Dacron fabric developed in the UK; they carry no CHS penalty.
The new Checkmate sails were used aboard the Jeanneau Selection that Eddie Warden Owen used to beat the French in their Jeanneau Selection Championship, and recently in the Hamble winter series on David Tydeman's Bénéteau First 38s5 and the new J/35,Jailbird , again sailed by Warden Owen.
Interested owners should contact Peter Jones at Banks Sails on .
Year-round racing
Brighton.
Brighton Marina Yacht Club seems to run race series 52 weeks of the year, with CHS and Yardstick fleets involving an interesting collection of boats from production cruiser-racers to old one-offs.
They also offer racing for multihulls.
A recent report from the club's racing on 25 November highlights an unusual hazard for John and David May's Hot Chocolate .
After rounding the last mark incorrectly, they returned, losing places in the process, only to catch a submerged dustbin on their keel.
The race was one by Smokey 3 , the Hunter HB31 owned by Tony and Margaret Ryle.
Family fun
Hunter regatta.
Owners of Hunter yachts, including the twin keel versions of Hunters, are invited to a regatta at the Island Sailing Club on 6/7 July.
The aim is to create a family event, particularly for the twin keel boats.
Interested owners should contact Peter Poland.
Hunter are hoping to have their first Channel 32 on the pool at Earls Court.
The fin keel version of this boat will sport a special keel designed by Ian Howlett.
The keel has been highly successful under the Impala Burhou and will bring its bulb and winglet form to this new cruiser-racer.
The Channel 32 will also be offered with twin keels.
Faster fox
Red Fox.
Developed from the Laser 28, the RF290 has been notching up some impressive results, winning at least three class 1sts in the Hamble Winter Series.
Changes from the original design include an extra 440lb (200kg) of ballast and a stiffer mast.
Red Fox herself has some extra sails from the standard inventory, but sports a full interior, including the latest development of the Laser 28's bag storage system.
Prices start at £35,000 including VAT.
Information is available from Charles Watson.
Charity chase
Charity Pursuit.
Lymington Town Sailing Club's pursuit race for Children in Need on 19 November sailed in dusty conditions of up to forty knots.
It was won by Xystus , sailed by Ms S Galpin.
In 2nd place was Spellbinder of Beaulieu , skippered by Dr Keaton, with Locomotion , owned by S and M Crowther, 3rd.
In total 75 started.
Dominant yacht
Yacht of the Year.
Jean-Yves Furic's Bénéteau First 45f5,Cap Sogea , the lead-keeled version of the striking Pininfarina-styled Farr-designed cruiser-racer, has been awarded the Midnight Cup for CHS yacht of the year 1990 and has been awarded the Cowland Trophy for consistently high performances.
Cap Sogea had such dominance in the class that her one discard was a 1st place.
Winter series
Hamble results.
Hamble River Sailing Club's winter series ended on 2 December with an eighth win in IOR Class 1 by Oracle Arrow , the training yacht from the Oracle Admiral's Cup team.
The top three results were posted by the new Sigma 35 in CHS 3 and the new J/35 in CHS 2 — the Westerly Typhoon scored 5th overall, with the J/44 4th — while Rob Boulter's replacement for Alexa , the X-99 sunk in the Round the Island race, came 1st in CHS 1.
In the Sigma 33 class, on average 43 yachts turned out.
CRUISING LOG
edited by Elaine Thompson
A privately run dock has been opened at Antigua Yacht Club to increase the mooring space in busy Falmouth Harbour.
Together with neighbouring English Harbour, home of Nelson's Dockyard, Falmouth Harbour is a favourite Caribbean stop for both cruising and charter yachts.
Dock space is also available at the Catamaran Club in the north-west of the bay, stern-to in English Harbour and at Crabb's Marina in the north of the island.
There is anchoring space in both harbours, even during the most popular events such as Race week and Charter Agents week.
Flying the flag
We cruise mainly in the Mediterranean these days, where yachting is quite different from that we observed on a recent visit to the Solent,write Bill and Laurel Cooper.
Here in the Med we see boats from many nations and, with the exception of a very small number of elderly Britons and Dutch, most are comparatively recent recruits to the joys of yachting.
There is no longer a naval tradition among yachtsmen, nor any hankering after playing naval sailors.
There is a decreasing sense of nationalism, anyway, with so many Europeans moving enthusiastically towards unity.
Such cosmopolitanism has many gratifications, and it does add to the total enjoyment of cruising.
The European flag (a circle of gold stars on a blue field) has replaced national ensigns on a great many yachts this year, though as yet few of these are British.
There is some scope for a minor manifestation of nationalism as in the photograph, which represents a European-minded German.
We have seen versions of this flag with several little national flaglets nestling in the masthead corner, presumably joint bedfellows from different countries.
Yachts with crews of mixed nationalities are now very common, though a more usual way of showing it is to fly an appropriate string of miniature courtesy ensigns.
The only sign of ostentatious flag-nationalism (apart from aforesaid British, Dutch and a few Americans) is among those nations who have only recently realised that the sea exists.
The Swiss come to mind; they fly clean national and cantonal flags with gusto.
It would be interesting to speculate on the legal position of the European flag if any prosecution for failing to fly the correct British ensign were to be appealed to the European Court.
Not that there is much chance of prosecution.
This year the flags we have seen flown as ensigns by yachts purporting to be British have been as imaginative and various as they have been illegal.
A plethora of union flags, one St George's cross, two red saltires on boats of Channel Islands registration, two International flags M, Scottish Lions, and Welsh Dragons.
The question that must be asked is: does the national ensign still have any part to play among yachtsmen, apart from acting as a sort of sporting rosette?
National flags, where still seen, are rarely flown with any respect.
The average yachtsmen lashes his ensign to the backstay, and there it stays until it rots.
A tour round any Mediterranean marina in winter will find faded remnants of national pride hanging like tatty washing from more than half the yachts.
By contrast the courtesy ensign has become more of a duty than a courtesy.
Yachts have been fined for neglecting to fly one in Turkey, and reprimanded for a torn one in Greece.
In some West Indian islands a yacht arriving without one will be confronted with a customs officer producing a rolled-up flag from his pocket and offering to sell it at an inflated price in an atmosphere of thinly disguised pressure.
Sometimes the simple national ensign is no longer enough: in Corsica, now going through a violent secessionist campaign, it is advisable to have both the French ensign and the Corsican flag.
The Catalans like to see their red and yellow stripes, the Bretons their ermine, and there are similar tendencies in Yugoslavia, which is subject to imminent fragmentation.
IN the West Indies the appropriately coloured rainbow flag for friendship can sometimes be used to replace the plethora of different ensigns (there are more ensigns than steel bands among the islands), but mostly it has become merely an additional flag.
On a long cruise the courtesy ensigns can cost more than the charts and wear out quicker.
Ready for action
A big question mark hangs over the wisdom of visiting any Arab state at present,writes Mike Harper .
Tunisia is probably the most popular, and a number of British yachts are wintering here despite the Gulf crisis.
Our experience should be of value to skippers thinking of calling here in 1991.
There seems to be no animosity towards foreigners on the part of the ordinary citizen.
It is thought that the government will follow the Iraqi cause, but the country depends on US and French aid to an extent which makes it hard to believe that the government will take any action to prejudice its continuance.
It is my personal feeling at the time of writing that there is no more danger in wintering or cruising in Tunisia than before, but war with Iraq might change the situation.
There are certain precautions it seems wise to take while the crisis continues.
One should maintain full fuel and water tanks, and have a good stock of food.
Keep the battery fully charged and the engine in running order.
Listen regularly to the weather forecasts and the BBC World Service news.
If you have ham reception, you might get an advance warning of trouble from someone directly involved in it when it happens.
Keep ship's papers and passports in a safe, but easily accessible place: you may have to leave in a hurry.
It is also a good idea for foreigners of all nationalities to contact their consulate or embassy and register their names and addresses, so that the appropriate advice can be passed on swiftly from he government's local representatives.
The British Embassy in Tunis has contingency plans, the implementation of which depends on them knowing where all British nationals live.
Notify them if you move on.
The embassy also suggests avoiding crowds, not arguing politics with the locals and keeping a reserve fund of cash available in case banks are closed, including the 45 dinars residents need for the normal exit stamp if your stay has been longer than six months.
As for the 1991 cruising season, most of the Med is still perfectly safe to visit.
Albania seems to be opening its frontiers, but it would be a major project to find out how a yacht cruising on its own can overcome the bureaucratic barriers.
EC countries and Turkey seem unlikely to be in any way different in the course of 1991.
At the time of writing, Lebanon is probably a little less hazardous than in the last year or so.
A Canadian friend who visited Junieh a few years ago said that it was an excellent and interesting place for a cruising yacht to go: cheap, with pleasant, welcoming people and without danger, provided you stay away from the trouble spots.
Syria still seems highly problematical, and I have a Dutch friend who turned tail and fled when his approach to territorial waters was marked by the arrival of a reception committee in the shape of a fleet of gunboats.
From Prune to Palm
John Caldwell is a latter-day Robinson Crusoe.
We first came across this South Sea adventurer on the fourth week of cruising around the Caribbean on our Hallberg Rassy 352,writes Jenny Allan .
He is charming and versatile.
He also happens to be the founder of one of the most beautiful islands in the Grenadines: Palm Island, 130 acres of tropical splendour.
Lying approximately 100 miles west of Barbados and 1,770 nautical miles from New York, Palm Island comprises five golden beaches, a mile of coral garden and 100 acres of totally clean flatlands on which to relax.
While we were there the sun shone from a clear blue sky, birds skimmed over a translucent sea and amiable West Indians smiled at us.
Since December 1989 cruise ships no longer visit Palm, which makes this island paradise a remote hideaway for the overworked and weary.
The discovery of Palm Island by John Caldwell and his intrepid family is a romantic tale of sea-lore.
After an early life of sailing most of the seven seas, John built himself a 45ft (13.7m) clipper-bowed ketch and named her Outward Bound .
Shortly afterwards they were outward bound for the Great Barrier Reef where they cruised for a year in search of a dream.
After island-hopping across Australia, over the Indian Ocean, up the Red Sea and through the Suez Canal to Port Said, they entered the Mediterranean.
In December 1959 they decided to do another 3,000-mile passage to Barbados across the Atlantic.
At the end of their financial tether, they converted Outward Bound into a charter yacht.
During the early sixties they happily cruised the Windward Islands, revelling in some 30 tranquil anchorages.
He recalled those early days with great enthusiasm.
‘We found Prune Island, as Palm was known in those days, after calling in for a spot of sight-seeing.
It was then an overgrown jungle, swamp-ridden and mosquito-infested, but in this unlikely environment I saw my dream.’
After approaching the St Vincent government, a price was agreed and John Caldwell embraced a 99-year lease on the island.
After shipping in on local sailing schooners, 200 workers and piles of materials, work began on filling swamps.
spraying mosquitoes and clearing spiny trees.
Over a period of 22 years, the Caldwells have tamed a rough diamond and beaten it into the gem it is today.
This Caribbean island complex seta a new standard in escapist luxury.
As with all tranquil hideaways Palm offers its visitors little night-life: however, dancing under the stars to calypso music coupled with a fish and chicken barbecue is a delightful tropical experience.
Traditional ‘jump-ups’, with pulsating rhythms and trade wind breezes, will provide perfect conditions for dancing until the early hours.
Reports suggest that things are happening on Palm Island which may change its future.
The island is undergoing a preliminary feasibility study for a marina, with an entrance channel site on the south shore, a club site, restaurant, boutique, general store and 15 exclusive properties; in short, an exclusive island marina.
Fiji formalities
Entry formalities in Fiji are strictly enforced and several visiting yachts have fallen foul of the regulations recently for not being aware of the correct procedure,writes Jimmy Cornell .
Officials are particularly strict in the capital, Suva, where arriving yachts must wait at the quarantine buoy, or anchor nearby until visited by the medical officer.
Yachts may go the the government wharf to clear first immigration and second customs.
This must be done in the correct order.
Alternatively, foreign yachts may go directly to the Royal Suva Yacht Club and clear immigration there.
The Club will make the necessary arrangements, but no-one is allowed to go into town before clearing immigration nor should the skipper or any of the crew visit immigration as they will be told, in no uncertain terms, to return to the club immediately.
The club works closely with the immigration department who will send an officer to the club at their request.
Both immigration and customs take a stern view of any visiting yachts trying to charter while in Fijian waters and are determined to catch anyone who is trying to do it illegally.
Another problem brought to my attention recently concerns herbs.
Several sailors have spent hours and even days under investigation by the Drug Squad after herbs in plastic bags or unmarked containers had been discovered on board.
Usually they were ordinary cooking herbs that had been taken out of their original packaging, so visitors are advised to any herbs in their original jars or boxes.
This is not as odd as it may sound as, for most Fijian customs officers, such herbs as basil, oregano or thyme are totally alien and are easily mistaken for a different sort.
Amateur chefs beware!
London marinas
St Katherine Yacht Haven, located under the shadow of Tower Bridge in London, is the best known marina in central London, but it is not the only convenient haven for visitors who want to sail right to the heart of the city.
The recent frenzy of docklands development, coupled with a growing relish for waterside properties, has brought about two other well-appointed marinas: the Marina at South Dock and Chelsea Harbour.
The Marina at South Dock is two-and-a-half miles down-stream from Tower Bridge on the south side of the River Thames and has a total of 350 berths.
Phase two of the development is in progress and will extend capacity of the marina by providing berths for larger yachts up to 106ft (32.3m).
Prices for visitors' berths until 1 April are; £9.50 per night for craft of up to 31ft (9.5m) and £11.50 for boats of 31ft or above.
Telephone and fax lines are supplied to each berth, along with water and electricity, and on shore there are toilets and showers, a launderette and a 20-ton hoist.
There is also a marina yacht club and a licensed restaurant barge at South Dock.
Transport into central London from here is relatively straightforward: you can either take the East London Tube line from Surrey Docks station (five minutes' walk away) or take the river bus from the pier right outside the marina when the route reopens later this season.
Chelsea Harbour, situated further upstream, towards the west end of the city, is much smaller, with only 60 alongside berths, but has a higher profile by being an on-the-water platform for boats during the London Boat Show.
It has the advantage of being close to most of London's tourist attractions.
being situated just off the King's Road it is also ideally placed for an excursion to shops or restaurants.
Chelsea Harbour is, however, not suitable for large yachts, as the maximum draught there is 8 ft (2.5m).
As well as water and electricity at each berth, there is the attraction of a hotel overlooking the harbour, four restaurants, a basic chandlery and a high level of security.
Transport to other areas of London is by a frequent bus service.
The convenience and exclusivity come at a price, though: £1.75 per metre, ex-VAT per day, and electricity costs £2 per day extra.
For further information contact the Harbour Master.
Irishman wins Blue Water Medal
Paddy Barry, a 47-year-old civil engineer from Dublin, is the latest winner of the Blue Water Medal of the Cruising Club of America,writes W M Nixon .
His citation reads: ‘For a series of voyages in the wake of St Brendan the Navigator, completed in a traditional timber-built workboat from the west coast of Ireland, to include passages to the west coast of France, the Canaries, Bermuda, the US and to Iceland, Jan Mayen and Svalbard.’
Being thus honoured by the 1990 award, Barry crowns out a remarkable decade and more of voyaging in the 1911-vintage 40ft (12.1m) Galway Hooker St Patrick .
In addition to playing a leading role in the movement for the restoration of these craft (he was Honorary Secretary of the Galway Hooker Association for six years), he has taken his boat where no Hookers have ever sailed before.
For instance, in 1986, he and his crew made the first Hooker crossing of the Atlantic to be Ireland's representative in the Parade of Sail which celebrated the Centenary of the Statue of Liberty.
For 1990's cruise to the Arctic, he had the St Patrick extensively rebuilt by renowned workboat shipwright Colm Mulkerrins of Muinish Island in Connemara in the west of Ireland (a photo of this project under way appears on page 84 of the August 1990 Yachting World ).
His voyage last summer was remarkable even by his own high standards, as he sailed to Iceland, Jan Mayen and Svalbard and Northern Norway, achieving his objectives despite an unusually high incidence of headwinds, between times climbing many mountains and entertaining new friends in distant ports (the St Patrick invariably carries a well-played selection of traditional musical instruments).
Instituted in 1923, the Blue Water Medal has steadily enhanced in prestige over the years to become the world's premiere award for outstanding seamanship and voyaging.
By becoming the 1990 medallist, Paddy Barry finds himself ranked with such legends of the sea as Francis Chichester, Eric Tabarly, Bernard Moitesserie, Eric Hiscock, Bill Tilman, Rod Stephens.
Peter's Café Sport
Anyone sailing across the Atlantic Ocean in the northern hemisphere is almost certain to find themselves, sooner or later, having a beer or two in Peter's Café Sport in Horta, in the Azores.
Peter's is a cross between an international cruising club, a good pub and home.
Anyone who's been there remembers it with a smile.
Peter's Bar may be the reason why Horta became such a popular stopping off spot for transatlantic yachts, and because so many yachts stop there the authorities have built a large marina with every facility.
So how did a bar have the effect of turning a sleepy little town on a far-flung Azorian island into one of the major yachting ports of the world?
The answer is José Asevedo, better known as Peter.
You'll find him behind a small wooden counter in the left-hand corner of the bar.
He'll be selling T-shirts, scrimshaw souvenirs and changing money (for which he charges no commission)— all in any one of seven European languages.
He is not the laughing larger-than-life character you might expect to find.
He is a small, quiet man, with a friendly smile and a firm handshake.
The first time I came across him I had arrived in the Azores with a blown-out mainsail, flat batteries and was in need of cooking gas.
Like many sailors before us our soggy footsteps led up the little hill to the Café Sport to sink the first beer in many days.
We enquired at the bar as to where we might find a sailmaker.
José informed us in perfect English that he would pick up the sail in the morning and deliver it, completely repaired, by that afternoon.
The batteries and gas bottle would also be taken care of.
We sat for the rest of the evening with that particularly pleasant feeling which comes when the jobs aboard are getting seen to and the heaviest thing you've lifted, thus far, is a glass.
Peter took the bar over from his father shortly after the war.
There was not a great deal of transatlantic cruising in those days, but whenever a yacht did sail into the harbour Peter rowed over and introduced himself.
If more than one yacht visited, a barbecue was set up on the beach, and many a bleary Azorian dawn was witnessed as a result.
People had a good time and Peter's reputation grew.
Apart from supplying the ingredients for a good evening, he also supplied the boats with essential services, as we found out, and in so doing, he distributed work.
As cruising and chartering became more popular, so too did Peter, his Bar and Horta.
In the early eighties the marina was built and now accommodates hundreds of foreign yachts.
Upstairs and away from the noise is probably the largest collection of scrimshaw to be found anywhere in the world.
Scrimshaw is Peter's passion.
When whaling was stopped in the Azores he created a museum to display the thousand of pieces he had collected since a boy.
These pieces are engraved with the delicacy of a fine line pencil drawing.
They depict, not only the scenes of whalers about their business, but also portraits of the town's social life: picnics, weddings and parties.
These days Peter takes a back seat.
His son, also Peter, is taking over.
It is pleasant to see the same easy charm, quiet confidence and obliging manner re-establish itself in the new generation of ownership.
It ensures that Peter's will go on being a yachtsman's haven for many decades to come.
Cruising snippets
Plans for a private marina with 100 properties, to be built beside Poole Harbour, have recently been given the go-ahead.
Construction on Moriconium Quay, named after the Roman settlement of AD45, will begin early this spring and the first properties will be ready in the summer of 1992.
Sales on some of the apartments, which start from £300,000 and rise to £500,000 in price, have already been agreed.
A new series of tide tables and harbour guides for 1991 has been published by Boatswain Press to be sold in aid of the RNLI.
The guides cover the following areas: Portsmouth and the Solent, Dover and the South-east, Plymouth and the South-west and Harwich and the East Coast.
They are all 24 pages in length and include such information as tides, tidal flow charts, local weather forecast information, coastguard sector offices, airports, rail service information, details of local harbour masters, yacht clubs, sailmakers, and the VHF channels in use in the area.
The guides cost 60p each and can be bought from most chandlers and marinas or direct from the publishers.
Cay Electronics opened a new branch at Rodney Bay marina in St Lucia in November.
Following an agreement with the St Lucian government, electronic equipment and chandlery have been granted duty-free status.
The opening of the office was timed to coincide with the arrival of the ARC rally from Las Palmas.
A new chandlery also opened in the Rodney Bay complex in December.
A new marina and leisure development on Loch Lomond in Scotland is currently in the preliminary stages of construction.
The 120-berth marina is to form part of the Cameron House Hotel and Country Estate, located 30 minutes drive from Glasgow.
The estate also comprises a 68-bedroom hotel, which was opened in August last year.
There are also to be 100 time-ownership properties and an 18-hole golf course.
Facilities for visitors and berth holders will include a clubhouse, chandlery and fuelling berth.
The country estate covers an area of 106 acres, to be developed in phases.
Scottish company Reid Marinas are to design, build and install the marina, which will have ten smaller finger pontoons, at a cost of around £200,000.
Nixon at large Milford Haven is a vital port, but for Mr Nixon it had the flavour of nostalgia
Milford Haven arouses conflicting emotions with its contrasting impressions.
Sweeping into it after a lumpy sail from Lundy, our first thought is an ‘If only…’
If only it weren't so cluttered up with oil installations, it would be so lovely, for the glimpses of countryside through the pipelines hint at the kind of rural charm which is a real balm to salt-stained mariners in from the sea.
Then, heading out next morning to try and make a 90-mile (130km) passage before some nasty weather arrived (we just made it), the place was all a-bustle.
Big ships were heading seawards, the haven's handsome pilot cutter Hakin was going about her business (when I'm terribly old, I'd quite fancy a motor-cruiser based on her hull), and from one of the many sailing clubs, Mirror dinghies were towed across the calm water for a championship race.
In short, the haven was alive, and he'd be a dull dog who didn't respond to all this evidence of vitality and commerce.
Even if you can't stand the industrialisation, it only takes up a relatively small, if significant, part of the 12-mile-long (15km) inlet.
Head up the winding river Cleddau, as we did on a previous visit, and you're soon in total country, the ‘Little England beyond Wales’, a sweet part of the world.
This time we'd sought peace and quiet after a hectic time in Cornwall and Lundy, and the comfortable marina at Neyland was just the job.
Normally, if you want nothing more than a passage anchorage, Dale, down near the entrance, will serve very well, but we felt Neyland merited a first visit, and thanks to going there we had this early morning enchantment of seeing ships, great and small, going about their work.
In distant times, Milford was a great whaling port, so maybe the folk who live around the haven are accustomed to shipping which is at the somewhat brutal end of sea trade.
These are harsh times for all professional seamen, though, and you'd be concerned at the cost-cutting implicit in the flags of convenience shown by vessels of all sizes — the only port of registry with a British flavour was Douglas in the Isle of Man.
Then, as we neared the entrance, a ship came up astern, and she can only have been one of Everard's sailing barges coming up on the tide.
We were quite misty-eyed as the very workaday Amity came past.
‘A proper London ship,’ we said to each other.
And there on her stern was the port of registry.
Nassau.
Yuk.
Nationalism is becoming euro-nationalism, as the ensign shows
Hakin goes to work at Milford Haven while the Mirrors go to play
An aerial view of Palm Island, showing the harbour on the top left
The Tradewinds anchorage at Suva, Fiji — formalities are strict
Shadowed by London's Canary Wharf Tower — South Dock marina
A long way from home — Paddy Barry's Hooker
Peter, alias José Asevedo, looks over his collection of scrimshaw
The busy entrance of Peter's Café Sport in Horta, where you may find yourself, sooner or later
Paddy Barry and his crew mix sailing and mountaineering
LANDFALLS
2ND PORT OF CALL
LAS PALMAS
Jimmy Cornell traces the route of the round the world Europa 92 rally, featuring each port of call in detail
Since Columbus first called, almost 500 years ago, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria has always been a sailors' town.
One of the busiest ports in Spain, Las Palmas has become the traditional port of call for yachts on their way to the Caribbean.
The bustling city is an excellent place to provision for the Atlantic crossing and almost any repair can be effected here.
The yacht harbour, Muelle Deportivo, has seen many improvements in the last few years and even more are planned for the future under the dynamic president of the port, José Manuel Hernandez.
PROCEDURE ON ARRIVAL
Approaching Las Palmas from the north or north-east, the first land to come into view is the conspicuous hump of La Isleta, the peninsula sticking out to the north of the city.
Puerto de la Luz y Las Palmas, to give it its correct name, lies about two miles due south and is protected by a massive breakwater.
The end of this breakwater only becomes clear when fairly close, but otherwise the approaches to the main port are simple.
Las Palmas is a busy commercial harbour so the movement of small boats is largely ignored, and yachts entering or leaving are expected to find their own way through the traffic.
Having passed the green flashing light at the end of the main breakwater and also that of the inner Leon y Castillo mole, both of which are left to starboard, arriving yachts should make their way to the small boat harbour.
Muelle Deportivo is protected by its own breakwater and is located in the southern extremity of the main harbour.
Those who prefer to stay at anchor can do so in the area north of the marina, just inside the line of buoys and the remains of an anti-pollution boom.
For the time being anchoring is free and dinghies can be left at the Texaco fuel dock.
Those who wish to use the marina should come alongside the Texaco dock and ask for instructions.
An employee of the port authority, dressed in a grey uniform, will indicate a space at the main wharf either stern or bow-to which involves picking up a mooring to hold the bow or stern off the quay.
Occasionally, for boats under 40ft (12m) the port police may allocate an empty slip on one of the pontoons on the west side.
As most of the pontoons are rented to local yacht owners or associations one should not dock at a slip unless permitted to do so by the port police.
At the earliest convenience, one should register with the port authority office, located in the low building beside the marina.
This building also houses the showers and toilets.
The skipper should call during office hours (0700–1400 every day).
No other formalities are necessary and, as the Canaries are a duty-free zone, the customs authorities do not normally inspect yachts.
The Guardia Civil routinely checks the yacht register and notes the names of incoming yachts.
Yachts arriving with passengers, or those crew who will be leaving the Canaries by air, must visit the immigration office in the port authority building within the port compound.
The immigration office is located at the eastern end of the main port authority building (Edificio Junta del Porto).
Crew arriving by air to join a yacht are not normally asked for an onward ticket: however, nationals who need visas for Spain should have a letter from the owner of the yacht stating that the crew is joining the yacht at Las Palmas.
Customs control on arrival is very lax so any spare parts are best brought in as personal luggage rather than sent separately.
Parts that are sent to a yacht in transit can be brought in free of duty.
The easiest way is to employ a local customs agent or go to the airport with the airway bill number and reclaim the parcel from the Iberian cargo office, located west of the main passenger terminal.
Those expecting a parcel should give the sender a precise address in Las Palmas, such as the small boat harbour (Oficiana del Puerto, Muelle Deportivo, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria).
Both the name of the receiver and that of the yacht must appear on the airway bill.
Also the bill number should be faxed through, as this makes it much easier to trace the parcel at the airport.
NEW YACHTS
PARIS BOAT SHOW
Peter Milne visited the 30th Salon Nautique in Paris and reports on the fanfare of new yachts on show
There was a distinct nip in the air as, on the last day of November, the huddle of international yachting journalists, collars turned up against the northerly wind, made their way through the doors of the 30th Salon Nautique.
The show is held annually at the Paris Exhibition Centre at Porte de Versailles in the south-western suburbs of Paris.
The largest of the four exhibition halls — some 541,000 square feet (50,3000 sq m)— was dedicated to various kinds of sailing other than board sailing.
Boardsailors could find a surfeit of interest for them in hall two.
More than 70 builders were exhibiting their wares, from Oppies to opulence.
The salon Nautique continues to increase in importance as a major international exhibition; its steady development reflects the growing importance of yachting as the basis for a major European industry.
BRIGHT LIGHTS
The Paris Boat Show has always provided the platform from which the French boatbuilding industry has launched its new models, but it was interesting to note that more overseas builders were keen to bring their new products to the attention of the French market.
Dutch, German and Spanish builders are all working to enlarge their market.
A number of the larger British builders of production yachts were also keen to bite off a worthwhile piece of the market.
Westerly Yachts of Waterlooville displayed their Typhoon 37 and an Oceanmaster, while the agents for Sigma and Moody showed a Sigma 38 and a Moody 375 respectively.
It was left to the major French builders, however, to announce their new models with real fanfare.
Bénéteau went to town in their usual impressive way; it is, after all, their home patch.
They displayed 14 models under the glare of quartz-halogen floodlights.
Making its debut and dominating the stand was the brand new First 53f5, born of a collaboration between naval architect Bruce Farr, and stylist Pininfarina, with Bénéteau themselves contributing a considerable amount of production engineering technology.
The fanfare of trumpets for the 45f5 — the first fruit of the collaboration between the New Zealand designer and the Italian leaders in design — had hardly died away before the 53-footer (16.2m) usurped her position as flagship of the Bénéteau range.
In both outward profile and interior decor the yacht bears a very strong resemblance to her smaller sister.
Four standard layouts are available.
The yacht unveiled at the show was trimmed out in red-stained mahogany, although teak is an alternative.
All four versions include a skipper's cabin accessed from the upper deck only and sandwiched between the anchor well and the forward bulkhead of the owner's cabin.
The cockpit sports twin wheels and the centre section of the  retroussee transom may be deployed to serve as a bathing platform.
Perhaps Bénéteau's policy is to popularise their products by being able to attribute them to household names in the world of fashion and design.
The cost is £214,307 ex VAT.
Sheltering beneath the bilge of the 53f5 was a futuristic model by
Pininfarina of a hull, half-shark and half-dolphin which we trust will not be put into production!
Not to be outdone by the bright lights and razzle dazzle of their closest competitor, but having nothing in the size league of the 53f5, Jeanneau unveiled (literally) their new Jeanneau one-design which has an overall length of 34ft 9in (10.6m) and a displacement of about 7,716lb (3.500kg).
Designer Daniel Andrieu was present as the concealing-sheet was whipped away amid a swirling cloud of smoke which hid his creation for a few choking seconds before we could see what had been achieved.
The yacht is driven by a large fractional rig carried on a three-panel, deck-stepped mast.
The fully battened mainsail is loose-footed and stands a bold roach which has to brush past the backstay during a tack.
This is an exciting new raceboat which is futuristically styled, both on deck and below.
The hull is of relatively hi-tech construction being of quadri-axial glassfibre rovings augmented by carbon fibre.
The yacht was so new that a price has yet to be established.
There is just one window area in the cabin top and this is on each side of the companion: there are no windows lighting the settee area in the saloon.
We shall be seeing more of this yacht, which has already been chosen as the class for the Tour de France à la Voile race in 1992/93.
ONE-DESIGNS
Slightly smaller than Jeanneau's new protégé, and displayed with considerably less ostentation only a few metres away, was the neat little Sprint designed by Joubert/Nivelt and built by Archambault.
Both boats are aimed at precisely the same market.
Is there room for both?
A number of production yachts which are intended to develop into one-design classes are beginning to make an appearance.
Although a few may achieve this goal, better racing would result if fewer ‘classes’ were created and there was stronger support for just one or two of the better examples.
It might, however, be difficult to get builders, who are always on the look-out for new and successful products, to subscribe to this.
None of the major builders of production yachts would consider participating in the Salon Nautique without being able to attract customers to their stand with a new model: Gilbert Marine, builders of Gib'Sea Yachts, are no exception.
For a number of years they have been producing the yachts in their range in both standard and Master versions, the latter being more luxuriously appointed and intended for private ownership.
The Master versions have proved so successful that Gilbert Marine have decide to market a specific Master range.
They announced at Paris their intention to extend the range from 35ft (10.7m) to 52ft (15.9m).
The newest yacht to be added to the range, and making its debut at Paris, is the Master 42, designed by Joubert/Nivelt.
The yacht is modern and has a very nicely detailed deck and comfortable cockpit.
In-mast and headsail furling is standard, as is laid teak in the cockpit and on the bathing platform, but to continue this treatment on the upper deck costs an additional £5,000 ex VAT.
Her accommodation provides considerable luxury for two couples, there being excellently appointed double cabins at both ends of the yacht.
The standard of joiner work throughout is good and much use has been made of laminated veneers to provide rounded corners.
This both looks attractive and safe at sea.
The price is £102,750 ex VAT.
The Jeanneau family seems to have more than a little to do with the founding of a number of yacht building companies in France other than that which currently bears its name.
Dynamique Yachts, based at Marans in the Vendée, is a brother and sister team of Ian and Chantal Jeanneau, who employ about 60 people building a range of what are possibly the largest glassfibre production yachts in France.
The range starts at 47ft (14.3m) and steps up to a staggering 110ft (33.5m).
The company were exhibiting the Dynamique 80, which was, by far, the largest yacht in the exhibition.
Designed once again by Joubert/Nivelt, the yacht incorporates an interior layout which keeps the professional crew entirely aft from those who write all the cheques.
The furnishings are of a high standard and show considerable flair in innovative design and good taste with respect to choice of modern materials.
The general standard of joiner work achieved by this company has improved considerably during the past four years.
We would have liked to have seen, however, a better finish to the deck moulding, which showed some tooling marks.
The price is about £940,403 ex VAT, which represents very good value for a yacht of this class.
Jeanneau's brand new one-design attracted plenty of attention
Bénéteau's new and impressive flagship, the First 53f5
New to the Gib'Sea range, the Master 42 designed by Joubert/Nivelt with a luxurious interior
The innovative saloon of the First 53f5 on show at Paris
 WHAT'S NEW
edited by James Boyd
Catalogue news
Several chandlers are revising their catalogues for the new year.
Cruisermart, in Southend-on-Sea, who claim to be Europe's biggest mail-order company, will be producing a new 300-page catalogue in A5 format, for the London Boat Show.
The catalogue includes a variety of GPS models among its new products and is available free of charge from Cruisermart on (0702) 460055.
The new 322-page Simpson-Lawrence catalogue was launched at the British Marine Trade Show.
It contains 7,000–8,000 products including the company's new Horizon windlass, which is sold in 1kw and 1.5kw models suitable for boats up to 55ft (16.8m).
This A4-sized catalogue costs £8.50 from Simpson-Lawrence.
Plastimo have also already launched their new A4-sized, full colour, 160 page catalogue which is free of charge direct from them.
Quayside, the mail order side of Boat Bits Ltd, are producing a full colour 32-page A5-sized brochure.
This will include the self-adhesive, non-slip table covering called Scoot Guard.
The brochure is available free from Quayside.
Thomas Foulkes will have their full colour, 28-page foolscap brochure ready for the London Boat Show.
It can be obtained free from them on (081) 539 5084.
Walker digital trailing log
Along with the grey Seafarer echo sounder, the Walker log is what, in the world of yacht instrumentation, might be termed a classic.
Walker still produce three varieties of their traditional trailing log; they constitute the company's biggest selling products.
At the London Boat Show Walker Marine Instruments launched their latest trailing log, which will bring the range into the Nineties.
The Microlog is electronic rather than mechanical and has nine functions which, in addition to speed and distance, includes trim speed, highest speed, average speed, time and distance to destination and a 24-hour clock.
Walker claim their instrument is maintenance-free, The electronics are self-contained, being powered by a lithium battery with a ten-year life.
The original model required a special bracket to be fitted to the aft end of the cockpit coaming.
The Microlog has a simple system which allows it to be attached quickly to the pushpit.
The towline supplied is 30ft (9m) long.
It is suitable for boats of any size and costs £99.95.
Discount on waterproofing
A dry sleeping bag at the end of a long night watch in foul weather is something to be dreamed about, but, alas, rarely happens on long voyages.
Nikwax have joined forces with the professional cleaners, Sureclean, and are now offering a cleaning and re-waterproofing service for sleeping bags.
Polyester or down-filled sleeping bags will be washed or dry cleaned before being given a special waterproofing treatment with Nikwax TX10i.
For down-filled sleeping bags Nikwax can also refill a sleeping bag's baffles, which may have become short of down.
Three types of treatment are available for down-filled bags, ranging from the two-season at £17.25 to the four-season costing £31.50.
The treatment is £13.80 for polyester bags.
Yachting World readers are being offered a 10 per cent discount on the price of the service, providing they send them this page of Yachting World .
French performance instruments
The snazzy looking range of Cap Horn sailing yacht performance instruments is now being imported from France by Burmarc Ltd.
The instruments appear easy to use, working on the one-function-per-button principle, with each function clearly marked on the display.
Three units are available, all of which are made in the same casing.
The basic C1 model costs £655.50 (inc Vat).
It features boat speed, which Burmarc claim to be accurate to  of a knot, and a depth sounder measure up to 328ft (100m).
Secondary functions include trip and distance logs of up to 9,999 miles, a clock, stopwatch and variable depth alarm.
For £1,000.50 (inc VAT) you can buy the C2, which is similar to the C1, but also offers apparent and real wind direction, and wind speed displayed in tenths of knots.
The top of the range C3 costs £1,290.
It is a further development of the C2 and calculates VMG as well as ETA.
The C3 interfaces with a position fixer via the NMEA 0183 or RS232 ports and waypoints can be punched in directly to the C3's numeric keypad.
Four repeaters costing £140 are available for wind and boat speed, wind direction and depth and a multifunction repeater costs £160.
The units use back light liquid crystal displays and, according to Burmarc, consume very little power.
ON TEST
J/44
This biggest sister to the popular J/24 has already been proving her pedigree on race courses in Britain and the States
Oak trees from little acorns grow.
This well-known adage certainly applies to the rise of J-Boats of Newport, Rhode Island, in the US.
J stands for Johnstone, the family name behind a company which keeps six members of the family gainfully employed.
In the winter of 1976, Rod Johnstone, who started out as a schoolteacher before taking up naval architecture, designed and built the first J/24 in his garage.
The class now numbers about 5,000 and enjoys top level racing the world over.
As the J-Boat bandwagon gathered momentum, other designs took shape on Rod Johnstone's board.
Currently, the J/44 — of which more than fifty have been built — is the flagship of the range, although a 60ft (18.3) flyer is promised for later in the season.
Stuart Johnstone, President of J-Boats Europe, brought the J/44 J—Hawk to last year's Cowes Week.
She dominated the CHS Class 3 on handicap and, most decisively, on elapsed time.
Of the 62 yachts in her class, only the 12-metre Crusader led her round the course.
In many ways the J/44 is something of a wolf in sheep's clothing.
The outboard profile of the yacht is well proportioned and almost conservatively styled, but even so, there is something about her which invites a second look.
She has a long coachroof of medium height and a short-ended hull on which no attempt has been made to distort the lines.
These incorporate a very long run which promises high speed.
Accommodation
The J/44 is very much a racer before a cruiser: to this end the whole of the interior has been kept light, simple and open.
Two standard layouts re available: layout A incorporates a pair of very similar quarter cabins; while layout B retains the quarter berth on the starboard side, with a head and shower compartment, with a door through to a capacious lazarette.
It should be noted that layout A is completed to a more utilitarian standard: a gelcoat finish is left on the inside of the hull and underside of the deck in both forward and after cabins, in place of the strip teak ceiling and foam-backed vinyl in layout B.
In both layouts, the master cabin is forward of the main bulkhead.
Vee berths, which have an overall length of 7ft 6in (2.3m) convert to a double.
With the berth cushions removed and the base panels hinged up, the cabin converts into an excellent sail handling room with access to the deck through a 620mm by 620mm hatch.
The forecabin is separated from the cable locker by a bulkhead pierced by a pair of ball-clipped doors.
A true crash bulkhead with a submarine hatch may be incorporated here should the owner require it.
The forward head/shower may be used either en suite with the master forecabin or with access through the main bulkhead on the port side of the mast.
The compartment is easy to clean, but more thought should be given to preventing shower water from finding its way into cupboards.
An off-white Formica laminate faces all plywood surfaces throughout the accommodation — this lends a particularly light and airy ambience to the saloon, although some more traditionally minded owners might find the appearance a little too cool.
For those who do, teak, ash and cherry interiors are also available.
The galley is compact, but there is a good amount of stowage and the cook is provided with the luxury of a pizzo ignition, three-burner Force 10 cooker.
The locker doors above and behind the cooker hinge down to the horizontal where they form useful trays with fiddled edges.
In this position they are supported purely by piano hinges and require a separate stay to prevent the hinges from being strained.
The icebox is a generous 7 cubic feet (0.2cum) and may be refrigerated by a Seafrost unit.
However, this will cost extra.
A large, double bowl sink served by pressure hot and cold fresh water is set in the fiddles peninsula with a trash bin beneath.
Just to starboard of the companion is the navigating station.
The chart table is almost full size and faces outboard; it is surrounded by a wrap-around area dedicated to the display of instruments.
The navigator's seat swings out from beneath the chart table when in use.
The ship's electrics panel, which one usually finds in the navigating area for convenience, has been removed to above the vanity in the starboard after cabin.
This allows more space for the instruments in the navigation area.
Headroom in the starboard after cabin is 6ft 2in (1.8m) in the changing area at the head of the berth.
Here there is a large hanging locker beside the vanity with two drawers underneath.
In the yacht we sailed, a second head and shower (a smaller compartment than the one forward) was provided just abaft the galley.
The door to the toilet is adjacent to the cooker, so this is best kept shut.
Abaft the after head is a large locker accessed either through a door in the head or from the cockpit.
On deck
The J/44 is very much a performance yacht, so the deck is laid out mainly for racing although careful thought has been given to cruising requirements.
In an effort to keep weight out of the eyes of the yacht, the stemhead roller may be unshipped when not in use and stowed away further aft.
Stowage for a Danforth-type anchor is provided in the starboard side deck close to the shroud anchorage.
The end of the anchor cable may be retrieved beneath a screw plate in the foredeck and attached to the anchor when the ground tackle is needed.
The after legs of the bow pulpit were secured by a single bolt each — we hope that this will be remedied.
Wide side decks and a long run of substantial grabrail on each side of the coachroof allow a secure passage to and from the foredeck.
There is a handy boarding gate in the lifelines on each side at the point of maximum beam
Great attention has been paid to the layout of the cockpit so that it is as efficient as possible when racing yet convenient when the yacht is being cruised with only the family on board.
The mainsheet is taken down to a track just ahead of the wheel pedestal where it is within easy reach of the helmsman and the genoa is trimmed by a pair of three-speed Barient 37–3AST winches which achieve a ratio of 87:1 in third gear.
Rig and sails
Over the years, the masts of masthead-rigged yachts have been moving further and further aft, putting greater emphasis on the power developed by the genoa and enabling the boat to carry a longer spinnaker pole as the J measurement increased.
The J/44 does not follow this fashion.
The four-panel, white Awlgrip-coated Hall mast stands with very little aft rake and is set well forward.
This arrangement permits a very well balanced sail plan where both mainsail and genoas are worked easily by a small crew.
A racing crew will find that they can keep the power on while the yacht is weaving and dodging in close company.
Standing rigging is Navtec discontinuous rod and the backstay tension is controlled by a Navtec hydraulic ram activated by a pump on the fore side of the wheel pedestal.
A pair of double checkstays are provided foe extra control, but they are only essential to the security of the mast in the very roughest of conditions.
When not in use they my be tidied away forward and secured to the shroud anchorages.
Alternatively, they may be lifted up the backstay by shockcord to keep them out of the way.
Construction
Both hull and deck were very fair and the deck neatly detailed.
Baltek endgrain balsa is used to core all horizontal surfaces of the deck and the hull from 6in (150mm) below sheer to within approximately 18in (457mm) each side of the centreline.
The exception occurs in the region of the keel where the core is set back further to clear the outboard ends of the floors.
Hull and deck are Lloyds approved and ABS inspected and certified.
The hull-flange is through bolted to the deck at 6in (150mm) centres and bonded with 3M 5200 adhesive/sealant.
The lead with antimony keel is bolted to a pronounced stub which serves as an effective sump for bilge water.
This system also permits a very low centre of gravity for the total fin profile.
The wringing loads of the fin are taken by substantial glassfibre floors carrying undirectional rovings on their upper surface.
Plumbing is double-clipped to skin fittings and wiring runs clipped back correctly.
There are one or two places, however, where both are led either through or over bulkheads and not protected sufficiently against chafe.
The open wiring at the back of the control panel for the refrigerator is not protected from the contents of the food locker into which it projects.
Under power and sail
There was just one point in the rev range — about 1,800rpm — when we became unusually aware of machinery noise and a little vibration.
For the rest of the range, the engine delivered smooth and quiet power through a 18x16in folding Martec two-bladed propeller.
Seven knots were achieved at a comfortable 2.200rpm.
The blades of the Martec propeller are not meshed so they tend to throw open with something of a clonk.
One gets used to this, but it would be just as well when engaging astern gear to check that both blades have thrown before calling on any real power.
Saving the best fruit until last, our most enthusiastic comments have been reserved for this yacht's performance under sail.
She is stiff, exceptionally fast and as well mannered and seakindly as one could wish.
On all points we found that she tracked accurately and remained beautifully balanced.
Without putting any of the test crew on the rail, she shot along close-hauled at a full seven knots in a true wind speed of 16 knots and shed only 2½ knots during our smarter tacks.
The moment sheets were eased, the speed climbed to eight knots.
Considering the clean wake and the almost dinghy-like responsiveness of the yacht, we were convinced that a reach in a slightly stiffer breeze would have seen her sliding into an easy surf.
Specification and conclusion
Sails and spinnaker gear are not included in the basic specification because J-Boats are convinced that the racing owner will wish to specify his own sail wardrobe.
The standard specification does include, however, high quality deck hardware, blocks and winches.
The icebox is refrigerated and the sinks and wash hand basins are served with pressure hot and cold fresh water.
Shore power is standard and the rim of the steering wheel is hide covered.
A variable-speed fan is fitted over each of the four main berths.
We found the construction very sound and she was comfortable to live aboard, but we would like to see improvement in attention to some interior details.
In addition to being highly competitive when sailing under IMS, the J/44 is intended to provide excellent one-design racing.
Whether racing or cruising, the most critical crew could not fail to be anything other than delighted with this yacht's performance.
For and Against
For
1.
Excellent performance
2.
Ease of handling
3.
Standard and siting of deck hardware
Against
1.
After head adjacent to the galley
2.
Lack of attention to detail below
Extremely fast and well-mannered, the J/44 is a delight to sail
The chart area is simple, but there is plenty of room for electronics on the upper display panel
The cockpit is well set up for both racing and cruising
A high ballast ratio and plenty of form stability make the J/44 very stiff in a breeze.
The steering is always light and direct
A light Formica finish makes for a cheerful interior
There is plenty of room to work in the galley.
Some might prefer the head not to be next to the cooker
SCANMAR 40
Combining Scandinavian comfort with a rewarding performance, this yacht is traditional rather than innovative
Yachts of Scandinavia are builders of some substance.
Based at Mariestad on lake Vänern, 150 miles (242km) west of Stockholm, the company is responsible for the Omega, Maxi and Eagle (powerboat) ranges as well as the Scanmar 345 and Scanmar 40.
The yard has a capacity for about five Scanmar 40s per year.
The impression of well-tried practice, rather than flashes of innovation, characterises the yacht.
The outboard profile shows a short-ended hull with just a suspicion of sheer.
The coachroof is of moderate height and carried right forward to wash into the deck at the after edge of the anchor well.
There is a long run of teak grabrail on each side of the coachroof and the side decks and foredeck are skinned with laid teak, as are the cockpit seats and sole.
Stout lifelines are fitted and there are very substantial bow, quarter and spring cleats.
A 45lb (20kg) plough anchor is carried, but the yacht is not fitted with an anchor winch.
The cockpit is deep, and comfortable and there are useful winch handle pockets in each coaming.
Whitlock draglink steering is fitted as standard, driven by a 42in (1067mm) diameter, hide-covered wheel.
The mainsheet consists of a 4:1 or 8:1 purchase taken from the end of the main boom to a track running the full width of the cockpit at the after end of the bridgedeck.
We felt that the cam cleats holding the tails of the car adjustment purchases should be better aligned.
Access from the cockpit to the saloon is across a substantial bridgedeck then down the companion.
The companion itself is steep, although easy to negotiate, but the steps need to be fitted with non-slip treads and some form of chafe resistant nosing to prevent unsightly scuffing.
Accommodation
The yacht being of Scandinavian build, it comes as no surprise to find that the joiner work throughout the accommodation is of stained African mahogany.
The forecabin is separated from the saloon by a lobby which has a deep hanging locker on the starboard side with a sliding basket stowage for folded clothing beneath it.
On the port side of the lobby is the forward head and shower compartment.
With the infill piece in place, turning the vee berths in the forecabin into a double, one must dress in the lobby.
A strip mahogany ceiling lines the forecabin and there is plenty of stowage both beneath the berth, in the bins that run along each topside and in the locker across the foot of the berth.
Well executed joiner work and solid timber nicely matched with face veneers of bulkheads make for a very pleasant ambience in the saloon.
Seven adults can sit in comfort round the large, two-leaved cabin table, the centre section of which conceals a roll-out bin comprising a bottle store and cutlery tray.
Lockers and bookshelves — the latter lit by concealed lighting —line both sides of the saloon, which is semi-partitioned from the galley and navigating area by a very open keyhole bulkhead
Interestingly, the shrouds are taken down to a deep, galvanised, mild steel I-beam which runs between this bulkhead and the main bulkhead forward of the mast: ties are not taken down to the hull itself, so the lockers and shelving behind the settees remain unobstructed.
Headroom in the forward end of the saloon is 6ft 1in (1.8m); this increases to 6ft 5in (2m) at the foot of the companion.
The galley on the port side at the foot of the companion and useful worktop area is limited, but there is adequate storage for provisions as well as pots and pans.
A two-burner Optimus cooker is standard and the double sink is served with pressure hot and cold fresh water.
A stout, stainless steel pillar between deckhead and cabin sole in the galley area forms a useful handhold.
A midheight spar joining the pillar to the cabin after bulkhead allows cook to wedge himself firmly in position at sea without having to use a safety strap.
Plenty of space has been given over to the navigating area.
The chart table is almost full size and the sloped, desk top may be made horizontal to provide an extra level surface for use in harbour.
A swivelling, vinyl-covered bucket seat is provided for the navigator: this takes a little getting used to at sea (perhaps the fitting of a cramp lock would overcome this criticism), but it really comes into its own when the yacht is in harbour and the navigation station becomes part of the living area.
The chart table is supported on a tier of large drawers and there is adequate space on the bulkhead for mounting instruments.
The companion, which separates the galley and navigating area, lands on the engine box.
Small members of the crew will find that the long run of handholds down each side make it easy to use.
The companion ladder, engine box and associated panels are very easy to remove, giving excellent access to the auxiliary.
All piping and wiring was clipped neatly.
A large double berth dominates the centre of the full width after cabin.
Its apparent width is increased by the rectangular ports set just below sheer in each quarter.
The feeling of spaciousness is degraded, however, by the intrusion of the cockpit well, which prevents one from sitting up in bed.
There is a useful deep bin stowage on each side of the berth, a large hanging locker and comfortable small settee just inside the sliding cabin door.
Although normally kept shut, there is an escape hatch for the after cabin in each of the cockpit seats.
One is clipped on the inside so that the occupants of the cabin may open the hatch and the other is clipped on the outside for rescue from the cockpit.
En suite with the after cabin is a simply furnished head and shower compartment.
As in the forward head, considerable use is made of varnished timber trim; this will require wiping down after a shower.
Under power and sail
Handling under power is very simple and the yacht can be brought to a stop from full speed ahead within her own overall length.
The engine box is well sound-insulated and the engine itself runs smoothly and quietly throughout its rev range.
Furlex reefing and furling gear on the genoa and a fully battened mainsail which drops between lazyjacks into its cover using the Doyle Stack Pak system, takes all the hard work out of sail handling.
The main boom, however, is set fairly high on the mast and one has to make use of the fold-down mast steps when stowing the head of the sail.
Large steps would be an advantage.
The yacht tracked accurately and was well balanced on all points.
There was no backlash in the large wheel, which was positioned conveniently whether the helmsman was sitting down to leeward or perched to weather.
Adequate room was provided between the wheel and the edge of the cockpit seat.
We found that the yacht stood up well to her canvas.
This was no surprise, however, when considering her powerful midship section in conjunction with an unusually high ballast ratio of 46.7 per cent.
The Scanmar 40 is well equipped in basic trim and moderately priced.
She combines a rewarding performance under sail with traditional Scandinavian comfort.
The yacht was stiff and well balanced as the breeze freshened.
Note the Stack Pak sail cover
A light, African mahogany is used throughout
Joinery is excellent
Galley stowage is generous.
Note the grab pillar and the cross bar where the cook can wedge in
The chart table is particularly large and there is plenty of space for instruments
YACHTING WORLD TEST OF TIME
VANCOUVER 28
This seaworthy offshore cruiser is a modified design that became popular in its own right.
We sailed aboard the first yacht built
Robert Harris established his name many years ago as a designer of sound blue water cruising yachts, so it was no surprise when a couple tackled him in the late 1960s to design for them a small yacht that would take them from Canada to New Zealand in both comfort and safety.
So it was that the Vancouver 27 — the forerunner of the Vancouver 28 — was born.
Its qualities as a cruiser offshore were soon recognised by an increasing number of serious cruising yachtsmen and women.
Kevin Seymour, a 43-year-old architect who has cruised for most of his life, was one of the serious sailors attracted to these tough little cruisers.
He bought Collavoce , a Vancouver 27, in 1984.
In many ways the yacht suited him well enough, but there were a few details that niggled — like the way a lump of green water lifting onto the weather side deck and running aft almost invariably hit the rail at the corner of the transom and slopped over the coaming to soak his trousers.
As often happens between yachtsmen and builders, Seymour began imparting his experience to the builder, Phaeon Yachts of Newhaven, now defunct.
The upshot was that Phaeon Yachts would incorporate Kevin Seymour's proposed detail changes in a new yacht, provided that he placed an order for the first one!
Seymour took delivery of the first Vancouver 28, christened Islander , on 16 May, 1986, a date he finds difficult to forget because it was his birthday and on that day he wrote a rather large cheque.
The Vancouver 28 is a very close relative of the slightly smaller Vancouver 27, but some very subtle changes have been made.
The hull and the deck mouldings are identical to those of the earlier yacht, except that the transom has been raked back from the tuck to meet an extension of the deck.
The Vancouver 28 boasts a short after deck as a result.
This feature encourages water that finds its way aboard over the weatherside to slip round behind the after coaming and exit over the lee quarter.
The rail was raised by three quarters of an inch (19mm) and the deck inside the rail by 2in (50mm).
This seemingly minor alteration gave the boat much more headroom, more useful height for cupboards in the galley (‘At least the sauce bottle can stand up now,’ Robert says) and, generally, a much better feeling of space below.
The deep beam that once ran across the deckhead in line with the forward edge of the chart table has been removed and with it the possibility of scalping tall members of the crew every time they made their way forward through the saloon.
Islander sports a wider quarter berth than the Vancouver 27.
In port it may be considered a cosy double.
The yacht has been used as a model upon which all the Northshore Yacht Yards' Vancouver 28s are based, but they do differ slightly from the original yacht.
Kevin Seymour has made some detail changes himself, but the owner is good with his hands and, in many places, it is very difficult to differentiate between modification and original joiner work.
Islander was snug in her berth in Hythe Marina when we called on a dull and almost windless day shortly before Christmas last year.
She was secured with almost over-size, tailored lines and lay stern-to the dock.
The light genoa was stopped to the lifelines and the staysail was ready to send up through the forehatch.
She was obviously impatient to be taken out for a spin even though there was hardly puff enough to stir her anemometer.
Peering down the companion, however, we caught a glimpse of the well cared-for interior and noted with satisfaction that a posse of mugs had been assembled in the galley and that the kettle was on duty.
The yacht was particularly trim.
The lead teak of the upper deck, the rail cap and the laid teak in the cockpit area had been recently scrubbed.
All halyard tails were neatly turned up; the yacht had an air of being well used, yet she obviously had an owner who kept right on top of the maintenance and defects list.
Below, we found a highly organised and well-maintained saloon.
The joiner work was from nicely matched teak, the surface of which showed few of the marks that one would expect in a yacht whose log has ticked off more than 16,000 miles (25,000km) of long distance cruising.
This does not take into account weekend sailing and the occasional daily excursion.
With the watery light in imminent danger of failing, we wedged our empty mugs in the sink, dropped the dock lines and took Islander out into Southampton Water to put her to the test.
A very light northerly wind wafted us round the moored yacht on which we had marooned the photographer.
Islander did her best, but this was definitely not a day for beating the daily run record.
We returned her to her berth and shot below to warm ourselves and learn something of her achievements.
Two days after she was launched she took part in the 1986 Round the Island Race, but did not feature too high in the overall results.
Shortly afterwards she made her way west and explored the coasts of Devon and Cornwall before extending the cruise to take in the Scilly Isles.
In her second season,Islander set off from Falmouth in June, keen to take part in the Cruising Association rally in La Coruña.
The yacht took four days to reach down across Biscay, look in at Luarca and then rendezvous with the 11 other participants in La Coruña.
Four of these were Vancouver 27s; two, including Islander , were Vancouver 28s.
In the summer of 1988,Islander sailed from Hythe Marina Village bound for southern Norway, but the light winds and limited time caused her to lower her sights and she shaped a course for the Limfjord at the southern end of Jutland.
Even this plan had to be revised when really bad weather struck and, after a couple of uncomfortable days hove-to off Jutland, she scuttled back down the Danish coast to Esjberg and, finally to the mouth of the Elbe and the Keil Canal.
Then followed a cruise round Zeeland and Fünen before passing once more through the Keil Canal, running down the Dutch coast and crossing the North Sea to Harwich.
Islander was now really beginning to clock up the miles.
She averages about 3,000 miles each year.
In 1989,Islander crossed the Bay of Biscay once more to cruise the north coast of Spain from San Sebastian to Santander.
By the time she returned to England she had logged more than 12,000 miles since she had been launched.
Having been frustrated in her 1988 cruise to Scandinavia,Islander headed north-east once more last summer and this time succeeded in passing through the Limfjord, sailing down the Kattegat and up into the Baltic as far as Stockholm before retracing her steps to visit Copenhagen for the second time on this voyage.
From there she made her way back to England via the Keil Canal.
This foray into the Baltic clocked up a further 2,155 miles and kept Islander 's owner away from the office for five weeks.
The photographer had long since gone, but Kevin Seymour and I pored over the yacht's considerable folio of charts while we discussed in detail the cruises that have been sketched in so lightly in the previous paragraphs.
A gimballed brass oil lamp in the mast pillar filled the little cabin with a warm glow that kept the December chill at bay.
There seemed little point in asking Kevin whether or not he and Islander were well suited.
‘If we're chatting again in ten years' time,’ he said, ‘we'd almost certainly be in this cabin, but we might need some new cushions by then.’
‘She has obviously had an owner who kept right on top of the maintenance and defects list’
Islander slips along in a breath of northerly air off Hythe Marina Village
Plenty of stowage for groceries and effectively fiddled worktop areas in the neat galley
Kevin Seymour goes through his photographic record of Islander's cruises to Spain and Scandinavia 
Islander still wears her original suit of sails.
A light genoa disguises the cutter rig 
The head aboard the Vancouver 28 is compact, but very comfortable
Deep coamings make for security when the going gets rough.
Two gas bottles and the liferaft stow in the locker beneath the after seat
The saloon is light and airy.
The clock and barometer have been handed on from Kevin's father's yacht
EQUIPMENT GUIDE
ALTERNATIVE ENERGY
Sun and wind are so free so it makes sense to use them where possible for power.
We examine a selection of wind generators and solar panels for yachts
Using the elements rather than fuel to generate power is why yachtsmen prefer sailing yachts to motor boats.
The more philosophical might say that harnessing the power of the elements brings a certain unity with mother nature; the more prosaic that sunlight and wind are free while diesel or petrol are not.
With the Gulf crisis threatening to raise fuel prices further, wind generators and solar panels are becoming an increasingly attractive alternative to petrol and diesel generators.
Those who have lived with a large refrigerator on board their yacht in sunnier climes will remember what a bother it is to have to run the engine for an hour every day to keep the drinks cold and the food fresh.
Generators powered by a free energy source can be left on all the time, perpetually recharging the batteries and, provided they are of an adequate size, can handle the charging demand of all but the largest yachts for most of the time.
A fuel-powered generator or an engine's alternator will charge batteries a finite amount, but the output from solar panels and wind generators is more sporadic.
There will be a few overcast or windless days when the batteries will not be adequately recharged and a traditional generator will have to be called upon, but in the time they are charging, wind generators and solar panels will easily pay for themselves in saved fuel costs.
Over the past few years wind generators and solar panels have become cheaper.
Their efficiency and reliability have also increased, to the extent that they can now be regarded as a primary recharging source for a yacht's batteries alongside the engine alternator or the petrol generator.
So, when buying an alternative energy generator what should a buyer look for?
Wind generators and solar panels are available with a variety of different power outputs.
The big wind chargers, for example, can deliver a hefty ten amps, while the smaller versions might deliver only 0.1 amp.
The decision about which size generator to buy depends upon a yacht's battery and the power drain it must handle.
Batteries last longer if they are charged and discharged in deep cycles over a long period.
The larger the battery capacity, the faster and more deeply the charge/discharge can occur.
For example, a big generator delivering a constant 10 amp/hour to a small battery will reduce that battery's life by recharging it too quickly.
Batteries have a natural tendency to discharge slowly, a tendency which increases with age and as the surrounding temperature gets higher.
A battery's charge-holding capacity can also be seriously reduced if it is kept in a discharged state for more than a few hours.
Once this has occurred the battery will not be able to hold as much power.
Malcolm Dalkin of LV Motors, who produce the Aerogen wind generator range, maintains that if a tiny trickle charge is put back into a yacht's batteries it will both maintain their performance and could increase their lifespan by two or three years.
Large generators can overcharge batteries, ultimately destroying them as the electrolyte boils away and the plates heat up and buckle.
This can be solved by wiring a regulator in series with the generator and battery.
This restricts the battery's level of charge by converting the excess power into heat.
Mark Hammonds, marketing executive of BP Solar, recommends that a regulator should be included in a generating circuit if the capacity of the 12V battery is less than 50 times higher than the peak output current of the generator.
For example, a regulator should be used with a 2 amp (24W) generator if the battery has a capacity of less than 100 amp/hr.
There are two techniques for using a wind generator or a solar panel.
A small generator can be used primarily to stop a battery discharging and it will only be able to recharge a battery if it is small and has a long time in which to do it.
Small generators might put in 0.2 amp/hour (2.4W) and are easy to use as they can be left charging indefinitely, even when the yacht is not being used for long periods, without damaging the battery.
The impedance of the battery alone is enough to regulate their input.
The alternative is to use the wind generator or the solar panel as the primary source of recharging, in which case its output must correspond to or exceed the power drain being placed on the battery.
A yacht which has basic navigation equipment and lights, and which is used at weekends, might cause a current drain of 50 amps over two days.
If the battery is connected to a generator which can put back ten amps per day (0.42 amp/hr) on average, it will be recharged by the following weekend.
Equally a yacht which is cruising and has more power-consuming electronic equipment, such as a refrigerator, which might use 200 amps during a week, would require a much larger generator, one that could recharge at 28.6 amps per day (1.2 amp/hr).
The power cables for both types of generator can be a problem on the bigger models, which require them to be able to handle the maximum current produced by the generator.
The length of cable used with these generators can also effect their output in low level conditions due to the impedance of cable increasing with length.
Most of these generators are also fitted with a blocking diode.
This prevents a permanently installed generator from being charged by the battery when it is not creating an output itself.
WIND GENERATORS
A wind generator's performance is difficult to test.
The wind rarely blows constantly and results can vary depending on whether the wind is increasing or decreasing in speed at the particular moment when an ammeter reading is taken.
Alf Neale, a member of Essex Yacht Club and a retired science teacher, studied the performances of the six leading wind generators best suited to yachts.
These ranged from the mighty Rutland and Ampair models to the Forgen, an entirely different design of wind generator which has deeper vanes that rotate round a vertical shaft.
The test took place in a unique setting: the top deck of an old Bembridge pilot cutter, now the Essex YC's clubhouse; this provided a reasonably open setting with little wind shadow.
The generators were individually tested, but unfortunately, during the tests of all but the Aero3gen and the Forgen, the winds were rarely more than Force 4.
The generator outputs were fed through a good quality ammeter and into a 40 amp/hr 12V lead/acid battery which was half to three-quarters charged.
All the generators, with the exception of the Forgen, arrived in kit form and had to have their blades attached.
Only the Rutland and the Wasp generators required the angle of attack of the blades to be set manually.
The blades were generally inclined to 20 ° and the Wasp was supplied with a template to set this.
A blade's angle of attack and its alignment, if incorrect, can seriously reduce a wind generator's performance.
CONCLUSIONS
Alf Neale: ‘In general a wind speed above Force 2 is essential before any worthwhile output is forthcoming.
With the Forgen, this threshold was at least Force 3.
Some of the larger models made appreciable noise in winds of Force 4 or more and the fans, of course, are almost lethal at these speeds.
The size and weight of the larger models would suit them only for a fairly hefty boat.
The length of battery leads might become important with the larger outputs and voltage limiters or isolators would be essential, I think.’
Alf decided that Aerogen 25 would be his choice for use on board his Hunter 701.
We found that the output of the Wasp and the Forgen in.particular, was tiny.
Even in a Force 5 wind the Forgen never generated more than 0.2 amps.
Both must be considered useful for nothing more than maintaining a battery's charge.
The manufacturer of the Forgen maintains that because the turbine is balanced it will charge in the slightest breeze, when the others will not.
While the Forgen's output is not impressive, it is, however, a much safer design than its competitors; the blades are designed to throw out anything which accidentally get caught in them.
The mounting of a wind generator on board a yacht should be carefully considered.
The larger generators are heavy and, with turbines that can be as much as 36in (914mm) in diameter, can be very dangerous particularly in strong winds.
The mounting must be fully secure and in a position as far out of harm's way as possible.
Smaller generators are reasonably unobtrusive when mounted on the aft pulpit.
Ampair's stern-mounting kit would appear to be the most sensible system for fixing larger generators on yachts.
The generator is mounted on a solid aluminium alloy pole and ideally set so that the turbine rotation is at its lowest just above head height.
The pole can be mounted onto the backstay chainplate.
It is then stayed athwartships by wire and fixed for and aft by an aluminium alloy strut which clamps onto the backstay.
All the wind generators tested used standard ferrite magnets.
According to LV Motors the future for their wind generators lies with new magnetic materials such as neodymium yag.
This is expensive, but its magnetism is ten times as powerful as standard ferrite.
SOLAR PANELS
The problem with solar problems has always been to convert the sun's energy efficiently from light into electricity.
This technology was originally developed by the American Space Program and during the Sixties and Seventies by the telecommunications industry which explored the sun's potential for powering equipment on satellites.
The Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) in California has spent ten years running a US government-sponsored project, which has succeeded in reducing the price of solar cells by 15 times, increasing cell efficiency from 6 per cent to 15 per cent and extending their lifespan from ten to thirty years.
The result has been that solar panels are now comparable in price to wind generators.
Old problems of contacts breaking or the case deteriorating have been rectified on most models.
The major difficulty with comparing solar panels is that manufacturers' output figures cannot be compared.
Clearly there is a need for some international standard to be laid down to govern this.
Most of the solar panels we came across in our survey used monocrystalline silicone cells.
Although one manufacturer described this as being the oldest technology, monocrystalline cells provide the most efficient conversion from light to electricity at 13 or 14 per cent.
Polycrystalline silicone cells, which are 12 per cent efficient, are also used in solar panels for other applications, as are amorphous silicone and hydrogen and according to American manufacture Solarex, has a potential of 100 times the absorption of other crystalline types.
However, these cells are currently only half as efficient as crystalline cells for their output reduces by as much as 15 per cent the longer they are exposed to light.
Amorphous cell technology is still being developed.
Solarex are also trying to develop multijunction cells.
Solar panels react fairly well over the visible light spectrum, which has a wavelength range of 400 nanometres for ultra-violet to 1,100 nanometres for infra-red light.
However, the performance of monocrystalline cells drops off with the longer wavelengths of light in this spectrum.
A multijunction cell, Solarex believes, should be more efficient as it uses layers of different crystals, each of which is optimised for a specific band of the visible light spectrum.
One of the main problems with solar panels is that they are wired in series.
As a result of this, if one cell falls into shadow, the current of the overall panel drops.
Panels should be mounted in a position where they are least likely to fall into shadow, although of course the movement of the yacht and of the sun will caused this to change constantly.
Nevertheless, it is important that the cells are not permanently obscured by, for example, seagull droppings or dirt.
WIND GENERATOR OR SOLAR PANEL?
It is very unlikely that a solar panel would chop your hand off if you accidentally put it in the wrong place, but the 36 in (91cm) span of the larger wind generators can be deadly.
Surely a manufacturer could develop a wind generator which has a cage enclosing the turbine?
Some of the smaller models have sacrificial blades which snap off if they come into contact with anything.
It is essential to fit wind generators as well out of the way as possible: on the aft pulpit, for example.
LV Motors have an excellent S-shaped pulpit mounting for their generators, which keeps the rotor outboard of the yacht.
In terms of reliability, solar panels have in the past had a poor reputation, but according to the manufacturers, technological development, especially by JPL, has now made them much more reliable.
Solar panels have the advantage over wind generators of not having any moving parts and, provided they remain watertight, should be far more reliable.
In the UK, of course, there are fewer hours of sun in the winter than there are in summer.
The wind characteristics might be slightly to the contrary of this, but are not nearly so definite.
A wind generator would therefore provide better value power than a solar panel in the UK, particularly as power requirements increase in the winter, as the hours of sunlight diminish.
In the Mediterranean or Caribbean the peak sunlight lasts longer and is more reliable, while the wind's strength is frequently weaker than in the UK.
In these areas there is often not enough wind to drive the bigger wind generators; they require a minimum seven knots before they turn.
In this situation a solar panel should provide better value.
Wind generators also have the advantage that they can go on working 24 hours a day, where solar panels can only operate in sunlight.
Serious cruising yachtsmen might consider hedging their bets by using a hybrid system as used on many of the trans oceanic racing yachts.
This would enable them to recharge their yacht's batteries equally well when sailing through the doldrums as through a gale in the North Atlantic.
ARC RALLY
ATLANTIC PARTY
Emotions ran high, as always, at the start of the fifth annual Atlantic Rally for Cruisers, Elaine Thompson joins the party and meets the participants
For the fifth consecutive year, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria hosted the start of the Atlantic Rally for Cruisers, this time on Sunday 25 November.
As on previous years, the start of the event which has come to be known simply as ‘the ARC’ was emotional: 121 boats ranging in size from 30ft to 75ft. (9 to 23m) headed off for a transatlantic crossing to St Lucia in the Caribbean.
Most were on the brink of their longest voyage ever, and many, by their own admission, embarking on one of their most significant adventures.
Entries this year were slightly down, but you wouldn't have known it during the week preceding the start.
The marina at Las Palmas was crammed full of yachts dressed overall, and of crews making final preparations and taking on astonishing quantities of provisions.
At night, the marina reverberated with the sound of various dancing, fancy dress competitions and Canadian stick fighting.
Jimmy and Gwenda Cornell's ARC team has grown since the first event in 1986.
There are now eight other staff to deal with everything from race details to marina discounts.
To their credit, the 1990 ARC start and preliminary shindigs once again ran smoothly and efficiently.
Unlike previous years, the ARC yachts will this year plot a course for St Lucia rather then Barbados.
Dissatisfaction with facilities offered to the ARC fleet in Barbados is said to be one of the chief reasons why the destination has changed, although a hint of rancour appeared to cloud references to the former destination.
Nevertheless, this year's rally looks set to gain from the St Lucia connection, which has been cemented by a three-year contract.
The goodwill and excellent relations that Jimmy and Gwenda Cornell have built up with the authorities in Gran Canaria seem to be in the process of being matched in St Lucia: more and better facilities were planned for Rodney Bay Marina, parties were organised and funded, and a special ARC committee to deal with such things as restoring extinguished navigation lights and easing participants through customs formalities was set up and presided over by the Prime Minister of St Lucia.
As for the organisation of the ARC itself, it has, since its inception, drawn a disproportionate number of critical appraisals.
With fewer yachts this year than before, there was a degree of speculation among some rallyists about the future of the ARC formula.
Some felt that the entry fee — on average approximately £300 per yacht — was too much.
Manfred Kerstan, the German owner and skipper of the yacht Albatross , thought that the entry fee might put people off the ARC in future and that a lower fee with correspondingly fewer organised social functions, might, in fact, be better.
One could be forgiven, however, for viewing this as a purely academic philosophy.
Manfred Kerstan is a typically affluent ARC participant;Albatros is a Swan 61 and the entry fee constitutes about one hundredth of her value.
Kerstan and his partner, Vera Schmidt, are also proof of the evergreen attraction of the ARC: they took part in both the 1986 and 1988 rallies.
The crew of the generally acknowledged party yacht, the good-time boys of the Northern Irish boat,Eevin , disagreed most volubly.
The collective fee for their Excalibur 356 had been £250, and at £50 per head, they reckoned the ARC was a singularly good deal.
As skipper Trevor Marshall jokingly put it: ‘We've probably got that amount back in free drink before the race starts.’
The people taking part in the ARC are enormously varied, as are their motives for doing so.
This is the key to the continuing popularity of the event: it accommodates, equally, the ambitions of family crews, business men and women who have sold up and taken to the oceans, retired couples and racing skippers in search of another rosette.
The yachts, too, are a rainbow coalition.
Moodys, Sigmas, Oysters and Bénéteaus lie alongside Prout catamarans, Trintellas, Swans, Baltics and one-off 60ft-plus (18.2m) maxis.
Of the 121 yachts, 44 were over 47ft (14.3m).
The Twist family, taking part in their Prout Quest 33 Quicksticks , are in many ways exemplars of the composite ARC participant.
David gave up his job as the headmaster of a primary school near St Helens in Lancashire earlier this year, his wife, Vicky gave up the job of supply teaching she had been doing and, with their two children, Jonathan (11) and Patrick (5), set off in May last year for some serious cruising, which includes going transatlantic with the ARC.
Like most of the ARC crews, the Twists had not sailed across the Atlantic before and they viewed the prospect with some trepidation.
‘This is the first thing of any scale that we have attempted,’ admitted David, ‘but the good thing about the ARC is that people's anxieties are shared.
There is a great feeling of camaraderie.’
Blake Simms and his crew were taking part in the rally for very different reasons.
Simms' X-95,Hurricane Tree , was the smallest boat in the ARC this year at just over 30ft (9m), but the size of the boat was no indication of the skipper's ambitions.
Tim Dixon, David Earee and Blake Simms are RORC race pundits; they don't generally cruise and the ARC seemed an unlikely challenge.
So, why were they there?
‘I've done 35 Cowes Weeks and nine Fastnets,’ said Simms, ‘There are few yachting challenges left to me except, say, the America Cup.’
He thought for a moment and added: ‘In fact, the further I get into it, and see all these boats and families aboard, the more I realise that crossing the Atlantic is no feat at all.’
Philippe Barbe, whose slender Martin Francis-designed 77-footer (23.4m)Speedy-Go was the largest in the fleet, had taken time out of the Route de Rosé race from St Tropez to St Barts to participate.
Philippe Barbe is in the happy position of being able to spend much of the year aboard his yacht and Speedy-Go therefore bears the hallmarks of a largely liveaboard yacht: accommodation with the accent on comfort, a state-of-the-art navigatorium and a galley of industrial aspect from which excellent meals regularly emerge.
LONG-TERM CRUISING
Mike and Joanna Smith, and Joanna's father, David Cooper, were sailing aboard a more modest craft, their Rival 38 Rivalady .
After being told that they couldn't have children, the Smiths became the first to sign up for the ARC 1990, which would form part of some long-term cruising.
Mike and Joanna, both dentists, arranged to be away from work for a year: Joanna sold her practice and Mike employed a locum.
Almost immediately afterwards Joanna discovered that she was pregnant, but the arrival of William in June didn't cause a change of plan.
William was just five months 11 days old at the start; he had already sailed over 1,500 miles, was the contented centre of attention and was still fresh from triumph in the fancy dress competition, where he earned himself the prize of a furry whale for his appearance as a white mouse.
On previous ARCs there have been several female skippers, but this year there was only one: Terri Jupp, the small but formidable boss aboard International Venturer .
The 44ft (13.4m) yacht belongs to the charter company International Ocean Ventures and her nine crew were there to learn about ocean cruising — the hard way.
In contrast to most of the other yachts of her size,International Venturer carries no satnav, no weatherfax, no computerised racing program.
The only concession to technology is a 12V CD player and a selection of discs that would do justice to a small radio station.
The crew were looking forward to sharp sounds as they struggled with sextants in pitching seas.
The aforementioned crew of Eevin really were, it seemed, there for the beer.
They arrived at Las Palmas a month before the start, after setting off from their base, Down Cruising Club on Strangford Lough in Northern Ireland, on 16 September.
A month in the Muelle Deportiva at Las Palmas might seem excessive, but Eevin 's crew, brothers Trevor and Gary Marshall, David McKnight, Jude Docherty and Gary Hill busied themselves cultivating Eevin 's barnacles and partying.
By the time the last participant cruised into Las Palmas the crew of Eevin had earned themselves an affectionate notoriety.
As the marina began to fill up, some very odd provisioning was being done.
A delivery truck drove up to the quay and transferred the entire contents — 107 cases of beer — to the South African yacht, a one-off 61-footer (18.5m).
Bunches of green bananas, crates of unripened tomatoes and strings of rudely large Spanish onions were to be seen on every boat.
Astonished neighbours of Capricorn , a Halberg Rassy 45 owned by Norwegian Sigurd Ruud-Pedersen, reported six full bin bags of oranges having been taken aboard.
The day that had loomed so large in everybody's minds, 25 November, began grey and dull.
Six hundred people had their last proper wash for 3,000 miles.
121 yachts had their rigging and sails checked one last time and then crews pottered about anxiously, generating an atmosphere of nervousness so pervasive that even the spectators felt tense.
Jimmy and Gwenda Cornell, the ARC organising team and all those people from Gran Canaria who help the rally each year, boarded the Spanish Navy corvette,Villa de Bilbao , which was to act as the committee boat.
At 12.30, just as the clouds peeled back from Las Palmas, she sailed out to the line.
There was a little tentative transit-taking on board some yachts, but most dispensed with esoteric racing rites and held back from the melee to claim clean air and water.
The seamen aboard Villa de Bilbao lined up along the bow and the starting gun was fired.
ARC 1990 was finally under way.
The annual prize for the best ARC wall painting was awarded to Joanna Reekie, of Viva 
It was an impressive and, for the spectators, rather emotional spectacle when the 121 ARC yachts finally headed south from Las Palmas after weeks of preparation
Philippe Barbe, the skipper and owner of the fleet-footed maxi Speedy-Go tidies up the deck before a rain shower 
A deliver skipper touts for employment at the marina
A labour-saving method of doing last-minute washing
Final preparations include writing postcards
William Smith, the youngest competitor, with his parents, Joanna and Mike.
Tied up just behind is Ocean Venturer.
the crew of Eevin regaled in corporate kit.
From the left, the crew were; Gary and Trevor Marshall, David McKnight and Jude Docherty 
The crew of the Mystic 60 Elysia included in their pre-race manoeuvres an attempt to catapult water bombs on to the warship committee boat.
Thankfully it failed 
BRITISH STEEL CHALLENGE
FORGING A TEAM
It will take more than December sleet and gales to daunt the crews chosen to take part in the 11-boat round the world British Steel Challenge.
Elaine Thompson joined a crew training exercise off Plymouth to find out why he participants are so enthusiastic
It's mid-December and not much above freezing.
For the last three days ten novice sailors have been out in the Western Approaches, sailing in winds of 40 knots or more through occasional sleet showers.
The boat's heating is not working, the crew's sleeping bags are damp and several of them have been seasick, but the verdict is unanimous: they are having the time of their loves.
The crew being trained this week are part of the 120-strong contingent.
All have been chosen to take part in the British Steel Challenge, a round the world yacht race in 11 identical 67ft (20.4m) steel cutters, due to start from Southampton on 27 September 1992.
In the words of one of the crew it is ‘the ultimate one-design race.’
The idea of the challenge, conceived by Chay Blyth, was to give anyone aged between 20 and 60 the chance to buy a round the world adventure for £14, 850, subject to convincing Blyth of their suitability and enthusiasm.
It was, he says, a project ‘born out of frustration.
Sailing is seen as an elitist sport.
How can the average person get on a big ocean racer?’
The question is, of course, rhetorical.
‘They can't.’
Although perhaps reminiscent of the Whitbread race, with its high profile, closely fought circumnavigation, the British Steel Challenge is in many ways the antithesis.
For a start, the yachts are going round the world in the opposite direction, against the prevailing winds and currents, heading first for Rio de Janeiro, then Hobart and finally Mauritius, before returning to Southampton in April or May 1993.
The fact that the crew are all paying amateurs and only half knew how to sail before they became involved, is just as sharp a contrast.
Nor is the comparison with the Whitbread one which Chay Blyth would find entirely flattering.
When asked if he sees himself as a business man or a sailor, he replies without demur that he is ‘a businessman’, but he also professes, a touch pugnaciously, to being ‘a socialist’ and believes that opportunities for the ordinary person to take part in ocean racing have become even fewer since large scale sponsorship.
‘In some ways the Whitbread has compounded the problem because now there are big bucks involved,’ he says.
In December 1988 Blyth's newly formed British Steel Challenge made the first steps towards prising open the closed shop of big boat ocean racing.
ITN broadcast a short item about the race on the News at Ten and viewers were told that applications from prospective crew members were being invited.
IMMEDIATE RESPONSE
Donald Deakin, a 50-year-old amusement arcade owner from Wales, saw the news item that night and his imagination was kindled by the idea of the race.
He immediately phoned his wife from the hotel room he was staying in.
‘I asked her if she had seen the news and she said; ‘Yes, I did.
And, yes, you can.'’
Twenty-six-year old Mark Lodge, a suspended ceiling fitter from Canvey Island, also saw it.
The British Steel Challenge inspired him, too, although the only sailing he had ever done was on a windsurfer.
He contacted the Challenge office at Petersfield, Hampshire, the next day and was later interviewed in Chay Blyth's car on the Chertsey turn-off of the M25 motorway, and given a place.
Yvonne Flatman, John Cox, Michael Martin and Gary Ashton all saw the programme and applied.
The stories of how they got involved are typical.
‘They all knew they wanted to do it right away and by the next day had done something about it,’ Chay Blyth remarks.
Within three weeks of the first announcement, there were over 300 applications.
Blyth interviewed all the likely applicants and selected the 120 crew, placing 172 people on the waiting list.
In April last year, the first of the yachts was launched from DML in Devonport Dockyard in Plymouth.
Training began straight away.
The original training skipper, John Bullock, was replaced in October by Pete Goss, an ex-Royal Marine and single-handed transatlantic yachtsman, He now works with freelance instructor and first mate Nick Booth.
Since its launch, the first boat, appropriately named British Steel Challenge , has sailed 400 miles a week, most of them within 15 miles of Plymouth.
So far, groups of crew have had an induction course and what is called ‘a long sail’, when they spend several days acquainting themselves with the boat and gear, absorbing everything from how the cooker is switched on and how to flush the head to hoisting the mainsail and steering.
This is structured by hourly changes of sail or course, so that the crew can learn as much as possible about handling in the time they are aboard.
Last summer, the crew's appetites for racing were whetted by smaller one-design racing when 16 Sigma 33s were chartered from Britannia Sailing in Southampton.
The weekend was pronounced a success by the crew, who are still nurturing friendly rivalries.
The training will also include maintenance.
Once the crew for each boat is selected — a choice that will be made on the basis of strength, ability and leadership qualities — everyone will be given the opportunity of specialising in certain areas of maintenance.
Some will be given training by Ford so that they can lay healing hands on the yachts' Mermaid engines, some will go to Lewmar to learn how to strip down and repair winches and several of the crew will be trained by Hood to keep the boats' frugal sail wardrobe in circulation.
Specialist plumbers will also be needed, but Nick Booth smiles wryly and says that, so far, there haven't been many takers.
All have now done an average of ten days' sailing aboard British Steel Challenge and are being given what is termed ‘continuation training’.
We joined the group that had been out in sleet and gales in December, hoping to experience a typical day's training.
British Steel Challenge had broken one of her spreaders and was waiting in Queen Anne's Battery Marina in Plymouth for a replacement.
The sky had been obscured by a lifeless haze, confounding photographer Malcolm White, and the gales had abated:Yachting World had performed the all-too-regular feat of taming the tempest.
The crews were undaunted.
The spreader arrived and the boat was edged out of the marina and into Plymouth Sound.
She drifted helplessly along in calm water at just over three knots, making it virtually impossible to assess her sailing characteristics.
Windlessness was no excuse for sitting around, though.
Pete Goss took a group up to the foredeck to demonstrate a spinnaker hoist, four were dispatched to the leeward rail to induce some heel and to those in the cockpit Nick commanded: ‘Well, don't just sit there, get tying knots.’
Within seconds there were bowlines, rolling hitches and reef knots dangling from every available rail in the cockpit.
Yvonne Flatman had been designated the role of temporary helmsman and declared, cheerfully, that she had virtually no steerage way.
Twenty-eight-year old Yvonne is one of the more experienced members of the crew, having taken up sailing J/24s six years ago, and like most of the others had been seduced by the prospect of the round the world challenge after seeing the feature on the British Steel Challenge on the News at Ten.
The decision to take part meant a change of lifestyle.
She had been working in Poole as a trading standards officer and has moved to London to earn more money to pay for the venture.
The people taking part are varied: there are doctors and business men, a writer, two journalists, a chef, a market gardener, a trout fishery owner…so the list goes on.
As everyone kept mentioning, there is even an undertaker.
All have made the three-year commitment to the project and, excepting the few that have managed to get various forms of sponsorship, all but the wealthiest will have to make some financial sacrifices.
Twenty-six-year old Gary Ashton, who lives in Southend-on-Sea and imports cane furniture, looks unsure when asked how he will raise all the money, then replies that he will probably re-mortgage his flat.
His optimistic attitude is, again, typical.
John Cox has the money to take part, but as a result of unfortunate circumstances.
His company, a family business, was recently sold against his wishes and the British Steel Challenge was announced at a time when he was looking for a complete change of direction.
‘I didn't realise what I was getting into,’ he admits, ‘but I do know that this will be by far the hardest thing I've done in my life.’
Chay Blyth feels the crew are all, by nature, high achievers who could have responded to the call for any challenging adventure.
The skipper has another gloss: ‘Many are taking part to make a change in their life.
They know they will be different when they come back…for the better.’
The crew, themselves, felt that they had already been changed by the experience and some were a little anxious about the future.
Michael Martin, a 50-year-old management consultant and author of business books, spoke for most of the crew when he told us: ‘The circumnavigation is a fantasy, but one of the big questions is what are we going to do when we get back.’
Their uncertainty, however, belies a genuine relish for sailing.
Peter Goss repeated several times, emphatically: ‘I have never, ever, seen such enthusiasm.’
There is no reluctance to do arduous tasks; struggling up to the foredeck to change a sail on a cold, sleety December day is not a problem.
In fact, it must have been a pleasure, for the crew of British Steel Challenge couldn't wait to get back out there.
THE BUSINESS
Chay Blyth has long had links with British Steel and they have produced a pot of around £1 ½ million to fund the running of the race and cover part of the cost of building the yachts and training the crew.
The remainder of the costs will be covered by the entry fee — £14,850 each from participants — and corporate sponsorship of individual yachts.
So far five sponsors have been contracted besides British Steel: the Heath Group, brewers Hall and Woodhouse, which will be promoting their Hofbrau beer, Rhône-Poulenc, the giant French chemicals company, Group 4 Securitas and Commercial Union.
According to Blyth the Challenge is ‘talking to 20 companies at a high level’.
Even if sponsors for all the boats are not found —‘we don't see that happening’— they are under contract to start with all 11 boats.
Each of the companies pays a fee of £225,000 for a three-year period: the two-year training and preparation period and the nine-month duration of the race.
This buys them a livery package, plus use of the yacht for corporate hospitality and during Land Rover Cowes Week.
We see ourselves as a major event, not just a sailing event,’ says Blyth.
The possibility of an audience much wider than Whitbread is there: the flavour created by ordinary people achieving the extraordinary is bound to appeal to many if marketed successfully.
Already television consultants, Judge Marketing have arranged for a special camera to be set up on board British Steel Challenge .
The yachts, themselves, have been designed to recoup some of the costs.
‘The boats have been designed with resale in mind,’ says Blyth, pragmatically.
‘They are not too sophisticated or hard to handle.
We have geared them for the charter market.’
A British Steel logo on the boom of the first boat to be launched.
British Steel have sponsored Chay Blyth in the past
THE BOATS
‘There's nothing magic about these boats,’ Chay Blyth says.
True, they are not magic, but they are remarkable.
There's nothing particularly unusual about the design of the yachts: they were drawn by David Thomas, designer of the Sigma 33,35 and 38, and, like the Sigmas, are moderate displacement yachts with a very average form, unrestrained by the influence of rules racing.
Indeed, the lines bear a marked resemblance to the Sigmas.
Nor has the Challenge chased innovation.
The fleet has been devised within the strict limits of a controlled budget and Blyth, project manager Andrew Roberts and designer David Thomas have eschewed the trend for research and development that characterises most high profile yacht races.
The yachts will carry no custom equipment.
The only possible exception to the rule of fitting standard gear has been the masts: the die for the masts had to be bought from Proctor so that 11 could be built.
What makes these yachts special is the material used, the quality of build and the spartan but seamanlike accommodation.
We visited the Devonport Dockyard to see the operation there.
Five of the boats were then in build and number two was virtually complete, on time to take centre stage at the London Boat Show, where she was displayed outside Earls Court.
Andrew Roberts says of DML: ‘The steelwork is quite exceptional and the skill levels here are particularly high.
The hulls are very fair and didn't need much filler.’
The stainless steel deck of British Steel Challenge bear h the hallmarks of comparable quality in the fabrication of the deckhouse and the cockpit coamings.
Andrew Roberts points to this as further evidence of the impressive capabilities of DML.
‘The deck shapes they have achieved are excellent.’
Careful consideration of the practicalities of living at sea has led to a functional and secure interior.
Andrew Roberts points out that the yachts embody the relationship the design group feels exists between safety and comfort.
The deckhouse contains a small area of seating and a spacious wet locker to port.
To starboard is a considerable area given over to the navigator and surrounded by the yacht's ostentatious gallery of navigational electronics: Navstar 2000D Decca, 2000 satnav and XR4 GPs, a Skanti 8400S SSB radio and 3000 VHF and a Raytheon R20s radar.
Right aft, two cabins accommodate the skipper, mate and two crew members, while directly below the cockpit is the galley and main sitting area.
The galley is a U-shaped expanse of stainless steel worktop, bounded by deep fiddles.
The cooker is necessarily huge — even the teapot needs to hold army-sized quantities.
The sitting area, facing round a sensibly fiddled table, fits the 12 crew, but only just.
Even here there are few homely touches: a selection of books, some navigational, a few inspirational, and on the bulkhead a map projection of the world.
Forward of the deckhouse are four more cabins, two on each side of a passageway wide enough to allow a sailbag to be dragged through but not so wide as to be dangerous at sea.
The berths, too, are seamanlike, with high canvas leecloths.
Each of the crew also has two modest plastic trays for personal stowage.
Further forward are the two heads, one on each side of the boat, and the massive sailroom.
A broken spreader meant a short break in the training schedule for a group of British Steel Challenge's chosen crew and an unexpected morning's maintenance in Queen Anne's Battery Marina, Plymouth.
Just making way in Plymouth Sound.
Pete Goss explains a spinnaker hoist
Chay Blyth —‘We see ourselves as a major international event’
Project Manager Andrew Roberts at the boat's navigational table
Preparing for the spinnaker hoist: Yvonne bears away, and the foredeck crew get ready
Win a chance to sail from Southampton to Rio de Janeiro with the British Steel Challenge.
Details of a competition will be published in March and April issues.
Three of the boats under construction at DML in November
DESIGN
CUSTOM BUILT
Three yachts attracted our attention last summer, each designed for a purpose; Q2 for short-handed racing, Sparkle for cruising and Rulor 11 for CHS competition.
David Glenn reports
Q2
Designed by Mike Pocock
Built by Steve Etheridge
Last year was a relatively quiet year for Mary Falk.
For the first time since 1982 she didn't take part in a short-handed ocean race, a form of competition to which she has become healthily addicted.
Instead she concentrated on the completion, launch and shakedown of her new Mike Pockock-designed short-handed racing boat Q2 , a truly innovative yacht, custom-built and designed to win her class in the 1992 single-handed transatlantic race.
To put this project into perspective, it is essential to examine Mary's short, but action-packed sailing career.
A genuinely corinthian sailor who spurns sponsorship, she shoe-horns her racing and preparation into a few weeks' annual holiday taken from London-based solicitors Farrers and Co.
During the week, she lives in her Chelsea flat, but come the weekend she joins the ‘down-from-town’ M3 pilgrimage to Lymington to be aboard her beloved Q2 .
For someone who describes herself as a late starter in sailing — she first stepped into a dinghy 15 years ago at the age of 29 — Mary Falk has accumulated a phenomenal amount of experience.
Her first foray into short-handed sailing was in 1982 when she took part in the Round Britain Race.
This was followed by the Azores and Back Race in 1983, sailed in Q2 's predecessor, a UFO 34 called Quixote .
In 1984 she came third in class in the Yachting Monthly Triangle and in 1985 she came second in class in the Round Britain Race, taking part in Ann Frazer's Contessa 32 Gollywobbler .
She set a new women's record for the Twostar in 1986 when she came 2nd in class with Kitty Hampton in Sony Handicam (ex Ntombifuti ) and in 1987 completed the AZAB in Quixote .
During this race she had a lucky escape when she fell to the deck from spreader level while aloft trying to trip a jammed spinnaker.
Undeterred, she completed the 1988 Ostar in Quixote (4th in class) and in 1989 took part in the Round Britain Race again with Mike Pocock's daughter, Jenny.
Q2 's designer, Mike Pocock, wasn't so much chosen as self-appointed through a combination of admiration for Mary's enthusiasm and a clear understanding of what the owner wanter Q2 to be.
Despite being in Alaska at the time, en route round the world with his wife, Pat aboard their yacht Blackjack , Mike returned to the UK in 1989, specially to design Q2 .
The yacht was launched last year.
With the specific task of producing a class winner for the ‘92 race, Mike Pocock wanted to combine a powerful, easily managed upwind performer with a yacht which excelled on a reach.
A generous rig with a big, powerful main, counterbalanced by a waterballasted hull fitted with a cleanly shaped, non-bulbed, lead and iron keel, was the result.
Q2 has been particularly well built by Stephen Etheridge using an Airex foam sandwich system for the hull.
Pocock produced th scale models of Q2 to test the viability of the unusual hull shape.
The pronounced topside knuckle not only contains water ballast tanks, but also, by angling the top panel of the knuckle fairly sharply inboard, enables deck area and thus weight to be reduced.
Low freeboard also keeps weight down.
In anything over 12 or 15 knots of true wind the water ballast comes into play.
Some 1,500lb (6,800kg) can be hand-pumped into the weather tank effectively to reduce heel by seven degrees.
About 250lb (113kg) of this total is contained in the knuckle, well outboard of what would be the normal line of the topsides.
‘Somewhat equivalent to equipping one's regular crew with lead-soled wellies,’ said Mike in his design notes.
Retractable trimboards (see picture) can be deployed to ease steering in heavy weather reaching conditions, but so far they have not been needed.
‘The yacht is beautifully balanced,’ said Mary.
Cockpit design was critical.
Only 5ft 4in (1.6m) tall, Mary needed to be able to reach all the important controls from the steering cockpit.
Mike went to great lengths to get the ergonomics right, tailor-made to Mary's size and strength.
In fact, there are two cockpits, one for steering, from which primary winches, sheet car controls, mainsheet and ballast tank pump can all be reached without moving, and a deeper, off-watch cockpit designed for heavy weather.
It is cleverly protected by a lip extending aft from the coachroof, which is also fitted with a very useful grabrail.
Sitting here with the Autohelm 6000 wander lead control, Mary can steer and keep a well-protected lookout in relative comfort.
Q2 's rig is powerful and generous when measured against displacement and length.
The fully battened main is cut with five ref points, enabling the majority of sail reductions to be made on this sail.
The headsail wardrobe currently consists of a non-overlapping working jib set on a furler, originally designed to cope with wind speeds between 10 and 35 knots plus.
But Mary feels it is too small for the lower wind speeds, so she may introduce an overlapping furler for the 10 to 18 knot band.
In conditions below ten knots a masthead drifter, set flying from a tack point on the extended and heavily reinforced pulpit structure, should help Q2 in what are anticipated to be her least favoured conditions.
‘An asymmetrical spinnaker is on order,’ said Mary, with an excited glint in her eye.
Q2 's accommodation is dominated by a forward-facing chart table just abaft the Proctor mast.
Navigation instruments include Philips, Decca, Furuno weatherfax, Autohelm log and sailing instruments, Raytheon colour radar, Furuno Loran and Navstar satnav, Lokata radio receiver, ICOM VHF, a Prosser digital barometer and a Lokata Watchman, according to Mary the most important instrument aboard.
It is a radar detector which sets off an alarm if a ship, with radar working, is in the vicinity.
There's little else to the accommodation apart from an open-plan head to the starboard and a small galley opposite.
Sadly, we chose a day of light wind for our sail with Mary, and there was no need to use the water ballast at all.
But the yacht has already clocked 14.8 knots in moderate running conditions and recorded 24-hour runs of 200 miles.
SPARKLE
Designed by Warwick Collins
Built by Farrows and Chambers
One of the most interesting yachts taking part in the Atlantic Race for Cruisers (ARC) was Mo and Barbara Codd's Sparkle , a 39ft (11.8m) wood epoxy fast cruiser designed by the inventor of the Tandem keel, Warwick Collins.
For the record their performance was marred by engine trouble, but simply taking part was more significant than the result.
The ARC marked the start of a liveaboard adventure that the Codd's had been planning for years.
Mo has owned and completed several boats, including a Trapper 5000, a well-known Starlight half-tonner, also called Sparkle and, more recently, a Sadler 34 aboard which they have cruised the Mediterranean for two years.
The racing bug is a well known phenomenon, renowned for its resilience and there's no doubt that Mo has still got it.
So, the desire for a yacht which would take him and his wife on a worldwide cruise, comfortably and quickly, led them to Warwick Collins after they had seen one of his previous yachts, called Fondue , a 38-footer (11.5m).
Basically, they wanted a cruising boat that could also be their home.
The yacht's interior could be finished by Mo, but he was relying on Warwick Collins to design a yacht with an exhilarating performance.
With memories of sailing planing dinghies still fresh in his mind, he wanted a boat that would surf down a tradewind roller with the tiller humming easily in his hand.
Another reason for choosing Collins was the designer's penchant for wood epoxy construction, an attractive, strong and relatively easy method of building which allows plenty of scope for the interior to be custom-designed and completed to the owner's specification.
It is, however, a good deal more expensive than most glassfibre construction methods.
Thus it was, that in July 1989 Mo took delivery of a painted hull and deck from Grimsby builders Farrow and Chambers ready for completion at South Ferriby on Humberside.
It subsequently took Mo 2,200 man hours to complete Sparkle .
Tony Farrow has been building one-off yachts for 20 years and is well known for the trimaran Colt Cars GB , Geoff Panell's Admiral's Cup triallist Itzanotherpurla re-named Red Stripe and more recently used by the RAF as a test bench under the name of Oracle Arrow in preparation for this year's Admiral's Cup.
Farrow also built the beautiful Rob Humphreys-designed Catch 22 , originally for John Allenby, and the successful, Stephen Jones-designed 6-metre Lion .
Sparkle 's hull was built of two laminates of diagonally laid red cedar on an inner core of longitudinal Douglas fir.
An abrasion-resistant layer of glass cloth was applied to the outer skin for protection.
Although wood epoxy boats tend to look good unpainted,Sparkle has been finished in white.
Floors and stiffening by way of the keel and in other areas consist of 3in (76mm) laminated mahogany and, unusually, both water and fuel tanks are integral parts of the wood epoxy structure.
While water tanks made of this material would seem acceptable, we questioned the viability of storing diesel fuel in wood epoxy tanks, especially if they are inside the cabin.
We detected a faint diesel odour in the accommodation during our visit.
Perhaps lining the tank, which is situated beneath the starboard berth, in stainless steel would be more satisfactory.
Lifting the cabin sole floorboards, however, is a revelation.
Sparkle must have one of the most beautiful bilges in existence, her gleaming epoxied Douglas fir and mahogany-stiffened hull clean enough to eat a meal off.
The strength of the hull is enhanced by the deck, which is an integral part of the structure.
Naturally enough,Sparkle is fitted with a Warwick Collins Tandem keel, cast by Henry Irons in Cornwall and bolted to the mahogany-reinforced bottom of the boat.
She draws just 5ft 4in (1.6m), which should enable the Codds to reach some rather interesting places.
Warwick Collins points out that the keel design not only has a distinct draught advantage over a fin keel, but also claims that it helps to damp any pitching motion in a seaway.
The delta-shaped end plate or wing is responsible for this.
The effects will no doubt have been revealed during the ARC.
One other great advantage of the plate is that it provides a wide surface upon which to dry out.
But like so many good ideas on a yacht there is often a down-side not always appreciated.
Large end plates tend to ‘stick’ to sea beds when grounding and when they do come off have been known to carry around lumps of the said seabed for some time.
That probably won't worry Mo and Barbara in cruising mode, however.
Because the Codds have been used to tiller-steered boats, they were very keen that Sparkle be similarly equipped.
‘You get a much nicer feel’, said Barbara.
The rudder on this yacht is unbalanced, protected by a full length skeg.
So it has been necessary to fit a particularly long tiller in order to apply sufficient leverage.
While it looks a fine piece of work, the laminated tiller is extremely intrusive, extending to within a foot or two of the companionway itself.
As the cockpit is likely to be used a lot while sailing in the trades and while in harbour, it seems a pity that the tiller should take up such a large amount of space, although when at rest it can be lifted out of the way.
The cockpit is well protected by a deep coaming set on the teak-laid decks, although there is nothing to stop items falling through the aft end of the cockpit, something that may become a liability when sailing in a relaxed fashion with books, Walkmans and bottles of suntan lotion lying on cockpit seats.
Again, the ARC will probably have been a test.
An easily controlled, relatively short rig is set on a two-spreader mast.
The fully battened mainsail, cut with a considerable amount of roach, set particularly well and should provide plenty of power up and downwind.
When we had a chance to view the boat from a distance with the wind at the bottom end of Force 6, we noticed that the overlapping headsail lost its shape quite badly when half-furled.
While the current sail seems ideal for light airs, it might be worth considering a flatter, non-overlapping jib which is likely to maintain a better shape across a wider wind band,
Mo Codd has certainly finished Sparkle to a very high finish below.
A three-cylinder, marinised 26hp Isuzu diesel is contained in an engine box which forms part of the large galley peninsula.
The outboard-facing chart table is particularly well thought out with a bench seat for the navigator built into the engine box.
The owners' cosy accommodation is forward of the comfortable saloon while guests can be accommodated in a portside quarter cabin.
There is a large head compartment and oilskin locker to starboard of the companionway.
We look forward to hearing from Mo and Barbara to see whether Sparkle has lived up to expectations.
RULOR 11
Designed and Built by John West, West Customs
John West arrived in the UK in 1973 as part of the South African Admiral's Cup team sailing aboard Jackaranda , and like many young visiting yachtsmen he decided to stay.
He eventually joined the Ed Dubois design office where he met his current business partner Richard Lovett while they were working on two Admiral's Cup yachts,Formidable and Promotion in 1982/83.
Lovett is well known as an expert Solo dinghy builder.
West Custom Marine are now establishing in a modern yard nest to Lymington station.
Some of the well known yachts which have emerged from West in recent years include the quarter-tonner Diamond , the Laurent Giles/Warwick Collins-designed Phantom , the Dubois one tonner Midnight Express , and Rapscallion of Russel a cruising version of Phantom .
One of their most interesting projects has been the Rulor programme for owner Robin Clabburn.
Rulor 11 is a 36ft 6in (11.1m) CHS racing yacht with a most exhilarating performance.
Had the yacht not lost her mast during one of the Lymington autumn series races last year, she would have been a contender for top boat.
Rulor 11 rates 1.068 CHS.
The brief from Robin Clabburn for Rulor 1 , his first boat from West Custom, was for a moderate displacement yacht that would be easy to handle, particularly downwind, with not too much sail area.
She should perform well while running and reaching, but be docile enough for his family, including young children.
to handle.
John West was subsequently commissioned to build a 33ft (10m) boat in wood, using cold-moulded ply.
With high topsides, an almost hard chine form and a sail wardrobe which consisted of just three sails from Lymington-based Pete Sanders — the main, a 0.75oz spinnaker and a 100 per cent overlapping jib — she met many of her owner's requirements.
She was particularly stable downwind and reached 14 knots on occasions.
Unlike Fighter ), which was fitted with a Tandem keel,Rulor 1 had a more conventional fin configuration with short winglets.
For his second boat, Robin Clabburn again wanted good downwind performance, but needed a better windward performance.
Unlike Rulor 1 , the new boat was designed with a much fairer shape aft.
Instead of using wood, the yacht was constructed of an E Glass and 1in (25mm) Divinycell foam sandwich.
West decided to abandon wings and winglets and opted for a lead torpedo bulb suspended on a conventionally shaped fin keel attached to an oak spacer between the top of the keel and the hull itself.
The aim was to get the weight as low as possible while at the same time maintain adequate surface area.
A solid wood stem and mahogany floors and stiffeners complete the basic construction which has been particularly cleanly executed by West Custom.
The deck also has a Divinycell core and consists of two mouldings, the cockpit well being a separate module.
A fractional rig is set on a Proctor spar with swept-back spreaders.
Runners control forestay tension and considerable bend can be introduced into the mast to flatten the main.
John West and Robin Clabburn discarded a Hood main in favour of a Dacron sail from Pete Saunders.
West reports that the sail is not only cheaper than the Hood alternative, but sets particularly well.
The wardrobe also includes a 130 per cent overlapping headsail and a heavy 1.50z spinnaker from the Sanders loft.
Amazingly, they still use the leech-battened blade jib from Rulor 1 as their No 4.
Again it is by Sanders.
Deck gear and rig controls are extremely simple with the minimum of winches.
Runners and spinnaker sheets and guys double up on the same winches by using sheet jammers and, while this might be fine for a highly tuned crew, a less well-trained outfit might find it demanding.
There were a couple of excellent ideas in the cockpit.
Instead of mounting sheet and halyard tail bags on he upstands of the cockpit el, where they are vulnerable to being torn off, they are recessed beneath the cockpit seats.
Footholds have been cut into the edge of the cockpit seats to support those sitting to weather.
While these looked good in the marina, we found that these weren't big enough to maintain a firm grip while at relatively acute angles of heel, particularly when it got bumpy.
The dilemma is that if they are enlarged the danger of stepping through them is increased.
With only three crew, we had a stormy sail off Lymington in a breeze which topped 25 knots.
In lumpy wind-against-tide conditions off Yarmouth,Rulor 11 had to be steered through the confusion to avoid what could be described as that familiar IOR slam.
More weather rail weight was needed to keep her on her feet.
Downwind she was marvellous, scorching past Yarmouth at 13 knots through the water.
She remained entirely controllable on the helm and felt rock steady even in the gusts on a reach.
She was particularly fun in the choppier water when we could steer her accurately onto the face of the wave of our choice and drive her through the trough at full tilt.
She appeared to have sufficient buoyancy forward to lift her over the next wave instead of burying the foredeck, something which normally prefaces a broach.
Despite the clear emphasis on performance,Rulor 11 has particularly attractive accommodation which has been smartly finished by West.
Red upholstery and plenty of natural light help, and there are good sea berths on both settees and in two quarter berths.
There's been no skimping in the navigation or galley departments and with the application of a more personal touch, the cabin could become commendably comfortable for cruising.
Rulor 11 is a yacht which proves there is life after racing in the same boat.
Q2's hull shape incorporates a knuckle which contains water ballast tanks.
Her protruding pulpit carries the tack point for a light headsail
Mary Falk in her custom built cockpit.
Q2's navigation station
Q2 appears to be a fast yacht for her waterline length, close hauled and off the wind
Sparkle in light airs in the Solent.
The Codds use a spi-squeezer for spinnaker control
Barbara Codd at the helm of Sparkle,showing the long tiller 
Sparkle 's recessed transom should come in useful while cruising
Her accommodation is particularly comfortable
How's that for a bilge!
Epoxied Douglas fir and mahogany
With this 100 per cent jib she's powerful and relatively upright in a breeze
Even with a reef in the main Rulor 11 fairly screamed along with just three crew 
The navigation station is neatly arranged and well finished
Note the recessed sheet tail bags and the foot holds in the cockpit seats
West have completed the boat well.
She's a racing boat with a comfortable interior
FICTION
The day they all went sailing
by Richard Stilgoe
If anyone was to blame I suppose it was little Marisa Leicester.
Twelve years old, hopeful and wholesome as a morning daisy, she appeared one Wednesday on the Wogan Show and told a nation with honesty and enthusiasm how she had sailed across the Atlantic in her Optimist.
It was, she added, a pity that so many people had boats and didn't use them.
The armchair sailors shifted guiltily in their armchairs, and that's when the trouble started.
‘Look,’ said Derek, ‘it's not even as if it's very far away.
We've owned the thing for two years and only taken it out that one time when it snowed.’
His wife looked at him.
‘Bill uses it,’ she said.
Bill was her brother.
‘I know Bill uses it.
But it's my boat.
Our boat.
We never use it.
The finest summer for years, and we don't go near it.
That little girl on…’
‘Right,’ said his wife.
‘This weekend.
Friday evening.
I'll make a stew to take with us.’
For she had learnt during many years of marriage that faking a knock-out early on saved you 12 punishing rounds which you lost on points.
‘It's a management skill targeting exercise,’ said Tom Bull-Dwyer.
‘I take six of the younger ones out on Vita's Girl and we see how they shake down.’
‘Why so suddenly?’ asked his PA.
‘Something I read.
The Japanese do it.
Select high-flyers by peer-group pressure.
The company own the yacht, we never use the damn thing.
Let's put some of the spotty Herberts on board and we'll see what they're made of.
It was that little girl…’
‘I'll ring the scupper and tell him you're coming,’ said his PA.
‘Skipper,’ said Tom Bull-Dwyer.
‘It's skipper.
Here's the list of the ones I want to take.
No excuses.
Tell them we'll travel down Friday evening.’
‘Oh, go on, Steve,’ wheedled Trixie, ‘You'd enjoy it.’
‘I wouldn't.
I'd be sick.’
‘The weather forecast is lovely.
There'll be no waves.
And I'll try and keep it still.’
‘I'll be sick.
I'm always sick.
It makes me sick just thinking about it.
And we're up to our eyes at the garage just now.’
‘Just us,’ said Trixie.
‘Just us and the queen-size double berth, with the dappled sunlight dancing on the vinyl headlining.’
She had not been allowed to sail the boat often, but she'd read the brochure a lot.
Something stirred inside Steve.
Something stirred outside Steve.
He switched off the little girl on Terry Wogan and went to look for the Sturgeon.
‘Oh, Christ,’ moaned Alan.
‘Oh, Christ.’
He shut his eyes again, but the sight of the inside of his eyelids was too much for him.
He opened them, and his eyelids moved back and hit him on the brain.
‘Oh, Christ,’ he said again, for he was an Australian with a hangover and he shared a quarter tonner named Mrs Mangel with four other Australians with four other hangovers, and as they stirred in their sleeping bags in the morning they looked like five blind underground creatures disturbed by David Attenborough.
On their tiny battery portable they too had seen the transatlantic moppet.
Today they were going to get the broken mast back up.
On Saturday they were going sailing.
Saturday morning dawned hot and fair in Thames, Wight and Portland.
Even the residents of North Utsire felt warm.
In Chichester Harbour Derek and Mrs Derek woke on board their Sadler 32.
In the Lymington River, Tomm Bull-Dwyer's six young executives lay in their berths trying to remember some nautical words.
The skipper was up and was reading the state-of-the-art technology with which the Nicholson was refitted after every Boat Show.
IN the Hamble, Trixie and Steve lay in the rumpled queen-size double berth of their Catalac catamaran.
The sun and Steve's gorge had risen together, but he was now back in bed.
As the first wash of the day swayed the boat, Steve leapt up and rushed on deck.
‘Poor thing,’ thought Trixie, and wondered if she might be pregnant.
The Captain of the Lymington-Yarmouth ferry could not quite put his finger on what was wrong.
The proportions on the first trip across to the island had been strange — almost no cars, few locals and 2,000 passengers in guernseys with kit bags, carrying damp cardboard boxes of food.
Now, on the return trip to Lymington, he could see at least 200 white sails.
It was only 0830 in the morning.
Well, why not?
It was a lovely day for it.
He put the thought from his mind for he was nearing the entrance to the river, and approaching him was a solid stream of boats, their crews fussing with the unfamiliar gear on deck.
Heading straight for him was a big Nicholson called Vita's Girl .
She appeared to have a crew of one, and he was reading a book.
The hydrofoil had done four return journeys before its driver began to get really worried.
Each time he passed the mouth of the Hamble on his way out of Southampton Water the queue of boats was thicker.
All had their sails up and all were looking out to the Solent, not back towards the red foils approaching them at 35 knots.
At one point he even considered slowing down.
No — there was a gap, behind that Catalac.
The Chichester harbour master was fed up with waving.
Every bloody boat had waved as it crossed the bar.
He must have waved a thousand times, and it was barely ten o'clock.
Where were they all coming from?
Derek and his wife didn't wave.
They were discussing something.
‘It's a riding turn,’ said Derek.
‘I can't do a riding turn, darling,’ said his wife.
‘You know I can't do knots.’
The wind was freshening a bit.
And coming round to the south.
The harbour master waved at the Sadler 32, but it was heeled too far over for him to see if they waved back.
In the office of the Mercury Marina, they looked out of the window, they looked at each other, and they looked bewildered.
The empty network of pontoons stretched across the river like floating railway lines.
They counted 47 boats still moored.
That meant 302 had gone to sea, including five Australians with a mast held together with self-tapping screws.
‘I've rung Port Hamble and Hamble Point,’ said one of them.
‘It's the same there.
And Moody's.’
‘Did you see that girl on Wogan?’ said another.
‘She said it was a pity to see all those boats never going anywhere.’
‘I've just had an idea,’ said the first.
‘While they're gone shall we sublet their berths?’
Out in the Solent, it was all quite fun to begin with.
People waved and shouted ‘Starboard’ and ‘Water’in a jocular way.
(‘Why do they want water?’
Derek's wife asked).
Gradually the mood changed, and 15,000 pairs of lips grew tighter.
Yes, 15,000.
They didn't work out the figures until later, of course, but that's how many boats were fighting for space in the Solent that fine Saturday.
Thirteen thousand of them were commanded by a helmsman who hadn't steered anything without wheels for more than a year.
Something was bound to go wrong.
The fact that four things went wrong is unlucky, but not surprising.
Trixie was mopping Steve's breakfast off the Catalac's deck.
Steve would have been steering, but his mind was on other things.
They gybed, and slewed round into Derek and Mrs Derek, who was screaming, ‘Stop calling me Leo!’ at her husband.
At this moment the top half of the Australians' mast fell on her, followed by the Australians and the Australians' boat.
The Nicholson 58 under full sail is a fine sight, especially with her sheets as tight as violin strings (thanks to locked-up hydraulic winches) making nine knots under an autopilot which refuses to switch off.
Tom Bull-Dwyer, his unhappy skipper and six-beige faced middle managers watched as Vita's Girl ploughed into the three other boats.
It is man's nature, when he sees disaster, to go and watch, and see if anyone offers to help.
As more people come to watch, they force the first watchers toward the centre.
Then the disaster looks even more interesting, so yet more come (from even further away) to see what's happening.
At 1423 the tide turned, and began to empty the Solent, and anything floating on it, through the narrow Needles Channel.
The wind went round to the east and freshened.
A two-year-old motor-cruiser with a litre of two-year-old diesel in its tanks used it up while trying to separate the crashed boats, and so joined them.
Others rapidly followed, and the shouting became loud and warlike.
In the radar room of the freighter, Matyas gave the screen a thump.
The thing was on the blink again.
He could see the Needles.
He could see the outline of Hurst Castle, but in the middle of the Needles Channel was a circular white blob surrounded by snowflakes.
On the bridge Koskas should, of course, have been awake.
But he wasn't.
He was asleep, and happy.
Everyone could see his ship — all 20,000 tonnes of her.
Her navigation system guided her infallibly from waypoint to waypoint.
She had ample power to stem the tide that ebbed enthusiastically out past the Needles, and would not be blown off course by the north-easterly wind.
The raft of crashed boats had now reached 1,500 and was growing all the time.
The Nicholson's computer recorded 25 knots across the deck, and offered advice about what to do with it.
Tom Bull-Dwyer's middle managers stared unhappily out through the forest of tangled masts at the Needles, which seemed to be travelling past at a brisk walking pace.
Trixie saw the black cliff of the freighter bludgeoning its way towards them.
Even if Koskas had woken up it wouldn't have made any difference.
In her parent's garden in Brentwood, little Marisa Leicester stood beside her Optimist and smiled at the 30 cameramen.
‘I think,’ she repeated to the reporter from the Sun , ‘that everybody ought to go sailing.
You meet lots of people.’
As the Chichester harbour master waved for the thousandth time, he wondered, ‘Where are all these boats coming from?’.
CRUISING
Gateway into RUSSIA
In October the USSR and Finland signed an agreement to develop yachting tourism.
James Boyd reports
It isn't often that a new cruising ground opens to yachtsmen, particularly one that has hundred of deserted anchorages, summer water temperatures comparable to the Med, and which is the same sailing distance from Britain as Gibraltar.
‘The Gulf of Finland was a dead end for yachtsmen,’ says Leo Skogström, head of the Finnish company Lebak Charters.
‘Now yachtsmen can visit Leningrad or Lake Saimaa and may soon be able to use the Soviet canal system to get to Murmansk or the Black Sea.’
Skogström invited Yachting World on a whirlwind trip round this new cruising ground, starting with a baptism of fire: a motor boat journey from Kotka in Finland to Vyborg in Russia.
The tension heightened as we crossed the border.
Leo pointed out two large towers on the shore from which Finnish and Russian border guards view all passing maritime traffic.
Twenty minutes later a Russian patrol boat, identified by the large numbers on its topsides, sped by, inspecting us from a distance.
Yachts approaching Vyborg are supposed to stick to a ¾ mile (1.2km) wide channel marked on Russian charts, but not on Admiralty charts.
In the past it has been compulsory for visiting yachtsmen to call on VHF Ch 16 for a pilot to guide them in, but thankfully this practice has now been abandoned in Vyborg.
Passing an oil rig and numerous naval vessels, we moored alongside a jetty on the estuary leading up to the town.
Here, a border guard and two customs officers, all in uniform, came aboard to inspect our documents.
Our Russian translator, Igor, spoke to them, but non-Russian speakers should have no problems providing they treat the officials with respect and courtesy.
We motored down to Vyborg Castle Harbour, where we tied up by a newly built tax-free shop in the shadow of the 12th Century castle.
This was stocked entirely with butter, Spam, cigarettes, Gordon's Gin and hot dogs.
They could be purchased with hard currency but not roubles.
After we had docked, a representative of Inflot, the Russian equivalent of Trinity House, apologetically asked each of us to sign more documents.
These included a general declaration, stating the ship's name and registration, a crew list and maritime declaration of health which we signed, but did not have to complete.
We were charged a hefty US$46.80 (£23.60) in mooring fees.
According to Skogström, the charging structure is still based on calculations for commercial vessels.
The marina opposite us was scheduled to open in June and will provide pontoon berths and basic facilities such as water, toilets and fuel.
Hopefully, it will also be better value
Leningrad's architecture is similar to that of Paris, but although splendid, it is in a general state of dilapidation.
Facilities for yachts are limited and in the country's current economic turmoil visiting yachtsmen would be wise to stock up with adequate fuel and provisions to last the duration of their visit.
Leningrad has six harbours, but only two are to be recommended.
The Central Yacht Club of the Trade Unions has a good harbour and is centrally located, but its clubhouse, which looks impressive from the outside, is unfinished because of lack of funds.
We visited the Baltic Yacht Club, owned by the Baltic Shipping Company, where we were shown around by the friendly vice commodore, Alexey Bulkanov.
He speaks good English.
Being the end of the season, the 70-berth marina was largely empty, with yachts either ashore on the large area of hard standing or in the club's shed.
Diesel is available on the pontoons from a long pipe which extends down from a makeshift pump at the pontoon head.
Visiting yachts can be taken out of the water by the club's ten ton crane and wintered on the hard or in the shed.
A sailmaker, engineer and carpenter are available to carry out any work which needs doing.
No spare parts are available, but Skogström is planning to import them from Finland.
Although the club's entrance has a night watchman, security could be a problem.
LENINGRAD
Yachts entering Leningrad must stick to a channel similar to the one on the approached to Vyborg.
It leads through the commercial port to the passenger terminal, where yachtsmen can clear customs and immigration.
by prior arrangement yacht club members will meet yachtsmen there.
Currently, yachts must be led by pilot boat to their club, but this will soon change.
LAKE SAIMAA
At the end of World War 11, the border between Finland and the USSR was moved westwards.
As a result, half of the Saimaa Canal, which links the Gulf of Finland with Lake Saimaa (Finland's largest lake system), fell into Soviet hands and has since been cut off to yachts wishing to enter from the Baltic Sea.
This tear, under the new agreement, the canal will be open to foreign yachts, which will be able to enter Lake Saimaa's 124 x 186 mile (200 x300km) network of estuaries, lakes and islands.
The entrance to the Saimaa Canal is in Russia, just north of Vyborg.
Yachtsmen wishing to use the canal should contact the canal office of the Finnish sector at least one week in advance.
Yachtsmen going straight into the canal do not require a visa and the canal office will warn the Soviet officials of a foreign yacht's arrival.
A pilot is currently required to enter the canal and can be called up on VHF Ch16, but canal director, Seppo Koivupuro, says that this requirement may soon cease.
Groups of yachts will be allowed to enter the canal en masse on set days of the week, probably Tuesday and Friday.
The border to Finland is half way up the 30-mile (48km) long canal and the canal office is at the eighth of the nine locks.
Currently, 250 Finnmarks (£36.23) cover the pilotage and canal fees and this can be paid at the canal office or in Vyborg.
The canal is used by commercial vessels servicing Lake Saimaa's paper and steel industries.
Yachts wishing to use the canal are limited only by a maximum mast height of 80ft (24.5m).
Yachts visiting Lake Saimaa must be fitted with holding tanks, but otherwise draught is the principal limiting factor.
There are over 1,864 miles (3,000km) of marked channels, which vary in depth between 6 and 14ft (1.8 and 4.35m).
As the lake is so shallow, the water heats up very quickly during summer and water temperatures during this time are regularly 20–25 °C.
There are thousands of lakes and over 100 small harbours to visit, as well as several marinas, notably at Savonlinna and Lappeenranta, by the canal's exit.
Basic services, such as, fuel and provisions, are widely available.
There are also limitless, deserted anchorages.
Lake Saimaa is a fresh water lake and has flatter water and lighter, more fluky winds than on the open sea.
Due to its high latitude, the hours of daylight are very long during summer.
Further north it gets no darker than twilight.
However, the season only lasts for from the beginning of May until the end of November, after which the lake, canal and much of the Gulf of Finland freezes up with ice which can be 2ft (0.6m) thick.
Whether you are attracted to the beauty and tranquillity of Lake Saimaa or the historic and cultural wealth of Leningrad, perestroika can be thanked for having opened up a fascinating new cruising ground accessible to those looking for fresh places to visit, as well as being a potential charter area.
CONTACTS
INFORMATION
1.
To get Russian visas for Leningrad or Vyborg: Contact the Baltic Yacht Club stating name of the boat, dates of arrival and departure, a crew list with date and place of birth and passport number for each member.
An invitation is required for each republic to be visited.
Pass the application, invitations, on to the Russian Embassy together with a photocopy of the crewmembers' passports and three passport photos of each person.
The Helsinki embassy charges a 100 Finnmark fee (£12) and takes two days, but this is considered quick.
Visas are valid for 30 days.
Alternatively, Lebak Charters can organise invitations and visas.
Although the rouble is the national currency, foreign currencies are also widely accepted.
Arun,Skogström's Riva 50, was the first foreign pleasure boat onto Leningrad's Neva River, pictured in front of the Army Medical Academy 
A typical deserted anchorage on Finland's Lake Saimaa
RACING
AROUND THE RACE COURSE
with Stuart Quarrie
Deciding where to place your boat on the start line and then threading your way there through a crowded fleet is no mean feat, but Stuart Quarrie offers some tips
Normally, the angle of the start line relative to the wind direction will determine where you should start.
Having decided that basic fact, the real problem is getting to the chosen position at the right time and without being shut out by other yachts.
In general terms, the more definite the bias is, the harder it will be to start in the right place because everyone else will also be trying to start there.
If there is little or no bias it doesn't matter whereabouts on the line you start.
The fleet should then be spread out along the line and life will be much easier for everyone.
STARBOARD BIAS
Assuming that you have determined that the line is biased to starboard, and you therefore want to start near the starboard end of the line, there are still a number of considerations which you must take into account before you can put yourself in the right place as the gun is fired.
First of all, you have to ascertain whether your strategy up the first part of the beat will make you want to carry on sailing on starboard tack for some time after the starting signal, or to tack onto port as soon as possible after the start.
If your strategy is to start at the starboard end of the line and carry on sailing on starboard tack, the situation is as illustrated in Diagram 1.
In most starts, there is usually only one boat which is able to make a perfect start; everyone else will have to compromise to some extent.
The important thing, therefore, is to make the right compromise.
In this case, it is not essential to be right at the committee boat, but having clear air to allow you to carry on, for some distance, without tacking is vital.
You should, therefore, make every attempt to be in the first row, going fast as the gun goes and, ideally, with a space to leeward so that no-one is making you pinch.
Your exact place along the line does not matter.
In order to achieve this position, your bowman must know where the line is and how far away from it you are at any given moment.
This will entail getting transits before the start so that he can look either way and know where the line is.
You should then practise with the bowman so that he can get a feel for distance.
(It helps if the bowman has a good spatial awareness).
The distance you want is the perpendicular distance to the line, not the distance you would travel to the line if you stayed on the same heading.
Calling the distance in boat lengths is normally the best way.
Have the bowman on the front of the boat and get him to indicate distance to the line with his fingers.
It is up to you whether you allow him or her to call you as being late or early; I like to do this myself from the back of the boat.
So long as you know how far it is to the line, and so long as someone is calling out the time to the start, you just need to judge your speed correctly.
Remember that you are allowed to luff into the wind, but you have to do it slowly.
Be prepared to tell the boat to windward that this is what you intend to do so that he does nor barge down onto you and force you further along the line.
Conversely, do not be bullied by the boat to leeward.
He can luff you, but rule 40 says that, prior to the start, luffing must be slow and must give you room and opportunity to keep clear.
It is worthwhile practising timed starts to get a feel for how fast your yacht accelerates and slows down, and how long it takes to cover a certain distance.
At a real start, there will be lots of other boats giving you dirty wind and undoubtedly, you will not be able to sail as fast as you would on your own.
If you have decided not only to start at the starboard end, but also to tack onto port as soon as possible, then a different set of priorities apply.
As you will see from Diagram 2, clear air is no longer important, as long as you are in a position to tack when ready.
In this situation, it is much more sensible to be in the second or even third row from the start line, but you should be right at the starboard end.
Timing is therefore, less important than position.
The danger is in being too high on your approach to the line, and having to barge in, with no rights.
Practise before your start to get the line correct, so that you approach close-hauled and just lay the starboard end.
At the start, you will need to approach from a spot a little bit more upwind due to the effect of the other yachts, but not much higher than before.
If you find that you are too early, and cannot guarantee slowing down sufficiently, look for a gap and tack off early, then circle round and come in again.
As I've already said, being a few seconds late will not be a severe disadvantage, but being early or being forced down the line will stop you from tacking when you want to.
PORT BIAS
When there is port bias on the line you will rarely need to start right at the pin end.
Similarly, it is extremely unusual to need to attempt a port tack start.
With port bias, there are at least two ways of ensuring a reasonable start.
My preference, especially with a menagerie fleet and a relatively long line, is to approach the line as in Diagram 3.
Come in from the port end and take a note of the countdown time as you pass the buoy.
Keep a good lookout and stay back from the line a little so that you don't get into problems with people on starboard tack, then look for a gap to tack into.
Since you are on port tack, whereas the boats which have already lined up will be on starboard, your combined approach speed should mean that you will pass gaps quite frequently.
Tack into a gap once you have expended about half the time to the start from the buoy, then even if you sail back at the same speed, you cannot be early.
If you want to stay on starboard tack after the start, it is usually better to tack just in front of a group of boats so that they are safely to windward once you start.
However, if you need to get onto port tack as soon as possible, then go behind any big group and tack into the (probably) larger gap to windward of them.
Should a big enough gap open up at just the right time, then you will be able to stay on port and merely harden up to cross the line.
If this is your plan, then do not be frightened of ducking one or two sterns to get going on port.
NO BIAS
If the line is even, and your position is not critical, treat it as if it were starboard biased: that is, if you want to continue on starboard tack, join the bunch reaching down the line quite early.
Jockey to get a good slot, forcing a gap to leeward where possible and not letting anyone sail over you to windward.
If you need to tack quickly, then once again, start at the starboard end, or at least to starboard of the main bunch of yachts.
AFTER THE START
Whichever end is biased, there are some general points which are worth bearing in mind.
Although you will certainly be concerned about the start itself, it isn't tremendously significant: it is how you sail relative to the rest of the fleet after their start that really matters.
Unless you are forced to sail high by a boat close to leeward, come out of the start powered up and going fast.
Change to your normal upwind trim once you are in clear air.
Do not tack too much in the early stages of the beat and do not let yourself be forced the wrong way.
REACHING STARTS
In some ways a reaching start is easier than a beating one, but there are still pitfalls for the unwary.
Reaching starts are normally best managed with a timed approach.
Clear air is nearly always of paramount importance.
If this is to be a spinnaker leg, hold onto the hoist until you are sure that no-one is going to luff you, but be ready for a quick hoist.
If planning to start at the windward end of the line, remember that boats to leeward do not need to give you room.
However, once the gun has gone they are not allowed to shut you out by sailing above the course to the first mark.
RUNNING STARTS
At a running start you should plan to start at the downwind end.
Starboard gybe is obviously safer than port, and clear air is vital.
Try not to start to leeward of a group of yachts or they will probably sail over you.
If you do find yourself in this position, with a few seconds left to the gun, consider reaching across them so that you can get clear air.
In this case, it is going to be important to have good downwind speed at the start, so get the spinnaker up in plenty of time.
Time your approach so that you are not early.
Starting is not as difficult, or as frightening, as some people believe.
Know your rules, work out your strategy and then go and do it.
Do not barge in if you think you are in the wrong, be prepared to be a little late, or concede the best position, but do not be bullied by those who shout at you.
Next month: Stuart Quarrie takes a look at the beat.
Stuart Quarrie is a yachting consultant specialising in race training and coaching.
He was the British Admiral's Cup team manager in 1987 and has been involved in AC campaigns since 1981.
One of the advantages of tacking onto port as soon as possible after the start is that you don't have to worry about clear air
Clear air is one of the most essential ingredients of a successful start
A good position at the start line will put you in the front rank on the first leg
Diagram 1 Starboard bias Plan to stay on starboard track.
Clear air paramount.
Diagram 2 Starboard bias If you intend to tack right at committee boat.
It is not vital to be in the first row.
Diagram 3 Port bias Take time to go as you pass the buoy.
Tack into suitable gap when at least half the time has elapsed or harden up on port if a big enough gap presents itself
GETTING THE BEST OUT OF YOUR: J/44
Craig Davis went sailing with designer Rod Johnstone to get the lowdown on tuning this exciting new one-design
To people all round the world, the word J/24 signifies fast sailing and a great deal of enjoyment.
Rod and Bob Johnstone, who started their boat business in New England in 1977, have produced an enormous number of one-design racing and cruising boats.
their greatest success has certainly been the J/24, but the J/35, with over 300 boats, is also an extremely active and competitive class in the United States.
Now the J/44, which was launched only last year, has received an exceptional response worldwide, with 57 boats already on the water or in the process of construction.
In Europe boats are sailing in Britain, Germany and Spain.
Following the 1988 Newport-to-Bermuda Race, the Johnstones conducted a survey to find out what was the most popular class in terms of size, and then developed the J/44 to fit into that class.
Intended for use as an offshore racing boat, the J/44 has strong performance characteristics and a hull design not hindered by IOR distortions.
Its 44ft 9in (13.6m) overall length makes it manageable for inshore racing, and very comfortable for offshore racing.
In fact, a slightly modified water ballasted version of the boat, named Zafu , is presently competing in the BOC single-handed round the world race.
The J/44 is of moderate displacement at 22,350lb (10,138kg), but very stiff, with a low centre of gravity and a righting moment of 2,165lb (980kg).
The righting moment (RM) measures the boat's resistance to heel, and the higher the RM, the greater the resistance.
The J/44's RM is 14 per cent greater than the RM of a Swan 44 (1,900lb/860kg) A larger RM allows a boat greater sail carrying power.
The J/44 has a large sail area of 1,048 square feet (97 square metres)
With these characteristics, the J/44 is a sensational boat to race.
As in a lot of one-design racing, class rules ensure that the emphasis is placed on the ability and performance of the crew: owners are not allowed to make modifications to their boats.
In terms of boat configuration and sail selection, deck layouts are all the same and each boat is allowed four headsails including two with LP greater than 24ft (7.3m), but not greater than 26ft 9in (8.1m), two headsails of 24ft LP or less and three spinnakers.
One of the questions raised by the J/44 is of the masthead rig versus fractional rig.
Over the past ten years we have all learned from watching IOR boats that fractional rigs outperform masthead rigs.
But, as more racing takes place under other rating rules, the question arises whether the fractional rig retains its advantage.
The J/44, and some other J-boats, seem to indicate that it does not.
The IOR rule gives a benefit to larger mainsail areas versus adding sail area to the foretriangle.
The rule used calculated sail area as one factor in determining a rating, which typically indicated a larger sail area on a masthead boat of similar rating, while the fractional rig actually had more sail area.
But the IMS rule has done away with this bonus and has rated the foretriangle and the mainsail area equally, leaving the rig configuration to the designer.
In terms of the average sailor, the masthead is also an easier configuration to control, and you don't have to worry about the mast coming down if you fail to get the runner on immediately.
In light air the large genoa helps push you forward and in heavy, choppy seas, the larger headsail powers you through the waves.
With such significance placed on boat handling and sail trim, I went to the source to ask for personal recommendations from Bob Johnstone for trimming the J/44.
I also had discussions with some of the skippers participating in the Columbus Cup Match Racing regatta which was held in Baltimore, Maryland, and used, exclusively, the J/44.
To set the boat up, the butt of the mast should normally be in the position furthest forward.
For shroud tension on the mast, the uppers should be tight, but the lowers should be loose enough to allow the mast to bend in order to enhance sail shape.
The boat sails better with mast rake, the optimum length of the forestay being 62ft 3 ½″ (19m).
This length was used by Fair American to win the North American Championships, although some boats have lengthened the forestay to as much as 62ft 7in (19.1m).
For class racing, you should be aware that rake may be limited in the future by class rules and, besides, in terms of performance, sail shape is of greater importance.
Spoiler at the start of a spinnaker drop, the sail having been tripped from the pole end 
Fair American 's genoa is being ground home as speed builds, after the leeward mark.
The spinnaker is being tidied away
Light air
Sailing upwind in six knots of wind, or less, the masthead rig does not require the use of the checkstays — which can be clipped forward to the shrouds — and the backstay and outhaul should be eased.
In extremely light conditions, the boat should be sailed by the upper telltales on the genoa, with both the main and the genoa very full.
In eight knots of true wind the optimum boat speed would be about 6.15 knots at a true wind angle of 44 °.
Under most conditions, the J/44 is a very well balanced boat which doesn't need unusual weight distribution.
Consequently, crew weight should be equalised at all times, whether the crew is to leeward or windward: that is why the halyards and the topping lift are usually controlled by the stoppers and winches at the base of the mast.
When sailing upwind only three people should be aft of the cabin top.
One unusual aspect of the J/44 is the need to depower the main more quickly than you might be accustomed to on other boats.
By the time you get all the crew up on the windward rail, which would be in true wind of 10–12 knots, you should be flattening the bottom of the main and opening up the leech.
The sail may appear to look better with the leech closed, but actual performance has shown that, other than in very light conditions, the boat will sail better with the main opened up.
Most boats use a light-to-medium genoa with an indicated wind range of up to 11–12 knots true, a 155 percent overlap and a good, efficient shape throughout the sail.
Medium air
As the wind begins to build, the boom should continue to be carried on the centreline and you should not attempt to sheet the main using the vang: because the boom is so long, the mainsheet is a more effective control.
Remember again to allow the main to twist off, and in puffs or gusts it is better to control the boat by playing the mainsheet rather than the traveller.
Sufficient backstay and checkstay should be used to keep the mast in column.
By the time the wind reaches 12–13 knots true, the genoa should have been changed to the heavy No 1, which is good for up to 18 –20 knots true.
In 14 knots of true wind, the optimum boat speed would be about 7.15 knots at a true wind angle of 40 °.
Right , halyards on the J/44 are best hauled just abaft the mast to keep the cockpit clear and to keep crew weight in the middle of the boat.
Below, tag lines to the standard Harken genoa cars are normally handled on a cockpit winch, but they can be replaced by tackles if desired.
Below right , sewn boot round the rigging screws, plus the white line above, keeps sheets from snagging when tacking.
Note the inboard and outboard tracks for the No 3 headsail sheeting position
Vamp 's cockpit.
Genoa sheets can lead direct to the primary winch.
The red and white line through the stopper on the rail is the tail of the runner, leading to the secondary winch
Good sail characteristics for the heavy No 1 would be 150 per cent overlap with the aft portion of the sail being flat.
With the heavy No 1, the genoa car should be about six inches (15cm) more on the checkstays and add additional backstay pressure.
It is important not to overuse the checkstays because excessive use can close the leech of the main, slowing the boat.
To test this, ease the mainsheet slightly, and if the boat speed jumps up you know that you probably have too much checkstay tension.
Heavy air
The heavy No 1 can be carried up to 18 –20 knots true or 25 –26 knots apparent.
As the wind increases above this level it is better to go directly to the No 3 to help the stability of the boat rather than changing to the No 2.
To trim the sail, the jib car should be used on the inside track and the clew trimmed back to the shrouds.
You should be able to carry an unreefed main up to 30 knots of true wind, but it will have to be trimmed quite flat.
The boat will need power forward, so the No 3 or No 4 jib should be round and not too flat.
Reaching and downwind
For white sail reaching or any point of sail off close-hauled, the genoa sheet should be moved to the outer rail.
In winds of up to 14 knots true you can begin to spinnaker reach with the 1.5oz at 60 ° apparent.
When sailing downwind in light to medium winds, it is important to remember to sail the boat higher until the optimum boat speed is reached, at which time you can begin to work the boat down.
The yacht will hold its speed well, but as it slows you will have to head higher to regain speed.
In heavier air you will probably want to keep the boat square and play the waves.
Mainsheet traveller control is powerful, but the traveller itself is very short.
The two-part mainsheet has its own winches at each end of the track.
B&G readouts are well placed
Rod Johnstone at the helm of his Iona during Key West Week.
Ten crew is about right to race the boat, though more weight in a breeze — if allowed by the rules — is an advantage
In a strong breeze set the traveller and play the mainsheet to relieve the helm
Craig Davis is an international photographer/journalist, who has over 20 years experience in yacht racing, most recently with the entry of his one ton Top Gun in the 1987 US Admiral's Cup trials
CRUISING
PASSAGE INTO PARADISE
Beyond the reef, tantalising Mexican beaches and calm turquoise water beckoned Nigel Calder and his family, but there was no way in…or was there?
Approaching from Cozumel or the north, the Mayan temple at Tulum in Mexico's Yucatan province stands out from miles away, a square mass in a small indentation on an otherwise low-lying and featureless coastline.
This conspicuousness is just as well, since there are no detailed charts of this area, and on our large scale chart (1:906,530) the word Tulum is placed two or three miles north of its actual location.
We bore down on the landmark at a steady six to seven knots under a single genoa, the 15–20 knot wind on our port quarter with 10–12ft (3–4m) steep-sided swells barrelling up astern and sweeping past.
From time to time Nada , our 39ft (11.8m) ketch, took to rolling heavily, dipping first one gunwale and then the other.
Pippin, our four-year-old daughter, and Paul, two-and-a-half, were becoming a little cranky and tired of hanging on to the cockpit coamings.
My wife Terrie was feeling seasick.
It was time to get everyone ashore.
Now a mile or two ahead, we could see a white line where the swell was crashing up on the fringing reef.
We raced on because we were still well off soundings.
The bottom here drops precipitously.
We closed the reef rapidly, approaching a dangerous lee shore with the wind and waves astern.
Leaving Nada firmly in the wind vane's control, and taking the binoculars with me, I climbed the ratlines to the lower spreaders to take a closer look.
The reef stretched in a seemingly endless arc of foam to the north and south.
MAELSTROM
Closer now, the steady rumble of the breaking seas was en ever-present sound in the background.
Quite suddenly we were on soundings: 150ft, 100ft, 60ft.
We came round, a quarter mile or so off the reef, and headed south on a parallel course, one eye on the depth sounder, the other on the maelstrom to starboard.
A glance to seaward revealed a sight that never ceases to amaze us: the dramatic change from a deep ultramarine blue to the most glorious translucent light blue that occurs in these waters at around 100ft (30m).
It was one of these abrupt lines drawn on the surface of the ocean that has to be seen to be believed.
We adjusted our course to move off the reef and hover on this line.
With Terrie now at the helm I climbed to the spreaders again, binoculars in hand.
We were not operating completely in the dark, since we had a set of instructions for entering Tulum, written in the bulletin of the Seven Seas Cruising Association, the monthly newsletter of a 3,500-strong group of sailors who have roamed every corner of the world.
The note read:
‘The cut through the reef is easy to see and is wide.
We entered on a course of 312 °T toward a conspicuously tall palm among other palms in an area south of the pier, which is south of the lighthouse, which is south of the ruins.
A rock awash outside the reef entrance was 100 metres or so off to port.’
The ruins passed to starboard and then the lighthouse.
Where was the pier?
We rolled heavily as I clung to the shrouds scanning the reef as best I could.
Behind it the water looked tantalisingly calm with a gorgeous white sand beach fringed with coconut palms.
Scattered among them were groups of palapas — the tiny Mayan houses made of sticks with roofs of palm thatch, each with just enough room to swing two hammocks.
No sign of a pier, nor of the ‘conspicuously tall palm’.
On the beach I could see a number of fallen and decapitated trees.
I had a sinking feeling: in the autumn of 1988 hurricane Gilbert, a class 5 hurricane (one of the strongest on record), had passed just to the north.
We were now well south of the lighthouse.
It seemed clear that Gilbert had wiped out the landmarks.
I made my way back to the cockpit.
‘There's no sign of a break in the reef.’
‘What do we do now?’ asked Terrie, gloomily.
‘I hate to give up when we're so close.
It looks lovely inside.
It was hard to make out some of the details with the boat bouncing around.
We'll make another pass a little closer inshore.’
We cranked the motor for added security and put a few wraps in the roller reefing genoa to make it easier to control.
I returned to the ratlines while we made an arc inshore and back to the north in 50–60ft (15–18m) of water.
The shallower water was making the waves a little steeper.
Occasionally, one would be considerably larger than its brethren with its crest attempting to break.
We were both a little nervous as we made our way to the lighthouse past the palms, the palapas and the tantalising lagoon.
Definitely no pier and nothing that looked like a break in the reef.
Despondently, I returned to the cockpit.
‘Nothing.
Not a chance, especially with these seas and an onshore wind.
We'll make one more pass, a little closer, but I don't think it will do any good.’
‘Do you think that's safe?’ asked Terrie.
‘We're getting awfully close to the reef.’
‘We'll be on enough of a reach to pull off, even if the motor fails,’ I said.
We took in another couple of wraps on the genoa, came round into 30–40ft (9–12m) of water, and wallowed our way slowly southwards once again, a scant couple of hundred yards off the reef.
Here the seas were steeper than ever.
On my perch, arms wrapped tightly round the shrouds, I was alternately laid back over the deck and thrust out over the water.
Yet again I gazed intently at the lighthouse, the beach, the palapas, the palm trees and the reef.
Without a doubt, there was no pier and no conspicuous palm, and I could almost swear there was no break in the reef.
On one final sweep with the binoculars, however, I saw a clearer patch of water to the south, with the waves breaking further inshore, some of which were rolling clear up to the low rocky cliffs.
Could this be the gap, much further south?
For some reason I remembered, at this moment, a second set of instructions for entering this reef, photocopied out of someone else's copy of Heart and Stone's A Cruising Guide to the Caribbean and the Bahamas .
I scrambled back down the ratlines, rushed to the cockpit and down the companionway hatch.
I had the photocopy stashed in a chart drawer and was back out with it in moments.
I read aloud:
‘South of the lighthouse is a wide break in the barrier reef which may be safely used in good light and moderate sea conditions.
Well, we had neither: the sun was already moving down into the west, making it difficult to judge depths by water colour, and the seas were definitely not moderate.
‘Ron Barr of Cibola recommends that you orient yourself by identifying some resort houses and a beach, further south some low cliffs, and still further south a stand of palms with one particularly high one on its north end.
Coming in on this conspicuous palm tree on a course of 310 °M, you will pass to port a prominent flat-topped and nearly awash rock just before you get to the reef opening itself.
The low cliffs were the key to the puzzle: we had been searching too far north.
There was the stand of palms, but not the conspicuous one to the north.
Instead, there was a tall, straggly looking tree seemingly at precisely the right spot, but it was definitely not a palm; no-one could mistake it for one.
Another trip up the ratlines, this time with the hand-bearing compass, confirmed that we were indeed off the gap in the reef.
I watched intently our changing bearing on the tree.
We were centred up on the gap in the reef: this must be it!
Suddenly, Terrie yelled out: ‘The rock is right ahead!’
She came up to the wind and headed out to sea as I swung round.
There was a square slab, looking just like the top of a subterranean pillar, breaking the surface in the deeper wave troughs.
It was now just a hundred yards off our starboard bow.
All the pieces of the puzzle were in place: it was time for a little conference.
THROUGH THE GAP
Terrie is by nature cautious: ‘It's too rough.
You can't see the bottom.
There are still some waves breaking in the gap — maybe there are coral heads there.
If we get into trouble once we head in, there's not enough room to turn.’
‘You're right, but we have two clear sets of instructions from reliable sources and everything fits,’ I said.
‘Let's go for it.
You take the helm and I'll go back up to the spreaders.’
So we came about for the last time, since we were now south of the entrance, and motorsailed north, a little further off, to give the rock a good clearance.
We passed it to port, and now I focused on that lone, spindly tree as its bearing came around.
310 °M.
Time to make our move.
Terrie put the helm hard over while I alternately concentrated on the reef, closing rapidly on both sides, and took bearings on the tree to ensure that we made whatever course corrections were necessary to counteract the current that runs northward up this coastline at up to three knots.
With the wind and waves astern Nada gathered momentum: no turning back now.
We were in the gap itself.
In a wave trough I caught a glimpse of a coral head to port: a little too close for comfort.
Nada accelerated as a wave broke behind us.
We surfed in as Terrie fought to keep control of the tiller and stop us from broaching.
Then the breakers were all astern and Terrie was coming round to starboard to motor up the back of the reef.
Peter Hancock, a friend in whose company we were cruising, came sailing through the reef behind us in fine style in his yacht Kylie .
The swells rapidly subsided as we moved into the lee of the protective barrier.
‘I don't think I have ever been so frightened in my life,’ said Terrie (who is given to a little hyperbole at times).
I too confessed to some anxious moments as she happily passed the tiller over to me.
We made our way to the lighthouse, in full view of the temple, and dropped anchors.
After four attempts to set our 45lb CQR in the thin sand-over-rock bottom, we gave up and put out a couple of 40lb Danforths, both of which bit hard on the first attempt.
Since the swells were still partially coming over the reef and the wind holding at 15–20 knots, we also set the CQR down once again and streamed out 120ft (36m) of ⅜″ chain: at least it would provide additional weight on the bottom, and should we drag we would hear the chain scraping over the rocks.
Pippin and Paul are banished to the cockpit when anchoring.
With the beach all but in reach they are getting heartily tired of this anchoring business.
‘Daddy, aren't you finished yet?
We want to go to the beach.’
Eventually, it was all done; snubbing lines set, sheets tidied up and the dinghy hoisted off the cabin top.
I had one last thing to do.
The residual swells coming over the reef were causing a moderate surf on the beach: I needed to reconnoitre, weighing up the possibility of swamping before taking the children in.
Making a slow pass behind the surf line to try to gauge the size of the breakers, it seemed to me to be rather dangerous.
I headed over to the Kylie to collect Peter, so as to have an additional adult on board, and finally back to Nada to pick up Terrie and the children.
We had a thrill surfing up on the beach and clambered out of the dinghy, damp but safe.
There, to greet us, was a suntanned stranger.
‘Hello, I'm Bill.’
He stretched out his hand.
‘I live opposite the gap in the reef.
I saw you come in.
I said to myself, I've got to meet these people.
They must either know what they're doing, or they must be crazy.’
We all smiled broadly.
The truth is, it was a little of both.
American Nigel Calder is the author of several books on boat maintenance and repairs at sea.
His latest book, Boatowner's Mechanical and Electrical Handbook, was published this year and he is now working on a cruising guide to the Yucatan peninsula, Belize, Guatemala and Honduras.
Mayan houses, or palapas, grouped along the beach at Tulum
Looking north to the lighthouse at Tulum
Opposite the gap in the reef
Landmarks to the north, the lighthouse and the Mayan temple
Pippin and Paul can at last play on the gorgeous white sand
It was worth the effort for an anchorage sheltered from the swell
Charter Update
Flight details
If you have to arrange your own flights to an exotic charter destination where the bareboat cruise of a lifetime awaits, Holidayfax might be the contact you need to get the best flight information.
Holidayfax's flight guide lists the carriers, fares, departure and arrival times, and relevant discounts of published flights from all UK airports.
All you have to do is telephone Holidayfax on (081) 878 9141, state your destination and your departure date and a guide will be posted to you free of charge.
Holidayfax can then check availability and book the flight for you.
Scottish thrift
ALBA Yacht Services, based at Oban on the west coast of Scotland, offer a wide range of boats from Moody 31s to a Westerly Sealord with which to cruise the Western Isles.
Their 1991 brochure highlights the boats and the cruising area, and gives details of a very comprehensive inventory.
While the majority of ALBA boats are restricted to the Hebrides and are not permitted to venture further south than the Mull of Kintyre, experienced previous customers can take boats to the island of St Kilda for a premium on the charter fee.
This is a passage that should appeal to the more adventurous.
Closer to the Alba base at Dunstaffnage, however, there are still scores of places to visit.
Contact: Alba Yacht Services Ltd, Dunstaffnage, Oban, Argyll.
Mexican charters
Chartering in Mexico is fraught with legal problems for the organisations that set up there.
One company that has managed to find a way through the red tape is Fraser Charters Inc, who offer skippered charter in the Sea of Cortez and Mexican Riviera areas.
Their fleet consists mainly of motor yachts and sport fishermen, including the 120ft (36.5m)Obsession and Allegro , a 73ft (22m) sport fisherman, although there are also a few sailing craft, some with bareboat options.
Contact; Fraser Charters Inc, PO Box 60099, San Diego, California.
Right connection
West Indies specialists Caribbean Connection have launched their new brochure for 1991 which includes, for the first time, yachting holidays organised through a well known Caribbean company, The Moorings.
The brochure features all the top Caribbean locations, with new destinations, including Guano Island off Tortola, the Dominican Republic, the Cayman Islands and the Turks and Calicos.
Plantation house holidays in Nevis, St Kitts and the Grenadines offer a change from conventional hotels, while there are also villas and Caribbean houses for private holidays.
The Moorings' holidays offered through Caribbean Connection range from fully crewed charter to combined hotel and sailing holidays where you stay at an hotel on Tortola or St Lucia, either learning to sail or combining the pleasures of a beach holiday with sailing.
Contact: Caribbean Connection, Concorde House, Forest Street, Chester.
Sunsail '91
Leading bareboat, flotilla and club holiday company Sunsail have their all-new glossy brochures published in time for the New Year booking rush, offering some new destinations and routes.
Another club has been added to the club sailing format so popular with families.
The new base is at Panormos Bay on the west shore of Skopelos Island in the Sporades and offers air-conditioned accommodation plus sailing off the beach, or the option of adding a second week's flotilla sailing to the shore-based first week.
A new flotilla route in the Dodecanese Islands is offered for more experienced sailors.
The route is based on the island of Kos and the fleet of Sunlight 30s and Sunrise 35s visits Patmos, Leros and Kalymnos, as well as many smaller islands in the area.
Sunsail's sailing areas now include Yugoslavia, Thailand, Corsica and Sardinia, the Caribbean and the Bahamas, as well as Turkey and Greece.
Boats are available for bareboating as well as flotilla sailing and range from the Bénéteau 25 to the Lagoon 55 catamaran.
The fleet includes Jeanneaus, Biancas, Moodys, Westerlys, Apollos, Stephens and Irwins.
Contact: Sunsail, The Port House, Port Solent, Portsmouth Hampshire.
Funny business
Corporate sailing, either as a training exercise, a reward, or just because the chairman fancies himself as Captain Bligh, is a fast growing business.
Tenrag Yacht Charters have just started a business division which offers holiday packages for incentive bonus schemes, and sailing courses for team management, plus conference facilities and five-star hotel accommodation.
Sunsail have a fleet of 15 identical Bénéteau 35s5s in the Solent for use, either for level boat racing or for corporate entertaining.
Their boats have been used for the Royal Lymington Cup and the Air Canada Industry Sailing Challenge, as well as the Chartered Surveyors' Regatta and many other similar events.
If you would like to be seen in a classic yacht, then contact Lake Marine, who operate their unique fleet of wooden Redwing racing keelboats from Poole.
They offer the boats for corporate sailing, entertaining and regattas, and you can join their sailing club even if you don't have a boat.
You can charter a Redwing, arrive, be ferried to the boat and back again, and you don't have to worry about things like painting, varnishing and antifouling.
Contact: Tenrag, Bramling House, Bramling.
Canterbury.
Mexico is an exciting charter venue, but red tape is a problem
ON TOUR IN TURKEY
Sam Llewellyn's family charter on the Lycian coast had to cater for all tastes, including those of a budding rock and roll band
When the Llewellyn family went chartering in Turkey with the Bullough family last summer, the options were as follows: charter one very big boat, or two very small boats.
The children in question are boys, two per family, the youngest ten, the oldest 15, all of them passionately devoted to rock ‘n ‘roll.
They had recently founded a band, the Blox.
In order to be certain that the Blox would have peace, quiet and privacy when they needed it, we arranged with Sunsail to charter two bareboat Oceanis 320s, and to take them from Göcek, Sunsail's base in Fethiye Bay, south and east towards the wild and lovely Kekova Roads.
We sat on the Göcek waterfront, sweating in a toppling mound of guitars and snorkels.
Elsewhere in the café, one of Sunsail's flotilla skippers was explaining the difference between a sheet and a halyard to some Germans who had never heard of either.
Down on the quay, brown youths in bathing trunks hauled white blocks of ice up the gangways of gulets.
‘Where,’ asked someone, ‘are the boys?’
Far out in the blue bay, a small figure was rowing a rubber dinghy, from which, at intervals, three other figures hurled themselves into the water.
We rounded them up, pulled up the anchor with some difficulty from the sticky mud (when chartering in these waters, make sure you get a boat with a windlass) and set off.
That night we slid into Tomb Bay, where Lycian rock tombs glare over a sheltered bight and cicadas yell from oleanders.
It was one of the many coves in Fethiye Bay where you can anchor up while the meltem , the locally variable north-westerly that is both the driving force and the cooling fan of the Lycian coast between May and September, does its stuff.
‘Where,’ asked someone, ‘are the boys?’
Two hundred yards away, under the cliffs, the snorkels moved to and fro, blowing like whales' spouts in the breeze.
We hit a routine.
The meltem cut in at about 1100, immediately after the Blox returned from the shore in the inflatables, bearing the round loaves ordered the previous night in the tiny restaurant among the ruins.
Time started to disappear.
At some point (it is hard to be sure when) we started to move slowly east.
If you are making a passage, laid-back local advice is to move off at dawn and motor in the calm for as long as you can.
This is based on respect for the meltem , which can blow up to Force 8.
Charterers discourage sailing in more than Force 5–6.
As it happened, we never met more than a bracing Force 5.
The longest hop is the not-too-daunting passage past the Yedi Burunlar, the Seven Capes, 30 miles (50km) of romantic, but harbourless, cliffs and beach.
We set off early from Gemiler Island, the anchorage closest to their northern end, where we had anchored in perfect shelter, hunting lizards and mosaics in a labyrinth of Byzantine ruins.
The capes are famous for a confused and ugly swell, and peculiar lumps of wind that crash down from the coastal peaks of the Taurus Mountains.
The breeze kicked in after breakfast.
By the time we were off the Capes, there was water flying in all directions and glad cries as the Bénéteaus surfed down the glassy fronts of the swells.
The Blox sweated over their respective winches and tillers, scowling at the logs, trying to crank them past nine by sheer will power.
At the end of the long beach that marks the silted mouth of the ancient Xanthos river is the modern village of Kalkan, a small green jewel set in dun cliffs, with a white minaret above its shiny new concrete harbour.
The springs that water the town's geraniums also cool the harbour, much to the delight of the Atlantic=bred Blox.
They were overheating in the Med, which they claimed was like swimming in spit.
We left them on the boat while we wandered into the town to discuss with Sunsail a fuel tank that a previous charterer had filled with water instead of diesel.
From the roof bar of the Pasha Inn, we gazed down on the harbour.
There was a small crowd gathering.
‘Where,’ asked someone, ‘are the boys?’
Erkum Bey, owner of the Pasha Inn, Kalkan's unofficial ruler and Sunsail liaison man, lent us his glasses.
The Blox had run the whisker pole to maximum height on its track, suspended it from the main halyard, and were swinging on it from the pulpit far out over the harbour and letting go.
Wisps of applause floated up on the breeze.
Later in the day, a clam, dark brown Sunsail mechanic elbowed his way through the crowd of friendly Turks on the quay to see what he could do about the fuel line.
He fixed the line.
The groceries and the ice arrived.
We were ready to leave.
Then somebody said, ‘Where are the boys?’
Willie was in the town garage, giving good advice to someone stripping down a motor bike.
Tom was in a restaurant, enquiring about the live music advertised outside.
Olla was bargaining with nightmarish persistence for a carpet, and Mart was considering nipping back to the boat to see if anyone could lend him five hundred quid so he could buy a really wicked sword.
We left, plugging along a red and arid coast for Kas, where the usual deputation of dolphins bounded out to greet us.
Just outside Kas harbour, someone asked, ‘Where are the boys?’
They were below, reading.
‘Anyone want to steer?’
I said, foolishly.
‘Me,’ said one.
In Turkey, you drop your anchor in the middle of the harbour and go astern into your berth.
Kas is big, by Lycian standards.
The harbour tends to be a bit full, the berths correspondingly narrow.
The helmsboy went between the pierheads with the throttle wide open, in order to show he was not, in any way, unnerved.
He then engaged full astern, causing the boat to stop as if it had hit a brick wall, and cried: ‘Drop anchor!’
The anchor went down.
The foredeck man snubbed it on the cleat.
The Oceanis thundered down the middle of the harbour, the anchor crunching as it picked up several chains on the bottom.
The helmsboy then engaged full ahead, performed two pirouettes, and thundered back the way he had come in a cloud of blue exhaust smoke and coloured speech.
We sorted out the knitting next morning.
For the record, we had caught five other boats, the smallest of which was 65ft long (20m), and tied underwater knots new even to gulet captains, who are notoriously hard to surprise, being Istanbul bus drivers in their spare time.
It was with a sense of relief that we slunk east again, through a surprising (but apparently intermittent) east-west tide rip through the narrows of Akar Bogazi, for Kekova Roads.
The roads is protected from the meltem and occasional westerly gales by Kekova Island.
The sunken city on its north shore makes it one of the few places in the world where it is possible to go hard aground on a Byzantine mosaic.
There are numerous anchorages in the roads.
There is also the Arabian Nights castle of ‘Kale Köy and the village of Uçagiz, lying beside a landlocked harbour, the Olu Deniz , or Dead Sea.
The road has only recently come to Uçagiz; the whole area emanates a powerful feeling of being on the edge of the world.
On the second day, the old water-in-the-diesel reared its head.
Sunsail are insistent that the only people allowed into their engines are their own mechanics: but there were no Sunsail mechanics around.
So we commenced fiddling with fuel lines that spouted raw diesel into the 110 °F cabin air.
At which point someone gasped: ‘Where are the boys?’
Actually, the Blox were furtively retrieving a windsurfer sail they had tied to the anchor chain with an injudiciously big bowline, allowing the sail to sink into some 40 feet of water.
Having recovered the sail, we made them bleed the line.
They enjoyed every minute.
We rose early and sailed back among the flying fish to Kalkan.
The usual group of well wishers was waiting on the quay.
The Blox dispersed to their old haunts.
The grown-ups found a café, ordered raki , and found out the day of the week from the waiter.
Surprisingly, the plane home left tomorrow.
The sun went down.
The moon came up.
Somebody asked: ‘Where are the boys?
There was a silence.
Then, very faintly, a sound floated through the hot, jasmine-scented air.
Four voices, more or less unbroken, were singing the old Drifter's classic ‘Stand By Me’, and it was followed by ragged Turkish applause.
The Blox's Lycian tour was over.
CHARTER DETAILS
This charter was arranged with Sunsail, The Port House, Port Solent, Hampshire.
Sunsail are the biggest charterers in Turkey, with 148 boats ranging from Everette 29s to a Jeanneau Odyssey 51.
Our Oceanis 320s were in their second year.
Navigation equipment was basic, consisting of log and compass only.
It should be said that in a nominally tideless sea where charterers ban night sailing and there is no need to go out of sight of land, dead reckoning backed up with fixes on prominent objects ashore will get you round nicely.
Since the water is clear and the shore steep-to, echo sounders are desirable, but not essential.
In view of the fact that you may use all of your chain while anchoring, a windlass (not fitted on 32-footers) is essential.
Windsurfers and cruising chutes were provided at a cost of £100 for two weeks each.
All boats are equipped with sewage holding tanks, freshwater showers, inflatable tenders (outboards optional, but unnecessary and anti-social) and windscoops.
There was also snorkelling equipment, some of it in unusable condition.
It is essential.
Take your own.
Cost:
A Bénéteau Oceanis 320 in mid-July costs £790 per person per fortnight for four sharing.
The Oceanis 320 is a six-berth boat, if you include settee berths.
Turkey in the summer months is hot, however, and any more than four people on our boats would have made the Black Hole of Calcutta look like Earls Court.
Comments:
With its reliable climate and predictable (but locally variable)meltem , Lycia is an exciting, but by no means challenging cruising ground.
Weather forecasts, reliable in the event of storms, but otherwise somewhat fanciful, are broadcast in English from Rhodes.
Charts of the area are largely unaltered since the mid 19th Century, and can mark dangers which do not exist while remaining silent about those that do.
Essential on board(and supplied by Sunsail) is Rod Heikell's splendid Turkish Waters Pilot .
Sunsail's Oceanis 320s were fine for four people, but would be crowded with the full complement of six
Moored stern-to in picturesque Kalkan
Lycian rock tombs glare down onto the two yachts in Tomb Bay
The Meltem can give winds up to Force 8, but the Llewellyns never met more than a 5.
Beach café at Tersane
Local fishermen show their wares
Under cruising chute in the Kekova Roads
Return to ELBA
After 30 years away, Denis Pitts returned to the Italian island of Elba and found it to be as beautiful as he remembered
For as long as the sun rises over those rugged, evergreen hills to the east and the island's wines continue to be so subtly perfumed, I shall never understand why Napoleon chose to leave Elba.
Not only did he go on to lose at Waterloo: he suffered the final indignity of living and dying in a house called The Briars on St Helena, far down in the South Atlantic.
I love Elba.
It is, Capri notwithstanding, the most beautiful island in the Mediterranean.
Unlike Capri it is unspoilt.
ungrasping and permanently green.
I spent a romantic holiday on the island some 30 years ago in a mountain village with a non-sailing companion and found myself pining in the summer heat for that azure water in the little harbour below.
It was not until last year that I achieved my ambition to sail there.
We sailed to Elba, from Corsica via Capri, a long haul despite a favourable westerly, and watched the bulk of Monte Capanne emerge slowly from the heat.
We rounded Cape Andrea and anchored in Marciana Marina harbour below the same mountain village on the north side of the island.
It was late August and inevitably, the quay was packed with home-going Italian boats.
Our chartered Sunsail 350,La Pietra , rode contentedly with the other anchored boats in the shimmering heat of the afternoon, and it was not until the sun turned bright orange and began to drop rapidly seawards that anyone in the boat felt like stirring.
The forecast from Livorno has spoken of increasing winds and I laid out all the chain before we rowed ashore (feeling curiously British and eccentric using oars among so many outboards) for the pasta and wine we had been promising ourselves since mid-morning.
I left the crew to fend for themselves; they were a married couple, after all, and I remembered a small trattoria in a back street where I had enjoyed a candlelit meal.
Sadly, the building was now a bank.
I enjoyed the gnocchi in a friendly watering hole along the road, however, and the Elban wine was just as good as it had been 30 years ago.
It was not until I wandered back to the harbour that I realised the wind had freshened.
It was now blowing a near gale into the harbour, churning the once=calm water into a mass of whitecaps.
The flags of all European nations were standing horizontal and cracking ominously above the hard and Lerissa , a handsome 52ft (15m) classic sloop, was pitching wildly in the harbour mouth as other boats strained at their anchors.
A big Italian motor cruiser had clearly dragged and was dangerously close to La Pietra .
By good fortune, the crew turned up at that moment.
I was so relieved that I even gave them time to finish their ice creams.
It was dark when we reached the boat and we were soaked as we climbed back aboard.
The wind had increased in velocity and was now a low, angry howl.
A hundred masts were playing the halyard concerto at full volume.
A forest fire had been raging in the east all day and a giant red glow was silhouetting the peaks beyond Portoferraio.
The captain of the Italian motor cruiser had reboarded his craft and was screaming orders in a cracked baritone.
Lerissa had weighed anchor (breaking a 56lb Danforth in the process, her owner told me next day) and was wandering around the anchorage looking for a new parking place.
In the middle of the confusion,Raoul F , carrying thousands of gallons of water, chose to enter the chaos and made a tight circle among us to moor against the mole.
It was a warm wind, though, and there was no real hardship in sitting up in the cockpit reading hornblower by the binnacle light as giant flames licked the night sky.
We mused quietly on the fact that we prosaic Brits don't give our winds dramatic-sounding names like our cousins across the Channel.
The winds around the Italian islands in the northern Tyrrhenian Sea are like the country's drivers: unpredictable, given to sudden shifts, occasionally very noisy, but generally safe.
We left Marciana Marina on the following morning at first light to find a stiff north-westerly directly on our nose.
Our beamy Bénéteau made a lot of noise as she slammed down into the troughs before climbing the next steep wave.
Away from the island the wind converted itself into a westerly and we were surfing at ten knots even with two slabs in the main and the genoa furled to almost nothing.
Just 30 minutes later the westerly switched itself off — just like that, as the man said — and we had to motor sail for the rest of the voyage.
A bareboat holiday round these islands — Capraia, Elba, Giglio and Monte  Cristo in our case — is much recommended.
You take your chance during the season, mind you — especially in the smaller harbours which tend to get packed in July and August.
May, June, September and even October are ideal, despite the possibility of rain.
Prices in the shops and restaurants drop like the libeccio wind did for us and people have time to talk to you.
Elba has several fine harbours, the capital, Portoferraio, in particular.
Napoleon described it as ‘the most complete harbour in the world’ and you will agree when you go ashore and walk through those narrow streets or climb to a huge citadel above the bustling town.
Napoleon's house of exile, San Martino, is worth a visit, although Boney was quite frugal when it came to buying furniture, clearly having other things on his mind.
He did write on an engraving, however: ‘Napoleon is happy anywhere ’.
Giglio is equally charming, although you need to be careful when dropping an anchor.
The floor of the north-facing harbour is a mass of mooring chains and, according to the Imray pilot, there's at least one inhabitant with a glass-bottomed boat who makes a good living from visitors' misfortunes.
We didn't see him, but we had a superb seafood meal in a trattoria on a hill and found ourselves adopted by a shaggy island dog, another hazard of Mediterranean voyaging.
I had reservations about Monte  Cristo , which is said to be infested with adders.
It is a dramatic island viewed from the sea and I can understand Alexander Dumas choosing it as a setting for his novel The Prisoner of Zenda .
A tricky wind was blowing on to the anchorage and what with snakes and the prospect of getting wet I lay off for lunch.
I'm still not sure whether anyone lives on Monte  Cristo , but there was an eccentric Englishman who proclaimed himself the Count.
I could happily enjoy a really lazy holiday in Capraia.
From the moment that La Pietra 's anchor was safely biting (again, watch those mooring chains), a superb air of idleness overtook everyone on board, so much so that no one could be bothered to put up the awning and we lay and baked in the sweltering afternoon heat.
The same inertia applied ashore; even the short climb to the tiny village assumed Everestine proportions, although the tagliatelle with the local red wine made it well worthwhile.
We stayed well clear of Pianosa.
Apart from being pancake flat, it is a prison colony surrounded by restricted waters.
We heard at least one yacht being warned off on VHF as we headed back to the Sunsail base in Corsica.
We passed by and opted instead for an easy final passage.
USEFUL INFORMATION
1 Take plenty of water.
Most of these islands are short of fresh water in summer and rely on tankers from the mainland.
By the time they get there and unload, the water is hardly drinkable.
If you charter from Corsica — where there seemed to be no real shortage — take as much extra as you can manage.
2 Keep your diesel tank full, too.
Delivery drivers are somewhat strike-prone in Corsica and the Italian islands.
3 Take a pair of old gloves.
Moorings are often filthy and there isn't always someone to hand them over when you moor stern-on.
4 Be tolerant of your neighbours.
Italians like a bit of noise.
Remember it's their holiday, too…and their country, come to think of it.
5 Don't make a dash for the first restaurant you see.
Some of the best food can be found in the smaller, less pretentious restaurants.
If you make the right noises about the wine — it's on the cards that it comes from the proprietor's own vineyard — you're likely to find another bottle on the table gratis ….
6 Don't ignore the weather forecasts.
When they say strong winds, they mean it.
The most reliable forecast comes from Livorno Radio on Channel 26.
7 Don't take too many clothes during the season.
A few sports shirts and a sweater will do; and they'll probably not even have been unpacked when you get home.
CHARTER INFORMATION
A bareboat charter from Solenzara, Corsica, in 1991, based on four people sharing a Sunsail 350 costs £870 per person in high season (July/August) and ranges to £445 per person during the low season.
For further information contact, Sunsail Limited, The Port House, Port Solent, Portsmouth, Hampshire.
Sunsail's Bénéteau charter yachts are beamy and comfortable.
Elba remains largely unspoilt and life goes on in a traditional vein
Marciana Marina, first port of call on the north side of the island
Porto Azzurro on the east side of the island — Elba has several good harbours
Portoferraio, the capital, was described by Napoleon as ‘the most complete harbour in the world’