

Rover bombshell hits BSB Dorland
by Helen Jones
BSB Dorland's grip on the £28m (Media Register) Rover account is threatened following Rover's decision to set up an in-house marketing consultancy.
Rover was unavailable for comment but the company is known to be launching the consultancy to handle its marketing, which will include advertising.
An insider says: ‘You can speculate that this could mean the end of Rover's relationship with BSB Dorland.’
The consultancy is expected to be headed by Rover UK's managing director Kevin Morley, who is thought unlikely to relinquish his current position within the company.
It is uncertain whether the consultancy will also work for Rover Europe and Rover International, or how much direct marketing or sales promotion work will be involved, but it is believed Rover wants to use as few external agencies as possible.
Rover is BSB Dorland's biggest account.
The agency won the business in 1985 when it snatched the bulk of it from Leo Burnett.
Zenith handles media buying and planning.
BSB Dorland was unavailable for comment.
It is thought that the consultancy may be a cost-cutting exercise due to the current slump in the UK car market.
According to the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders, Rover is doing slightly better than many competitors.
Ratners rushes to segment brands
By Helen Slingsby
Ratners is to intensify its programme of brand differentiation in the wake of dismal Christmas sales and the resignation of Gerald Ratner as chairman.
The troubled market-leading jeweller is speeding up its policy of segmenting Ratners, H Samuel, Ernest Jones and Watches of Switzerland to encourage shoppers and boost sales.
Although traditionally a time when Ratners does 90 per cent of its business, sales this Christmas were 15 per cent lower than last year and analysts are predicting pre-tax losses of more than £72m.
The group is singling out stores in terms of product mix.
More emphasis is being placed on Ratner's position as a gold jewellery specialist and Ernest Jones is being pushed for diamonds.
Ratners marketing director Simon de Mille says: ‘We are speeding up the process.
Further work is going on in terms of market augmentation to clarify things for consumers.’
Observers say the move is timely.
County NatWest retail analyst John Richards says Ratners should have distinguished its brands more fully two years ago and that the jeweller is running the risk of becoming a British Shoe Corporation where ‘there are endless stores and only the name is the difference’.
‘Ratners thought this through a couple of years ago and then found itself locked into the game of pushing price to keep volumes moving and everything was put on the back burner,’ says Richards.
Chief executive Gerald Ratner stood down as chairman last week, and was replaced by former Coats Viyella deputy chairman Jim McAdam.
Pitcher, page 16
Moss Bros plans privilege points card
By Michele Martin
Moss Bros has become the first high street retailer to launch a privilege card that clocks up points towards discounts at the till, giving customers money off at the group's stores and other outlets.
It means the menswear chain has acted ahead of several other retailers, including major supermarkets like Tesco, which were looking into similar schemes.
‘It is completely novel for a high-street retailer to launch an added-value card like this, through it's been talked about for some time,’ says Ian Minors, managing director of Moss Bros agency MHA Direct.
Moss Bros appointed MHA to handle the £1m three-year project this week.
The card, which is yet to be named, will be launched later this year.
Users clock up points on the card itself according to how much money then spend.
The points entitle them to discounts in Moss Bros Group stores such as The Suit Co and Cecil Gee.
Other discount deals are being negotiated with shops outside the group, and are thought to include motor companies and dry cleaners.
Points will be monitored through Moss Bros's central database and customers will be informed quarterly how much they have accumulated.
A promotional campaign targeting new customers as well existing shoppers is expected at the launch.
Last week Moss Bros appointed Mitchell Patterson Aldred Mitchell to handle its £1m  above-the-line account (MW January 10 ).
Other companies which have tested customer loyalty discount schemes include Burton subsidiary Evans.
Brackenbury takes Ford's top ad job
by Chris Boulding
Ford of Great Britain is to promote its manager of sales analysis Nigel Brackenbury to its most senior advertising job, advertising manager.
Brackenbury will fill the gap left by the former advertising and sales promotion manager Roger Craythorne, who took early retirement last month (MW November 15) as part of a sweeping programme of marketing changes.
The management cuts, which aimed to reduce staff at Ford by more than 1,000, have altered reporting structures within individual departments in the company and shifted emphasis towards supplies.
Brackenbury will have immediate responsibility for the £35m Ford account, handled by Ogilvy & Mather.
Although sources suggested at the time of Craythorne's departure that marketing director Udo Kaul might roll his responsibilities into the brief of marketing manager Peter Townsend, Brackenbury has been appointed as head of all advertising functions, with an advertising coordinator, Roger Harris, reporting to him.
Observers suggest that the appointment of a ‘number cruncher’ to the key advertising role is a mark of Ford's predicament.
Ford: Management changes
Rover: Moving ads in-house
Ratners: Dismal Christmas
Moss Bros: Card clocks up discount points at the till
NEWS
Euro Disney runs debut campaign
By Fanny Moyle
Euro Disney's pre-launch advertising campaign kicks off in the UK next week, three months before the resort is due to open its gates on April 12.
Four weeks of TV ads begin on January 20, along with a colour press push which will start at the end of the month.
The UK offensive is part of a pan-European campaign.
The ads, produced by Ogilvy & Mather's French office, will not only communicate ‘Disney fun and quality’, but will also explain the resort element of the park.
It is this aspect of the complex — the hotels and camp sites additional to the themed areas — that Disney believes needs reinforcing.
The pre-launch advertising represents the culmination of months of ‘participant marketing’ with partners such as Coca-Cola and P&O European Ferries.
P&O launched its own TV work featuring the resort this week and Coca-Cola ran a four-week TV push in November.
Travel industry sources endorse the success of Disney's cumulative marketing approach.
Euro Disney claims that one of its tour operators has sold 70 per cent of its first three months of Euro Disney allocations.
Citroën TV ad draws 50 complaints of ‘menace’
About 50 consumers have complained about the latest Citroën ad showing a woman being blindfolded and abducted.
Viewers objected to the impression of ‘threat and menace’ conveyed by the ad, which was created by Madell Wilmot RSCG and went on air almost two weeks ago.
The majority of complaints came after an article in the Mail on Sunday slated the ad for ‘presenting women as aesthetically acceptable victims’ and called on those who felt offended to complain.
Some 19 people objected to the Independent Television Commission and a further 30 misguidedly rang the Advertising Standards Authority, which covers only ads in print.
While accepting that 49 complaints is above average, an ITC spokesman says it is not a deluge.
The commission admits it was aware that the ad could cause problems but felt the spy spoof treatment killed ‘any atmosphere of threat or malice’.
The ITC will closely monitor response to the ad but says it will be difficult to edit out offending elements.
Madell Wilmot, chief executive John Madell dismisses complaints as coming from the ‘loony fringe’, saying the Independent Television Association managed to pass the ad without any major comment.
‘I find people's ability to have two standards — one for advertising and one for programming — quite absurd,’ he says.
‘Jack the Ripper is on TV this week; are those women going to bombard Thames TV about this?’
Ex-Max Factor boss goes to Rimmel
Former Max Factor marketing director David Hughes has resurfaced at Rimmel International as marketing manager, as tipped by Marketing Week (September 6).
Hughes resigned from Max Factor following its takeover by Procter & Gamble last April (MW April 19).
Sources say Hughes was ‘mightily fed up’ with the imposition of P&G's staid formal corporate culture on the more informal style of Max Factor.
However, the same sources profess to being amazed at his move to a position ‘that is clearly a demotion’ and to a company owned by P&G's rival Unilever, which is equally formulaic.
Hughes will be responsible for an ad budget of more than £1m across all Rimmel branded goods, which includes lipsticks, eye make-up and the recently launched Silks nail polishes.
He replaces Jean Puri, who has moved to Unilever's Swedish cosmetic operation.
Marketing director Ann Hunter says: ‘He has a lot of relevant expertise.’
Hughes began his cosmetics career in 1978 with Avon as associate campaign planner in its European marketing department, becoming head of its UK marketing unit in 1984.
After just two years at Max Factor, which he joined in 1986 and where he was marketing director of colouring and skincare products, he was appointed marketing director.
Eagle Star joints charity in TV push
Eagle Star is sponsoring Help the Aged's first-ever TV campaign, to capitalise on the fast-developing Grey market.
The 90-second ad, which breaks on January 29, is one of the first such reciprocal marketing exercises between a commercial organisation and a charity.
Eagle Star launched it strategy for the older market last April, with a range of special policies sold by a mature salesforce.
It is in the process of being implemented nationwide.
Help the Aged's campaign is to raise money for its international  ophthalmic programme and has been put together by its agency, O&M Direct.
It will be tested on TVS before being rolled out across other regions, and success is being monitored on a cost-per-response basis through an 0800 number.
The ad is thought to follow the theme of past press advertising, with a celebrity voice-over.
The Eagle Star logo appears half-way through.
A Help the Aged spokesman confirms the charity could only move into television with Eagle Star help.
Eagle Star hopes to continue the reciprocal strategy later this year with joint mailings and factual publications outlining government benefits for the elderly, and how private insurance can supplement them.
Senior job chased by 700 hopefuls
More than 700 applicants responded to a recent marketing director job ad, underlining the extent to which the recession has hit top management.
Recruitment consultancy Michael Page Group has been inundated with applications for the £65,000-a-year post as marketing director for a South-East service sector company.
‘This is a record number for this level of position and clearly indicates that competition for senior posts is getting tougher,’ says David Bodmer, director of Michael Page Marketing.
‘At one time, only junior posts attracted such a level of response,’ he adds.
Sources indicate that while 700 may be an exceptionally high number of applicants, response figures of 250 and above are increasingly common.
‘This recession is different in that people at the top are being affected as well,’ says Price Jamieson director Andrew Swift.
‘Response levels to senior jobs are very high.
But it's not all doom and gloom — the number of vacancies is higher than it was a year ago.’
Euro Disney: TV ads explain resort element of park
Eagle Star: Help the Aged ad
Executive market: Over-run
Alexon lays off board directors
by Helen Slingsby
Alexon brands managing director Peter Ridsdale has asserted his new role and laid off two board directors responsible for the Alexon, Dash and Eastex brands to cut costs.
It is Ridsdale's first action since joining the clothing retailer four months ago from Burton group, where he was managing director of Evan and discount concept Is.
Board director Colin Hargrave, who joined Alexon 18 months ago as retail development director, has been made redundant along with trading director Nick Wastnage.
It is understood that there have been further changes to the company's management structure: ‘Alexon is undergoing a review of its management and cost of structure,’ says a company spokesman.
Ridsdale has a reputation for being a tough, determined operator with an ability to get things done quickly.
Observers say there was some overlap between his role and that of Hargrave and Wastnage.
Ridsdale was at Burton for six years and was brought into Alexon to replace Ruth Henderson, who was promoted to chief executive.
Alexon embarked on a relaunch of its Essex brand last summer, aimed at the older, shorter woman.
Interim results for the first half to July 1991 revealed that this revamp was the only operation to increase sales and profits.
Alexon's pre-tax profits were £3.82m on a turnover of £56.1m.
Lever repackages its Wisk detergent brand
Lever Brothers appears to be throwing its weight behind Wisk, its pioneering brand in the fiercely competitive liquid detergent market.
The soap giant is repackaging Wisk, through Fisher Ling & Bennion, as part of what industry sources believe is a major marketing initiative to revitalise the brand's fortunes.
They point to the poster campaign it launched last September, through Ogilvy & Mather, which effectively relaunched Wisk as a mainstream colour care detergent, and the new label design as evidence of Lever's determination to boost its sales.
Lever is playing down the move.
A spokeswoman describes the redesign as ‘a tweak’ and says that colour care ‘has always been an integral part of the formulation’, which has ‘just been strengthened’.
Lever treats ad budgets and strategies as confidential information and she says below-the-line plans have yet to be formulated.
Leaflet drops and added value promotions have not been ruled out.
Launched in 1986, Wisk was the UK's first heavy duty liquid detergent and its advent revolutionised the market.
But its success was quickly eclipsed by Ariel Liquid, produced by arch rival Procter & Gamble, according to Euromonitor's Household Cleaning report.
Since then the market has grown from £12m to more than £230m, according to industry estimates.
Persil and Radion precede Wisk in the Lever pecking order, both in terms of sales and marketing intensity.
According to industry estimates quoted by Euromonitor, Ariel took 25 per cent of the market in 1989, Persil took 22 per cent and Wisk took seven per cent.
The Direct Mail Information Service's 1992 trends survey has found 82 per cent of customers are satisfied with the last transaction they made by direct mail, six per cent more than last year.
Only nine per cent of respondents expressed any dissatisfaction.
Philips Electronics will launch its digital compact cassette system in September, preceded by a campaign in June and August, through Ogilvy & Mather.
Thomas Cook has introduced a £1 deposit offer to try to capture a greater share of early summer holiday sales.
Rival Lunn Poly has extended its discounting campaign for a further three weeks to stimulate the lacklustre sector.
Michael Soden is to leave design company John McNeece.
Former adman Soden says he intends to return to marketing communications.
Matthew Gloag & Son is to take on the marketing and sales of Bunnahabhain 12-Year-Old Islay Malt Scotch Whisky.
Baring Fund Managers,the unit trust company, has launched a year-long press campaign, which aims to inform the public of the advantages of unit trusts.
The campaign is in the form of a Baring-Sponsored cartoon strip, titled ‘The Smart Sett’.
More than a quarter of hoteliers believe business will not recover from recession in the next 12 months, according to Horwath Business Review.
But the review reveals that hotels are increasing marketing and advertising spends.
Limbo,the direct marketing agency, has appointed Linda Rost deputy managing director.
Rost was formerly one of the managing partners and head of planning at the Rapp Collins Partnership.
Employment Minister Eric Forth said yesterday (Tuesday) that he plans to ask tourism authorities to stage a national tourism week to promote the UK and boost visitors here.
The European eco-label designed by Newel & Sorrell has been thrown into confusion following the introduction by France and the Netherlands of their own individual labels.
The second annual Advertising and Marketing to Children conference will take place on April 29.
For more details contact Clare Tester at Centaur Conferences on 071–434 3711.
Eastex: Summer relaunch
AGENCIES
Euro Tia Maria goes to Publicis
by Ruth Morelli
James Burrough has appointed Publicis UK to handle the first ever pan-European campaign for its flagship liqueur Tia Maria.
Publicis, which handled the brand in the UK, will roll out the two UK ads featuring model Iman in the three other European countries that allow TV advertising of alcoholic drinks which are Portugal, the Netherlands and Spain.
A new print campaign, based on the ‘After dark — Tia Maria’ theme, will run in at least four other European markets.
According to international marketing manager Lorraine Cade, the UK accounts for a quarter of Tia Maria's world-wide sales and is its most important and most mature European market.
‘The UK leads the trends in advertising.
[The UK ads]have extended the brand franchise and we are now looking to replicate that in Europe.’
Previously, advertising was handled by local agencies in each country, with Gregory Ellis Martin & Partners handling the international duty-free campaign.
Tia Maria is the UK's leading traditional liqueur and claims a 46 per cent share by volume of the UK market.
Its major competitors are Cointreau, Drambuie, Grand Marnier, Bailey's Irish Cream and Malibu.
Agency business up in value for third year
Agency new business increased in value and in the number of appointments in 1991 for the third consecutive year, according to the New Business Monitor compiled by Anthony Rau & Associates.
But a decline in the third quarter was followed by further slippage in the fourth — a new trend.
In earlier years, the fourth quarter had shown the peak quarterly total for new business announcements in the year.
Total new business billings for 1991 were £1.544bn compared with £1.357bn in 1990 and £1.224bn in 1989.
Appointments by number were: 872 in 1991, 820 in 1990 and 733 in 1989.
The New Business Monitor recorded seven per cent fewer account change announcements in the fourth quarter, equivalent to 14 per cent less billing than the third quarter.
Media-only appointments increased at a faster rate than those involving creative and full service during the year.
Currently, 130 accounts billing £297m are out for tender.
CU draws up list for grey campaign
Commercial Union is reviewing its 3rd Age Initiative account, thought to be worth £2m, in preparation for its consumer launch into the grey market, later this year.
Included in the final pitch is Miller & Leeves WAHT, which already handles CU's £2m corporate advertising.
Incumbent Hill Murray and City Financial Marketing are also involved.
Hill Murray has been handling the product, which comprises three healthcare policies for the elderly, since it was launched last June to insurance brokers.
CU now wants to increase its range of policies and promote them heavily to the growing 50 to 64-year-old market, which will grow by 27 per cent by 2015.
‘We see this as the marketing opportunity of the decade,’ says CU Life director Robbie Graham.
The three agencies involved in the pitch have been asked to present options before a final strategy is adopted.
It is thought likely that both press and TV would be central to a campaign.
The agency brief is believed to have stressed the need to educate potential consumers about the costs of healthcare for the elderly which is not always covered by the Government or conventional insurance policies.
Commercial Union is one of several major insurance companies to target the Grey market with specially designed policies in the past year.
Others include Eagle Star, which is sponsoring Help the Aged's first TV campaign.
COI review of direct marketing
The government's advertising advisory body, the Central Office of Information, is reviewing the way departments place their annual £9m below-the-line spend with agencies.
It wants the independent Advisory Committee of Advertising (ACA), which already selects the above-the-line agency roster for government departments, to do the same for direct agencies and sales promotion companies.
At the moment, departments can approach agencies directly and ask them to pitch, or select a shortlist from the COI's own direct agency roster which includes Brann Direct and Maxima.
All the COI's current agencies are being put forward for inclusion, but are not guaranteed a place.
Agencies not currently used can also apply.
The ACA committee comprises none members of the marketing and advertising industry and is chaired by ICI's head of group communications Anne Ferguson.
The final decision to put below-the-line agencies in the hands of ACA will be made by the reports committee on January 20.
Mead vows to improve ad industry
The Institute of Practitioners in Advertising is to continue its campaign, which broke on TV this year, to reassert the industry's effectiveness, according to IPA president Peter Mead.
In a speech last week, Mead attempted to buoy industry confidence after ‘the toughest year in our business for a very long time’.
He exhorted members to work against the ‘offensive and untrue’ beliefs that agencies are inclined to rip off clients, stressing the IPA's commitment to ‘weed out dubious practice’.
Mead also called on agencies to combat the myth that agencies are over-profitable and profligate in paying employees.
The IPA has commissioned a study to demonstrate that industry salaries are comparable at best with other professional advisers like lawyers and accountants.
AFTER DARK TIA MARIA Tia Maria: UK accounts for a quarter of its global sales
Mead: toughest year
CU: ‘Big on-going project’
COI: Below-line scrutiny
GGT cleans up Cussons work
by Lindsay McMurdo
GGT's string of new business wins continued this week with the agency picking up the Cussons personal care account.
Analysts predict the agency's share price will now climb above £2m.
The Cussons business moves into GGT from Lowe Howard-Spink in the same week that North-Western Electricity Board has appointed GGT subsidiary Bowden Dyble Hayes to handle its £6m account.
Last week GGT picked up an extra £5m of business from Cadbury and the £4m Philips CD Interactive account.
LH-S bought media for Cussons' Imperial Leather and Pearl soap brands since it absorbed Allen Brady & Marsh, Cussons' agency of 20 years, last March.
The agency originated no new creative work for the brands.
The account was handled by former ABM deputy managing director Angus Fear, who left LH-S last week for J Walter Thompson.
Cussons moved the creative work for its household brands into BDH in April.
It is understood that GGT pitched for the company's media business as early as last August, without LH-S' knowledge, and the decision to move the account was taken before Christmas.
Media spend on the personal care brands through LH-S totalled just over £1m, but the brands have historically been worth much more.
Cussons is understood to have an active npd programme under way, with some sources suggesting that spend in the future across all its brands could go as high as £7m.
GGT Direct will handle the company's below-the-line requirements.
It is thought likely that Cussons will drop ABM's creative strategy, which featured actress Julie Walters in spoof Noel Coward-style TV ads.
Saatchi pockets $20m Samsung across Europe
Korean consumer electronics giant Samsung has awarded its $20m pan-European account to Saatchi & Saatchi, as tipped by Marketing Week (last week).
The UK account remains with Bozell.
Samsung, which is the world's 14th largest company, appointed Saatchi to handle its US account last summer, which ‘substantially improved’ its chances of bagging the European business, say insiders.
Saatchi pitched against J Walter Thompson and incumbent Bozell, which last week believed the decision to appoint a pan-European Agency had been revoked in favour of a country-by-country strategy.
Samsung has been trying to discard its somewhat downmarket image for some time.
Observers believe the move to a single agency for both Europe and the US presages a more corporate approach to advertising like that of its rival Toshiba.
Previously Samsung's £9m UK ad spend had been split between separate campaigns for stereos, videos and fax machines and a small corporate campaign, which was boosted to £3.5m last year.
Former Yellowhammer managing director Brian Astley is tipped by industry observers as the frontrunner to succeed Bruce Haines as managing director of Leagas Delaney.
Abbott Mead Vickers/BBDO chairman Peter Mead, however, insists that speculation is premature, and no successor has been chosen.
Astley has not had an agency job since D'Arcy Masius Benton & Bowles took over Yellowhammer 17 months ago.
D'Arcy Masius Benton & Bowles has been appointed for the UK launch next month of Procter & Gamble's sanpro range Always.
Young & Rubicam has won the £2.5m Welsh Water account.
The business was previously with McCann-Erickson, which, along with Abbott Mead Vickers BBDO, Collett Dickenson Pearce and Alliance, pitched against Y&R for the account.
Heal's has shortlisted Cowan Kemsley Taylor, Leagas Shafron Davis Chick and Butterfield Day Devito Hockney.
Hall Harrison Cowley Bristol has won the Pascoe's dog food account.
The business is thought to be worth up to £1.4m.
The Lowe Group has negotiated a five-year, £48m revolving loan facility, guaranteed by Interpublic, to finance European acquisitions.
 Childrens  World marketing communications controller John Forester says he has been talking to agencies with the knowledge of the incumbent GGT and insists there is no review of the Sears-owned business.
The Foundation for the Study of Infant Deaths is calling for all ads featuring sleeping babies to be shown lying on their backs, following its new safety guidelines, issued in October last year.
Generator has beaten Travis Dale & Partners to the £500,000 Caradon Mira showers account following the withdrawal of Ogilvy & Mather Partners in December.
Rock Kitchen Harris has won accounts worth £650,000 from Monsanto and LI Products.
It has also been appointed by cleaning equipment maker Karcher.
Still Price: Lintas is thought to have won the Adams children's wear account following a pitch against Advertising Principles and KHBB.
Cussons: Likely to abandon ABM's creative strategy
MEDIA
C4 to rethink its breakfast format
by Chris Boulding
The first indications that Channel 4 may be broadening its original programming remit in the run-up to its new sales arrangements emerged this week with the proposal to revamp the breakfast time service, Channel 4 Daily.
C4 says that the options being considered include an extension of the existing service or a ‘complete change of focus’ to target children or young families.
Current contracts with production companies expire in September, when C4 plans to begin broadcasting the new output.
However, from January 1993, C4 will be selling its own airtime, which will put the onus for revenue on its own scheduling.
A C4 spokesman says: ‘Whatever service we choose must be broadly self-financing, although this does not mean wall-to-wall cartoons.’
Despite the higher profile audience attracted by C4 Daily's news-based format, media observers say that some advertisers demand a larger absolute size of audience before they consider it commercially viable.
One media independent says: ‘If C4 Daily was a newspaper, it would be a quality, and the company seems to want to move it more towards the Daily Mail.
‘Now that C4 has to look harder minute-by-minute at audience size and profile, it needs to strike a balance between more people watching without losing good market rates.’
‘A major debate at the Edinburgh Television Festival in October centred on whether C4 would be able to sustain a diversity of programming ‘not generally catered for by Channel Three’(Broadcasting Act 1990) under the new commercial conditions.
IoS enjoys rise in sales as other qualities slip
The Independent on Sunday is the only quality Sunday newspaper to have increased sales over the past six months compared with the previous year.
According to the latest Audit Bureau of Circulations figures, the IoS averaged 374,084 for July to December against 352,335 for the same period in 1990.
Although this is partly a result of lower market share during the last days of The Sunday Correspondent, the IoS has made ground while its rival The Observer has not.
Sources at the IoS suggest the merged news operation with the daily paper has improved the Sunday's edge.
The Mail on Sunday is the only other newspaper to have shown sales growth over the period, rising to 1,958,660 from 1,902,706 in 1990.
Observers suggest that readers lured by promotions such as the October British Airways offer have been stabilised by added value supplements such as the fashion supplement Visage, launched in the same month.
Today has slumped heavily, down to 459,621 from 1990's six-month average of 539,690, a drop of 15 per cent.
The Daily Express' circulation has also fallen to 1,518,764 from 1,585,495 in the previous year.
Of the quality dailies, the Daily Telegraph has sustained only marginal losses, while The Independent's sales have fallen to 372,240 from 411,378 and The Times to 387,386 from 420,127.
The Guardian has edged ahead of both of its major rivals with a smaller sales fall to 409,660 from 424,124.
CIA International, Cosmo in $1m deal
CIA International has negotiated a $1m pan-European advertising deal with National Magazines' Cosmopolitan.
The deal which covers nine colour pages for Nike Cross Trainers in six of the title's editions, was put together despite the absence of a formal pan-European rate card and that Cosmo is published by independents in three of the countries.
It will run in the UK, France, Italy, Spain and the Netherlands.
Publisher Simon Kippin says: ‘Other magazines talk about it, we actually do it.’
Kippin says that it is ‘a year or two’ away from producing a formal rate card, but sees pan-European deals becoming increasingly important.
It is ‘very likely’ that NatMags owner Hearst Magazines International will appoint someone to market specifically European and global deals, he adds.
Hearst publishes 71 titles in 80 countries.
President George Green says: ‘Global marketing is an important area of development and we are probably in a better position than any other publishing group.’
CIA International managing director Mike Morris says: ‘There are more politics involved [in creating a pan-European deal]than in almost anything else you can mention.
[Indigenous]publishers and advertisers tend to reject them, so you need a very strong centre looking after co-ordination.’
IPC launch sparks off puzzle war
A puzzle war looks set to break out in the women's magazine market following the launch of IPC's Puzzle Weekly this week.
Publishers have stepped up their involvement in stand-alone puzzle titles recently, with German publisher Bauer  converting its bi-monthly Take A Puzzle to monthly this week and Gruner & Jahr distributing a planned rival monthly, Puzzle Challenge, produced by Redgate Publishing.
However, media observers say IPC has beaten its rivals to the market by launching a weekly.
Puzzle Weekly, which will be heavily advertised in other IPC titles, targets C1C2 women aged between 25 and 55.
It aims to lure readers away from titles like Bauer's Take A Break and G&J's Best.
Women's Magazine Group managing director Nigel Davidson says: ‘We have streamed the puzzle content as a line extension from Chat, whose editor Terry Tavner will also edit Puzzle Weekly.
All the major retailers have agreed to fit it into the women's weeklies’ ranks.’
Although the title will take only two pages of advertising, Davidson hopes that by branding it like a full-colour weekly, it will escape the image of the rather staid specialised ‘puzzler’ magazines.
A steady circulation of 300,000 should make a healthy profit, even at a cover price of 35p.
IPC is looking for sponsorship deals for several of the magazine's regular puzzles.
TMD Carat head of press Paul Shalet says: ‘If they can sell 250,000 copies and get sponsorship for it as well, they should make a lot of money.’
C4: Broadening remit?
IoS: Harder news edge
Kippin: ‘We actually do it’
Puzzle Weekly: Extension
Wootton and HCK to part company
by Chris Boulding
Horner Collis & Kirvan media director Bob Wootton is to leave the agency — a further repercussion of the merger with Colman RSCG.
Wootton is understood to have felt unhappy with a proposed role that would include responsibility for existing HCK media accounts, with Colman's in-house independent Media-Star handling any new business for the merged agency.
Wooton, who has been with HCK for over six years, remains in place while terms of a settlement are agreed.
MediaStar managing director Bob Offen is likely to assume administrative control over the two self-contained media teams, with HCK's ‘director, media’ Mark Taylor leading the self-contained HCK operation.
A MediaStar source says: ‘There was no battle over who should take charge of a merged media operation, simply a decision by clients that they would rather continue with the same team.
Wootton is unlikely to be replaced because there's no need to replace him.’
The situation was caused by a conflict between the Peugeot Talbot and Citroën accounts, which has bedevilled the Euro RSCG merger from the start.
Although Citroën creative work is handled by Madell Wilmot Pringle, its £20m (MEAL) media buying is done by MediaStar, and would clash with HCK's Peugeot business.
When MediaStar was formed from the Colman media department at the end of 1989, it was the first of the hybrid media departments to take on independent buying work.
It has since been followed by D'Arcy Masius Benton & Bowles' The Media Centre and Collett Dickenson Pearce's CDP Media.
Wootton was unable to comment on his move.
Consortium fails to seal safe future for Spectrum
Extreme turmoil still surrounds Spectrum Radio as political wranglings and fierce takeover battles threaten to pull the multi-ethnic station apart.
At an extraordinary general meeting last Thursday, Spectrum's shareholders agreed to form a consortium, Harmony Investments, which has pledged to inject at least £600,000 into the station to cover debts estimated at £450,000.
Formation of the consortium is primarily a tactical move to thwart a takeover attempt by Allied Radio and Avtar Lit's Asian Broadcasting company which was supported by four of Spectrum's seven board directors (MW last week).
Those directors have since been ousted from the board.
Despite assuring the Radio Authority last Friday that Spectrum's troubles were now at an end the station is now threatened with a court case brought by Lit to prove the EGM was illegal.
Lit claims to have become chairman of four companies which control between them 45 per cent of Spectrum's stock and is pledging to fight Harmony Investments to the end.
The potential legal action leaves the Authority in an embarrassing situation after it issued a statement saying it was satisfied with Spectrum's decision.
But it did add: ‘The Authority has suggested…the management needs to address the issues which have been the subject of adverse public comment…‘
Spectrum denies the EGM was illegal and says existing shareholders cannot sell shares to outsiders without first offering them to inside investors.
Lit also claims to have won another four per cent stake in the station from private company, Spectrum Radio Investments.
‘We will resort to court action.
It will be swift and sharp, and Spectrum Radio will be policed at every step.’
The European Commission has approved the Sunrise TV breakfast time franchise, delayed  because of suspected media concentration (MW December 13).
The London Media Group has won the claimed £3m HMV UK media planning and buying account following a review last month out of Pattison Horswell Durden.
TVMM marketing director Ian Platt has left the company following the firm's merger with Scottish TV's sales interests.
Media Register-MEAL , the Maxwell-owned media research company in the hands of administrators Arthur Andersen, is understood to have attracted interest from several bidders.
Potential buyers include the Register Group, led by John Gordon and Dan Levin, Nielsen, VNU and a consortium led by ex-managing director John Stockley.
Financial Times owner Pearson this week dropped out of the bidding for the Maxwell 51 per cent share in Mirror Group Newspapers.
Procter & Gamble (US) has moved all its television buying into two agencies; Wells, Rich Greene/BDDP and DMB&B.
Maiden Outdoor is introducing a new range of poster campaigns, called Flagship 500, which comprises 500 quality sites in large towns only.
Continental Research , the independent market research group, predicts that the number of UK homes with satellite dishes will exceed 3 million this year.
Primesight Fours and Baillie Advertising, the four-sheet poster contractors, have launched a joint marketing initiative for their combined sheetage.
Trinity International has promoted corporate development director Philip Graf to deputy chief executive responsible for the group's UK newspaper interests.
Time Out magazine has appointed Walton & Wiggins to produce a £200,000 campaign, which will include ads on Thames, LWT and Channel 4.
Associated Newspapers is understood to be considering a bid for the Oracle teletext franchise, alongside Carlton Communications, Independent Television News, TV-am and MAI Broadcasting.
Peugeot: Clash with Citroën
NEWS ANALYSIS
New workings at the coal face
EC proposals could favour the UK coal industry, so now's the time for British Coal to gain an edge by shaking off its outdated image.
This is hopes to do with a new boss and a £1m campaign.
By Chris Boulding
Last week British Coal named Andrew Horsler as its director general of marketing.
At the same time it rolled out a corporate advertising campaign intended to convince the business world that coal is an economic fuel.
In the past six years, the coal industry has shrunk dramatically, with more than 100 pits closed and 150,000 jobs lost.
Capacity is down to just over 90 million tonnes.
Only 57 functioning pits now remain, employing 50,000 miners.
British Coal, one of the few companies still nationalised, has the unenviable task of proving to its customers that it is more than a dinosaur of the industrial revolution, slouching towards privatisation and a slow demise.
Despite speculation that the campaign, produced by Hoare Wilkins, was put together with privatisation in mind.
British Coal insists that is main aim is to hold on to the three-year contracts with the two electricity generators, which will be renegotiated in March next year.
National Power and PowerGen have already indicated that when these contracts fall due, they are keen to diversity into other supply fuels, especially gas and cheap imported coal.
British Coal chairman Neil Clarke has stated publicly that the industry's future depends on securing advantageous terms and stemming the ‘dash for gas’ by the generators.
The Hoare Wilkins full-page ads feature a grimy-faced miner above the catchline: ‘One of Britain's most successful businessmen.’
Agency chief executive Jonathan Hoare says: ‘It is a right-of-reply campaign.
The perception of coal is very much a Victorian, industrial revolution, slag heaps industry doomed to extinction — a perception that's been gently encouraged by the other sources of energy in their advertising.
Our job was to point out the commercial success of British Coal as a modern company able to compete.’
British Coal regarded the £1m campaign as of such importance that Hoare Wilkins presented to, and had work approved by, the board itself, through public relations director Michael Green.
His brief was to convey coal as a developing rather than a senescent industry.
Green says: ‘We have these two gigantic customers which represent more than 80 per cent of our output.
They are making this huge investment based on their perception of us and we need to impress on them that we are a forward-looking, cost-conscious business.’
Green boasts that British Coal has reduced prices by 30 per cent in real terms over the past six years and predicts the trend will continue ‘not just by closing marginal capacity, but by ensuring existing capacity will be more efficient’.
However, further pit closures are inevitable in the productivity battle, because the 65 million tonnes agreed for the last year of the contract is likely to shrink to fewer than 50 million, at best.
Not surprisingly, the productivity strategy fits snugly with the Government's declared plans for selling off coal at the best price if it won the election.
Energy secretary John Wakeham, who was responsible for seeing through the electricity privatisation last year, has pledged that legislation for the sell-off will appear in a new Tory government's first term, with a commitment in the election manifesto.
Before any sale, the Department of Energy would want to remove any loss-making capacity, but all parties were shocked by a government-commissioned report from merchant bank NM Rothschild, which was widely leaked, forecasting that the industry could be reduced to 12 deep pits over the next three years.
Kleinwort Benson mining analyst Huw Williams says: ‘Coal is unlikely to be a direct flotation along BT lines.
More probable is a trade sale to existing mining companies or back to the generating companies, which is quite a common practice in the rest of the world.
If the head office and overhead structures were removed, however, some currently uneconomic pits might become quite profitable.’
Under a Labour government, the situation might not be that different.
Although Labour has made a commitment to buy back the national grid, Williams argues that its policy on British Coal's future has been left largely unsaid.
He adds: ‘The crunch for Labour will come over getting local authority permission for open-cast mines, which produce better quality coal, but are mainly sited in Labour-held areas of the UK such as Wales and Scotland.
British Coal knows its future depends on the outcome of the election.’
Horsler's appointment to control British Coal's marketing strategy came amid reports that his business experience as national contracts director suited him for a negotiating  role.
Meanwhile, commercial director Malcolm Edwards, who has defended a sizeable coal industry, is on the point of departure after a boardroom battle with chairman Clarke, reportedly backed by energy secretary Wakeham.
In the domestic market, which represents just over three per cent of coal output, marketing is handled by Central Marketing Services, created when the Solid Fuel Advisory Service was phased out in December 1989.
Central Marketing Services manager Anne Martin, who is responsible for the Saatchi & Saatchi coal ads featuring a dog, a cat and a mouse in front of a real fire, says: ‘The growth area for domestic coal is supplementary fires, which people incorporate in their living rooms for aesthetic reasons.
They've grown alongside the fashion for fireplace surrounds, although the coal heating market is lapsing slightly.’
The second execution of British Coal's real fire campaign, which broke last month, continues the ‘flame, flicker and crackle’ theme, although the larger part of the domestic budget has now been transferred to direct marketing.
This followed investment in a national database two years ago.
However, both in the home and within the huge power stations, coal is taking a hammering from environmental lobbyists who object to the depletion of fossil fuels and the atmospheric pollution caused by their use.
A Friends of the Earth spokesman on air pollution says: ‘The bulk emissions are nitrogen oxides and sulphur dioxide, which are major producers of acid rain, with of course, the ordinary carbon dioxide, the greenhouse gas.
‘However, some of these emissions could be reduced if the Government would keep to its pledge before electricity privatisation of installing more flue gas desulphurisation equipment.’
Whatever the outcome of this debate, British Coal's industrial future has reached a critical point.
EC proposals for a reference price are likely to favour the UK industry, which is more efficient than its two competitors, Spain and Germany, enabling British Coal to grab a decent share of European supply and maintain a larger capacity.
However, British Coal faces a marketing struggle at the pit face.
Coal's name may be just too black for the future.
Taking Time Out to blitz the UK market
Cadbury's Time Out will be a winner here, but it will not be conquering Europe.
By Lindsay McMurdo
All the legislation coming out of Brussels this year won't affect the average European palate one jot.
When it comes to chocolate, we don't like theirs and they don't like ours.
Cadbury's launch of a new countline, Time Out (MW last week), has taken the UK confectionery market by surprise.
A chocolate and wafer combination, it strikes directly at arch-rival Rowntree's £130m cash cow Kit Kat.
Given Cadbury's peerless reputation for research and development, and its continued commitment to high levels of marketing support, which in Time Out's case includes a £5m advertising blitz through GGT, few can doubt that the company's £35 sales target for the brand will be achieved.
According to analysts, the product is hot.
Industry observers say the launch will disrupt the rather cosy relationship between the big three — Cadbury, Mars and Rowntree — whereby each has dominance of certain sectors and they largely avoid treading on each other 's commercial toes.
Kit Kat is virtually a sector unto itself, and therefore vulnerable, with the only similar product, before Time Out, being Terry's unsupported Waifa.
Time Out is also significant for Cadbury as a mainstream snack product.
Other products in the portfolio, such as Twirl, Boost and last year's big launch Strollers, are increasingly bought for snacking, says product manager Anne Greenwood, which prompted the development of a specific brand.
So Cadbury looks to have another winner on its hands.
But how important is another domestic product launch in 1992?
Cadbury evidently has no plans to make Time Out its first pan-European brand.
The name does not transliterate into any other language, and the advertising has been assigned to an agency without a real European capability.
Cadbury has a ten per cent share by value of the European chocolate market, and lies in fifth place behind Nestlé, Mars, Suchard and Ferrero.
Unlike any of these, it has conducted very little in the way of cross-border brand-building, preferring to buy smaller companies, such as the French moulded chocolate manufacturer Poulain, as a way of gaining market share.
Cadbury-branded products in Europe receive very little advertising support.
At first sight, this attitude appears negligent, but the reason for it is simpler than might be imagined.
Brits expect chocolate to taste like Cadbury's Dairy Milk and are not really keen on anything else.
European taste in chocolate is altogether different.
They like theirs stronger, more bitter, thinner and preferably cold.
Mars' products are similarly not valued on the Continent for the quality of their chocolate, but for their ingredients.
The reverse is also true.
Three years ago, Suchard spent millions launching its Milka products in the UK, but they failed to take hold.
The other alternative is major acquisition or merger.
After Jacobs Suchard's failed bid for Rowntree in 1989 (the company went to Nestlé instead), a merger with Cadbury was entertained, but foundered on Cadbury's insistence that it was the senior partner.
Since US food giant Philip Morris bought Jacobs Suchard in 1990, ostensibly for its coffee business, there has been speculation that Cadbury might bid for the Suchard chocolate business.
However, funding such an acquisition, which would cost upwards of £1bn, is deemed impossible in the current climate.
Analysts now speculate that Hershey, the US chocolate company to which Cadbury sold its US interests in 1988, is a more likely bidder.
Cadbury's reluctance or inability to resolve its European dilemma in chocolate is exacerbated by another factor — its commitment to growth in its soft drinks.
Observers agree that the soft drink sector is an altogether better bet for the company, which in addition to its strong Schweppes brands has added most of Perrier's non-water brands and the best-selling Euro-brand Gini to its portfolio in the past two years.
Assuming the European market mirrors the US trend, there is still room for almost indefinite growth, and all soft drinks manufacturers benefit from the massive marketing programmes of Coca-Cola and Pepsi.
It is ironic that the very thing which made Cadbury such a dominant force in the UK — creating and building a unique product — should be the principal impediment to the company's growth in that market elsewhere.
But those, as they say, are the breaks.
Cadbury has been prudent, not to say lucky, in developing an extremely viable second string to its bow.
Time Out: Attacking Kit Kat's sector unto itself
MEDIA ANALYSIS
Political reasons to be cheerful
An election year heralds an ad blitz by the main parties.
This helps agencies, but will it really aid the politicians' cause?
By Nick Higham
The advertising agencies' trade body, the IPA, kicked off 1992 with the president's New Year reception at the institute's Belgrave Square headquarters.
An occasion marked by a speech from the president himself, Peter Mead of Abbot Mead Vickers, which was noticeably defensive although a few of the jokes might have been considered mildly offensive by one or two sections of society (indicating that the IPA, like kindred bodies, is still predominantly white, male and middle-class).
Now there's no denying that 1991 was not a good year for the advertising industry.
As Mead pointed out, the numbers (estimated at 13,000) are lower than at any time since the institute started counting more than 20 years ago, and well below the peak of 15,400 in 1989.
Reckless optimism about 1992 would clearly be out of place — but to hear Mead you'd think there was a crisis of confidence in advertising not only among clients but among some of the industry's own leading lights.
The ‘batten down the hatches’ tone of his speech, at an occasion when something cautiously up might have been more appropriate, betrayed a lot about how badly the industry — and agencies' morale — has been damaged by the recession.
And there is something to be upbeat about in 1992: it's an election year.
Whatever advertisers and their agencies may think about the respective merits of Conservative, Labour or even Liberal Democrat administrations, general election mean a windfall of about £10m worth of business for media owners and a favoured few advertising agencies — reportedly some £8m of that spent by the Conservatives, £2m by Labour and a meagre £250,000 by the Liberal Democrats.
It's not all extra business.
Election poster campaigns by the main political parties customarily occupy sites previously booked by others — by clients of the party's agency who can be persuaded to postpone campaigns for a few weeks, by the Central Office of Information (whose government advertising goes on hold once an election is called) or reputedly (in the case of the Tories) by the big brewers and tobacco companies.
But plenty of the money spent by the parties in those frantic few weeks of the election itself, particularly on newspaper advertisements, will be fresh funds — which has to be good news for the media and agencies.
But is it good news for the political parties: are they spending their money wisely?
And will advertising play as significant a part in the 1992 election campaign as in 1979, 1983 or 1987?
The probable answer to the first question is ‘No’.
Professor William Miller of Glasgow University, author of a number of studies of voters' behaviour at elections, believes formal advertising has relatively little effect on how people vote.
He says the enormous sums spent on advertising by political parties — in particular the Conservatives — have more to do with boosting party workers' morale and with the fact that it would be deeply embarrassing and demoralising if they lost the election but still ended up with cash in the kitty.
From detailed study of the 1987 election, Miller reckons the biggest influence on the way people vote is news coverage on television and radio of the campaign — and the comment masquerading as news coverage of the popular press.
Individual advertisements are swamped in the welter of political coverage.
To be effective, political advertising needs to be undertaken well in advance of elections, to fix an image in voters' minds ahead of the campaign itself.
But that's something Labour and the Liberal Democrats — who arguably need advertising more because so many of the popular papers support the Conservatives — can't afford to do.
As well as being of questionable effectiveness, ads and party political broadcasts can be actively dangerous.
Every ad is a fresh chance to make a blunder which opponents can seize on; a badly conceived or badly produced advertisement or party political broadcast can alienate voters.
Paradoxically, as even the impecunious Liberal Democrats have now acknowledged, that's also a reason for taking the whole business of advertising seriously.
Last week the party's election campaign director, Des Wilson, unveiled the Lib Dems' new ‘My Vote’ emblem — not a logo, not a slogan, but a ‘device’.
The device was thought up by the party's first-ever full-time advertising agency, TBWA Holmes Knight Ritchie.
After years of getting by under its previous labels of the Liberals and the Alliance with just the voluntary help of a few advertising professionals (including Mead's partner David Abbott), the party has decided that such an approach is too risky.
So the Lib Dems, somewhat belatedly, have joined in the game first played with such effect by the Conservatives and Saatchi & Saatchi in the run-up to the 1979 election with Saatchi's ‘Labour Isn't Working’ poster, and taken to new heights in the 1987 campaign by Labour with Hugh Hudson's memorable ‘Kinnock: the Movie’party political broadcast.
TBWA's ‘My Vote’ device is neat enough, but it scarcely breaks new ground.
In addition, TBWA is new to the political advertising game — one that is played by different rules from ordinary advertising and, according to the experts, takes a while to learn.
What's more, the rival teams have changed as well.
The Conservatives, after flirting with the idea of a Labour style ‘shadow’ agency of volunteers, is back with Saatchi, but a Saatchi where many of the key personnel who worked on the Tory account in previous years (notably Michael Dobbs, the agency's former deputy chairman and once a Tory Central Office staffer himself) have departed.
And, although Labour's Shadow Communications Agency, coordinated by Philip Gould, still exists, some of the personnel there have changed as well.
Most significantly, the team is without its original inspirational manager, Peter Mandelson, who as Labour's communications head was widely credited with positively machiavellian skills.
The newcomers will have to learn that political advertising is less about selling and more about persuasion.
But if they get it wrong they have the consolation that, for all the recriminations, it probably won't have made much difference to the outcome of the election.
Nick Higham is media correspondent for BBC news and current affairs .
Rocking the vote: Campaigns need to start early
BUSINESS
Time to cut the crap on Ratner
Gerald Ratner is not a fallen golden boy, nor a victim of his own jokes, but an extremely shrewd businessman.
By George Pitcher
There are some great myths of the late 20th century that are gradually being recognised for what they are.
They do not, perhaps, rank with the tales of Hydra, Odysseus and Achilles in their narrative appeal, but they are myths just the same.
The most current is the Myth of the Economic Miracle.
This is the story of how a woman made of iron emerged from the depths of a grocer's shop in Grantham and, speaking with a strange tongue given to her by the God of Graven Images, Sir Gordon Reece, held a nation under her spell.
The mortals believed that she was the provider of great riches until a seven-headed monster called The Cabinet destroyed her with the Golden Hair of Heseltine.
Other modern myths include: tales of survival of the recession by switching advertising budgets to PR; the principle that property prices always recover; and the idea that privatisation automatically heralds increased competition.
Needless to say, there are as many victims of these myths as there are heroes.
Some of these are unconscious victims.
Witness the serried ranks of highly paid company chairmen who maintain, in the face of incontrovertible evidence to the contrary, that the Eighties enriched us, that we are immeasurably better off as a result of the Thatcher experiment than we would have been without it.
To that, one only has to respond that the tax burden is greater and the economy is in worse condition than before Thatcher embarked on it.
But there are those in the business community who are victims of myth through no indolence of thought on their part.
They simply find themselves categorised by the limp thinking of economic commentators.
One such victim is Gerald Ratner.
Much of the presumption that surrounds Ratner's fall from grace is baseless.
Unusual position though it is, let me defend Ratner by exploding a couple of myths.
Myth No.1: ‘Ratner is another victim of the passing of the Thatcher boom.’
This is true in that consumer demand has collapsed as a result of the credit squeeze, the bursting of the property bubble and rising unemployment.
But what it implies is that Ratner was another child of the Thatcherite philosophy.
Sure, Ratner embarked on a takeover spree during the Eighties.
But note that Ratner differs from other exploiters of the Thatcher Years in that he stuck to his last.
Jewellery was and is Ratner's game and he has never sought to diversify.
In this respect at least, he differs noticeably from other high-profile corporate denouements on the evening of Thatcher's day.
John Gunn of British & Commonwealth, John Ashcroft of Coloroll and, to some extent, the Saatchi brothers are among those who were tempted to believe that expansion was synonymous with diversification.
This corporate credo held that, by spreading one's base of activity, one immunised the corporate entity from the cycles of sector.
Similarly, it was argued that globalisation spread a company's exposure to geographical  vicissitudes of local economies.
By contrast, Ratner stuck to what he was and is good at: jewellery retailing.
Even his overseas expansion was prescribed by rational identification of opportunity rather than the quasi-imperialism that typified much of the ambition in the UK advertising agency sector.
So to identify Ratner with the flyboys of the Eighties is unfair on what was a far more strategic expansion than was theirs.
Myth No.2: ‘Ratner is finally paying the price for his foolish comments to the Institute of Directors.’
Enough time and energy was expended on this incident last year, so I do not intend to rehearse it here.
But it really is nonsense to suggest that his remarks about the quality of a decanter and glasses and the longevity of his earrings compared with a prawn sandwich presaged the decline in Ratner's fortunes.
Ratner built his retail combine on price-competitiveness.
His comments on the £4.95 decanter and 99p earrings, used on numerous occasions before his speech to the IoD, were what supported the Ratner share price rather than what undermined it.
The shares rose 17p to close the week at 187p soon after the speech.
At a sales level, the reports of the IoD speech had but a marginal effect — Ratner's outlets trade under a variety of names and the consumers' memory is short.
Ratner is a victim of Christmas, not crap.
But the issue of Ratner's knock-down pricing policy does raise issues of quality that are as yet unresolved.
As I have argued before, disproportionate reduction in quality in relation to reduction in prices imply a lack of sufficient competition in the market.
This leads to the identification of a Ratner myth, the removal of which is rather less supportive of him.
Myth No.3: ‘Ratner has built his market entirely on low prices.’
Last May, I wrote that if customers had only limited choice as to where to buy jewellery ‘then it is every bit as exploitative if the quality is unnecessarily low than if the price is unnecessarily high’.
Ratners controls some 33 per cent of the retail jewellery market, according to the ex-chairman.
The nearest competitor is Argus with just six per cent, with the remaining 60 per cent-plus accounted for by small, independent retailers.
The Office of Fair Trading chose not to examine this market and the Hatton Garden traders have not always been able to stand up to Ratner's negotiating muscle.
Now the dismal retailing market has moved in where the OFT has not — pre-tax profits are predicted to fall from £112m last time to a loss of £72m for the year to January 31.
Ratner's trading power in terms of market share remains undimmed, so its decline will be felt throughout Hatton Garden.
With James McAdam from Coats Viyella ensconced as chairman and Ratner himself still chief executive, there can be little doubt that Ratners will develop a policy of doing what it is best at: selling cheap jewellery cheaply.
Simply because it is in dire straits should not necessarily preclude the OFT from examining how it influences the UK retail jewellery market.
Myths have a habit of ignoring the truth.
Ratner is not a fallen golden boy of the Thatcher era, nor a victim of his own jokes.
He is a very shrewd businessman who has taken full advantage of having a market very largely to himself and who is suffering a temporary setback as a result of the economy.
He is down, but his stranglehold on the retail jewellery scene means that no one should say he is out.
That really would be crap.
Zales: One of Ratner's Eighties takeovers
AMERICA
Troubled Kiam seeks saviour
Victor Kiam is still seeking a buyer or backer for Remington — the razor company he liked so much in 1979 he bought it for $25m.
Kiam put Remington up for sale last month — it has lost market share to US brand leader Norelco and to Braun, Gillette's German subsidiary.
But his main problems stem not from the electrical appliance industry by from the American Football team — the New England Patriots — he bought for $85m in 1988.
As part of that deal he agreed to pay $38m to his 49 per cent partner in the purchase, Francis Murray, if Murray wanted to sell after three years.
Murray wants to opt out of the deal but two deadlines have already passed for Kiam to raise the money and now a third, and perhaps final, one has fallen due this month, the end of the football season.
The Patriots have been something of a business disaster for Kiam.
Apart from performing the worst of all US football teams in 1990, the team has amassed losses of $20m since Kiam took over and has been playing to 70 per cent capacity despite some improvement this season.
Kiam has also become embroiled in the ‘Great Locker Room Scandal’— an incident involving a woman sports reporter (who is now suing for sexual harassment) and several naked and semi-naked Patriots players.
Kiam's alleged remarks about the episode and his heavy branding as Remington's company spokesman did nothing to help the firm's sales to women customers.
Industry estimates show Remington's market share has fallen to 28 per cent from a peak of 40 per cent in 1986.
Sales revenue is estimated to have tumbled from $250m in 1989 to about $200m.
Kiam is keeping quiet, but Chase Manhattan has confirmed it has been retained and that selling Remington is one of several possibilities under review.
A spokesman for the bank told The New York Times: ‘We are looking at several options.
One is an outright buyer, one is a partner, one is some other form of investor and one is for Kiam to stay put.’
Jailbirds find a new calling in telemarketing
Sixteen US states are allowing convicts to be hired for telemarketing, prompting renewed calls for the curbing of telesales to the home.
And there is no restriction on candidates, although telemarketing companies say they try to avoid using people convicted for fraud.
One company, TGS Marketing in Omaha, Nebraska, says criminals with longer sentences tend to make more devoted telemarketers —‘they're looking for something stable to hang on to in their lives’— and it says it is not against hiring convicted murderers.
Prisoners in Nebraska are paid 17.5 per cent commission — the same as outside employees — but the inmates have to pay $1.25 an hour back to the prison and another five per cent of their wages to a state fund for crime victims.
A ‘good’ sales person can still net $150 a week.
Not every state approves of the telemarketing schemes, no matter how disguised they are — the fact that the call comes from a prison or a reform school is not part of the sales script.
Minnesota's Oak Park Heights Prison cancelled a telemarketing project because of fears that inmates might menace customers.
A spokesman said: ‘You don't want [prisoners]calling folks all over, perhaps saying inappropriate things, attempting to develop relationships.
These folks are in here because they exploit other people.’
Orange juice is to be pitched as a sportsman's drink in a new marketing strategy to be adopted by the Florida Citrus Commission.
The commission, which has an annual budget of $72m, is also  examining ways of emphasising Florida because of competition from orange growers in Brazil and Mexico.
Business Week led the field in the volume of ad pages last year beating its nearest competitor Forbes by about 100 pages with Fortune coming third.
However, all three magazines were down, according to figures from Media Industry Newsletter.
World airline passenger traffic fell by 4.1 per cent in 1991, the first annual fall since the International Civil Aviation Organisation began collecting statistics in the Forties.
By Michael Chamberlain Edited by Sophie Bate 
Kiam: Hampered by Remington losses and football debt
Telesales: Menacing?
LETTERS
Making clear the benefits of marketing
I found your recent article ‘A new discipline’ on marketing in the Nineties (MW December 6) extremely interesting and felt that it raised a number of important issues.
The most significant was the perceived inability of marketing to reliably, consistently and systematically demonstrate its return on investment.
Naturally this aspect takes on heightened importance when money is tight and harder, ‘pay-your-way’ attitudes emerge.
The key problem for marketing is that, unlike other areas of company activity, the returns achieved are not directly under the control of the managers.
The returns can be completely negated by competitive activity and changes in general economic conditions.
Does this mean that these marketing plans have failed?
Of course not.
I feel quite firmly that the only way forward is to move to the situation where marketers control not only what they spend but also the presentation of sales results in terms of changes as a result of alternative contributory factors.
These could include relative price, distribution, advertising, competitive activity, economic conditions and whatever else is relevant for the product.
Econometric modelling actually provides this facility.
The use of econometrics as a regular part of the marketing function is growing fast and in exactly the way described above, that is, using it to measure the return on investment.
But its use still requires an enlightened management and a long-term commitment.
Data sources are imperfect, data handling skills in short supply and the cause-and-effect processes long and complex.
But this approach does work and the Nineties should witness regular use of modelling in marketing planning.
One has only to look at the regularity with which courses on modelling now appear on the MRS lists.
I would therefore expect that at the time of the next recession, markets will be much less vulnerable to cost-cutting.
S J Messenger Director of market planning services OHAL London SE3
Confident, but illiterate ad
May I say how much I agree with David Abbott's condemnation of the ‘school of teenage illiteracy’(MW December 6).
There is a brand of tampon, Confident, which features a protective overwrap which prevents the shedding of fibres.
So far, so good.
Now, as they say, we come to the pay-off, which manages to undermine everything the copywriter has worked so hard to establish.
The consumer is left to figure out what on earth a ‘non-fibre shedding tampon’ can possibly contribute to her quality of time-of-the-month.
Chris Gilbertson
Hungry for new products
I would like to congratulate you on your excellent article on the Kwikmas pudding.
Full of enthusiasm, therefore, and anxious to try this product, I toured Gateway and other supermarkets but the product was too kwick for me and not one was to be found.
I could only hope that Father Christmas had one up his sleeve for me!
DE Drake Broadstone Dorset
Donating to a worthy cause
While I found you spoof story on ‘Kwikmas’ pudding (MW December 13) mildly amusing, it was sad to see a publication of your standing devote five pages, almost a quarter of the editorial space, to such a feature.
Surely, if you really had not news to report, the space could have been deployed in a much more productive manner — maybe to help some worthy cause or charity.
John Mendleton Mainstream Marketing & Advertising Taplow Berks
LEADER
Europe: Too hard for Cadbury?
Not everyone has been having a bad recession, and not everyone believes they must prune radically their investment and marketing budget.
Take Cadbury-Schweppes for example.
Last week, with the launch of chocolate snack Time Out, it wheeled out the big guns for a direct assault on the mainstream snacking market dominated by Nestlé (Kit Kat) and Mars (Twix).
The product has been well received and stands, according to analysts, a good chance of success.
They base their prognosis on the aggressive new product development and marketing that has been Cadbury's hallmark in recent years.
The takeover of Trebor Bassett was well-handled, resulting in a handsome and almost immediate lift in trading margins, and a sharpening of brand image (Extra Strong Mints, for example, have now taken over from Polo as the UK's top selling mint).
Meanwhile, the company's entry into the largely unchartered bagged sector with Strollers seems to have got off to a fair start.
In value terms, Cadbury has beaten Mars and Rowntree Nestlé in the UK chocolate confectionery market for the best part of a decade, but it is noticeable that its lead has become more decisive since 1988/89 and the beginning of the recession.
The big question mark over Cadbury remains its attitude to Europe and, indeed, its strategic resilience in the broader international market.
Progress in its soft drinks business has been brisk, despite a generally lacklustre year, and by extreme good fortune, Coca-Cola & Schweppes Beverages escaped curtailment by the MMC.
But there has been a good deal less successful cross-border brand-building in the confectionery division.
Cadbury wisely backed out of the US market some years ago.
But the same argument cannot be used for ignoring Europe.
And here there seems to be a deep cultural problem.
For just as the British rejected the multimillion-pound blandishments by Suchard three years ago on behalf of richer, more bitter European chocolate, so Continental consumers are largely unimpressed by UK products.
Cadbury lies a dangerous fifth in the European chocolate market.
In the long run, however, adroit its marketing, takeover may be the only solution.
News analysis, page 13 
Pudding: Fun or fatuous?
DRINKS
Teetotal recall?
The parlous state of the no-alcohol and low-alcohol beer (nablab) market has forced brewers to sober up and refocus on products and advertising.
The health and safety line has been ill-received by drinkers, who also rejected the offerings as small beer.
Now brewers must ensure their message to consumers is in the best possible taste.
By Ruth Morelli
Marketing hyperbole conquered common sense long ago in the low-alcohol and alcohol-free beer (nablab) sector.
Drunk with optimism and keen to combat an overall drop in beer consumption, brewers in the late Eighties hailed nablabs as one of the growth markets of the future.
In the  rarefied atmosphere of brewery marketing departments it was no doubt possible to believe that the nascent trend towards greater health consciousness and personal responsibility would result in huge demand for reduced alcohol products.
Brewers also spotted the ideal opportunity to polish their rather tarnished image.
The popular press had laid the blame for the evolution of the larger lout squarely at their feet; pushing nablabs would allow them to appear as capitalists with a social conscience.
So ‘every brewer and his auntie’, as one nablab marketer puts it, rushed headlong to brew up — many with foul-tasting and ill-researched products that consumers quickly and rightly rejected.
Few brewers realised that the sheer proliferation of products, rather than consumer demand, was fuelling growth and that this short-sighted gallop would eventually limit the size of the market.
If standard lager was bland, pallid nablab imitations were substantially worse and they put many drinkers off altogether.
And, as if the taste wasn't bad enough by itself, the early marketing of nablabs made matters worse.
The idea that drinking nablabs was a seriously smart thing to do ant that hordes or women would subsequently fall at one's feet probably looked great on a storyboard but it failed to impress the punters.
Advertising then moved on to emphasising the safety element of nablabs (as an alternative to alcohol for drivers), effectively saying to consumers ‘when you can't have a proper drink, have this instead’.
So it is hardly surprising that nablabs are seen merely as a distress purchase.
The market's dramatic decline — from its 1989 peak of more than 600,000 barrels to about 400,000 last year — has had a sobering effect on brewers, and realism in now making a welcome return to their predictions of the market's long-term potential.
The most cautious believe that it will stabilise at between 0.5 and one per cent of the total beer market and even the most bullish say that it will take more than five years to reach four per cent.
Most predict a further shake-out of brands.
Many regional brewers' products have already been withdrawn, leaving the major brewers to flex their marketing muscle.
Even stout giant Guinness has pulled its alcohol-free bitter Smithwick's out of the fray.
Peter Karsten, marketing director of Surfax, which brews the low-alcohol Clausthaler, comments: ‘The number of products available has dropped from 70 to 50 and it needs to come down to about 20.’
Karsten foresees a mass culling of products in the next six months and a polarisation into four big brands: Guinness' alcohol-free lager Kaliber, Bass' low-alcohol market leader Tennents LA, Whitbread's White Label low-alcohol bitter and his own Clausthaler as the ‘premium imported’ brand.
But isn't a ‘premium’ nablab a contradiction in terms?
‘The problem in the UK is that people associate the word premium with strength, when what it really means is quality,’ explains Karsten.
Clausthaler, which claims to have taken more than half of the sizeable German nablab market, stresses the premium element in its latest advertising and uses the line ‘Its strength is its taste’.
Karsten believes the UK's fundamental folly is to sell on alcohol content rather than on flavour.
He argues that the nablab message should sound more like: ‘This is a really nice beer, oh and by the way it is low in alcohol.’
‘The market is not going to grow until we get away from this distress purchase idea — that's the easy way of selling it.
It should be marketed as a  beer in its own right; its alcohol content ought to be irrelevant,’ says Karsten.
Allied Breweries brands marketing controller Liz Morgan agrees with Karsten's marketing synopsis but naturally replaces Clausthaler with Allied's Swan Light in her list of survivors.
Of the rest of the pack she says: ‘I wouldn't want to be definite about how many of then will be around in five years’ time.’
Morgan characterises Swan Light's advertising as positive, lighthearted and conferring normal beer values of sociability and humour.
However, the positive benefit emphasised in the brand's most famous poster —‘won't make your dingo limp’— is unlikely to form the major plank of its future strategy.
According to Allied research, consumers ‘understand the role of nablabs and don't want to be preached to.
Instead they seek positive promotion, new reasons to drink nablabs that will make them feel good’.
According to Marketing Week research, turning consumers' negative opinions around will be like pushing an elephant uphill with a rope.
A small survey of drinkers' attitudes (see box, below) showed that people thought reduced alcohol products were massively overpriced and an irrelevant halfway house (‘I either drink or I don't’ was a typical comment).
Many of the drinkers  questioned felt cheated that they were paying as much or more for nablab products while the brewers paid far less duty (and practically nothing on alcohol-free products) than on their normal brews.
Victoria Wine director of marketing Ann Tonks, who reports a drop in nablab sales of 20 per cent over the Christmas period (compared with growth in total lager sales of four per cent), says that people respond strongly to price promotion in the sector.
‘Swan Light reduced its price from 52p to 32p a can and it performed the best of the nablabs, even out-selling Kaliber,’ she says.
With standard lager prices falling and added-value extra fill promotions becoming almost a permanent feature, Tonks sees the need to give customers an incentive.
‘As a retailer, naturally I would prefer to see added value rather than price cutting,’ she adds.
According to industry estimates, sales of nablabs last year were down by 25 per cent overall on the previous 12 months.
Total on-trade beer sales were down eight per cent as a result of the recession, with nablabs having fallen by 20 per cent.
Surprisingly, nablab sales in the off-trade, which is traditionally less affected by recessionary pressure, were down by a third.
Figures like these have taken much of the fizz out of brewers' forecasts.
Now if they could just do the same to the beers themselves, and improve the taste, more people might be inclined to drink them.
FAKES AND ALE: NO COMPETITION
Reports of the death of no-alcohol and low-alcohol ale brands are little exaggerated, analysts believe.
Barclays de Zoete Wedd brewing analyst Colin Davis says: ‘It is quite likely that the nablab ale market might die out altogether.’
Guinness' decision to withdraw its alcohol-free bitter, Smithwick's AFB, last February appears to endorse the persistent gloom surrounding a sector that was one described as a dynamic, vibrant and burgeoning niche.
Guinness' decision signalled a withering of nablab ale brands which has proved more serious than lager counterparts.
Although ales represent around a fifth of the nablab sector as a whole, The Brewers' Society says it is ‘so small a market that we don't even bother to quantify it.’
Industry analysts had long predicted a shake-out of the overcrowded low-alcohol ale market (it is virtually impossible to produce a no-alcohol ale).
The proliferation of regional ale brands since the sector's launch in 1988 made it difficult to build a national product that would kick-start it in the way that Perrier set off the mineral water market in the seventies.
Stephen Day, Guinness marketing manager for Kaliber, who witnessed Smithwick's demise, admits: ‘Ale drinkers tend to be older and more settled in their habits than the new young trialists who tend to go for lager, so it was more difficult to persuade them.
Brewers had launched a lot of nablab ale brands with very little support but wide distribution through tied estates.
Smithwick's volume just didn't justify the market support necessary to make it work.’
Even now, Day contends, advertising support is very much lower for ales than lagers, with only Whitbread's White Label and Bass LA receiving limited trade press and below-the-line spends this year.
The generic heritage of the developing nablab market limits the number of brands in any pub.
Day continues: ‘Very few outlets would warrant more than one product, and that is usually a lager, so ale brands find it quite difficult to get in-trade distribution.’
As ale drinkers are swift to confirm, the flavour of bitter is more delicate and complex than lager and more difficult to reproduce.
The technical procedures involved in nablabs — using specialised yeasts or ‘reverse osmosis’— cannot please all the partisan regional palates all the time.
A Campaign for Real Ale spokesman says: ‘Some of the original lagers had very little taste anyway, so taking the alcohol out made very little difference.
But the alcohol in ale is all-important to the taste, so most people seem to regard the nablab version as a drink of last resort only.’
In several European countries, notably Germany, nablabs have established themselves strongly as brands.
Analysts point to the fact that far more beer is drunk at home on the Continent, which provides a more conducive atmosphere for low-alcohol products than a pub or bar.
BZW's Davis says: ‘One doesn't want four pints of White Label, so it can't really be a substitute for draught beer in a pub, whereas a canned product stands a much greater chance.’
Despite formidable predictions for the growth of low-alcohol ale when brewers imagined that the ‘less is more’ formula would apply to anything, no brand has yet provided momentum enough to sustain firm growth.
Chris Boulding
BOOS AT THE BREWERS' EXPENSE
‘This,’ says Greg, holding up his pint of lemonade, ‘tastes more like beer than that does.’
His verdict on low-alcohol and alcohol-free beer was among the politest gleaned by a vox-pop of South London drinkers.
Others were more damning: ‘chemical soup’, ‘water with a nasty flavour’ and ‘treacle’.
Some were unprintable.
A small sample of Saturday night pub-goers agreed unanimously that nablab products are overpriced, and most said that they are a pointless compromise between alcoholic and soft drinks.
Even those who drank them ‘quite often’ because they were driving complained about their taste, expense and resultant hangover.
Greg, a 24-year-old trainee solicitor, says: ‘I feel ripped off.
After all, brewers are not paying tax on beer that contains little or no alcohol, so it should be half the price of normal beer.
And all the impurities are left in the beer so even though you don't have the benefit of getting drunk you still get a hangover.’
I would never drink them out of choice, and anyway the hangover just isn't worth it,’ says Steve, a 35-year-old sculptor who drinks nablabs ‘fairly regularly’.
Of the 15 people questioned, only one had made a positive decision to drink low-alcohol beer — to protect his liver.
Ian, a 32-year-old salesman, says: ‘I made a conscious decision to drink low-alcohol lager because entertaining, and therefore drinking, is what I do for a living.
If clients want to drink then I have a drink.
I drink low-alcohol lager in the evenings to keep the booze under control.’
Drinkers appear largely untouched by the much-hyped trend towards greater health consciousness.
Ray, an accountant, provides a typical response: ‘It's all rubbish.
People were interested in it for about five minutes.
You can already see the backlash against all this ‘right-onness’.’
Simon, a manager who, at 39, is the oldest person questioned, says: ‘The idea that people will think it is in some way impressive to be seen drinking low-alcohol muck is obvious nonsense.’
Simon adds that he has bought low-alcohol beer once — for an alcoholic.
The two women questioned had little knowledge and no inclination to learn about nablabs.
‘It would not occur me to drink a low-alcohol beer,’ says Alison, a 23-year-old sales assistant.
‘And I don't think the manufacturers are particularly interested in women; a lot of people still think of beer as being a real man's drink,’ she says, peering over the rim of her pint glass.
Alison's contemporary Heather, who is a data editor, has ‘had a sip of one’ but has never ‘considered drinking it as an alternative to alcohol’.
She says: ‘Maybe men need something that looks like ‘a proper drink’ but, as a woman, there is no stigma attached to being sensible and having an orange juice.’
‘I wouldn't drink it even if it tasted like the real thing,’ comments Stephen, a 32-year-old designer.
‘I don't drink ordinary beer for the taste: I drink it for the alcohol.’
His view is shared by Graham, an actor of the same age.
‘People drink because it has a pleasant relaxing effect,’ says Graham.
‘It is not the same if you know that what you are drinking has nothing in it.’
Most people said that when they wanted to drink they drank alcohol and when they didn't, they didn't want an imitation of it.
‘What is the point of drinking a synthetic substitute?’ asks Graham, draining his mineral water.
The strangest point came from Steve the sculptor: ‘At least you don't spend as much time rushing to the loo as when you drink lemonade, and you burp less.’
‘The market is not going to grow until we get away from this distress purchase idea — that's the easy way of selling it’— Peter Karsten
‘Swan Light reduced its price from 52p to 32p a can and it performed the best, even outselling Kaliber’— Ann Tonks
IAIN MURRAY
Keep your hands off Selina
The BBC doesn't deserve our support if it insists on betraying Selina Scott and promoting the less charming Esther Rantzen
Events of the past few days have pointed yet again to the pressing need to abolish the television licence fee and leave the BBC to fend for itself financially.
First came the decision to award Esther Rantzen a new contract worth £1.2m when the consensus is that few people can stand the sight of her.
Then came the disgraceful ‘leaked minutes’ of a BBC review board meeting in which the good name of the breathtakingly beautiful Selina Scott was traduced by a cad called Peter Estall.
This fellow's excuse for putting his shovel into the public purse is that he is executive producer of the Wogan show, something he keeps to himself in public places if he has any sense.
Apparently a member of this ridiculous board remarked that Scott resembled a ‘coy schoolgirl’.
Others were of the opinion that during her stint in the Wogan slot she seemed bored by some of the interviewees and asked trite questions.
Worse still, she had apparently issued instructions before her appearance ‘that there were to be no topical references, no jokes and minimal body contact’.
Now for Estall's inane contribution.
According to him, when Scott interviewed the rock star Bryan Adams she ‘merely asked him why he wore scruffy jeans, why he drove an old jeep, and why he didn't spend more of his money’.
Those questions seem to me to be inexorably leading to ‘And while I'm about it, why don't you clean your fingernails and wash your hair?’
In other words, exactly the questions the nation wishes to be asked of its visiting rock stars.
Everything said at this foolish board meeting unwittingly points to Scott's consummate grasp of the essentials of television.
She was bored by the interviewees.
Well, I ask you, who the hell isn't?
She asked trite questions.
What do they expect, depth?
She ruled out topical references and jokes, understanding perfectly that her executive producer was incapable of appreciating either.
And, she forbade bodily contact, a perfectly sensible interdict given that her interviewees were boring, or scruffy, or dirty or all three.
And she suspected too, without being told, that to question a rock star like Adams merely at a trivial level was potentially more fruitful than to elicit his opinions on, say, constitutional reform or Schopenhauer.
Estall has made a serious mistake that could prove his undoing.
As the Daily Mail pointed out, Scott's inestimable contribution to television is mystery.
There cannot be a viewer with soul so dead that he or she does not yearn to know what, if anything, is concealed by the dazzling effulgence of her beauty.
And if you want to know what that is wheezing, clanking and snorting in the background — a sound resembling a veteran totter emerging from a collection of Blue Peter cans — it's Sir John Junor dressed up in armour and on white charger.
He lifts his visor, wipes the back of his chainmail gauntlet across a perspiring brow, takes a deep breath and speaks: ‘What goes on?
Why should there be so much adoration of Esther Rantzen and so much favouritism extended towards her, and so much envy of and hostility towards the quite blameless, devastatingly lovely and completely inoffensive Selina Scott?’
We do not know, Sir John.
What is the answer, prithee?
Sir John, dismounting,(sound-effect of six galvanised buckets rolling down flight of concrete steps) makes his pronouncement.
‘I do not pretend to know.
But I sure as hell hope that the BBC chairman Marmaduke Hussey is going to tell us,’ he proclaims.
Those words, repeated in Sir John's Mail on Sunday column, should have the wretched Estall quaking in his boots.
He is not the only man in the BBC with much to fear.
They all have.
For director of personnel Margaret Salmon has instituted a reign of terror among BBC staff aimed at stamping out sexual harassment within the corporation.
All employees have received a booklet instructing them on how to report ‘anything from unwanted touching and uncalled-for blue jokes to overt demands for sexual favours.’
There is no time limit on complaints, so Sylvia Peters is free to settle some old scores.
BBC network television has gone a step further and introduced a sexual harassment hotline, which, though it sounds like one of the services advertised in David Sullivan's tabloid journals, is intended to root out rather than promote unwanted lubricity.
Husband Michael Salmon, a management consultant, bravely dismissed his spouse's antics.
‘Highlighting sexual harassment in such a way can have a totally detrimental effect,’ he said.
And so, finally, to Anthony O'Hear, intellectual and all-round clever fellow, albeit a bit slow on the uptake.
Writing in the Daily Telegraph, he describes how, on three recent occasions, he has contributed to ‘ostensibly serious television documentary programmes’.
‘The exercise was, in each case, an abject failure.
My views were not exactly distorted: they were not actually presented in any serious sense at all,’ he says.
And, in a sentence that should be inscribed in pokerwork and hung above Hussey's bed: ‘The constant stress on the visual which infects television production largely undermines any pretension the medium has to be a vehicle for discussion of serious ideas.’
The case for abolishing the licence fee is unanswerable.
I don't mind that television is trivial — one might as well mind that a banana is bent — nor do I much object to the BBC appointing a personnel director to implement witlessly trendy policies.
I do mind of course, that Scott, who walks in beauty like the night of cloudless climes and starry skies, should be hurt by the words of a bunch of churlish rogues, but with the gallant Sir John riding to her defence she needs no help from me.
What is indefensible is that the tawdry motley should be financed by an annual impost on you and me.