

Highlight Pursuits
When the call first came in from Fraxilly, I didn't accept it.
Earlier I had told the Posi who runs everything in my ship to hold all calls.
She records them, acknowledges them — unless I'm being incommunicado for some reason — and replays them for me later.
That way I avoid being plagued by calls from obscure planets when I have important things on my mind.
What was mainly on my mind just then — in fact, preying on it — was another obscure planet.
Our destination, named Ixyphal II.
We were down to Halflight, sliding through the tangle of the Lagoon Nebula interlink, making our way towards the secondary GalacNet lines that would get us to the sector containing the Ixyphal system.
Many less well-equipped ships would have gone through that interlink only at Firstlight speed, and then nervously — because of the horror tales of ships that slid through the wrong slots and were caught in endless loops round and round the interlink for centuries.
But Posi was performing superbly, always.
So I'd left my pouch-seat in the control area to take my troubled mind back to my personal cabin.
There I tried to ease my worries by shipping a Freezobalm and thinking about the fee I could be carrying away from Ixyphal II.
If I could get away from Ixyphal II.
That planet is populated by millions of little blue paranoids who have many arms and legs and absolutely no inhibitions.
Especially about avenging insults, real or imagined.
They are  among the most hypersensitive exters — extraterrestrials —I've ever encountered, and I almost refused their commission for that reason.
But they offered a very tempting fee simply to transport an art object, a sculpture, which they'd bought as a centrepiece for a planetary arts festival they were staging.
And I had foolishly thought it would be the easiest fee I'd ever earned.
Instead, as I sat in my cabin moodily pouring another Freezobalm, I was facing a good chance of losing my valuable reputation as an interplanetary courier.
Any maybe my even more valuable life.
The job had started well enough, with the receipt of half the fee up front, then the receipt of the sculpture.
It had been made by a galactically known artist — an ancient, smelly and mostly blind human living on a renovated asteroid near the Home System where Old Earth still spins.
The artist had fussed around while the thing was being loaded on my ship, babbling about how important it was and how delicate it was and so on, until I'd just stopped listening.
I'd also stopped looking at the sculpture.
I don't know anything about art, but I know what turns my stomach.
It was about room-sized, and bright blue, which may be why it appealed to the Ixyphalians.
It seemed to be a conglomeration of small shapes, looking vaguely like humans and exters, who were all suffering extreme torment in deeply disgusting ways.
Supposedly a weird image of an afterlife.
And it seemed to be made from millions of tiny fibres, fixed firmly together by the artist's special secret process, which I think he called Solidity Polarization.
Except that the solidity didn't stay polarized.
It was my partner, Mala Yorder, who first noticed it.
Mala is small and trim and dark-haired, with luminous blue eyes, the lissom body of an Ondilian angel-dancer — and the mind and soul of a policewoman, which she once was.
She has all the skills as well as the attitudes that her police training gave her.
So she is highly observant, good at noticing things.
Particularly small errors and omissions on my part.
In this case, sometime before we reached Ixyphal, she had  gone back to the storage and cargo area to look at the sculpture again, murmuring things like’ masterpiece’and’magnificent’and the usual art-appreciation noises that people murmur.
and then she came running forward, shrieking.
’ Curb quick its Fraying’
I went back to look through the view-panel, an felt my stomach go into zerograv.
There was a scattering of blue fibres on the floor — a large scattering and some of the outer figures looked different.
Just as repulsive, but different.
Smaller, and distorted.
Then Mala shrieked again’ curb, you pinch-headed moron!’
She mostly calls me by my last name.
It's her way.
You've left it in atmosphere.
I suppose I should have been paying attention to the old artist, when he was telling me that the thing had to be carried in near-vacuum with traces of helium and neon but definitely no oxygen, which would destroy it.
But then the old fool should have been a little less unwashed and boring.
Besides, I didn't see why I should do everything myself, and said as much to Mala, tersely.
I thought you'd seen to it’ dribble-brain!’she yelled when she'd finished directing Posi to alter the gases in the cargo areas.
What are we going to say to the Ixyphalians?.
Nothing I told her.
I'm going to fix it
You?
Disbelief and scorn were heavy in her voice, but I put it down to stress.
And eventually I convinced her — or anyway caused her to throw up her hands in rage and dismissal and stamp off to her cabin.
Then I fixed it.
With one of my better inspirations.
I put on a spacesuit and went into the cargo area were I found that while the main part of the sculpture was now solidified again, the fibres on the floor were disintegrating and useless.
but it didn't matter.
I simply went and fetched a squeezer of magi-blue and a pair of my socks, in a pleasing electric blue.
They were among my favourites, but the sacrifice had to be made.
Back in the cargo area, ruining two pairs of gauntlets in the process, I ripped fibres from the socks and glued then here and there, in and around, more or less filling out the places on the sculpture that had been affected.
It took a long time, it was tedious and tiring, but in the end I thought the repair looked almost unnoticeable.
Yet when I coaxed Mala out of her cabin to have a look, she stared through the view-panel with her normal rosebud mouth compresses into a thin line.
It horrible, she declared.
The Ixyphalians will tear our bowels out and hang us with them.
Then she flounced in to her cabin.
And it was shortly after that when I retreated to my own cabin and the comfort of a Freezobalm.
But throughout the delicate passage across the Lagoon interlink my mind kept replaying Mala's last graphic remark — with the growing conviction that she'd understated the Ixyphalians.
As it happened, the Ixyphalians were overjoyed.
They greeted us royally, obvious of the fact that we were sweating and trembling.
Or I was, anyway.
Mala just goes pale when she's anxious, with slight darkening of her eyes.
Perhaps the little blue exters thought humans are always like that.
Perhaps humans are, around Ixyphalians.
Anyway, they unloaded the sculpture with reverence, popped it into a transparent showcase filled with the right gases, made a number of loud noises expressing awe and admiration, and wheeled it away without having noticed a thing.
Some of them remained behind to tell me a length how the object was a perfect focus for their festival that was being held in memory of one of their multi-armed folk heroes.
It probably was perfect, at that, with all its images of pain and suffering.
But I didn't listen too closely, being busy trying to stay upright despite slightly rubbery knees.
Then they clapped me on the back with too many hands, thrust upon me the plastiform wafer that confirmed payment of the rest of my fee, and proclaimed that they would create a song for the festival in praise of’ the, most safe and reliable Delmore Curb, master courier’.
I stammered out a fairly acceptable reason for declining their invitation to make a personal appearance at the songs premiere, and very shortly  Mala and I were back on our ship as Posi took us off-planet, with much relief all round.
So much for art appreciation, I thought.
But when I said as much to Mala, as a joke to ease the tension that still showed in her eyes, she merely called me an unrepeatable name and stalked away to her cabin again.
Then, finally, as we hit Highlight in deep space beyond the Ixyphal system, I asked Posi for a playback of any comm messages.
And I lay back in the cradling pouch-seat, enjoying the feeling of being safe and relaxed — and financially secure for a while, with that fee safely tucked away in my Fedbank account.
It was a moment to be savoured, when danger was past and I was wholly at peace.
It was the last peace I was to savour, for quite a long time.
Just then, though the Fraxilly message looked very interesting.
Even Mala said so, when she emerged again.
(I'd had Posi put the message on the commscreen in her cabin, as well as on the one in the control area where I was.
I don't hold grudges).
Mala did point out that she found elements of the message suspicious.
I remind her that she finds a great many simple normal things suspicious, as the police mentality does.
She ignored me, and told Posi to repeat the message.
It was from an employee of the Grand Emissary from the planet Fraxilly to the Sentient Federation.
It said that the Emissary would soon be travelling to SenFed Central, and that en route he wished to communicate directly with me, face to face, on a matter of immense delicacy.
It politely requested that, for security reasons, I bring my ship down to Underlight speed at specific co-ordinates, at a specific time, and prepare for rendezvous with the Emissary's ship.
’ All this security, matters of delicacy’Mala said.
That's what's suspicious.
Someone as important as a SenFed Emissary creeping around in secret.
’ Why not’I replied.
’ An important man needs privacy and security more than anyone.’
And now he seems to need me, I said to myself.
It was a  pleasing thought, that I might soon be moving in more exalted circles.
I was not going to let Mala spoil the anticipation.
She was frowning.
’ You said man.
Is Fraxilly a human planet?’.
’ No idea.
Just a figure of speech’.
She turned to Posi.
’ Give us a full rundown…’
’ Wait,’I interrupted quickly.
We don't need all the details.
It could take hours.
It was true enough.
Posi is equipped with the most advanced call-beam facility, which lets her link up with other servomechanisms and artificial intelligences, nearby or distant.
From just about anywhere on the GalacNet she can access systems on other works including the all-inclusive Encyclobanks of SenFed Central.
There was no knowing how much might be useful to us as background.
But I knew that Posi was quite capable of droning on forever with useless stuff about gross domestic product and tertiary natural resources.
That's often the trouble with thinking machines.
They're like people.
They sometimes just don't think.
Still, Posi is the best that creds could buy.
By far the most advanced type of Intelloid — artificial intelligence in non human form — and more capable even than the latest model of all-purpose, human-form, mandroid.
Also a lot more expensive.
In fact its usually planetillionaires and the like who can afford a Posi.
But I had bought mine at a time when I'd luckily accumulated some nice big fees, and she is just what I need, in every way.
Her name classification stands for Polyfunction Organizational and Service Intelloid — and its always useful to be organized and served.
Though Posi can be deeply irritating at times — she has the pedantic self-esteem of a precocious child—often feel I'd be nearly helpless without her.
’ Synopsis, Posi — just the main headings’, I directed, ignoring Mala's stony look.
Posi obliged, revealing that Fraxilly was a small human planet, a member of SenFed for less than three hundred years, remote and poor and backward.
Poverty kept everything depressed including the birthrate, so that the planet held only a few million people, mostly low-tech agricultural.
And the  place was ruled by an absolute monarch named y'Iggthradgipile the first, known as the God-King.
Many legends were told about this ruler, not very credibly, including (I allowed Posi one example) tales of his improbably heroic virility.
But it was proven fact that the God-King was unusually long-lived and overwhelmingly rich.
’ He and his court live in a luxury that is as excessive as his subjects' poverty,’Posi concluded, in one of her most disapproving tones.
A tendency to editorialize seems to come with higher-lever Intelloids.
’ Stick to the facts, Posi,’I told her firmly.
’ Anything more?’
’ No, Del,’she replied, unless you wish me to provide the subsidiary data…’
’ Definitely not’, I said quickly.
I have gave her the co-ordinates from the Emissary's message, instructing her to drop down to Underlight as we neared that point.
Then I leaned back and smiled at Mala.
’ See?
That's all we need to know about Fraxilly’.
She grimaced.
Posi's right.
It sounds sickening.
People starving while their God-King wallows
I sighed.
She gets these surges of anger now and then, against injustice and evil and so on, no matter how often I try to remind her about the facts of life.
But I don't stop trying.
It's least I can do.
’ Mala love,’I said patiently,’Fraxilly is a faraway place of which we know little.
We can't make things different there.
We simply provide a service, transporting things.
It's not our business if the people who hire us aren't nice people.
We can only require them to pay us, and not to get us into anything dangerous or illegal…’
’ You've never worried about illegal,’she snapped
’ I may cut a corner or two, now and then,’I said stiffly.
’ Anyone does, in business, if it helps to provide a better service…’
’ Curb,’she broke in,’I should tell you that I'm never closer to getting out than when you start sanctimonious about how you operate’.
’ Fine’, I snarled.
’ You could probably get back into the FedPol.
For about an eight of what you're getting here’.
’ It might be worth it’she yelled, and fling herself into another flouncing departure for her cabin.
I settled back into the pouch-seat, smiling to myself.
That was the third angry walkout in one biological day, and the second threat to resign in less than a bio-week.
We were getting interestingly close to setting a new record.
But I told myself, I shouldn't provoke her too much.
That would be cheating.
And I suppose it did upset her.
All the same, I was confident that her threats to leave we were mostly empty.
When she joined me-after we'd met while she was still an undercover FedPol investigator — she sternly announced that she was coming into the firm for the sake of the money, and because the job offered interest and challenge without the lethal risks that a FedPol agent often had to run.
I'd accept all that, just as I accepted her usually sharp-edged attitude to me during the nearly two years of our association.
Because I was certain that other things lay beneath the surface.
It seemed to me that beyond the superficialities of our relationship there was a growing rapport, a strengthening of feeling.
She never even hinted at it aloud, of course, probably because such emotions ran counter to the veneer of toughness imposed on her by her FedPol training.
But I sensed it within her.
And I was sure that, given time and patience on my part, I would eventually emerge and flower to give a rich new dimension to our partnership.
Meanwhile, I had to accept that she was probably not consciously aware of the true nature of her feelings.
Women often aren't.
So she had to express them, and relieve her tensions, with those stormy little displays of temper.
But it made things difficult for me, at times.
Just as it was difficult to be alone so much of the time with such an attractive young woman, despite the size of the ship and our separate cabins.
In fact, I had once or twice let myself be tempted into making overtures to her.
But when they had been greeted with expressions of total derision and distaste, I realized that she was still not ready to come to terms with full womanly depth of her unacknowledged feelings.
So I backed off at once and resumed my patient waiting.
At least there was nothing to prevent me from enjoying a fantasy or two, now and then, while waiting.
As I began to do while reclining there in the pouch seat.
And intermingled with my usual imagined scenes of Mala and me together were other images — of Grand Emissaries and God-Kings, what they might want of me, what they might offer in return.
I had only once or twice done jobs for high SenFed aristocrats or, for royalty.
It seemed at the time that meeting the Fracxillians could created some sort of major turning point in my career.
If I'd been able to guess at the future, the turning point would have been right there — wheeling the ship around and moving as fast as possible away from anything to do with Fraxilly.
It was going to be well into the next bio-day, I knew, before we made all the Netline interactions that would bring us to the rendezvous point.
So I had a quiet dinner — alone, for Mala was still sulking — followed by a refreshing sleep.
I even enjoyed an inspirational dream in which God-King, radiant and fatherly, conferred wealth, honour and titles upon me.
But when I awoke, it was time to put dreams aside and get hold of reality.
That meant a substantial breakfast, followed by a word with Posi to confirm that everything was on course and on line.
Later, in my cabin, I treated myself to a long, languorous Omnipure sauna before turning at last to the task of choosing my outfit for the meeting with the Emissary.
Something discreet, quiet and slightly formal, I thought.
Probably the dusty-green tunic-and-leggings ensemble, with the pink-and-gold collar and cuffs and the pink-trimmed gold boots.
And when I had laid out the clothing, I began the even more important business of transferring my personal armament.
Among my acquaintances there are some who like to seem amused or amazed by my weapons.
They call them excessive.
They make remarks about an unmanly attitude, and they pretend to look for yellow streaks.
But I never rise to their teasing.
I see my weapons as reflections of a sensible, realistic caution — that of a true professional.
I've worked at a number of occupations that put me into positions of possible danger.
As a private investigator, for instance, or earlier as a guide in the giant planet Worbali'n, where the smallest life form had teeth as ling as my arm.
I am known all too well that it's big rough galaxy out there, full of more surprises than the human imagination can conceive of.
And I've always liked to be ready for surprises, especially the lethal sort.
That means approaching my work realistically.
Not for me the reckless, romantic heroisms that make obituary writers reach for phrases like’ untimely end’and’cut down in his prime’.
I don't consider that I've reached my prime.
And I intend to get there, with the help of professional caution and my range of weaponry.
The weapons are made for me on Clabidacia V, the home world of spidery exters with delicate filaments instead of limbs who are among the finest micro-engineers in the SenFed.
For me they have miniaturized an array of defensive and offensive armaments, which I carry in disguised form here and there on my clothes, accessories and body.
I've gathered them slowly over the years, because they're cruelly expensive.
So is the constant need to maintain them, and to re-energize or replace some of them.
But it's worth it, because they've never let me down.
As is to be expected from the work of such notable craftsman.
Crafts-exters.
Anyway, when the complete transferral was done, I dressed myself with care and switched on a full length mirror for an inspection.
The mirror showed me a youngish man, perhaps a little thin and no more than average height — whatever average is in a galaxy overflowing with exters and mutant humans.
There was a suspicion of extra flesh at hip and belly, but that's to be expected on an adult male.
All in all the image that looked back at me was not displeasing.
I've heard people say disparaging things about my looks — a narrowness of shoulder, thinness of face, pointedness of nose.
But I try to be indifferent to the slurs of face, pointedness of nose.
But I try to be indifferent to the slurs of my enemies.
My hair may be ordinary brown, a bit wispy and thinning — but it's all hidden under a thick wig that is tawny-blond and artfully tousled.
Why not?
Everyone goes in for a little enhancement, one way or another.
In any case, my wig is more that just a wig.
And the jewelled headband that encircles it, the rings on my fingers, the studded belt around my waist, my other jewellery, other bits of my clothing and of my very self…all are more than they seem.
Most importantly, everything-mini-weapons, clothes, mood and spirit — seemed just right, perfectly ready to meet an important personage.
So then I spent a few hours quietly relaxing, until finally Posi reached the rendezvous point, reduced speed and gave the’ spacecraft sighted’warning.
I sauntered along to the control area, trying to be at ease.
But what the screens revealed was not likely to make me feel easy.
The Fraxillian ship, displayed on the perceptor screens was breathtaking.
I'm proud of my own ship, a good sized and costly Starstream Mark 8 cruiser.
But the Grand Emissary had swung up in the very newest model of the Novablast Personaluxury Liner, making me feel like a meteorite next to an asteroid.
The immense dumbbell-shape drew closer, almost languidly there out a wide-focus tractor beam, and anchored our two ships together.
Then from one of its airlocks something began to be extruded, like a giant worm stretching out — an expanding Manport passage, to connect the airlocks of the ships.
No clumsy spacesuited crossing for the Emissary.
The Manport reached my ship's airlock and clamped on, with puffs of a vapour as it formed its insta-seal around the join.
’ Spoken message being transmitted,’Posi said brightly.
’ Let's hear it’, I said, still staring at the liner, a little dazed.
A hearty human voice emerged from a speaker.
’ Greetings from the Grand Emissary Lord y'Fiprehaude of Fraxilly to curb the Courier.
Requesting permission to send Manport passageway to bring you aboard.’
’ A little late to ask,’Mala said sourly.
She had just emerged to frown at the Manport, wearing a plain dark coverall that made no concession to dressing up for important company.
Except that her figure made it look good anyway.
’ And why should we go to them?’
’ Because they're the clients, with the money.’
I keyed my comm into action.
’ Greetings from Del Curb to the Grand  Emissary Lord y'Fipre…y'Fip…to the Grand Emissary.
We will come aboard with pleasure.
Mala sniffed, but I grinned and opened the airlock.
’ Come on, smile’I told her’.
’ How else will you ever get to see inside a Novablast Liner?’
We floated quickly across — no artificial grav even in a Manport — to be greeted by a small pale human wearing lushly decorated robes, who abased himself in the manner of a true flunkey and then blandly introduced as one y'Pripio.
He guided us along a functional passage or three, then finally into a large open area where he halted — obviously to let the full impact hit us.
And it did hit, so that I did suitable amount of gasping and goggling and even Mala drew in her breath with a hiss.
I wasn't so overwhelmed, though, that I forgot to raise a finger to one of the jewels in my headband, as if idly adjusting the band itself.
Then slowly turned full circle.
Facing forward again, I touched the jewel again, seeming to brush at a lock of hair.
Only then did I properly examine what lay before me.
I'd seen the Illusochamber advertised — for the rich — on the galacvid.
But I'd never seen the real thing.
Except that there in no real thing: it creates illusion.
I knew that the area where we were standing was sizeable enough.
But I was looking at immensity.
A fantastic chamber from a fairy-tale palace, staggeringly wide and dizzyingly high, gleaming marble floor and walls, snowy-white fluted pillars, glossy draperies and glowing works of art.
Towards the centre of the chamber was the reality in the midst of illusion — real pillowy furniture, a real fountain and pool in rainbow colours, real near-naked nymphs playing in the water…
Only then the nymphs were retreating at speed, in a flurry of droplets and giggles, so I got only fleeting views of slender backs and rounded behinds.
In any case the flunkey, y'pripio, was moving again, leading us to the largest of the cloud-soft couches, where a man was reclining.
He was small, scrawny, hairless and quite ugly, aside from his teeth when he smiled, which were gleaming re-gens looking sixty years younger than their wearer.
He wore a rich robe  so encrusted with precious metals and stones that I wondered if he could stand up under the weight And his eyes were tiny, wet and somehow avid as he looked me over — wholly ignoring Mala — from head to foot.
’ The Lord y'Fiprehaude of Fraxilly,’the flunkey intoned’Grand Emissary of His Divinity the God -King y'Iggthradgipile the First.’
’ Del Curb,’I said briskly, unwilling to appear any more overawed than was diplomatically useful.
Nice to meet you, Lord y'Fip…y'Fipre…’
’ Come, dear boy,’the Emissary said in a high, affected voice, with a languid wave of the hand.
’ Come sit by me, where it's comfortable.’
With some wariness I lowered myself on to the front edge of his couch, while form one side more flunkeys appeared, guiding a hover-table laden with delicacies and fancy drinks.
The Emissary gave me another view of his new teeth as I glanced round.
’ Do take refreshment,’he purred,’and tell me what you think of my environment.’
In fact I thought the whole fairy-palace effect was a long way over the top and painfully unoriginal.
A total waste of the fantasy potential of the Illusochamber.
But I wasn't about to vice either that thought or any of the others that were gathering in my mind.
I simply took a glass of Ephractian feather-wine and nodded.
’ Very nice.
Very luxurious.’
The gleaming smile widened, then vanished under the onslaught of a large, sticky confection of some sort.
During that pause I realized that Mala had not been offered a seat, nor any food or drink.
The Emissary and his people were behaving as if she simply wasn't there.
I could see that she was scowling and stiffening into a Mark 2 temper, so I gave her an encouraging smile — which raised her, as I expected, to a Mark 3.
’ So this is the great Del Curb’, the Emissary was saying through a mouthful of stickiness.
’ The famous interplanetary investigator, lately turned courier.
I suspect there is a story behind that change of vocation.’
I shrugged.
’ Just a search for new challenges, new horizons, that sort of thing’.
And new ways to make a living that didn't threaten to put an end to living, I might have added.
’ Mm.’
He seemed to have slid over nearer to me, though I hadn't seen him move.
’ I would have expected you to be bigger’.
I sighed inwardly.
’ If I had a decacred for every time someone has said that…
But I put on a bright new grin.
I am bigger’, I said jauntily.
’ Bigger than lots of things.
Than a Melorivicish tree-dwarf, for instance’.
He laughed so hard I thought he would dislocate his dentures.
’ How droll’he finally gasped.
’ And how modest! but then modesty is your key-note, is it not?’
Again his hand waved languidly.
’ The unassuming garb, the inexpensive little ships…all signs of a man who knows his own worth and has no need for display.’
Mala's vigorous snort stirred up a few echoes, but no one looked around.
And I felt a bit rankled.
Unassuming?
Inexpensive?
The condescension was beginning to go too far.
So was the Emissary, whose airy wave had brought his hand finally to rest, with elabarate casualness, on my knee.
I shifted minutely.
’ What I do have a need for, your Lordship, is your reason for contacting me.’
’ So business-like’, he murmured, moving his hand up to my thigh.
I was by then realizing something that had eluded me before, about the fleeing nymphs.
All that slim, rounded, unclothed flesh I'd seen — from the back — had not been girl flesh.
I could also see that Mala was near to exploding, which might have been disastrous.
You don't want to antagonize rich and powerful Emissaries, especially not on their own ship in deep space.
Not if you plan to soak them for a very large fee.
So I retained my grin, a bit strained, and slid minutely away again.
’ Business before debauchery, Lord, as they used to say on Old Earth.’
’ Mm.
So very well.’
With a sigh he withdrew his hand and struggled to sit up.
’ To business, then.
Explain, y'Pripio.’
The flunkey bustled forward self-importantly.
’ The Lord y'Fiprehaude wishes to commission you to convey — with the utmost discretion and security — an object to Fraxilly.
And  place it with your own hands, into the hands of no one except the Most Sacred Body-Servant of His Wondrousness the God-King.’
I waited, but he had stopped as if he thought he had said it all.
’ I'll need more,’I said patiently.
What kind of object?
Why all the secrecy?
Why have you come to me?
And — most important — how much.
The flunkey hesitated, then responded by answering the last question first — with a figure that was nearly four times larger than the largest sum I had thought I might try asking.
I stared, open-mouthed, hardly even noticing that the Emissary's hand had crept back on to my leg.
’ In return for that amount,’y'Pripio went on,’we would expect you to maintain total discretion and loyalty for the duration if the contract.
And to accept only the minimum of information necessary for you to complete the task’.
’ But we can answer some of the dear boy's questions,’the Emissary put in, massaging my quadriceps.
’ The object is a prized possession of the God-Kings, very valuable.
Perhaps his most valuable acquisition, worth than planet's ransom.
But to you, my dear, it will simply be a small cylinder of Balbazian steel, that wonderfully unbreachable metal.
And you are taking it, rather any other, because our…usual carrier service has regrettably gone out of business.
And because we now we can rely on your experience and skill to convey it safely.’
I took a sip of wine, gathering my responses.
If the thing was so valuable, then the secrecy and the size of the fee were understandable And if how the Emissary lived was any indication of life at the top on Fraxilly, presumably the God-King did like to own things worth a planet's ransom.
So I nodded and smiled and agreed, while part of my mind began to toy with the question of whether Balbazian steel was as impregnable as its well-advertised reputation insisted.
I asked for the usual guarantees — that the object wouldn't endanger my ship or anyone on it, and that carrying it would breach no SenFed laws.
Instantly y'Pripio produced a document with those assurances already signed and sealed.
I know  such guarantees aren't really worth the plastiscrip they're printed out on, but they have at least a token legal value if there's any trouble.
Then I asked for half the fee in advance, and was given a wafer confirming the immediate transfer of the amount to my Fedbank.
And finally I asked where the object was.
’ Vadinamia,’the Emissary said merrily.
That was reassuring.
The’ safety-deposit planet’, as it was called, prided itself on being the most secure place in the galaxy — and also one of the most law-abiding.
It had its own unique ways of safeguarding objects in its care, and its own ways of keeping the galaxy's criminal predators at bay.
If Vadinamia had the Fraxillian cylinder, it looked like I'd be making a safe and secure pick-up.
As long as I maintained my own security.
So it was all settled; y'Pripio smiled blandly, Mala's temper subsided to a Mark 2, and the Emissary's hand slid smartly up into my groin.
Where it ran into the special ceramic-and-leather codpiece that it tailored into most of my tights and leggings, a useful protection in many situations.
A very few moments later, Mala and I had firm hold of the contract for the job and were taking our leave of a decidedly miffed Emissary.
We hurtled at speed back to our ship, and Posi got us away about two nanoseconds after the Manport had withdrawn to the Fraxillian liner.
By then Mala and I were sunk into our pouch-seats, awash with laughter.
Or anyway I was, while Mala struggled to keep her giggles from swamping all of her outrage.
’ Foul little lizard!’she said, half-choking.
’ Wasn't he just?’
I agreed, mopping my eyes.
’ I mean you, curb! sitting there grinning while he groped at you…
What would you be doing at this moment, if I hadn't been there’
I sat up, glaring.
’ I'd be dong exactly this — sitting here laughing my head off.
Only if you weren't here I'd be enjoying it!’
She sniffed, then switched the subject as she does when she knows she's wrong.
’ Well, you needn't be so pleased with  yourself.
No matter how much he's paying.
There's something slimy and crooked involved in this whole thing’.
I shook my head.
’ Mala, we're transporting a container.
That's it.
If there's slime, I don't care, as long as it doesn't come off on me.
Us.
And it won't, as long as we do the job and keep security.
Which reminds me — Posi, sweep for bugs’.
With no apparent pause, Posi replied.
’ All internal perceptors show no intruding devices, Del.’
I nodded, and sank back.
So far, so secure.
The Emissary's Illusochamber had also been free of bugging devices as I'd found when I'd been fiddling with my headband, activating a mini-ceptor in one of the jewels.
We were clear, and we were going to be rich.
Not even Mala's temper or suspicions could diminish that.
’ I still have my doubts,’she said, almost as if she'd heard my thought.
’ Then waive your share and let me do it alone,’I suggested.
She merely snorted, as I knew she would, and stared moodily at the blank of the comm.
’ You don't like the job because you don't like the Emissary, because he doesn't like women,’I told her.
’ Never mind.
I do’.
And reached over to slide a hand along her upper arm, then down the trim length of her back.
But she shook off angrily.
’ If you want to fondle someone, go fondle the Emissary.
And listen to what I'm saying, Curb.
There's a smell of nastiness about that Fraxillian, nothing to do with what he likes to fondle.
There's nastiness and too much mystery.
Which could add up to serious trouble.’
’ It add up to more Fedcreds than we've ever earned for one job,’I said lightly.
’ That's all.
We simply have to be sensible and professional, and we won't have a speck of trouble.’
And with that monumentally fate-tempting remark, I gave Posi the new course to follow, and settled back peacefully in my pouch-seat.
At that time our position was most of the way across the galaxy from the sector where the planet Vadinamia lay.
Even at top levels of Highlight speed it would take us a few bio-days to get there.
But that didn't trouble me.
I always enjoy the restful times of interstellar travel.
I can take it easy, relax a with the galacvid — which is networked through the sentient worlds along another form of call-beam following the GalacNet lines.
But on the journey to Vadinamia I also spent some time giving a little thought to security.
It's a problem people are always thinking about, but never wholly solve.
Whether in the SenFed or in the Freeworlds that haven't joined, there is simply no such thing as one hundred percent security.
Within the SenFed almost every one of those million or so planets is vying with at least some others — for influence, for position, for trade and aid and income.
To manage the vying successfully, they need information.
So information becomes a valuable commodity, and the gathering of it a labour-intensive industry.
The gatherers proliferate like the Yechotinic Polyp plague.
I know because I was one, once as an investigator.
So was Mala, as a FedPol agent.
They labour away, digging up the secrets with every bit of up-dated and often extra-legal technology they can get.
They scrape up gossip and rumour and myth, when hard data is thin, to keep their salaries coming in.
And they strive non-stop to thwart, misinform or actively eliminate one another.
They particularly infest the important places where secrets might abound.
Like the planetary cluster that makes up SenFed Central.
And like the wealthy worlds, the high-tech industrial worlds, the larger resort worlds, the popular cross-roads worlds…
And Vadinamia.
Where I was going to have to keep a secret about an incredibly priceless mystery belonging to a God-King.
But I felt fairly confident.
Vadinamia has its own ultra-tight security that has been frustrating spies for a long time.
As for the other end, Fraxilly, I doubted whether it was important enough to have any spies watching it.
’ Maybe,’Mala said, when I said as much to her.
’ But we need data’.
So she went off to go doggedly through the full factual screening of Posi's data of Fraxilly.
I managed to avoid a lot of it by having some tasks of my own.
I made some comm-calls to contacts on planets here and there, pretending to some that I was looking for commissions, to others that I was in different parts of the galaxy transporting things for different people.
All a casual but effective smokescreen, neatly blurring our back trail.
But Mala did insist, with some steeliness, that I look at some of the data.
So I had to watch an earnest and over-long documentary, first made for one of the vid's information services, about the ruler of Fraxilly.
It showed a few shots of the God-Kings residence, called the Divine Sanctum, which looked from the outside as big as some planetoids and not much lovelier.
I was impressed, though, by the Sanctum guards — those specialized, monstrously expensive, human form soldiers called killdroids.
And I was interested to hear the film-makers weren't allowed in the Sanctum — about the God-Kings lavish lifestyle, which included a large stock of harem girls.
’ At least it proves he's hetero,’I muttered to Mala.
But she merely looked at me, coldly, and fast-forwarded.
We found no security tips in any of that films material.
Just more specifics, tediously detailed, of the contrast between the God-Kings immense wealth and the miserable poverty of the  people.
And more legends and lies about the God-Kings supposed longevity, divine strength and other supernatural powers.
It seemed to me that if the Fraxillians were docile enough to put up with their misery, and stupid enough to believe in their rulers divinity, they weren't likely to offer much of a threat to him or to my delivery.
So, ignoring Mala's reproaches, I took myself back to my cabin and the galacvid's more entertaining screen material.
And there I was, nearly a day later, when the call came from the Ardakkeans.
There was nothing unusual about getting either that call or the earlier one from Fraxilly.
That was how prospective clients often made contact, since Mala and I made the ship our home and office, in space, much of the time.
The comm-link details for reaching us are available in a number of professional directory data banks.
But it was unusual to have another caller ask for another highly secret, ship-to-ship rendezvous.
’ Everybody's getting clandestine and paranoid,’I complained to Mala.
’ Everybody always was,’she replied.
She was also busy, through Posi, acknowledging and agreeing and setting up con-ordinates for this new meeting.
Then, of course, she turned to the task of getting from Posi all available data about the planet Ardakke.
I was about to stop, expecting another turgid flood of brain-numbing data, but Posi surprised me.
There was very little information available — even on the SenFed encyclo-banks about Ardakke.
I didn't have to ask Posi for a synopsis because that's just about all there was.
Apparently Ardakke was one of those cranky’ closed worlds’that exist here and there.
It was a human world, we learned, theoretically part of the SenFed but only just.
Its Emissaries were seldom seen at SenFed Central, and it received no diplomats from other worlds.
In fact it allowed very few off-worlders on to the planet, and they were mostly technicians with special skills — who were required to live restricted lives  in special compounds, hardly ever mixing with the local population.
But other off-worlders had now and then wheeled their way on to Ardakke, claiming to be academic researchers.
A few were legitimate, but most spies.
Yet they had all come up with very little.
The real researchers found themselves as restricted as the employed technicians, and soon left in frustration.
And the spies all seemed to have been the clumsy types, exposed and expelled almost at once.
Not that anyone seemed to care very much according to the data.
The conclusions were that Ardakke was small and remote with nothing much to offer, where dull people led uneventful lives.
The accepted theory said that within their closed society they probably practised some exclusivist cult religion.
Everyone seemed content to let them get on with it.
Yet now some of these standoffish people from an introvert world were out on the GalacNet lines, coming to meet Mala and me.
I wasn't looking forward to it much.
All the indications were that they would be a stern and forbidding lot, which is my least favourite type of person.
They'd definitely sounded that way on the comm — and there was another hint about their nature in the fact that they were too withdrawn to make a visual link.
Which seemed odd, since all the data had agreed that they were an unusually fine-looking race.
’ Theyr'e dragging us along way out of our way,’I grumbled to Mala, indicating her note of the co-ordinates for this new rendezvous.
She shrugged.
’ It'll add a few more days to our hop to Vadinamia.
But the Fraxilly package isn't going anywhere.
And I'd go farther for a chance to have a look at people from this planet of mystery.
Aren't you curious?’
’ Not very,’I muttered.
’ Then just think of it,’she said with a superior smile,’as a few days extra for you to go on pulping your brain with galacvid garbage.’
’ The vid has a lot of very educational and cultural programmes,’I said stiffly.
’ I know.
And you're very selective.
You watch everything else.’
I knew then that is she was in that kind of mood there was no point in staying around.
I withdrew to my cabin, to find that I was just in time for a repeat episode of Garry Garrison, Para-space Pilot.
So one bio-day placidly followed another, the ship plunged on through Highlight, and nothing at all of importance happened.
Until the Ardakkeans came on board.
They came to us, which was something.
And they came in an old-model passenger pod, out of a slightly battered Stellablaze cruiser — a line that had been discontinued before I was born, and a ship that was markedly smaller than mine, which was gratifying.
But nothing else about the meeting was.
Expecting them to be dull and puritanical, I'd worn one of my most conservative outfits — pearl-grey blending into iridescent blue, with glitter-silver trim at wrists, collar, belt and headband, and plain-contrast boots (one grey, one blue).
But I was surprised by their looks, as they came through the airlock — enough to keep me from being puzzled, then, about how they had crossed from their pod to my ship without space suits.
There were four of them — three men and a woman, as was later revealed, though, that they are tall and broad of shoulder and walked with that kind of lithe confidence and grace seen in GalactiGames athletes in peak condition.
They were wrapped in long, midnight-blue capes that disguised most of their shapes, but their uncovered faces were strikingly handsome.
Thick dark hair, large eyes, pale unblemished skin, sculpted planes of the face, straight noses, strong mouths.
All four looked white different, yet slightly the same, like distant relatives with an underlying family resemblance.
Mala had come out in one of her crumpled dark coveralls.
But as the first Ardakkean strode through the airlock she went wide-eyed, whirled and vanished back into her cabin.
Even before the fourth one had entered she had reappeared — in  a flimsy thigh-high tunic of translucent Tructollean cling-silk.
Almost at once she was aiming her brightest smile at the nearest Ardakkean, who proved himself to be a male by grinning back at her and swelling his chest manfully.
By then the Ardakkean who appeared to be their leader was approaching me, throwing the cape back.
And it was my turn to go wide-eyed, for the leader was a woman, possessing every anatomical aspect of femaleness in glorious Amazonian splendour.
She and the others — when they let their capes fall open-were wearing one-piece outfits of a lighter and duller blue than their capes, with black boots and belts.
Not so much conservative, I thought, as repressed.
The outfits were not particularly tight-fitting, yet they revealed much of their splendid physical development and amazing muscle definition.
I found that I was mostly focused on the leader's chest, where the blue cloth was more taut, stretched by the magnificent swelling mounds beneath it.
But in truth I didn't have much choice where I focused.
She was standing directly before me, and her bosom jutted not too far below my eye level.
’ I am Sergia, of Ardakke.
You are Curb’.
She spoke Galactic with an exotic accent and in a voice that was strong, melodious and full of authority.
With difficulty I raised my gaze to her face, staring dazedly at the soft abundance of her mouth, the petal-perfect skin, the powerful femaleness that radiated from her eyes.
’ I'm Curb,’I said in a voice that sounded rusty.
A small frown creased the smoothness between her eyebrows.
’ You are the one who brought down the spymaster of Aldebaran?
Who rescued the Callitee princess?
Who put an end to Rimeq the Renegade?’
For people from a closed world, I thought dimly, they're well-informed — if a few years out of date.
’ That's me,’I said’or it was’.
She pursed those edible lips.
’ I had imagined you would be bigger.’
Here we go again, I thought.
But I found a bright smile.
’ I am bigger…’
I began
The frown deepened.
’ It is no matter.
We wish to hire your  services.
And those of your…partner?’
She raised an inquiring eyebrow towards Mala.
Mala tore her gaze away from her grinning Ardakkean male.
’ Mala Yorder,’she said.
’ His business partner, only’
’ Ah,’Sergia said.
The two men looked at each other for a moment, no doubt exchanging of those wordless communications that women contrive now and then.
At last they both smiled faintly as if to say message understood, over and out.
Then Sergia turned back to me, her smile regrettably fading.
’ A crime has been committed on Ardakke, most serious and reasonable.
But we cannot identify the criminal.
Crime is nearly unknown among our people, and we have none of the means or experience to pursue it.
We need an investigator of your reputation, Curb, to seek out the criminal, so we may punish him’.
Lost in the contemplation of her beauty and the music of her voice, I just went on looking, waiting for her to speak again.
But then the meaning of her words, and the thickening of the silence around us, came home to me.
’ Investigator?’
I echoed.
’ I'm not.
I haven't done that for two years.
I'm an interstellar courier now.
Curb the courier…’
She made a gesture with a graceful hand that shut me up as if it had turned a tap.
’ You were an investigator.
Your skills still must exist.
And we are in need of them’
’ Why not go to the FedPol?’
Mala asked.
Sergia shook her head, dark curls quivering.
’ We have no experience of them.
We are a closed world, having little contact with Federation authority.
We would not wish groups of policemen on Ardakke, prying into our lives.
We seek only one person, or perhaps two — to conduct an investigation that we could oversee’.
Another time I might have bristled at the idea of being overseen, at work.
But I'd let my gaze slip back down to the wonderfully out thrust cloth over Sergia's chest, so I wasn't picking up every detail.
’ Can you tell us anything about the crime itself?’
Mala asked.
Sergia glanced at the others, then told the story.
Or some of it  Ardakke has native shrub, she said, called phet in their own dialect.
it produces berries from which comes a juice called phetam.
To the Ardakkeans, every tiny drop of phetam immeasurably, heart-breakingly valuable.
So every time drop is carefully gathered and even more carefully stored.
But somehow the ultimate betrayal had been committed.
Someone on Ardakke had managed to steak a small amount of phetam — and, probably, to spirit it off-planet.
’ Why?’
Mala asked.
’ What makes it so valuable?’
’ We prefer not to reveal that,’said the Ardakkean man next to her.
’ We hope that you and Curb can investigate without that data.’
’ I don't know…’
Mala said doubtfully.
I said nothing, being still in rapt contemplation of Sergia's magnificence.
But I slowly became aware that they were all looking at me —just the time that sergia became aware of the direction of my gaze.
With another frown, she took a step back.
Weirdly, the step turned into a kind of floating movement, so that she seemed to be somehow poised in the air for an instant.
I blinked and looked up at her face again, to find that it held an icy glare.
’ We are naturally prepared to offer payment for your services,’she said tightly.
And she named a sum.
It was small enough, compared to my usual fee, to make me smile.
Compared to the Fraxilly fee, it made me laugh loud.
Sergia acquired a slight flush to with her glare.
’ We are not a rich people.
Our world strives to be self-sufficient, and there are few resources to spare.
We offer you what we can afford.’
One of the men chuckled.
’ As an extra inducement, Sergia, we could allow him to stare at your breasts for a while each day.’
They all burst out into rich, musical laughter, Sergia included — and joined, I'm sorry to say, by giggles from Mala.
To my annoyance, I found it was my turn to flush.
’ Just the sort of remark I might expect,’I said coldly’from an uncivilized closed-worlder.’
Their laughter faded, and Sergia glare returned.
’ It is not we who are uncivilized’, she snapped.
’ I begin to wonder, Curb  if your reputation as a brave and successful investigator may not be falsely inflated, undeserved…’
That did it.
Though I'm cautions by nature and habit, I have a temper that can flare up if I'm rubbed the wrong way.
Perhaps I did have a few lucky breaks as an investigator, now and then — and some useful assistance, here and there.
But what this Amazon had said was downright slanderous.
’ Then forget the whole thing!’
I rasped.
’ I don't need your dull little job, or your pathetic fee!’
’ In that case, they are no longer on offer to you,’Sergia replied coldly.
With a nod to Mala, she whirled away in a sweep of dark cape, the men following — until Mala stopped them.
’ Here's an idea,’she said.
’ I was in the FedPol once, and I have a friend there who has worked undercover, called Chertro.
I could ask him to contact you.
He'd work alone and be as discreet as you'd want.’
Sergia nodded.
’ That might serve well.
You are kind.
Our thanks’.
Then they stepped into the airlock, after a last lingering gaze between Mala and her Ardakkean.
As the lock slid shut, she turned to me with a merry grin.
’ You might at least have sold them that information,’I snarled.
She laughed.
’ What are you all heated up about?
You've been telling people for two years that you'll never be an investigator again.
Or would you have gone back to it, just for the beautiful Sergia?’
’ No chance,’I said firmly.
’ I meant what I said.
Anyway, I'm not interested in some petty crime involving a weird drug or whatever.
And the fee was miserly.
We're better off giving our time to things like the Fraxilly job.’
She smiled wickedly.
’ But isn't it a shame that the Fraxillian Emissary wasn't a woman with an over-developed bust?’.
I might have made an angry reply about her own flaunting of herself at the male Ardakkean, but there was nothing to be gained by it.
So I turned on my heel and stalked away to the control area…
It was time to forget about Ardakkeans and their mysterious phetam, and get back on course for Vadinamia and the problems that would surely be waiting for me there.
Shortly Mala joined me in the control area losing no time in calling her FedPol friend, Chertro, to suggest that he contact Ardakke and offer his services.
From the warmth in her voice, she spoke to him on the comm, I began to suspect that she and Chertro might have been more than friends at one time.
But I told myself sourly that that was in the past, while here in the present a living was to be earned.
So I left Mala to it, went back to my cabin's screens and terminals, and set back to probing the data banks for something about phetam.
And drew a blank.
’ There is a listing of the shrub, the phet,’Posi said, in the galactic Bioregister contained in the Encyclobanks.
’ But there is no reference to a by-product.’
’ Odd,’I mused.
’ Aren't all life forms and bio-resources supposed to be listed?’
’ That is the supposition, Del,’Posi said.
’ But the Bioregister is a service, not a requirement.
If a home world chooses not to include an item in its listing, that item will not appear in the Bioregister.
Although it seems contrary to all logic…’
’ Right, Posi, thank you,’I interrupted.
And in the welcome silence I pondered a while.
I'd began hunting for data on phetam to see if it really was valuable as the Ardakkeans claimed, and if so, why.
But data stores, I had stumbled on a case of data suppression.
A secret.
Which meant, my instinct told me, that phetam really was valuable, and those caped puritans didn't want the whole galaxy to know about it.
So I fell into one of my enjoyable reveries, examining the problem from every angle, looking for the key point where I might provoke a few kilocreds to tumble into my lap, by acquiring a bit of phetam.
Perhaps, I thought, I'd been too hasty in rejecting Sergia and her muscle-bound cohorts.
But if so I felt that I had a chance of retrieving the situation, once I'd made the Fraxillian delivery.
I was sure that I could smooth over our little misunderstanding, and that Sergia would then be glad to have me on the job — so to speak — instead of some heavy-footed FedPol type.
And my reverie had begun to include some delightful visions of how Sergia might make me welcome when I was interrupted.
’ Del!’
It was Posi, of course.
They're just pure-intellect machines, as well all know, but I swear that it's not out of humanizing sentiment that we give them female names and pronouns.
Posi has the most womanish ability to choose the worst moments to disrupt a man's thoughts — usually with something trivial.
As in this case.
’ I have accessed ancient fragment of a data store,’she told me proudly,’recovered from the deal planet Ichael, whose star went nova 157 years ago’.
’ So what?’
I said sourly.
’ It contains sections of a report assembled by a self-employed intelligence agent from Ichael, who made a study of the planet Ardakke.’
That made me sit up.
’ Anything in it’.
’ Of course,’Posi said, sounding surprised.
’ I could not have accessed it if there had been nothing in it’.
I ground my teeth.
’ I mean anything of interest, to me about phetam.’
’ Nothing about phetam,’she said.
’ Then why bother me with it?’
’ Because it contains material about the Ardakkeans that might stimulate your sense of humour.
Although I may be mistaken.
Even an advanced Intelloid cannot be properly  programmed with an inclusive appreciation of human laughter-stimulation…’
She was speaking with the usual tone of insincere humility that she puts on when talking about human qualities that Intelloids lack.
(There aren't many.
Not useful ones, anyway.)
It's another thing that makes me wonder if the crazed geniuses who developed the first Intelloids weren't perpetrating some subtly painful joke on the human race.
Eventually I got her redirected, and she told me what she'd found.
It was a mostly garbled, semi-literate report put together by the free-lance Ichaelan spy, largely based on idle remarks and hints and speculations picked up from technicians who had worked on Ardakke.
When the free-lance added then up.
He come to the remarkable conclusion that Ardakke was nothing less than the setting for the next evolutionary step for mankind.
According to spy's theory, the Ardakkeans had been transformed — by some beneficial mutation, he theorized — into super-beings.
And he noted some of the superhuman attributes they were supposed to have developed — like unnatural strength, invulnerability, the power of flight and some others.
Along with being very impressive physical specimens.
I laughed, of course.
Though admittedly I did feel a brief uneasiness when I remembered that odd floating movement of Sergia's.
Not to mention the peculiarity of their lack of spacesuits when crossing from a passenger pod to a ship's airlock.
But then I told myself that those were idle fancies.
I had not doubt that this Ichaelan free-lance, probably some spindly droop with acne and myopia, had found himself on a world where nothing but good old genetics had spawned a race of tall, handsome, muscular people.
So he'd started shouting’ Supermen’.
To my knowledge, cranks and dreamers have gone around talking about and looking for Homo superior ever since the primitive times when writers still used paper.
And with precious little success.
I always say that there are planetillions of humans in this galaxy who haven't even come to terms with being sapiens.
Superior still looks a long way off.
’ This fragment from the dead planet Ichael,’Posi then  added,’is part of a nearly forgotten data package held at a university on Quarley's World, a planet located on the Rim Beyond the Rim’.
I scowled.
’ So?’
’ In my search of all other Federation data stores, it has become clear that the data on Ardakke has been tempered with.
Portions have been erased.
Since it is an Intelloids ability to perceive matrix-links between apparently discrete items and extrapolate…’
’ Get on with it,’I snapped.
’…beyond them,’ she went on imperturbably,’I can speculate that someone may have overlooked the Quarley's university, when removing from all data banks material akin to that gained from the Ichaelan agent.’
When I'd sorted that out, I shrugged.
People going around wiping data stores-all except one — because they said Ardakkeans were super-beings?
’‘More likely,’ I told her,’the Ardakkeans have been erasing every mention of their very valuable phetam.
To keep the vultures from learning about it’.
Except, I thought, now some vultures had learned about it, and had got away with some.
Which showed how wrong that mud-brained Ichaelan spy had been.
All right, the Ardakkeans seemed fairly naive about some things, like crime.
But even so, if they really were super-beings, how could anyone manage to steal from them?
By then Posi was asking me to explain the connection between Ardakkean phetam and the carrion bird of Old Earth called the vulture.
I'm convinced she knows all about image and metaphor, and just does it to annoy.
And she succeeds.
Feeling a headache coming on, I switched off the terminal, stretched out on my bunk and returned to my interrupted reverie, mingled with more speculation about why phetam should be so valuable.
And the ship, meanwhile, rushed relentlessly along its interrupted course to Vadinamia.
Days later, we were only a few bio-hours from the Vadinamian system when we received a call from Mala's pet FedPol, Chertro.
He had already visited Ardakke and seemed very full of himself.
I was in the control area with Mala at the time so I had to suffer through it.
The fellow's smugness and unnecessary familiarity with Mala made me dislike him at once.
Just as much as I disliked the lean, tanned, grinning face that he presented on the comm screen.
’ Hallo, little Fuzzy!’he began,.
Later I asked Mala the original of that unlikely nickname, but she merely told me, with a faint blush, that is was none of my business.
’ You put me on to a good thing,’he went on,’with Ardakke.
Nice simple job, perpetrator in custody, everybody happy.
Or nearly.’
’ That was quick,’Mala said, and gave an odd little chuckle.
’ Not like you at all’.
Chertro's grin altered to a distasteful leer.
’ Some things I like to do quickly, Fuzz,’he said.
And when they'd finished gurgling and sniggering at teach other, he went on.
’ Can't understand how those people couldn't find the thief themselves.
I spotted him right off.
One of the off-world technicians, taking some kind of massive bribe from other off-worlders to steal phetam.
The Ardakkeans were amazed — an shocked,.
I think they just couldn't believe that anyone would do that to them.
But closed-worlders are often kind of naive and gullible’.
He added that Sergia's people had been grateful, though they'd ushered Chertro and his prisoner off-planet as soon as they could.
But they weren't totally happy — for it was confirmed that the interrogation of the prisoner — going on at that moment — would reveal where the stuff had gone.
’ One other thing might interest you’, he added.
’ I was mostly reporting to that woman leader, Sergia’
’ I met her,’Mala put in.
’ Lucky you’.
Chertro laughed.
’ She's spectacular, right enough, but not my type.
I'd say she's a bit of a fanatic, and just as naive as  the rest of them.
I like women who're small and neat and who know a few thing.
Right Fuzz?’
He widened his moronic grin into another leer while Mala went into a revolting spasm of tittering.
But in te end the repro-brain got his story told.
It seemed that when he had arrested the thief, and reported to Sergia, she had been sitting in an ornate chair made of a local high-gloss hardwood.
Hearing confirmation that a trusted employee had indeed turned thief, she had gripped the chair-arms in white knuckled rage.
And the arms had been crushed to splinters and sawdust.
Mala laughed.
’ Well, she's big and strong, just like the men…’
’ I thought you'd have noticed the man,’Chertro said with an echoing laugh.
’ But it was weird.
I had a look at a chair like it, later, and the wood was hard as chunki-crete.’
’ Probably there was a flaw in that line chair,’Mala said, in the voice that women use when they think men are being fanciful little boys.
’ Think of it as another reason for you to stay away from big gorgeous women with enormous boobs’.
’ I'd always stay away from them, Fuzzy,’he said earnestly,’if you were around’.
And they went back to their chuckling's and grinnings while I made a scowling withdrawal.
For a second the echo, in Chertro's story, of the notion that Ardakkeans were super beings tugged at the edge of my thoughts.
But I pushed it away.
I was through with thinking about Ardakkeans.
I would spate not one more thought for their closed-world mystery, their mythical super-powers…all of it.
I had to turn my concentration now onto the Fraxilly job.
Thought I still thought, when that was done, it might be worthwhile to sniff around here and there for any leads worth following that might turn up the stolen phetam.
Alone in my cabin, then I got comfortable, put all troublesome thoughts out of my mind, and switched on the vid to one of the best of what the vid expressively calls it Everlasting Serials.
And by the morning of the next bio-day, Posi had brought the ship's speed down to Firstlight and we were sliding through the system that contained Vadinamia.
In a while we had drawn close enough to sight the planet itself — a slowly enlarging spot of brightness on the ceptor screens — by which time Posi had contacted the spaceport.
I knew that the Vadinamian Intelloid who was the entry controller would guide Posi to orbital position where we would wait for our turn to land — for only one ship at a time can make the approach to Vadinimia's unusual port.
I was leaving all that to Posi, as usual and paying more attention to the lateral and reverse ceptor screens around the control area.
Most visitors to vadinamia are aware that, as they approach the planets territorial space, they will have to pass through what might be described as a sort of gauntlet.
I was waiting for it to show up an confront us.
It didn't keep me waiting too long.
Posi gave the warning — spacecraft approaching — and the screens flashed up the images.
Three long, lean gunships, the latest model of the Nebulance 40 GTF (that is, each one carrying forty fusitron energy weapons).
I watched the screens unblinkingly as the three wheeled into triangular formation around my ship — their guns trained in an unmistakable attitude of menace.
Even if I hadn't expected the gunships, their colours would have told me what they were.
Matt black relieved by knife thin white stripes, with a broader stripe of white down over the nose.
Everyone in the galaxy, probably even in the closed worlds, knows what those colours mean.
Famlio.
The galaxy if full of criminal organizations of every sort — from gangs of juvenile hot-jetters who storm through the Netlines and vandalize the odd moon to groups of hard-bitten specialists in banditry and terrorism.
But the biggest, best organized and just about the nastiest was Famlio.
It's a long-established human set-up, whose name comes from the Old Arcturean quickspeak for’ family Organization’— because they like to affect a patriarchal system and because they demand the same absolute loyalty and devotion that one would show to close kinfolk.
I'm told that the work also occurs in the local exter dialect of the planet Milifinil-il, where it means’ there is a smear of faeces below your fourth ventricle’.
No one ever reminds a member of Famlio of this coincidence.
Famlio members tend to be touchy.
As well as large., ugly and violent.
I'd expected to be met by Famlio gunships because they're always there.
The organization gathers to the smell of credits like Vygeantic blood-worms to a corpse.
Like all criminal gangs, Famlio specializes in profiting from human weaknesses  such as pleasure, greed and fear.
For instance, they have near total of the manufacture and sale of bliss, the illegal drug that induces brief comas filled with incalculable pleasure, and that rots a users brain inside seventeen weeks.
Famlio also has its tentacles around many legitimate businesses, including large chinks of the galacvid — which, as Mala lies to say, has the same effect as bliss but takes longer.
Similarly, Famlio has found a way to make a profit form Vadinamia.
Over the centuries the’ safety-deposit planet’developed and refined all its amazing ways of maintaining the security that is its primary resource.
So Famlio and other criminals have never felt able to plunder the place directly.
But Famlio didn't take long to see other possibilities, in the established traditional of what is ironically known as protection.
A visitor to Vadinamia is greeted, just outside territorial space, by the black-and-white gunships.
They announce that the visitor must pay a certain sum Famlio's fee for protecting the visitor and his valuables from robbery.
Anyone who doesn't pay gets robbed.
By Famlio.
Sometimes they even rob a visitor who has paid — if the cargo, being bought to or taken from Vadinamia, is valuable enough to tempt them.
But then no one should ever expect a criminal organization to be trustworthy.
At the same time, I feel, no one should be too over-awed by Famlio's own belief that they're all-powerful.
The three ships swirled around my ship, neatly bracketing it as they matched its speed.
I felt the usual clench of tension in the bowels, and could see pale anger in Mala's face, but there was nothing we could do.
My ship might just be able to outrun theirs, but it couldn't outrun the fusitron blasts that would be fired if I tried it.
And while my ships does have useful guns of its own, in nose and tail, they were hardly a match for the hundred and twenty flamers ranged against me.
So I just waited for the contact, and hoped that my voice would sound calm and easy as I told Famlio my lies.
When the comm blinked into life, I saw face that I vaguely recognized — a Famlio enforcer named Pulvidon, who had lately been rising rapidly through the ranks.
It was odd to find  him in charge of such a low-level enterprise as the Vadinamian protection racket.
I wondered idly if he had done something wrong and been demoted.
Anyway, he was a lean and hot-eyed human, wearing the usual Famlio garb — a roomy over-tunic and trousers of dull black with white pinstrips and a black shirt with a wide white necktie hanging down the front.
The outfit is supposed to be traditional in some way, but I've never bothered to find out how.
’ Thought it was you’Pulvidon said, flashing sharp eyeteeth in a carnivorous grin.
’ What brings the great Del Curb to Vadinamia?
Delivery or collection?’
The sneering was heavy but unavoidable.
I get it form most of his kind, who remember that I was once a private investigator, and so to them not far removed for law.
I simply gave him a cool look.
’ Neither’I lied.
’ Just touching down briefly, scouting for work’.
Mala gave me a quick startled glance, but wisely said nothing.
She knew that what I said was believable enough, since Vadinamia was a highly likely place for a courier to drum up a job conveying something somewhere.
It was also a likely place for lies told by a courier to be exposed, by the host of speed that gather there, Famlio and otherwise.
But I believed that I could avoid them, with some help from the Vadinamian processes themselves.
Pulvidon narrowed his eyes.
’ That better be true, Curb.
You wouldn't like what happens to people who try to cheat me’
’ Why would I lie’I said, putting an injured tone in my voice.
’ If I get a client down there, you'll be the first to know’
’ That's for sure,’he snarled.
’ And if you don't bring anything off-planet, I'll let you off with the minimum.’
’ Why should I pay protection,’I asked irately, knowing the answer very well,’if I'm not carrying anything to protect?’
He produced his carnivore grin again.
’ Insurance, Curb.
Deep space can be dangerous.
Think about it’.
The screen shivered and cleared as he cut off, which allowed me to offer him a few choice epithets that he couldn't hear.
As we watched the striped killer-ships peel away, for once Mala and I were in total accord — both anxious, both angry.
Except that her anger was mostly aimed at me.
’ What do you think you're doing now?’she wanted to know.
I shrugged.
’ I don't see why I should pay then if I don't have to.’
’ You do have to,’she snapped.
’ You never con Famlio.’
’ I've done it before, other places,’I told her.
’ It's not hard.
They're too confidential, too certain that we're all terrified of them.
So they aren't a hundred percent efficient.
They have little blind spots — places where the system is out of phase, holes in the structure where a person can slip through if he's sharp and quick enough.’
’ Like a rat?’she inquired innocently.
I scowled, but let it go.
’ The main thing is that we have no choice.
At the least we'll have to pretend we're carrying nothing.
But really I want to try to slip past them.
Or would you like to announce to Pulvidon that we'll be carrying a priceless but unidentified object for a God-King?’
She shook her head slowly.
’ He'd hijack us before we were out of planetary speed’.
’ Exactly.
So we have to try to avoid them.
And we can do it.
We'll just have to try to avoid them.
And we can do it.
We'll just have to be very alert and very low-profile.’
’ Like a pair of rats,’she murmured.
But then Posi gave the’ imminent entry’warning, and we sank deeper into the enfolding embrace of our pouch-seats as the ship tipped over an unseen edge and began to fall all the way down the planet.
We swept over the surface of the planet without a glance at the perceptor screens, for Vadinamia's surface is of no account.
It's permanently overcast, with frequent squalls of rain that burns like acid, more deadly even than the stuff that history says helped to kill Old Earth.
But the rain has no effect on the tireless hostility of local life forms.
Accounts by the first space-travelling visitors to the planet say that they found even the rocks and plants coming after them, but that has since been shown to have been normal travelogue exaggeration.
But the first visitors did find intelligent life within the planet, in a vast hallowed-out area that has as much land area as some smaller worlds.
Life presumably evolved there because  it was safe from the horrors on the surface.
Most of the access points from surface to interior are quite small and easily guarded or blocked up.
So the intelligent Vadinamians delveloped their underworld civilization, under an artificial sin, in peace and safety.
And that very excess of safety inspired some bright Vadinamians in to a galaxy-class piece of lateral thinking.
They recognized that they were living in an immense natural vault, with many extra security features also built in.
And in the SenFed there were people and governments willing to pay fortunes for the promise of near-perfect security.
So Vadinamia became the safety-deposit world.
It also became a very tedious place, since you can scarcely blow your nose there without going through a security check.
As for getting in…
There is only one entry point for spaceships into the world within the planet.
It's known as the Vadinamian Valve, and it's big enough for only one ship to pass through at a time.
At that entrance, every ship goes through a painstaking security check examination right down to molecular level, which can seem endless.
In fact they had Mala's and my molecu-prints and other data from our previous visits, and that helped to speed up the process to a slow crawl.
But we know that the real checks would come when we left.
The Vadinamians don't care what you bring in — but they'll go to any lengths to stop you taking things out that you shouldn't take.
Vadinamia's claim to fame, in its vid adverts, is as’ the bank that can't be robbed’.
In fact I know about one occasion when it was robbed, though they've mostly hushed it up.
It was when a thief of some brilliance spirited away some micro-miniaturized documents hidden in a pimple on his chin.
He'd had a real pimple when he arrived, but during the time he took to find and bribe an official to provide the documents, the blemish had healed,.
So he simply made a convincing artificial one to hide his miniaturized booty, and the Vadinamia's missed it — because when he left he was just the same as when he arrived.
That, however, was in earlier times, before molecu-tech searches and all the rest.
Now things are different.
Vadinamia has spent lavishly on all kinds of state-of-the-art technology  There are no longer any bribable Vadinamian in direct contact with the stored valuables — just servo-mechanisms, including mandroid guards and Intelloid overseers with multiphase fail-safe level of programme reinforcement that make them incorruptible.
And at the valve, as ships enter, there is also a small army in Intelloid screeners operating the scanning technology that record every detail of visitors.
As they did to Mala and me.
Nothing was disassembled or even disturbed, but in the end they had complete molecular images of us and the ship — which we would have to match perfectly upon departure.
No chance of sneaking a false pimple past them now.
It all took just over a bio-day, after which we drifted down from the Valve and touched ground at the spaceport.
But even then there was no acceleration of the process.
Things happen in their own time, on Vadinamia.
I trudged along and paid the usual fee to the port collector, then presented myself to a Vadinamian Warden, one of the high officials overseeing the Intelloids that do the real work.
As usual, he laboriously studied my various credentials, including the plastiform wafer from the Fraxillian Emissary.
He knew I was no impostor, from the screening at the Valve.
But he had how own procedures, and he seemed to enjoy them.
Finally, after a comm-call to the Emissary brought Lord y'Fiprehaude himself on to the screen, to simper a confirmation, the warden grudgingly gave me clearance.
But he had saved one further little irritation for the end.
’ We are twenty-seven dous from Recovery, Visitor Curb.
You arrival is not well-timed’.
The average Vadinamian looks like an over-sized larva, boneless and segmented.
Half of the body moves along the ground on many little legs — the front half rears up taller than a man, with many little arms.
The head, if that's what it is, is crowned with a tuft of rubbery antennae serving various functions.
There is no expression on the face, because there is no face.
But I swear that when a Vadinamian tells an off-worlder that he's going to have to wait around even longer, the joints between the upper segments curve into a number of smug smiles.
I wasn't smiling, but wasn't I particularly troubled.
That's life, on Vadinamia, as I said to Mala when I told her the news.
’ Twenty-seven dous…’
She had to pause to work it out, having had only one brief experience of Vadinamia before.
’ Nearly three bio-days!’
I shrugged.
’ We'll find ways to pass the time’.
’ Which means you'll fall back into the Vid,’she said.
’ Not me.
I hardly got off the ship, last time.
This time I'm going to go sightseeing.’
’ I'll go with you,’I said, which surprised us both a little.
But I was feeling a bit tense and restless, and didn't feel like being alone or sitting still.
So we picked up one of the little floaters provided at the port, and went exploring.
Off-worlders are restricted to the spaceport and the small city that has grown up around it, but that was all right.
While Vadinamia will never be a rival to any of the known holiday-resort worlds, it has a few things to offer by way of amusement.
Even better, Mala was being fairly close to friendly towards me, making her very good company.
So I didn't even raise an objection when she insisted on touring the Story of Vadinamia museum, which included a lengthier account of the planet's development than I could ever want — plus an equally detailed, and gruesome, study of life and death on the planets surface,
Later on, though, we found a little bar on the edge of the port city, with acceptable food and drink.
And before long Mala was actually responding to some of my witticisms with that flashing smile which alters her from being pretty in to being staggeringly beautiful.
Back on the ship afterwards, she flashed the smile one more time — and then whisked away to her own cabin.
I might have felt a little downcast at that point, only the evening had made me feel more encouraged about my prospects with her than I'd felt for some time.
Miraculously, her mind hadn't altered the next day, as it often does.
We took up our time-killing almost where we'd left off.
I showed all the tolerance and good humour that a woman might want of a man when we investigated the range of shopping offered by the spaceport city.
Though I admit that Mala bought nothing during our slow trawl through the  available outlets, while I picked up two reasonably priced shirts in a subdued canary-yellow-and-indigo, and an irresistible pair of boots made from the filmy hide of the Rexol'rian flutter-snake.
And then, as we drifted back to the ship after a placid midday meal, a shadow darkened our cheerful day.
It didn't seem so at first.
The shadow was in the form of a vast spaceship resting near ours, and the last thing it looked was shadowy.
The surface was gleaming with pure white and even purer gold.
You might have thought that no meteor shower, no space dist had ever touched that brilliance.
And within the rich glistening shine were a million intricate decorations, a million subtle shapings and carvings, so that the whole thing began to resemble some giant confectionery, the ultimate in the art of a crazed master pastrycook.
Mala shrieked with delight, and stopped the floater to stare.
’ What is it?’
’ One of the compact versions of the Astropalace liner.
Someone's got carried away customizing it’.
’ More money than taste’, she said with a giggle as we floated around the thing, shading our eyes from its glaring brightness.
’ There's something’, I said slowly.
’ Something it reminds me of…’
And then the memory leaped into life as the liner's spotless white airlock opened, and some figures emerged.
Most of them were small, gnarled, dark-furred exters, but I scarcely glanced at them.
In their midst was a man, a human, who would certainly catch any eye in nearly any crowd.
He was built a bit like a make Ardakkean — that is, tall, broad-shouldered, lean-hipped, muscular.
But otherwise he was quite different.
He wore a pure-white sleeveless jerkin  casually open at the front, white tights that left not the slightest doubt about his gender, thigh-high white boots.
His hair curled in a thick golden tangle, his skin stretched taut and golden-bronze over his rolling muscles and over his high cheekboned, demonically handsome face.
Framed in the airlock, he seemed like his ship to have his own light source, shining white and gold.
And his smile, appearing slowly as he looked down at us, gleamed with a whiteness that almost hurt.
I knew, then, who he was.
And what.
And the knowledge was dampening my shirt with the clammy sweat of anxiety.
Mala was motionless, eyes wide, lips parted a little, as if hypnotized.
Then the gnarled, furry exters began pointing at her, chattering in their won dialect with guttural noises that sounded like laughter.
A that Mala flushed slightly, but even so seemed unable to tear her gaze away from the man in gold and white.
He, however, after making a very close inspection of Mala, was looking at me.
’ Curb, isn't it?’
His voice was golden, too, a melodious baritone that carried effortlessly down to our open floater.
’ The courier?
With a very lovely companion…’
’ You know me?’
I said harshly, feeling the worry-sweat burst out afresh.
’ I believe we know of each other, you and I’the golden man said, his smile and his voice taking on an edge of mockery.
’ Are you visiting this world in the course of some…employment’
’ That's my business,’I snarled.
’ Or will you tell me why you're here’
He chuckled resonantly.
’ We will keep our own counsel, then.
But we will surely see each other again during our stay.
And perhaps I can invite your lovely friend to visit my ship, so that she and I might also become acquainted…?’
Mala looked about ready to climb up the side of the ship towards him, if she had to, so that I felt necessary to grasp her by her arm.
That drew a fiery glare from her and more resonant chuckles from the golden man, until — flushed and annoyed as well as uneasy — I got the floater away from there.
It wasn't until we were in our own ship that Mala asked.
’ Who…was that?’
’ You don't know?’
I said, surprised.
’ The Fedpol must have a file on him to fill a room.
That's Gharr.
Gharr the Gherpotean.
One of the most notorious and obnoxious criminals in the galaxy.
Calls himself the prince of bandits.’
Her eyes looked a little dreamy.
’ Really?
That's Gharr?
Why didn't you introduce me.’
’ You should be glad that I didn't.
He may look a bit glamorous, in his overdone way, but he's poison all the way through.’
She was licking her lips thoughtfully, not paying attention’ And those exters, with the fur?’
’ His followers — or crew.
I forget where they're from.
People call them the Gharrgoyles.
They say he recruits them so he can look even more golden and gorgeous by contrast.’
’ He doesn't need to,’she murmured.
I scowled.
’ When you've finished drooling over him, you might re-activate your brain and help me think of how to find our why he's here.’
When she looked at me blankly, I went on.
’ We're about to pick up a very valuable thing.
Suddenly one of the best-known bandits in existence turns up, parks nearer us, and starts giving unknowing grins.
Is that coincidence?’
’ That's over-reaction,’she said.
’ He could be here for any number of reasons…’
’ And it would be a great relief to know what they are.’
She smiled,’ I could go and visit him, as he suggested, and ask him.’
’ You keep away from him,’I told her.’
He's as likely to feed you to the Gharrgoyles.’
That was when Posi broke in, to announce a comm-call.
It was from another officious Vadinamian Warden, informing us that the Recovery — which would release the Fraxillian package — would occur at exactly the mid-hour of the following bio-day.
I thanked him and switched off rather brusquely, since right then I was more concerned about that evening and might, and what I wanted to do during that time.
Mala agreed with a surprisingly little hesitation to stay behind and protect the ship, while I went into the spaceport city.
I wanted to sniff around a little, and I always  do that better on my own, without distractions.
In a way, I was thinking, Gharr had done me a favour.
His arrival had jolted me back into a proper appreciation of my problems, which I'd pushed aside in my enjoyment of Mala's warmer mood.
So I was mentally on my toes as I took a floater into the city and then left it, mingling with all the pedestrians thronging the walkways.
Naturally I knew that I wouldn't be wandering unnoticed.
Famlio would have people watching me wherever I went.
And there might well be other watchers.
Though in that crowd of humans, mutants and exters there was no way of telling who was watching who.
After a while, though, I began to feel sure that I'd spotted a Gharrgoyle — or maybe a different one at different times — wriggling through the crowds behind me.
Which just strengthened my suspicious of Gharr.
And I had a feeling that a certain exter with spiky reptilian skin and several eyes was also appearing too often in my wake.
I might have tried a few quick manoeuvres to lose those shadows.
But Vadinamia's spaceport city is a compact place, and any tails would have picked me up again soon enough.
So I just kept on my way, letting then all come along for the ride, while I hunted for confirmation of what I suspected and feared about Gharr.
I didn't try asking any Vadinamian officials, because they would have sent me angrily on my way.
On Vadinamia secrets are kept, and visitors are left strictly alone as long as they keep the peace.
Vadinamia doesn't care if you're a criminal or a captain of industry (Not that there's much difference).
Nor do they care how you might have come by your possessions, off-planet.
If you bring something to them, they assume it's your's, and they keep it safe for you.
No questions asked-about anything.
So as night fell I looked for information elsewhere.
I haunted bars and lowish dives, entering into innocent-seeming conversations, turning them to talk of new arrivals, waiting for hints and rumours about Gharr.
And — nothing.
Most people were aware that Gharr was there, but the news seemed to be mainly of interest to human females.
You'd have thought the man was a vid star rather than a murderous bandit.
Eventually I decided to give up.
If Gharr was there for any  reason to do with me, I'd have to wait and find out.
Besides, I'd began to think that Mala had been right.
Perhaps I was over reacting.
There hadn't been any lapses in my security that I knew of.
And the Gharrgoyle trailing me needn't heave meant anything special.
I was known courier, on Vadinamia, possibly there to pick up something valuable.
Just seeing me there would trigger thief responses of someone like Gharr.
That's the trouble with the work, I thought.
It does attract the villains.
But I'd eluded them before and I could again, I told myself, almost jauntily, as I ambled into the bar that I decided to make my last stop for the night.
It was fairly crowded, but I found a place for at the side and bought a beaker of No-tox Fungi-beer which tastes like mouldy bread but leave your head clear.
Raising it, I glanced at the door to see if my tails had arrived.
And nearly choked on the drink, which it probably deserved.
The spike-skinned exter who had been following me was coming through the door, in company with several other exters, none of them very humanoid.
But it wasn't their appearance that had shaken me.
It was their watchful defence towards the even more unusual exter in their midst.
That one was squat and immensely wide, with a sleek moist skin and an upper body sprouting ten powerful tentacles, two of which were extra-long and whippy.
Cephalopoid, he'd be called.
And I had trouble recognizing him.
The tentacles the skin — with its patchiness that spoke of increasing age — were clear giveaway.
But so, most of all, was the faint trickle of what looked like black smoke or mist from his slit-mouth.
It was a protective capability, I'd heard — a black mist that could suddenly be blown out in a huge, binding cloud.
But I wasn't recalling the data so clearly at that moment.
I was simply staring.
Because the tentacled exter was a living legend — of crime — as he had been for longer than I'd been alive.
Ten-huc, known as Blackheath, the cruel and ruthless pirate chieftain from the Alkaline Asteroids.
It was too much.
Gharr was on Vadinamia, and a Gharrgoyle  had tailed me.
Now Ten-huc was there — and one if his crew had tailed me.
It couldn't be any kind of coincidence.
And if it wasn't, it was terrifying.
As I shakily set down my glass, with a new attack of the clammy sweats seeping into my shirt, things grew more terrifying.
The group of pirates had clustered in one corner of the bar, and we all staring directly at me in an unblinking, bloody-icing way.
Then Ten-huc said something, with a tiny puff of blackness.
Two vaguely serpentine exters detached themselves from the group.
And began to move slitheringly in my direction, keeping their metallic black eyes fixed on me.
I'm glad to say that I never found out what they intended.
I could guess that he might have asked me what Gharr had asked — what I was doing on Vadinamia.
And I heard enough about the grisly ways in which he like to make sure his questions were answered.
But thankfully the two exters never got to me.
As they approached, there was aloud clumping of heavy boots at the bar, followed by an almost quivering hush.
Then a great many of the bar's occupants began to behave as if they had just remembered urgent appointments.
They all headed for the door, with that slightly stiff gait of people who are in a tearing hurry, but who are trying not to break into a run.
The reason for the rush — and for the retreat of the two serpentine pirates — was an armed and armoured squad of FedPol Forcibles, that elite branch of ultra-combat heavies, who had pushed their way into the bar.
I stayed where I was, trying to look indifferent, though I did set my beer aside and asked the bartender for a calming shot of Hypergrog.
The Forcibles stood silently by the door, studying the departing customers — and exchanging particularly cold stares with Ten-huc and the pirates as they sauntered out.
Well, no one expected arrests.
The trouble with powerful  interplanetary criminals is that they are powerful and interplanetary.
Everyone knows about Ten-huc and Gharr and Famlio and the rest — but proof is something else.
Whenever the Fedpol think they've built up a case on one world or another, they find platoons of sharp lawyers appearing, kilocreds are spent, evidence vanishes, witnesses have strange accidents…
So the criminals move freely around the galaxy, pursing their profession, and the FedPol must swallow its frustration and hope one day to be in the right place at the right time to catch a big-time wrong-doer in the act.
And those watching Forcibles swung their empty stares around the nearly deserted bar, then wheeled their tight formation and clumped out.
I sat still, sipping slowly and thinking hard.
The FedPol don't have a permanent presence on Vadinamia.
No SenFed world is required to have them, and the Vadinamians prefer to manage their own law enforcement.
But the FedPol can and do visit any SenFed planet whenever they want, in pursuit of an inquiry or a suspect.
And there they were on Vadinamia, the night before a Recovery.
Along with Gharr and Ten-huc and Famlio.
And no doubt other dangerous folk who might have been known to me.
For a moment I toyed with the idea of getting back to the ship, lifting off and going a comfortingly long way away.
But I couldn't do it.
A very large number of kilocreds has a loud voice, and the Fraxillian fee was still shouting in my ear.
I had to go through with it, I thought.
And be quick, watchful, clever, like a wild creature that must elude the hunters.
I seemed to hear an echo of Mala's tasteless remark —’ like a rat?’— but I ignored it.
More like the perril of the Richain moon — sleek, fast perfectly camouflaged, armed with an array of defensive weapons.
Let the predators gather, I thought.
Can't catch me.
I moved to the door of the bar, stepping lightly, warily.
No one paid any attention to me.
Outside, I registered the fact that the walkways were almost empty.
It was getting late, and not many folk would stay up carousing on the night before a  Recovery.
I glanced around me, then slid with perril-like stealth towards a nearby bank of shadow.
It turned out to contain an unseen, jutting corner of the building, and as my shins crashed into it I barely managed to stifle my cry of pain.
No one noticed that, either.
So I hobbled away, my shoulders involuntarily hunched against the thought of eyes behind me, watching.
Within a few moments I was on a floater, crossing the fairly well-lit spaceport, still with no one in sight anywhere around me.
As I passed the palatial ship of Gharr the Gherpotean, I saw that it was shut up tight, with no sign of activity.
Then I was at my own ship, dismounting from the floater — and abruptly halting.
There had been a definite rustle behind me.
Or maybe beside me, I thought, as the tension built.
I saw that there were a few patches of shadow around me that could have been crammed with evil doers.
I flexed my arms slightly, trying to stop my hands from trembling, readying the mini-blazer s in my wristbands.
Then I whirled, so quickly that I nearly ricked my neck, as I caught a movement at the edge of my vision.
From one of those shadow-pools a small, semi-spherical object came sailing towards me in a high looping arc.
As it glimmered with reflected light, I recognized it.
I was carrying several just like it, in miniature.
But the recognition didn't flash along my neurons in time to activate my legs before the thing exploded in my face with a breathy puff.
A half-sized haze billowed around me, sweet and soft.
Laboriously, my mind formed the words GAS GRENADE in large capital letters, then underlined them and began to colour them in.
I didn't feel the ground when I hit it.
I awoke, and found myself in a cold hillside.
On the planet's surface.
It had been one of the kindlier gases, so the after-effects left me feeling only as if I has swallowed barbed wire and my brain was battering at the inside of my skull.
At least I could move, breathe, stand up — and be sick.
That made me feel a bit better, so I tottered to the top of the hill and stared bleakly around, in the equally bleak daylight.
For as far as I could see, the surface was bare, grey dirt — rocky, bumpy, ridged, pitted.
I wasn't sure whether a distant haziness was dark vegetation or my vision being hazy.
Nor did I look too closely at a scummy pool nearby, which rippled ominously.
I simply stared across the empty greyness while my headache rattled my brain cells like a QuaAvian earthquake.
I was vaguely aware that my death was imminent.
Luckily, the gas had left me feeling so foul and depressed that I was almost looking forward to it, feeling faintly curious about what form it would take.
Not immediate suffocation, anyway, for the surface of Vadinamia has a thin atmosphere with some oxygen.
Like most SenFed worlds.
It had very little warmth but the chilly air was helping to clear my head.
So did Metastim capsule when I finally managed to fumble one out of the tiny pouch in my belt.
But as I began to feel better, I grew more terrified.
No one could survive that surface for long.
It was a miracle  that I was alive at all.
Clearly I had arrived between downpours of the searing acid rain, while none of the local wildlife had come looking for snack in my vicinity.
But it was only a matter of time.
Unless I could find the place where my would-be killer had brought me out, and get back in.
Everyone knew that there were plenty of smaller access points from Vadinamia's interior to its surface.
The Vadiamians keep some open and make forays on to the surface for obscure sorts of research.
I'd never met an off-worlder who knew where they were, or cared.
Yet now someone had found one of the openings, and was using it to kill me.
Only that someone had done a stupid thing, from his point of view.
It indicated that he didn't know me well — for which I was deeply grateful.
He had dumped me on the surface just as he had found me.
Fully dressed, l including accessories and jewellery.
With a slightly shaky hand I tool hold of the pendant hanging around my neck and pressed its jewels in a certain way.
’ Hello, Del’
Posi's cheerful voice, clear and over the mini-comm in the pendant.
I wished I could direct her to bring the ship to my rescue.
But leaving through the Vadinamian Valve the ship would have to go through another full molecular security check.
I doubt if I had the necessary day or so to spare.
Instead, I directed Posi to pinpoint my position with her ceptors, then to access — discreetly, for it was probably illegal — Vadinamia's central data store to find the nearest opening to the interior.
Which would presumably be the one I'd been brought out through.
It had to be possible, for someone else had obviously located that opening.
But then I found that they hadn't done it that way.
’ Vadinamian data stores are protected by multiface security codes,’Posi reported almost at once,’with reflex fail-safes against code-break attempts.
Set up reinforced by advanced Intelloids who are Posi-sisters’.
I might have known, I thought, feeling suddenly much  colder.
The Vadinamians are usually step ahead.
Now they had acquired Posis to improve their security — and to provide a barrier that my Posi couldn't breach.
In panic, my mind went blank.
Fortunately, Posi didn't.
’ But it will be possible,’She said happily,’to access the data you seek from another source — in 3.47 minutes from now’.
I was about to ask her how, when I was distracted and silenced, by a double-edged shock.
A thing slid hugely over the crest of a nearby ridge, and gazed at me from several eyes.
And a blazing-hot drop of wetness fell precisely on to the top of my head, and began to sear its way down into my hairpiece.
In other words, one of the surface denizens was deciding I looked edible, while some large drops of acid were arriving as for runners of another lethal shower.
’ Posi!’
I shrieked’ Hurry’
’ Only 2.51 minutes now, Del,’the maddening mechanism replied.
’ I am waiting until one of the spaceships orbiting this planet passes over your position.
Then I will form a call-beam link with its perceptors and use them to locate the opening that you seek’.
I worked out, later, that a ceptor from orbit may have been how my enemy had found the opening in the first place.
But I wasn't thinking about it then.
Attracted by my outcry, the thing was flopping towards me for a closer look.
It resembled a huge, tubby fish, about three times as long as I was tall, with thick appendages like fins trying to become legs.
The top of it was covered with a thick, slabbed hide like pliable armour, with all the eyes jutting from the front.
But I was more focused on the row of large sucker-mouths along its less armoured underside.
Mouths that opened and closed hungrily as it advanced, showing lots of saw-teeth within the openings.
But it didn't move too swiftly over the rocky soil, and I began to doubt if it would reach me before the deadly rain finished me off.
By then large drops were falling all around me, another landing on my wig and one splashing on my shoulder, making me jump as if I'd been prodded with a therm-knife.
I was vaguely aware of my voice repeating’ hurry — hurry — hurry’into the pendant.
And then the part of my mind  that is concerned slowly, single-mindedly, with my personal survival say what it needed to see.
Drops of acid rain were also falling on the monster to no effect, because it belonged there.
From the thought to the deed, instantly.
Pure terror-driven reflex brought the mini-blazers in my wristbands into action.
But the monsters armoured back was impervious to that as well.
And another drop of acid rain left its scorch-trail down my arm.
Almost sobbing, I dragged off one of my rings, automatically adjusted the stone, and tossed it into the path of the creature.
As it flopped its way forward, the vulnerable underside came down on the ring just as the mini-grenade in the stone erupted into satisfying flame.
I slid a slim vibro-dagger from my right boot and stepped grimly forward.
’ Del, I now have the data,’Posi's voice announced from the pendant.
’ If you turn thirty-eight degrees to your right, I can direct you to…’
’ In a minute, Posi,’I said.
’ I'm just getting an umbrella’.
In fact it was slightly less than a minute.
My work-rate was speeded up by the further drops of rain that fell on me.
So I had crudely skinned the dead creature, and was holding its armoured hide above me, before the shower began in earnest.
Totally sheltered as the vitriolic stuff teemed down, I walked swiftly away — on a line provided by Posi, watching me through the ship ceptors that she had temporarily borrowed by means of her call-beam.
And that's one reason why I spent a middle-sized fortune in the most advanced form in Intelloid in the universe.
But I wasn't exactly strolling along enjoying myself.
The acid rain was splashing around my feet, rapidly dissolving my boots.
And the creature's blood was dropping heavily down on me — harmless, but repulsively slimy and smelling like rotting Detrovyllan haemo-cheese.
I tried to ignore both discomforts, but I wasn't happy.
Soon Posi guided me over another bleak ridge to an innocuous-looking depression, with a broad flat slab of stone lying at its centre.
Blithely she informed me that the stone was covering an access port to Vadinamia's inner world.
It was firmly fastened, of course, so that no floppy monster could flip it up and wander underground for lunch.
So I sourly jerked off what was left of my acid-seared wig, activated it, and let its compact thermic bomb blow the cover to flaming fragments.
Then I skipped down the entry ladder with indescribable relief.
Dumping the monster hide as I reached the bottom of the shaft, I hurried away along some disused-looking passages, by then moving on bootless, bare and blistered feet.
When I pushed open a door leading to a better-lit corridor, I realized that I was on an upper level of the main administrative building of the spaceport.
I also found myself facing an astonished mandroid guard, who began to reach for his holstered stun-gun.
I suppose my experiences and my burns made me both irritable and hasty, for I responded by flicking a sonic grenade at him, from another ring, that scrambled all his synapses.
Whereupon a sizeable squad of his fellow mandroids came around a corner and arrested me.
It all eventually got straightened out, despite the Vadinamian distaste for the unusual, and suspicion of off-worlders.
My appearance showed that I had been on the surface — and the officials were kind enough to put some healants on my (superficial) burns while they sent mandroids to check my story.
They came back with the monsters hide and a report on the blasted stone cover at the opening, and with theses verifications the authorities grew friendlier
But they adamantly refused to listen when I insisted that someone had been trying to kill me.
It was all most puzzling and distressing, they said, undoubtedly some mysterious accident that could never be explained.
I got the message.
They weren't going to become involved in one client's intent to murder another.
If they did, they would have to investigate.
But this was Vadinimia, where no questions were ever asked that didn't concern anti-theft procedures.
So…it hadn't happened.
Angrily but resigned, I stamped away from their bland assurances.
Or I would have stamped, except that my feet hurt.
By then I was wearing a pair of mandroid's boots, a size too large, and a lot of small medi-strips and healant salve on my other burns.
My clothing was drenched in monster-gore, where it wasn't tattered in the places charred by the acid rain.
And when I finally appeared in my ship's airlock, the only thing that Mala could find to say was,’ Don't you look a mess!’
She showed a little more concern when she learned what had happened.
And she seemed flustered when I demanded to know where she'd been when I'd been gassed right next to the ship.
After all, she might have seen it on the ceptors and come out to help.
But she finally admitted that she hadn't been in the ship at the time.
She'd gone for a walk.
Suspicion rose up in me like bile.
’ And was Gharr at home’I snarled.
’ No, he…’
She stopped, but her lip, then tossed her head.
’ As far as I could see, his ship was closed up tight.’
I would have questioned her further, except that she finally grew solicitous and began paying attention to my injuries.
So I pushed suspicion away and enjoyed being fussed over.
And at the same time, I pondered a little over who had tried to kill me, and why.
It made no sense, like many things on Vadinamia just then.
What had brought Gharr and Ten-huc and Pulvidon to the planet at the same time?
Why were all of them so interested in why I was there?
And if they somehow suspected that I was picking up something valuable, why would any of them try to kill me before the pick-up?
’ Maybe’, Mala said, after I'd shared some these speculations with her,’it was just someone who doesn't like you’.
And that annoyed me enough to drive me to my cabin, to clean myself up and choose fresh clothing.
Because despite the mysteries and attempted murder, it was then getting on towards the mid-point of that Vadinamian bio-day.
Which was the time of Recovery.
The process of Recovery is not one of the galaxy's most fascinating spectacles, but if you're an off-worlder on Vadinamia you have to be there.
So we arrived on good time, Mala and I, was pleased that in a new hairpiece and fresh clothes — a long sleeved short-robe over loose trousers and soft boots, in shades of chartreuse and cinnamon — my injuries didn't show at all.
Not that anyone was looking at me, post of the others in the off-worlders viewing gallery seemed important, who were occupied with looking competitively at one another.
There were humans of all shapes and sizes, richly and ostentatiously dressed, and a large mingling of equally impressive exters.
It grew quite crowded, since many of the guests had retinues with them, or at least bodyguards.
Then a realization struck me, unnervingly.
As far as I could see, every one of those off-worlders was an owner (or the employee of one), there to claim or deposit some personal valuables.
No one there was the kind of person who would be offering a transport or courier service.
No one but me.
That disturbing thought made me even more glad to have dressed soberly and inconspicuously.
But Mala had gone some way towards the opposite.
She was wearing — barley — another creating in cling silk, which drew any approving eyes.
Still, they were looking at her rather than me.
Until the moment when every single guest turned to stare avidly towards the door, with murmurs and gasps, at a series of startling arrivals.
First was Ten-huc, tentacles rippling, and a few of his more presentable pirates.
The frisson that he caused was still sweeping through the gallery when it paused and then redoubled.
A black-clad Famlio contingent had a marched through the door, with Pulvidon in its midst, blank-faced and hot-eyed.
And then, stagily delayed till it was almost too late, came Gharr the Gherpotean, with Gharrgoyles.
His entrance stirred up an even larger excitement, and the crowd surged forward — Mala among them — for a closer look.
So they all got a good view as Ten-huc rasped something with  a whiff of black mist, and Gharr whirled with teeth bared.
But he controlled himself — there was a force of mandroids that would have done the controlling, otherwise — and merely snarled a reply that left the old pirate fuming.
Literally.
Their rivalry was almost a solid presence in the place.
The aging pirate king facing the youthful bandit prince-patriarch against upstart — monarch against usurper.
I wished they would go somewhere and fight a duel to the death, and that it would end in a draw.
Then Gahrr, wheeling away, spotted Mala.
He smiled dazzlingly and looked her up and down as if fondling her with his gaze, while she returned his smile and somehow without moving made her cling silk dress ripple and shimmer.
In unthinking annoyance I moved towards her, one of the Gharrgoyles saw my and pointed, and Gharr looked my way.
His smile vanished as if it had been peeled of.
His face went as hard as the bronze, it resembled and his eyes said things I pretended not to hear.
And that was all the evidence I needed.
By then Tec-huc and Pulvidon and their followers had seen me, but hadn't looked at all surprised.
Gharr had.
So it must have been the Gharrgoyles who had put me on the planets surface to die.
I stared around, sweating, wishing I could go and lock myself in my nice safe ship.
But that was impossible.
And Gharr glowered at me one more, then stalked away into the throng while Ten-huc watched him balefully and Pulvidon grinned his carnivore grin.
Then the crowd shifted around me, thankfully taking me away from their gazes.
Though not from Mala's, who rejoined me with a startled expression.
’ I saw how Gharr looked at you’.
she said.
’ Do you think he…?’
’ Yes I think he’I croaked.
’ And I think…’
But I had to stop.
The mandroid guards had come to usher us along, herding us to our seats.
It was Recovery time.
The Vadinamians like to stage Recovery as if it was some kind of major ceremonial — with the required assembling of all the off-worlders, the exact timing and so on.
Many first-time  visitors are taken in, and expect exoticism.
They are disappointed.
The off-worlders are all required to be there so that the Vadinamians can know where they are and can watch them.
At a time when the stored valuables are a little more vulnerable than otherwise.
And the exact timing is simply the Vadinamian way.
In fact nothing much happens.
Within the vast vault-like inner world of the planet there are thousands of caverns, small or large, which are also like vaults.
No off-worlder has ever been inside any of them, but we are told that there are caverns, vaults within vaults, like those ancient puzzles where ever opened box reveals another, smaller box.
Each outer cave or vault can only entered through a small version of the iris-like Vadinamian Valve.
The openings are controlled by incorruptible intelloids, and only they know which inner vaults hold valuables, and which valuables are stored where.
At a Recovery, the Intelloids guide mindless servatons into the caverns.
They emerge with large silicaplast containers, all exactly alike.
Guarded by mandroids, the servators are sent off to the spaceport to deliver a container to each ship.
While the off-worlders area sitting in their gallery, watching the process on screens, being closely watched in turn.
Some of the containers placed on the sips contain valuables, others are empty.
No onlooker, during the process, can know which is which.
So, tediously, it was done.
The servatons at last emerged from the off-world ships, whose airlocks had been remote controlled by the overseeing Intelloids.
The locks were closed again, the process ended, insipid Vadinamian refreshments were served in the visitors gallery.
And a short time later, Mala and I were in the safe side of our own ship's airlock, staring at what lay nestled within the opened silicaplast container.
A Small, bright, metal cylinder, a bit shorter than my forearm, a bit thicker.
The first thing I did was ask Posi to scan its contents.
But Posi couldn't.
I'd forgotten a point in the vid adverts for Balbazian steel.
It's not only unbreakable and impervious  heat or cold or acid or anything.
It; s also impermeable to any kind of perceptor or X-ray scan.
Even at the spot on the cylinder where there was a hair-thin slit, half a millimetre long.
obviously for a pre-shaped molecular key.
In short, the cylinders contents were a mystery.
So I set it frustratedly aside, to concentrate on another mystery.
Which was how we could get away from Vadinamia, unmolested by any of that cavalcade of criminals.
I put in the usual request for official clearance through the valve and was pleased to find that we had got lucky.
A number of ships were leaving at the same time —presumably with what they'd come for, after Recovery — but we were slotted into the readiness pattern at fourth place.
Even so, it set up a security precaution that had occurred to me when I'd seen the cylinder.
Balbazian steel is a rarity, because its about three hundred times harder to make and costlier to buy than even high-tech accelsteel.
(That's why it gets used for only small and specialized purposes, not for things like spaceships hulls).
But the cylinder looked just like one segment of the pedestal that anchors the personal work surface in my cabin.
So while Mala was attending to Posi as they plotted our course to Fraxilly through the primary and secondary Netlines — a bit complex, since we'd be shifting through eight sectors even if we took the direct route — I took charge of the cylinder.
It needed only a few moments, and a touch of magi-glue, to insert the cylinder as par of the pedestal.
The unwanted segment that it had replaced went into the disposal unit to be jettisoned during Highlight.
Then we waited, as the ships ahead of us lifted off one at a time to make their laborious way through the Valve's exit security process.
It took about a day and a half for each of  them, during which time my nerve-ends were pinging like a Du-gnorian soniharp.
And when we were only a few hours from our turn to life off, we had last-minute visitors.
Who tightened up my nerves a few more turns.
Six large FedPol offices, steely of expression and watchful of eye.
I tried to tell myself, as they invited themselves in, that there was no need for anxiety.
I had committed no crime on Vadinamia.
Even if the contents of the cylinder were illicit, it would be the Fraxillians crime, not mine.
But a FedPol presence can unsettle even the innocent.
So I fretted and sweated as they stalked in and stared around with that disapproving, accusatory look of all cops everywhere.
But then I nearly laughed.
It turned out that they had come to consult me.
Mala and me, that is — for they knew something of my investigator background, and Mala's FedPol career.
’ We figured,’their leader said in an almost respectful tone,’that if anyone might have heard thing or two on this world it'd be you, Mister Curb, Miz Yorder.’
’ Possibly,’I said.
’ Depending on what about.’
The leader nodded as if I'd said something deeply wise, confirming his faith in me.
’ About a valuable objet gone missing from the planet Ardakke.
Sir’
That tightened Mala's back muscles — and mine too, though I was more concerned with keeping my jaw from falling open.
’ Ardakke…’
I said lamely.
Mala intervened.
’ As I'm sure you know, Curb and I had a brief contact with some Ardakkeans.
That resulted in my contacting a friend named Chertro, one of your officers.’
The Fedpol leader was listening stolidly, giving nothing away.
’ I've hear nothing about Ardakke since then’.
’ Nor have I,’I put in quickly.
’ Are you thinking that the missing object is on Vadinamia’
Everyone knows that the quick way to make a cop end an interview — with an innocent party — is to start asking him questions.
’ We're just pursuing enquiries, sir.
If you say you've heard nothing…’
I frowned and rubbed my jaw, looking thoughtful.
’ One  thing did come to my notice’, I said.
They looked alert and encouraging.
’ Someone in a bar was talking about Ardakke in connection with Gharr the Gherpotean’.
The six officers nearly snapped to attention and saluted.
’ Yes sir,’the leader said,’we intend to interview that person before he leaves.
Did you hear anything about the nature of the connection?’
I went on frowning and rubbing.
’ Only that someone said isn't it luck for Gharr that he could just about pass as an Ardakkean if he dyed his hair…’
’ Could he?’the FedPol leader nearly shouted.
’ Thank you, sir.
We won't detain you any longer’.
I've never liked that turn of phrase —’ detain’— but I ignored it and relievedly closed the airlock behind them.
’ Well, well…’
I began
Mala was glowering.
’ You didn't really hear that about Gharr, did you’.
’ Hardly’, I said.
’ But they'll keep glamour boy busy till we're well away from here.
And I owe him that, at least, after he and his Gharrgoyles tried to kill me.’
’ Mm,’she said.
’ It really infuriates me’
’ That he tried to kill me?’
She looked surprised.
’ No — I mean that Chertro!
All his promises about being as discreet as the Ardakkeans wanted, and now there are FedPol squads clumping around half the galaxy!’
’ He didn't look all that reliable,’I said, less than soothingly.
’ But its not our problem.
Our problem involves us getting into deep space past a patrol of Famlio gunships.’
’ I'm still worried about that,’she said.
’ Maybe you should pay them.
You'll just get Famlio trying to kill you as well as Gharr.’
Famlio would try to kill us both, I thought, but didn't say it.
’ It's not that risky,’I told her.
’ I've done it before.
Posi calculates a window that leads to a gap in their patrol, and we shoot through.’
’ And they've never come after you?’she asked dubiously.
’ Never.
The Famlio patrol doesn't admit it or record it when  ships get past them.
It makes them look bad.
And the personnel of the patrol doesn't care that much, or for very long.
They're fairly low rank, and are always being shifted to other jobs.
Or being killed, because in the profession life expectancy is fairly low’.
’ But now Pulvidon's there,’Mala said.
’ A top enforcer.’
’ Maybe not ny more, if he's been demoted too running the Vadinamian racket.’
I reached over and patted her arm.
’ Just remember what I said before, about Famlio's blind spots.
Trust me.
It's calculated risk, but it can be done.’
’ If you say so,’Mala said shortly.
’ But why is it the only time you take risks is when you're likely to make a profit.?’
’ When else?’
I asked, baffled.
But she just shook her head and went back to her pouch-seat and Posi's course-setting.
In good time, too for a moment later a Vadinamian voice announced over the comm that our lift-off slot was now open.
Of course that was just stage one, when we moved gently up into position at the Valve.
There the Vadinamian permanent station gave us their usual, painstaking, molecular once-over.
I was pleased to note that since they'd acquired Posis they were getting almost quick about it.
Very little more than a bio-day later they had established that our exit molecules corresponded with our entry molecules, save for those of the cylinder that we'd acquired and that was accounted for in their scanning.
We were free to go.
Except we weren't.
With very poor timing, Posi announced that her perceptors showed a Famlio gunship sliding by within visual range of the Valve.
That was unsettling.
I'd expected Famlio to be patrolling in deep space, as usual, giving me room to manoeuvre and avoid them.
But this ship was down in Vadinamaina territorial space, directly in my way.
as if Famlio had become very intent on intercepting someone, or something, leaving the planet.
A second later, a Vadinamian official came on-screen and irritatedly pointed out that the Valve was about to open and I should be moving.
’ Don't rush me,’I snarled over the comm.
’ I've got a thrust problem with one of my planetaries’.
’ Make haste!’the official spluttered, segments wobbling.
’ The scheduling requires…’
’ I am making haste,’I interrupted.
’ Shut up and leave me to it.
Or do you want me to go through the Valve at Firstlight speed?’
That shut him up.
It probably would have shut the Valve up, too, all that power boiling through its stasis energy field.
I could almost hear him fuming from his inspection station.
Not that I cared, for I was doing my own fuming.
No way was I going out with a Famlio ship in my flight path.
Not even if I had to block the Valve for a week…
At that point Posi chimed in to say that another vessel had come into visual range just beyond the Valve.
I was sure she meant another Famlio ship.
But, blessedly, she didn't.
’ It appears to be a ship of the Federation Police, Del,’she said.
I laughed aloud with relief.
Probably the FedPol contingent visiting Vadinamia had left a backup ship in orbit, as they often do.
And it had come down to the Valve to see what the Famlio ship was doing there.
So I have Posi the go-ahead, and we surged out through the Valve, coming almost face to face with the two ships.
But Famlio wasn't about to enforce any demands for’ protection’payments with the FedPol watching.
Posi then told me that a comm-call was coming in from the Famlio ship, but I told her to ignore it.
And neither of the other ships changed position as we fled past them towards deep space.
I lounged back in my pouch-seat, smiling with satisfaction.
In a few minutes we would be ready for Firstlight, and then we'd we clear.
Because no matter what suspicions the various crooks might have about my purpose, no one knew where I was going next.
That thought prompted me to ask Posi for a routine sweep for bugs.
When she pronounced us clean, I lounged and smiled some more, thought peacefully about the Frazillian fee, watched peacefully as Posi took us into Firstlight.
Until Mala reached for the comm-switch.
She was calling Chertro, her FedPol friend of the lean and grinning face.
I was pleased to see his grin varnish when Mala  gave him the vicious edge of her tongue for ignoring the Ardakkean request for discretion, causing the FedPol squad to visit Vadinamia.
’ You've got it wrong, Fuzzy,’he finally said, when he could get a defensive word in.
’ You're out of touch.
Didn't the squad on Vadinamia fill you in?’
’ They weren't giving anything away,’she said, tightly.
’ What are you talking about?’
’ They could have told you,’Chertro said, still defensive.
’ To late now for being discreet.
All the Ardakkean beans have been spilled.’
And before Mala could lash at him again, he explained, and terrified me right down to my boots.
First he reminded us that it had taken him no time at all to find the Ardakkean thief — an off-world technician working in one of the phetam refining plants.
The man had been secretly hiding away tiny portions of phetam, a drop or two at a time, until he had saved up about half-litre.
Which he then sent off-planet, by various well-disguised and roundabout routes, to an unknown recipient.
Probably his huge bribe was paid to him along the same obscure channels.
It had all been going on for years, Chertro said, and apparently earlier technicians had been doing the same for a long time before.
But just recently a stage in the delivery had broken down.
One of the carriers dropping out, Chertro thought.
That caused a series of hiccups in the process, and the ripples allowed the Ardakkeans to get wind of the theft.
Which brought Chertro in to catch the thief.
’ And the one who's paying the bribe?’
Mala asked.
Chertro shook his head.
The routes were impossible to trace back, he said.
But he had a feeling that they included some diplomatic folk, employees of Emissaries and the like.
A small chill, like a seeding of absolute-zero ice, congealed in my stomach.
Mala was frowning.
’ Didn't the thief himself tell you anything, when you questioned him?’
Chertro, oddly, looked a little sheepish.
’ He said some things.
We broke him down fairly fast.
But he didn't know who  was paying him, or who got the phetam in the end.
And then…’
’ Yes?’
Mala demanded, as he paused and gulped and looked more sheepish.
’ Well…
He was taken.’
’ Taken?’
I think that was the first time that a chill hit Mala too, for she seemed to grow a little pale.
Chertro was nodding embarrassedly.
’ Someone got through our security and got him out.
A couple of days later we found his body in a disposal.
He'd been tortured.’
Neither Mala not I bothered to ask who could have done it.
Probably Famlio — but it didn't matter.
Some criminal organization, anyway, with informants inside the FedPol, learning that a prisoner from Ardakke was talking about a priceless substance he's stolen.
So the organization kidnapped the prisoner and squeezed him dry.
And obviously other criminal organizations with spies in the right places would hear about.
So several sets of criminals might go looking, at the same time, for the priceless substance…
’ They wouldn't have got more out of him than we did,’Chertro was saying.
’ He really didn't know who was paying him, or where the stuff went.
Too many cut-offs in the operation.
Must have cost someone millions.’
’ He must have known where the phetam went in the first stage,’Mala said.
Chertro shrugged.
’ All he knew for sure was that the stuff went off-planet.
But he'd picked up hints that, at some point along the way, it's be left on Vadinamia.’
He peered from the screen.
’ Where you and Curb have been…’
Mala blinked, and grew paler, but quickly assured him that as far as she knew it was just a coincidence.
I could tell, though, that she was beginning to have some uncomfortable suspicions — like the ones that were spreading the chill all through me.
Then I thought of another question — just as Mala asked it.
’ Chert — did you tell anyone that it was me who got you involved with Ardakke?’
He frowned,’ I probably mentioned it here and there.
Is that a problem?’
A problem?
I would have yelled it if my throat hadn't tightened up.
No wonder Famlio had sent a top enforcer.
No wonder they were all watching me.
They had gone to Vadinamia to look for phetam and had found a well-known courier — the only courier there — was also had a known connection with Ardakke.
It was a miracle that my tortured body hadn't been found in a disposal somewhere!
I wanted to be sick.
Or scream.
Or shoot someone.
Preferably Chertro with his stupid grin and all the crooked FedPols who let someone walk away with the Ardakke prisoner.
But Mala, looking paler still, was assuring her friend that there was no problem.
I realized that she wasn't going to tell him about events on Vadinamia so that he wouldn't jump to any conclusions and complicate things.
And that was when he grinned and offered one more piece of terrifying information
’ One funny thing that technician said, about phetam.
About why it's so valuable.
Must be like those miracle elixirs and things that people pay fortunes for.
But its a joke.’
’ What is’Mala asked warily.
’ What the prisoner said.
Seemed proud of himself for having found out, because he said it's supposed to be the planet's big secret.
He told us…well, what he said was that phetam makes the Ardakkeans super-human.’
When Mala switched off, there was none of the intimate cosiness of her last talk with Chertro.
That might have pleased me, but by then I was in an advanced state of fear-chill, feeling nothing much except numb.
Even so, some brain cells were still working, as I stared inwardly at the nub of the problem.
Phetam had been stolen from Ardakke by someone who had no shortage of credits to spend and who had access to the secretive practices of diplomats and Emissaries.
And Phetam was supposed to have magical powers, or something.
I sat unmoving, adding up all the factors over and over, getting  the same answer, while Posi took us up into Highlight and on to the first Netline of our route.
Then I took a deep breath.
’ Posi,’I said carefully,’give me a list of what the old data packages you found says are the special powers of the Ardakkeans.
And a comparison list of the so-called divine powers of the God-Kings of Fraxilly.’
Mala, who had been doing some thinking of her own, looked at me uneasily.
’ I see you've grasped the implications.’
’ The implications have grasped us,’I said.
Then Posi replied, and the lists confirmed every scrap of my dread.
Not that they corresponded exactly, but they were close enough.
The Ardakkeans were said to be superhumanly strong and invulnerable to most life-threats.
They supposedly could even live a while in space without life support.
I grew colder, remembering their visit to my ship.
They had the power of flight, super-effective senses., X-ray vision, Heat-ray vision.
They were also amazingly healthy, immensely potent sexually, and unusually long-lived.
The listed powers of the God-King, assembled from among his worshippers, tended to be more flattering and less specific.
But the echoes were clear.
He was said to be super-strong and super-virile, invulnerable to mortal harm, and had occupied the throne for more than two centuries.
While his predecessors had been ordinary royal humans.
’ So,’said Mala quietly,’the God-King has been bribing technicians on Ardakke and stealing phetam all that time, to make himself godly.
And bleeding his world to death, to finance…’
But the rest of her sentence was lost, as Posi interrupted with a note of puzzlement in her voice.
’ Del — my perceptors show a spacecraft presence in this Netline.’
Now, most travellers know that Highlight isn't really a velocity, nor is a Netline a place.
It's different plane of existence, where normal space and time are somehow by passed.
The physics baffles me, the philosophy bores me — but I know that I would take about seven years for me to  write out all the digits in a statement of the odds against encountering another ship in Highlight.
If we had done so, it meant…
’ The other ship,’Posi said, confirming my thought as it formed,’has been locked on to our energy-field infrapattern, by means of the advanced Intelloid that controls it.’
My fear-chill magnified unbearable.
If the ship was locked on to us, it must have been following us from Vadinamia.
’ Posi, down to Firstlight’I yelled.
Posi moved at speeds that make a neutrino seem like a Habectric salt-snail.
But this time she was too late.
Even as I spoke, we were reduced to just about no light at all.
A terrible grinding crunch struck at us like a solid barrier.
The ship leaped and juddered as if trying to turn to inside out.
My pouch-seat automatically deepened and clutched me like an egg.
As a reddish darkness gathered in my vision, I waited breathing with difficulty, to die.
Because that's usually what happen when your ship has been blasted in space by fusitronic guns.
’ I have stabilized at Halflight speed,’I heard Posi say — and found myself almost babbling with relief that she was still functioning.
And that I was.
’ Where's the other ship?’
Mala asked, her voice as raw as I'm sure men would have sounded, if I'd been able to speak.
’ In pursuit,’Posi said, with disapproval.
’ I am taking evasive action’.
I found some of my voice.
’ How badly have we been hit?’
’ Damage survey,’Posi replied,’shows disruption of outer fabric at a midship location.
Automated mechatons have already set a temporary patch and seal.
Further damage…’
’ Oh please,’I mumbled.
’…as follows.
Eight preceptors partially disrupted.
One thruster of planetary drive shot down…’
For a moment I wondered if I'd brought the bad luck down on us by pretending the planetaries weren't working, at the Vadinamian Valve.
’ And,’Posi went on,’sections of the interfield links within the guidance systems are coming unstable.
At the moment however, I still have lightspeed impulse power and navigational capacity.’
’ And life support?’
I asked urgently.
’ And the guns?’
’ And your own systems?
And the comm?’
Mala put in just as urgently.
’ And the vid’I added.
Posi's voice sounded weary, like a parent pointing out the  obvious to troublesome children.
’ If the ship had sustained damage in any of those areas, I would have included the data in my damage survey.’
She paused for an instant.
’ I can offer a conclusion, on a high probability level, that the enemy ship intended to immobilize us, not to destroy us’.
Immobilize us, board us, rob us, I thought miserably.
but then all thought was dispersed.
The pouch-seat clutched me again as the ship suddenly bounced sideways with another grinding crunch and shriek of stressed metal.
’ Posi!’
I was shrieking as well.
’ The enemy ship has fired on us again,’Posi said easily,’but ny evasive action was effective and the blast did not strike us.’
’ Are we just going to go evading?’
Mala asked, her voice even more ragged than before.
’ You want to go-sub-light and shoot it out?’
I snarled.
’ That would be unwise,’Posi said, with her usual refusal to perceive irony.
’ My suggestion would be to use the Highlight Flicker, to effect an escape.’
My mouth opened, but I said nothing.
The flicker is a navigational trick used by ships in a hurry to make planetfall.
They go straight from planetary speed to full Highlight, then back again — and back and fourth, time after time, in little jumps.
Each jump crosses a few light-hours in a bio-second or two.
It helps to a get a ship through crowded places like solar systems without running into a planet.
But the Flicker is used by freighters with full-automatic Intelloid navigation.
Not by ships with human passengers.
Because a prolonged series of such jumps can seriously unhinge a human nervous system.
’ It'd kill us,’I said at last, faintly.
’ A brief use of the Flicker would merely cause pain and unconsciousness, with assurance of full recovery,’Posi said.
I swear I could hear amusement in her voice.
’ And the element of surprise could allow is to break away, or could being us into a position to fire on the other ship’.
’ What if it dosen't?’
I asked.
’ Then they fire on us,’Mala said grimly.
’ Shut up, Curb.
Posi, do it.’
Posi never wasted time obeying orders.
The leap to full Highlight plunged me deep into the pouch-seat.
But then the shattering instant fallback into sub-light speed felt like some thing was trying to pull my bones out through my flesh.
I howled with the pain, howled again when something like a mountain fell crushingly on me as Posi hurled us straight back up to Highlight.
The reddish darkness returned to my vision, and I dived into the anaesthetic of unconsciousness with a welcoming sob.
’ Right,’Mala said, with more crispness than she should have been able to produce.
’ What now?’
’ My head hurts,’I said weakly.
So for that matter, did every nerve-ending in my body.
True, I seemed to be alive and intact.
But I wasn't sure that was enough compensation for the pain.
’ Come on, Curb,’Mala snapped.
’ I'm hurting too, but we're not going to get anywhere sitting around moaning.’
’ I don't much want to get anywhere,’I mumbled.
She sniffed.
’ Yes, you do, and so do I. So we have to figure out who's after us and how we can avoid another attack.’
With some justifiable complaints, I struggled to sit up.
It was just like her, to be super-efficient after an emergency, when normal people are wanting to curl up somewhere soft and ease their battle wounds.
But I knew that Mala would allow me no peace until I joined in her speculations.
The trouble was, that's all we could do — speculate.
Although Posi had perceived the presence of the other ship she had never had a clear sight of it.
Being in Highlight tends to distort her direct sensory modes.
And even when the other ship tried to follow is into Flicker, so that both of is were in sub-light together for a millisecond, Posi had only glimpsed it.
Because in that instant she had fired the ship's rear guns and had blasted the other ship's nose section into particles.
So all she could report was that it seemed dark and cruiser-shaped.
’ It could have been anyone,’I grumbled.
In fact I was sure that I knew who it was, and I thought Mala must be too.
’ Anyone form Vadinamia,’Mala pointed out, or they couldn't have locked on to us.
I nodded, then flinched as my headache flared.
’ It could have been lover-boy Gharr.’
’ No in a dark-ship’she said coldly.
’ Anyway, he wouldn't.’
I was tempted to make some sardonic inquiry about how Mala could sound like she was defending Gharr, when he had so obviously been the one how had tried to kill me on Vadinamia.
But I decided against it, not entirely sure that I'd like the answer.
’ All right,’I conceded at last .
’ This time it was almost definitely Famlio.
Maybe we should have paid the protection fee.’
Mala snorted,’ And you said it would be easy to get past them.
A calculated risk’.
’ I didn't expect…’
I began.
’ No’, she broke in,’you never do.
But anyway, I don't think they came after us just to get their little fee.’
Unhappily, I knew she was right.
Especially in the light of what her friend Chertro had told us.
Which all meant several unpleasant things.
That the cylinder we were carrying probably did contain the Ardakkean phetam.
Or at least that may dangerous people thought it did.
That the phetam was unguessably valuable, a rich prize for criminals.
perhaps because it was some kind of miracle elixir.
Or people thought it was.
And that Famlio had come after us to get it.
Even worse, all the other unspeakable villains wanted it too.
Gharr had already tried to get me out of the way — probably thinking that Mala would collect it and her too.
And Ten-huc was no doubt hatching his own plots.
And who else?
Mala had clearly reached all the same conclusions.
’ If we really are carrying the Ardakkean phetam…’she began.
But I interrupted her.
’ Posi — cancel the course setting for Fraxilly.’
As Posi complied, Mala looked startled.
’ What are you doing’.
’ Keeping us alive,’I said flatly.
’ The only edge we have is that the Ardakkean prisoner, the thief, didn't know the final destination of the stolen phetam.
So Famlio can't know it either.
Which means that even if we do have the phetam on board, our enemies don't know where we're going.
But they'll know -from the ship that attacked us — where we are now.
Any they'll come looking for us.’
She nodded slowly, grasping the point.
The ship that had followed us would have left a record of its course, and ours.
So Famlio would send more ships along that route, searching for us.
And not just to take the phetam, either — not now.
We had done the unforgivable, striking back, disabling a Famlio ship, maybe killing Famlio people.
They'd have to hunt us down or suffer a severe loss of credibility.
The hunt might demand a huge allocation of ships and personnel, but Famlio had the resources.
The odds, in the short term anyway, favoured them.
Especially if we kept going on the course we'd established.
’ We'll have to hide out,’Mala was saying thoughtfully.
’ Turn the phetam over to the Fedpol and disappear for a while Maybe out on the Rim Beyond the Rim.’
’ You're partly right,’I said.
’ About disappearing’.
Not forever, of course— not with the usual turn-over of Famlio personnel.
In a few bio-years, the decision-makers of the organization would mostly be new appointees, their predecessors dead or retired, old vengeance losing importance.
’ Partly right,’Mala echoed, frowning.
’ We're not turning over the phetam to the FedPol,’I told her.
’ We're going to deliver it to Fraxilly.
We'll need the creds when we go into hiding.’
Her frown deepened.
’ We can't just deliver the phetam now we know it's stolen.
It belongs to the Ardakkeans.’
’ We can't be absolutely certain,’I said quickly, that there is phetam in the cylinder.
We're just guessing — like Famlio and all the other crooks are guessing.
And there's no way we can find out.
But we do know that delivering the cylinder, whatever is in it, will bring us a lot of creds.
And I want them.
’ But its crazy, going to Fraxilly now,’Mala said.
’ We have to find a place to hide, and get dug into it.’
’ Not me,’I told her as I struggled painfully up from the pouch-seat.
’ I'm not spending the time ploughing the Cochlea fever-steppes or herding Tyyrkyn mountain pigs.
If I have to disappear, I want to do so in comfort.
With Fraxillian kilocreds to smooth the way.’
Her frown eased back a little.
Maybe it was the thought of the mountain pigs.
’ Well,’she said,’if we make the delivery quickly…’
Then she remembered.
’ But you just cancelled the course to Fraxilly!’
My nerve-ends were even more painfully ablaze now that I was vertical.
’ We need a different route to Fraxilly — more tangled and roundabout, to throw off any pursuit,’I said tersely.
’ Start Posi setting a course that will take us on to a parallel Netline, doubling back the way we came.
The she can work out a different course to the Fraxilly sector.’
’ And what are you going to be doing?’
’ I am going to my cabin’I told her.
’ Where I'm going to have a relaxing soak in AmnioEze, and a drink or two.
Or more than two.
And during that time I am going to work out a way to keep us safe while we complete the job that will make us rich.’
She sniffed.
’ With a damaged ship, and a Famlio fleet scouring the galaxy for us.’
’ Those facts make my task harder,’I said loftily,’But not impossible.’
And I took myself away, feeling pleased with my parting shot, to my recuperation.
Recuperation went well, as modern science ensure that it will, especially after a nap deepened by some well-aged Ilwiiin smoke-ale.
But the thinking proved less successful.
A way to combine the two goals, safety and riches, eluded me.
Perhaps my brain hadn't fully recovered at the time, despite the sleep.
And my concentration wasn't helped when Posi intruded to tell me there was a comm-call of some urgency.
For one sweaty moment I was sure it would be Famlio, about  to issue dire threats and promises.
Not that it would really have been a problem, other then psychologically.
Famlio or whoever could fling out all the comm-calls they wanted, along the Netlines, but they couldn't get a fix on our position until or unless we responded.
Yet Posi seemed to think that I'd want to respond to this call.
And when I saw the face on the screen, I agreed.
It was y'Pripio, the little flunkey of the Fraxillian Emissary, looking as bland as ever, information me that the Lord y'Fiprehaude desired a moment of my attention.
This time the old Emissary was not in flirtatious mood.
Tension was plucking at his aged tendons like lute strings, mottling his complexion into an approximation of Sefcredian clay-lizard skin.
’ So glad to find you well, dear boy,’he said, wheezing slightly.
’ It seems so long since we…
I seem to have grown a trifle anxious.’
If you only knew, I thought.
’ What could be troubling you?’
I asked with careful innocence
’ One hears things,’he said vaguely.
’ Tales of…unusual sorts of activity.
On Vadinamia.’
’ Oh, that’I said, knowing that he would have acquired fully detailed accounts of everything that happened, from a number of free-lance information vendors.
’ A flurry of excitement, nothing to create anxiety.’
I gave him a smile with perhaps a little cruelty at its edges.
’ Not anywhere as exciting another bit of what you call’activity’.
The murder of a man who stole a priceless substance from a world called Ardakke.’
He was an experienced diplomat skilled at revealing little.
But the comm-screen exposes faces in the harshest detail, and for an instant I saw something move at the back of his wet old eyes, like a creature threshing in a net.
’ How interesting, I'm sure,’he wheezed at last.
’ But to our point — you do have the cylinder safe?
And you can make delivery?’
’ I've contracted to do so, and I will,’I said firmly.
’ But if I'm delivering what I think I'm delivering, your lordship, I'm an accessory to theft and corruption.
More immediately, I'm also  a target for every bandit and assassin out on the Netlines.
Which means — since I didn't know about all that when we drew up the contract — there will be a surcharge.’
He snarled and whined and grizzled, admitted nothing, pretending to be insulted, tried to bully me or bluff me or charm me.
Eventually, when I voiced the thought that it might be better if the FedPol confirmed that a further pleasingly large sum had been transferred to the holding facility of my Fedbank, to be released to my account when the job was done.
I knew the Emissary wouldn't cheat me, because then I wouldn't deliver.
And because I knew too much.
But the prospect of even more income from the delivery, made it all the more imperative that I got on and off Fraxilly safely.
And in that moment I realized that by some deep-rooted instinct I was already doing the right thing.
Almost automatically I'd told Posi to shift the Netlines and double back.
We were heading away from the Fraxilly sector, so Famlio could search in that area all they wanted.
And we were heading towards a sector containing a world that seemed a beneficial place to be, for a while.
It was closer, for one thing.
And it was also a place where I could get my ship repaired by skilled persons whom I more or less trusted.
Which was fairly high priority, if I was going to elude the hunters.
I knew there were risks in going to that planet, but there were risks wherever we went.
And increasingly, as I thought about it, that planet seemed the best idea.
While Famlio was looking for us near the Fraxilly sector, we'd be elsewhere.
By the time they left that sector to search elsewhere we'd be heading for Fraxilly, with functional ship.
It all underlined what I'd always believed — that Famlio had grown to big, scattered and over-confident, and could be eluded by someone who was small, concentrated and clever.
They'd never know that we'd been and gone.
Then, with a little luck, we'd find a comfortable hiding place and wait for Famlio and everyone to forget about us.
Quick, smart and lucky, I said to myself.
Practically my motto.
Then I went to tell Mala.
’ We're going where?’she said, her voice rising.
’ Home,’I repeated.
’ Uulaa?’
Her voice rose higher.
’ Everyone know's that's our base.
You've located there for year's…’
’ And I have friends there,’I said.
’ Like Frejji, who'll fix the ship better than anyone.’
’ Bit Famlio…’she began.
’ Famlio is looking for us in other sectors.
By the time they think of looking on Uulaa, we'll be gone, with the ship fixed.’
’ So you say’she replied, looking a little dazed.
’ Mala, love’I patted her arm encouragingly.
’ Believe me.
Uulaa is the last place, right now, that would look for us’.
’ Everyone's looking for y', Del’Frejji said.
’ What y'been up to?’
I didn't answer right away.
I had gone into partial shock.
We had arrived in Uulaa's system a few moments before, and as we drifted down to planetary speed I'd contacted Frejji on the comm.
Frejji is a big, bulk exter, very humanoid aside from her glossy dark-purple fur and the eight fingers on each hand.
She is a brilliant mechanic engineer, especially in spacecraft structures and Intelloid analysis.
She is also something of a friend.
Which has never stopped her charging me painfully large sums.
Nor had it stopped her form giving me news that struck me dumb with panic.
After assuring me the her comm was entirely secure — no one tampers with Frejjis machinery — she had told me that odd things were happening on Uulaa.
Strange people arriving singly or in groups, all with something in common.
They were all criminals.
And they were all looking for me.
Mala was glowering at me, an angry gaze that could have melted accelsteel, not needing to voice her opinion of my error of judgement.
For a moment, in my panic, I thought about swinging the ship around about and getting out.
But there was a problem.
On the flight to Uulaa Posi had reported a growing unrealiability within sections of the guidance system, mainly the  interlinked network of preceptors that serves as Posi's external senses.
If we didn't get the damage repaired, we could end up with a blind ship and fly ourselves into a black hole.
In short, I had to be there, at Uulaa.
Where a host of crooks was looking for me.
’ Who…’
I stopped, cleared my throat, tried again.
’ Who's looking for me?’
’ Quicker t'say who ain't,’Frejji said with a sharp-fanged grin.
’ Lessee.
Place is fulla Famlio, fer a start.
Top people, too.
Saw with my own eyes that hotshot Pulvidon’.
I gulped
’ Then there's the golden boy, what's his name, Gharr, an all his little devils…’
I moaned
’ An a buncha other folk.
Ayril ka Ti remember her — the robber baroness?
An' con artists like Retaa've an'ol'Perrishikk.
Then there's…’
I whimpered as the recitation went on.
It was as if Uulaa was hosting a PanGalactic Convocation of Criminality.
With me as the guest of honour, and piece de resistance.
’ Why’Frejji was saying,’somebody told me they saw just about the nastiest bunch, come in lately.
Y'wouldn't believe it.
Oversize exters bulging with weapons — an in the middle of em looking a thousand years old, Ten-huc himself.
Ol'Blackbreath’.
I shuddered.
’ An there's more spies pouring in, too,’Frejji added.
’ Never been so many, here.
An all of em, crooks an spies an everybody, sniffing round after ol'Del Curb.’
’ Frejji,’I said weakly.
’ Help’.
But when I quickly explained our problem and made my request, her large furry face wrinkled with doubt.
’ I c'n see why y'd want me t' come make repairs in space’, she growled.
’ But I don't like it.
Slows the work down, makes it dangerous.’
That wasn't true and I knew it.
Frejji is completely at home in zerograv, having spent many years building magni-freighters among the moons of Cytostom.
Anyway, she'd have the help of Posi and the ships auto-mechatons.
And her own  delicate manual skills could never be hampered by the customised membrane-thin spacesuits that she works in.
Especially when she has a little TK ability that can perform many manipulations beyond the reach of her hands.
So, I thought, she's after something too.
Like all the others.
But when I accused her of that, she firmly shook her head.
’ Not me, Del,’she said.
’ I want nothing t'do with what's got killer after y'.
I jus' want a fair rate fer a hard job.’
I relaxed a little.
She was just using the fact that I was desperate to hold me up for an outrageously high fee.
I'd have done the same myself.
I winced a little— well, a lot — when she named the sum.
But eventually we haggled out an agreement.
She would shuttle up with her equipment as soon as I got established just outside Uulaa's territorial space.
And she'd work day and night, as I wished, for only a small extra payment.
’ Course y'll hafta get off the ship,’she said.
My throat tightened again.
’ why?’
’ Y'got interfield problems, I got t'shut down, check through.
No ceptors or life support or nothin.
Y' won't wanta hang around.’
’ We can't go down to the planet!’
I said perhaps a little shrilly.
Frejji snorted.
’ Y'want t'stay in y'r ship after I shut down y'r ceptors an everything?
What if Famlio sends up a ship t'make a sweep?
Y'd be trapped, never see e'm coming.’
I flinched, feeling trapped already.
She had a point about how vulnerable the ship would be.
But even so…
’ all those spies, though, Frejji,’I began to say.
Her laugh was boisterous.
’ Del c, mon!
This Uulaa!
It's fun time here, like always.
This's the Three-Moon Festival or maybe the Ceremony of the Inner Spiral, I ferget.
Fancy dress time!
Get y'rself up as a Geho'quein spine-toad or somethin’, come on down and mingle.
Who's gonna know it's you?
So, fretful and fearful, I had to give in.
I felt even worse after I transferred a lot of kilocreds to Frejjis bank as a down payment.
Meanwhile Posi was sliding the ship forward, slowly and carefully because of the malfunctioning guidance system, to the co-ordinates Frejji had chosen.
Just beyond a world  teeming with terrifying folk who wanted and dismantle me.
How fast news travels on criminal grapevines, I thought miserably.
Especially when to concerns something pricelessly rare, like phetam.
But in the end I saw that Frejji was right — that Mala and I could probably stay unrecognized in the midst of a typical Uulaan carnival.
And there were a couple of other things, I told myself reassuringly, that to tip the balance back a little towards our side.
First, I knew that they were on Uulaa — but they wouldn't know I was.
Second, Uulaa was my home.
So I probably knew it better than most of my enemies.
I called Uulaa my home, but of course it isn't my planet of origin — or anyone else's.
It is a warm, mostly oceanic world with only rudimentary forms of life, whose few land masses had been restructured and reatmosphered as holiday havens for the rich.
It has gone through several more face-lifts, and is now a thriving resort world, especially popular among the fast-moving, free spending hot burners of the galaxy.
Who include hustlers and tricksters and lawless folk of every sort.
I suppose that's why I like to.
With its reputation, Uulaa is an important crossroads.
If everyone who is anyone doesn't actually touch down on the planet fairly often, at least their activities come to be known through Uulaa's favourite indoor sport (after making money)— trading information, along with rumour and scandal.
Best of all, Uulaa is a Freeworld, without local sentient population and so outside the Federation.
The Fedpol had undercover agents there, naturally, but no official presence.
Even better, people like tax inspectors didn't visit even under cover, unless they were feeling suicidal.
So all in all its a great place.
And it likes to make itself more attractive to the hordes of fun-seeking visitors by holding an almost endless series of Festivals, Carnivals, Games, Ceremonials and so on.
During which the authorities relax  even the few laws and rules that normally exist.
At festival time nothing is illegal or forbidden as long as you have the price.
Everyone puts on an identity-erasing disguise and leaps uninhibitedly into no-holds-barred, orgiastic delight.
Which, I was beginning to think, might be just what I needed to ease a few tensions.
And if the gathered criminals could find me on Uulaa at its most chaotic, they were sharper than I imagined.
By the time Posi had established the ship at the specified position, Mala seemed to be thinking along similar lines.
She had stopped giving me murderous looks and seemed quite bright-eyed as we got ourselves ready to leave the ship.
By then we'd decided to go down separately, in the little passenger pod.
Mala chose to go first, saying that she would check out the landing area for dangerous watchers and warn me if necessary when she sent the pod back up.
I didn't argue.
But I did argue when she insisted that we remain separated while on the planet.
I'd had visions of various Uulaan delights that I hoped she might join me in, above all the free-fall Orgitunnel, among whose heaving tangle of bodies in simulated zerograv I've had many memorable experience.
And Mala had put on a figure-hugging neck-to-ankle suit of Luxipelt, which together with a whiskered and eared mask made her look like on of the slinkiest, most enticing Clovellyan felinoids I'd ever seen.
But she was insistent.
’ People are looking for us down there, Curb.
Think.
They're looking for a man and a woman, our sizes and our ages.
Disguise or not, if we're together they'll look at us harder.’
I agreed, naturally.
Avoiding throngs of killers did strike me as a higher priority even than full filling my Mala-fantasies.
So off she went, while I got on with transferring my mini-weapons to my own costume.
I felt I was looking quite authentic, in the guise of one of the nearly extinct Grislewings of Egertro.
(They're primitive, semi-humanoid exters who haven't given up being cannibals despite sharply reduced birth rate.
Hence near -extinction.)
I was wearing a tight black one-piece, with hands and neck coloured Egertroic green, and artful of scarlet down  my front to simulate the usual bloodstains.
As well as the long-muzzled, black-fanged mask, I had a swirling ankle-length cape in black and green to represent the wings.
I was examining the effect in the mirror before putting on the mask, vaguely wishing that I could levitate a little to improve the illusion.
But flight, I thought, idly would be a useful ability any time.
And that led me the think of phetam, and to wonder again if it really did confer super-powers.
Toying with that idea started a train of thought about some of the other activities probably open to super-beings, which led me to conjure up some images of myself with Sergia, the Ardakkean, minus her costume, in the Orgitunnel.
So for a second it seemed the most natural thing in the world when the ships airlock suddenly opened, and I stepped out of my cabin to see Sergia framed in the lock, with two male Ardakkeans behind her.
She still filled her boring blue costume wonderfully, I noted — while part of my mind slowly realized that my ship's damaged preceptors probably had kept Posi from spotting their approach.
Then the same part of my mind registered that the Ardakkeans had again come to my ship without spacesuits, and had opened airlock manually despite its seals.
And that part of my mind seemed to whine faintly and go very cold and still.
But the rest of me was tinning a bluff, of the outrage-at-intrusion sort.
’ What do you think you're doing?’
I demanded.
’ Breaking in here’.
’ Curb!’
Sergia interrupted, moving towards me with a stern gaze.
’ Can you truly be a thief and lair.?
Do you dare to help those who robbed us?’
I drew myself up looking offended.
’ What are you talking about?’
’ We have learned things about the galaxy,’she replied grimly,’and we will be greatly glad to get back to our Ardakke.
But out here we have searched and looked and listened — and we have heard things.
We have heard about a planet called Vadinamia, where our stolen phetam may have been taken.
And we have heard that Del Curb was on that planet, along with numerous evil people who seek the phetam  Now all the evil ones seem to be on Uulaa, pursuing Del Curb, As are we.’
’ How did you find me?’
I asked, my bluff crumbling a little.
One of the men smiled mirthlessly.
’ The criminals look for you amid the filth and decadence of this world,.
But Sergia believed that you would be fearful, would skulk in space beyond the planet.
So we have waited out here, watching.
And here you are.’
’ With our phetam,’growled the other men.
I tried a light laugh,’ Everyone thinks I have the phetam, just because I'm a well-known courier.’
’ Or because you are a well-known trickster driven by greed,’Sergia snapped.
That stung me.
’ And what are you driven by?’
I demanded.
’ A big hearted desire to give phetam to the galaxy?’
Then I flinched as they took a threatening step towards me.
’ Phetam belongs to us,’Sergia said stonily,’not to any other planet or people.
Others who lack our inborn ethics would use it for evil ends.
No doubt it has been so used by the unknown one who has been arranging the thefts.
We are driven, Curb, by a need to retrieve the phetam — or destroy it.
Then we can return to Ardakke and take steps to prevent further thefts.’
’ Fine by me,’I said, managing a shrug.
’ But I can't help you’.
They all scowled.
’ Why should we belive you?’said one of the men.
I thought fast.
’ Because,’I said cleverly,’You know that my partner has a close connection with the FedPol.
Don't you think the FedPol would have checked me out, since Vadinamia?
But I'm not under arrest?’
Sergia's frown deepened for a moment.
’ It may be so.
The man Chertro seemed honest and reliable.’
Old reliable Chertro had rightly called them naive and gullible, I thought.
And I smiled winningly, while the sight of Sergia's abundantly filled costume gave me an idea or two.
’ No hard feelings, I can understand your concern.
Tell you what — why don't you come down with me to Uulaa?
We could see the sights, have some fun, and maybe I could  think of some ways I could help you.’
I looked at the two men.
’ Sorry, though.
I've only got a two-person pod.’
The men glanced at Sergia.
For a moment I felt hopeful, since she had begun to smile and was moving closer to me.
But then her smile twisted as her hand reached out to grasp the form of my costume — and lifted me smoothly into the air, at arms length above her head.
She hadn't adjusted her stance or braced herself or anything.
Just hoisted me up, with the strength of her arm alone.
’ Curb, your thoughts are plain.
I have looked at your planet Uulaa, and I know what sorts of fun you would seek there.
I can see the lust-gleam in your eyes when you stare at me.
You are a fool.
Ardakkean women have their choice of Ardakkean men when they wish to mate.’
Her gaze swept slowly over me, up and down, lingering for a moment on my groin while her smile grew mocking.
’ I do not think you have…much to offer.’
What most humiliating was the odd glint that showed in her eyes as she studied me.
It made me recall the list of supposed super-powers of Ardakkeans.
Including X-ray vision.
As her companions bellowed with laughter, she tossed me aside.
As someone might discard an empty mixifoam container.
I landed in a heap, bruised and furious, thankful only that Mala hadn't been there.
She probably would have been laughing too.
’ It occurs to me,’Sergia went on,’that Chertro and the Federation Police might also have been deceived by you.
So we will search, for our phetam.’
I expected them to start flexing their muscles in a wrecking, ransacking assault on the ship.
I did not expect anything like what happened.
The three of them moved thought the ship at a speed that I can hardly describe.
And the I could hardly see.
They became three blue smears of light on the air, flashing from control area to cabins to cargo spaces to everywhere, every centimetre of the ship's interior.
They didn't wreck anything, they hardly disturbed anything, but they examined everything.
In seconds and with that strange glint in all their eyes.
But when at last they halted in front of me, their eyes also  held disappointment.
Because even if they did have X-ray eyes, they had failed spot and to penetrate the cylinder of impervious Balbazian steel in my cabin.
’ It seems you do not have it’Sergia said grudgingly.
Her mouth twisted again.
’ It may mean only that you do not have it here,’she said.
’ We still believe that you are a rogue, Curb, without ethics or scruples.
You would be wise to keep away form Ardakkeans, henceforth.’
’ I didn't invite you in here in the first place!’
I yelled.
But they were stalking thought the airlock, ignoring me,.
dragging the lock shut behind them.
It took me a little while to recover form the experience.
I kept seeing Sergia's face as she held me in the air looked me over.
And I knew that I'd be seeing it in my more dejected moments for a long time to come.
But in the end I managed to put the events more or less out of my mind, and to finish my preparations.
Frejji would there soon, and it would be time to leave.
And by then I definitely felt like a bit of relaxation I'd earned it.
Finally I had shifted all the mini-devices form my headband to strategic spots on my Grislewing mask, and put it on.
Which got a big belly-laugh from Frejji when she arrived.
Then Posi announced that the pod had returned — with, reassuringly, no message from Mala.
So all was clear at the spaceport landing area.
Leaving Frejji to it, I slid into the pod and headed down, to mingle with my enemies.
As the pod slowed and the atmosphere-burn began to fade, I could see a sprawl of hazy lights coming up fast.
That was Uulaa-la, the dominant city on the planets dominant land mass.
Not a city but a metropolis, with enough mazy back streets and alleys and passageways to satisfy the most avid intriguer.
Let any crook try to find me, I said to myself, when I go to ground in Uulaa-la.
Shortly the pod made its unceremonious bump of a landing at the immensity of the spaceport, and I stepped warily out.
This was the bad time, when a host of watchers would be inspecting new arrivals.
But while I spotted eighteen known spies in my first glance around, none of them seemed to me focused on me.
We were, after all, in the huge personnel carrier area, with pods, shuttles and other small vehicles coming down in a steady stream, every one of them disgorging masked and costumed revellers.
Calmly I paid for the pod's berth and walked away, neither too fast nor too slow.
I couldn't resist taking a swing over towards the even huger area where full-sized ships would come down, if they did.
I wanted to check on the landing patch that I keep there on a semi-permanent lease.
My route drew no special attention, since many others were moving over that way to watch a magnificent Tau-cluster Megaliner thunder in, no doubt carrying another load of rich hot burners.
From the crowds midst, I glanced to one side and saw with satisfaction that my sign was still there, hovering like script in the air  over my leased patch.
It's a bright Flot-n-ad made by the Electroflare people, and says CURB THE COURIER with, in smaller letters, Del Delivers.
Simple and tasteful.
I'd seen no sign of Mala, but I hadn't expected it, since she'd been right about us being less obvious if we were apart.
Still, I regretted it.
A return to Uulaa at festival time always brightens me up, even with danger around, and I would have liked someone to share it with.
I had the crowd around me, shuffling slowly into a large ground-skim heading for city centre, but it wasn't the same.
I didn't much want to share anything with a grossly fat man wearing nothing but one of the lately fashionable cherub costumes — consisting solely of two small white wings glued to his blubbery back.
Nor was I drawn to two lofty and leafy exters resembling very tall thistles on legs.
So I kept myself to myself, watching everywhere without seeming to look anywhere.
The masks eyes hid my own eye's movement, just as a filter over the mouth would alter my voice when I spoke, in case anyone was using an audio pick-up with instant voice-print comparison.
Also, my costume had discreet padding and my boots had lifts to change my apparent height and size.
And I was wearing a mini-scrambler to distort any preceptors examination of me.
All standard anti-detection practice for the prudent professional.
At the city centre slid out of the skin and moved away thought the dense crowds.
It soon became reasonably certain that I hadn't picked up any kind of tails or bugs, and so I could begin to relax.
Around me the entertainment centres were bulging and booming as the night gathered impetus.
Places to eat, places to drink, places to watch a show, places to put on a show, place to smoke or sniff or inject or otherwise absorb any of the various ecstatic drugs, places to find a partner or several, places to lose a partner, places to gamble, places to indulge you smallest whim no matter how illegal or depraved, places where if you wished you could simply stand and scream.
Places to spend your money.
I stopped for a bite at an eating-place that was in a huge hove-bubble, drifting slowly about the roof-tops along one of the main spiral streets intersecting the city centre.
It was always a favourite place of Mala's, and I hoped to get a  glimpse of her in that enticing felinoid suit, to be sure she was all right.
The place seemed unusually full of lovely women, including an eight-foot mutant with skin the colour of moonlight — but no Mala.
Still not worried, still sliding smoothly through the crowds, feeling as elusive as a shadow, I passed from night-spot to night-spot.
And I began to think that if Uulaa-la was really as full of criminals as Frejji said, they were being very shy.
Aside from the usual number of hard-faced thugs, just low-level muscle.
None of the big-name crooks at all.
In fact, I may have been lulled by that into an unwise bravado.
And the bravado caused me to forget about caution and to head for a place that I'd earlier avoided — because it was my favourite night-spot in Uulaa-la.
Anyone in the city who knew me also knew that I could be found there, at some time every night, if I was on the planet.
It was office, meeting place, amusement centre, whatever I wanted.
Or whatever the owner allowed.
The owner was a small exter named Fif, a ball of orange fur with tentacles, whom I'd known for a long time in various planets.
Not that we were friends.
Fif always seems a little surly with me, because he blames me for some trouble he had on another world.
(But it wasn't my fault that someone blew up his sky-bar while trying to get at me.
Fif's place is an energy-field structure with no visible walls (making it popular with watchers) but with only one entrance.
There Fif stands guard, with a troop of armoured mandroids, checking his clientele.
The structure dominates a central area of the city where developers have built a new Transi-plaza-the kind whose exterior architecture and landscaping is hologrammic, altering entirely (but superficially) every twenty-four bio-hours.
Never a dull moment, sitting around Fif's.
I'd rarely seen the place as packed as it was when I got there.
At the entrance Fif extruded a couple of tentacles — probably organs of vision, but you don't like to ask — and surveyed the large group seeking admission, which included me.
The mandroids didn't stir, so we were in.
I pushed past a knot of overdressed pubescent girls, each with a scarred upper  lip that carried a smear of coloured grease.
It was called Frag, and it would be giving off enough psychochemical fragrance into their nostrils to keep there minds dislocated for a week.
While slowly rotting the flesh of their lips.
I went looking for a quiet place to sit — while gazing with interest at the multi armed, three-breasted Salmo'kkan dancers being sinuous on a mini-stage when I was frozen in mid stride
A table nearby had erupted into a burst of crashes and screams.
Then a formation of Fif's mandroids shouldered thought the throng, and I followed in their wake.
I saw a dwarfish exter on the floor with a nasty gash on his head, while another exter with claws and a beak looked about to disembowel him where he lay.
Clearly a momentary difference of opinion.
Nothing to do with me — but useful.
For the small table where the two combatants had been seated was now empty.
As the mandroids calmly gassed the beaked exter and carted them both off to be flung into the street, I slid on to one of the unstained seats at the table and cheerfully looked around for a servaton.
And then nearly dived under the table.
Except that I couldn't move.
As the throng around me rippled and shifted, I had seen the occupants of two other, larger tables.
The some way to my left contained a number of exters — some insectile and leggy, some reptilian and scaly, some piscine and finny.
All were armed, with everything from blazers to vibro-knives.
And in their midst, immense and motionless, sat a squat, wet-skinned, tentacled being with a trail of black mist escaping from his mouth.
Ten-huc, and his pirates.
At the table a short distance to my right sat a number of bulky, cold-eyed humans with guns visibly beneath their over-tunics.
Black over-tunics, with a fine white stripe, and black shirt with wide white ties.
In their midst was a lean and hot-eyed man toying with glass and wearing an expression as fierce as a fusitron.
Pulvidon, and his Famlio followers.
I wanted to leap up and run, but I stayed very still.
If I left a table in Fif's that I'd just acquired, I might attract attention.
I badly did not want to attract attention.
As it was, they were  all staring fixedly at the entrance to the place, so I had already been inspected by them.
And by then I could see other, pirates and Famlio, circulating tirelessly through the throng, watching, waiting.
Most often the two groups ignored each other, but tension fizzed in the air around them.
Now and then a circulating pirate might come face to face with a Familo thug, and there would be some ritual snarling and glaring.
Also now and then someone at one of the two tables might look at the other table with a sneer or an ugly remark.
If I hadn't been rigid with shock, I might have found it ironic.
For each threatening look flung from one table to the other passed right across where I was sitting, between them.
There they were, all wrapped up in their rivalry, never guessing that the object of it all was sitting right in front of them.
But it was a perilous position.
They had already out guessed me, by staking out my favourite haunt.
The longer I stayed there the more likely it was that I'd make some betraying movement and fix their attention in me.
So I sat motionless, sweating inside my costume, trying to think.
At least, in Fif's, drinking wasn't a betraying movement.
When a servaton finally appeared, I ordered a goblet of the fuming Paoostyc liquor called Old Sunburst, raised my mask just enough to gulp it, then ordered two more.
The first one was still exploding through my cortex as I gulped the second and reached for the third.
I threw that one back even faster, because in that moment a new shock struck at me — proving that bad things do come in threes.
Not that the new development was entirely bad, for it certainly riveted the attention of the pirates and Famlio.
But there was nothing else welcome about it.
Creating a little flurry at the entrance, in came Gharr the Gherpotean, with his Gharrgoyles.
He was dressed all in white, as before, skin and hair gleaming and golden.
He'd even enhanced the swashbuckler image with a slim molecublade sword — gold, of course— at his hip.
And he had Mala with him.
Around me, as the pirates and Famlio stared at Gharr, the atmosphere grew so much charged with fury and tension  that it almost crackled, like a defective energy field.
But I hardly noticed, for my attention was entirely on Mala.
She was still wearing her slinky felinoid disguise, with mask, but I knew it was her.
And she didn't seem to be a captive, though there were Gharrgoyles all around her.
In fact Gharr's muscular left arm was clamped firmly around her waist.
But the clasp was more like an embrace, with the hand sliding caressingly and too familiarly up towards her left breast.
And she didn't seem to be resisting at all.
In fact, as I saw them she was saying something to Gharr, making him smile.
I then saw that her arm was around his waist as well.
It occurred to me first that she was playing some dangerous role — as in her old undercover days — perhaps trying to gain some sort of information or advantage.
But then the clutch of girls with grease smeared lips, the frag hags, stumbled past in a burst of squeals at the sight of Gharr the golden.
And I realized the truth, Mala had to be drugged.
For why else, I thought would he be in that position, sensuously embracing a vicious criminal who had tried to kill her partner?
The realization eased my shock a little— enough to make me aware of the sense of violence building up around me.
The pirates and the Famlio were stirring, brandishing or fondling weapons, looking enraged by the entrance of yet another rival.
The Gharrgoyles seemed to be bracing themselves, readying their own weapons.
Fif's mandroids started forming up, stunners and gas-guns poised.
It looked as if a four-way war was about to break out.
Even the most brain damaged to the revellers sensed it, and the noise of the place began to die away.
It was Ten-huc who defused it, perhaps showing that old age brings wisdom even to pirates.
He spat out a black-misted growl, and the pirate crew suddenly began to subside.
So did the Famlio thugs, after Pulvidon he snarled at them, not wanting to be out doing.
And Gharr grinned his gleaming, toothy grin, and took Mala and the Gharrgoyles off to a suddenly vacated table on the far side of the place.
Everything went back to normal.
The noise swelled again, now enlarged by people gabbling about how exciting it was at  Fif's, and wasn't that gorgeous man the famous Gharr, and who was the sexy little cat-person with him, and so on.
And still unnoticed, I sat and thought and had two more sunbursts.
Then, while the pirates and Famlio were staring piercingly at a new contingent of roisterers coming in, I decided to move.
It was one of my more regrettable decision —for I got up and moved towards Gharr, and Mala.
The drinks did it, I know, and the adrenalin rush of the entire evening.
Having gone that long undetected by the enemies sitting almost next to me, I'd got my over-confident bravado back with interest.
I felt ready for anything, despite being a little unsteady on my feet…
I felt even readier when I saw not a Gharrgoyle insight at Gharr's table.
Just the golden giant himself, still clasping Mala, but almost laughingly fending off the attentions of the giggly frag hags.
Mala was looking at them in a distant and superior way when I sidled up next to her.
’ Come on,’I muttered.
’ I'll get you out.’
She whipped her head around, blue eyes staring from behind and felinoid Mask.
Then she laughed.
’ Get lost, biscuit -brain,’she said.
That drew Gharr's gaze.
’ What's this?’he rumbled in that musical baritone.
’ An intruder?
Fly away, little Grislewing!’
Rising to his feet, grinning, he placed a large golden hand over my mask and pushed.
I was flung back, failing, tripping over my capo, into a shrieking crowd of students who were certainly mind-blasted.
With more shrieks, they pushed me back towards Gharr and Mala, who were laughing boisterously.
That was when the bravado and drink and adrenalin took me further than I might have wanted to go.
In a flash of over stimulated temper, I was on the verge of silencing Gharr's laughter with one of my mini-weapons.
But I wasn't that drunk.
It would have been a clear giveaway.
Any yet I badly wanted to make some kind of personnel response.
So I hit him.
At the time it seemed one of the better right hands I've ever thrown — from the shoulder, punching not at but through the  target, with half-pivot that threw all my weight behind the blow.
But it had almost no effect at all.
The punch merely turned Gharr's head slightly away, while one ring left a tiny cut in his jaw-line.
For Gharr, still laughing, swung a backhand that smashed into my face with the force of a Kefridian ramwhale.
That time was lifted from my feet as I hurtled backwards.
Missing the students, I crushed on to a table occupied by several globular exters with drooping antennae and startled expressions.
Dazed as I was, I managed to roll on to the floor and crawl under the table as people crowded over to watch what they thought was a fight.
Then Fif's mandroids pushed their way through, and in the melee I managed to scuttle on hands and knees among all the legs before getting up and getting myself and my aching face away from there.
The jutting snout of the Grislewing mask had absorbed most of the blow, or I'm sure my face would have been crushed.
Even so I felt severely bruised.
And I felt worse, as I stumbled away, remembering Gharr's laughter when I'd struck him.
It would be different, I told myself, when next we met.
I'd probably been off-balance, what with the drinks and the crowds and everything.
I just wished that Mala hadn't also been laughing so hard.
I rode a half-empty ground-skim back to spaceport.
I wanted to get out before anything worse happened.
I'd stay on the sip, whatever Frejji said, and wait for her to finish.
And when Mala came back, I promised myself, I'd be very cool and distant until I got a proper apology.
If she came back…
But those gloomy musings ended abruptly when the skim dropped me near the pod was berthed — and when I saw the shadowy figures around it.
The gnarled shapes were unmistakable even in semi-darkness.
Gharrgoyles.
So Gharr no only had Mala but also knew our pod and had set a trap for me.
Or thought he had.
I slid away, another shadow in my dark costume, and made a wide half-circle to an unoccupied area being prepared for  new landing patches.
There I fumbled under my costume for my pendant, and called Posi.
’ Hello, Del’she said cheerily.
’ Your friend Frejji is a nice person.
She has been telling me…’
’ Posi’I interrupted sharply.
’ Later.
Is Frejji's shuttle still there by the ship.?’
’ Yes Del,’she said, sounding as if she'd be putting if she had lips.
’ Can you call-beam link with it and access its controls?’
’ Easily’
I exhaled with relief.
’ Then send it down to this position to pick me up’.
’ The passenger pod is still down…’she began.
’ Its not available,’I snapped.
’ Send the shuttle.’
So, before long, I was climbing into Frejji's little shuttle, stumbling through the mess of tools and equipment, squeezing into a spare spacesuit, costume and all, and finally lurching through airlock of my ship.
There, to my surprised pleasure, I found grav and life support operating.
There too I saw Frejji's ample backside jutting out of the forward workings behind the panel.
She drew back to look at me, startled.
’ Y're back early.
Not dawn down there yet’.
’ It got…boring,’I said vaguely, as I pulled off the helmet and my mask.
Frejji grinned, seeing my bruised face.
’ Don't look like it was borin'.
Who hit y'?’
’ A little accident’.
I touched my cheekbone and winched.
’ How are you doing here?’
’ Got the planetaries fixed, no trouble,’she said.
’ Checked other stuff, an' the mechs've put on a new hull section, sealed in nice.
But I got trouble with the ceptor links.
Faulty interfields.
Can't get em t'stay on phase…
She can go on like that for hours if she isn't stopped’.
’ When will it be ready?’
’ Can't say.
With these interfields, could be couple hours, couple days’.
I ground my teeth as I watched her crawl back into the machinery.
Two days, with a planetful of crooks looking for  me…and Mala perhaps staying on the planet, with Gharr…
’ You received a communicator call, Del,’Posi put in.
’ Shortly after you left the ship.
I did not acknowledge, but merely recorded it, as you instructed.’
Now what?
I asked myself.
There were a number of people that I didn't hear from.
At least Posi hadn't give our position away by replying.
’ Play it’I said tensely.
Sinking into the pouch-seat, I was aware that I was getting a sever headache to go with the soreness of my face.
Then the message came on-screen and turned the headache into a cosmic migraine.
It was Gharr, with his most arrogant grin.
’ Del Curb’he said.
’ I have your woman, Mala Yorder.
Even in disguise I knew her at once, for a truly sensual woman cannot disguise herself from my perceptions once I have seen her.’
Bighead, I thought.
’ She is not yet aware that I know her.
Nor that she is in fact a captive.
She seems very enamoured with me…’
Smug oaf, I thought
’…and, so I will enjoy her this night before explaining her position to her in the morning.
I intended to keep her, Curb, and perhaps sell her when I tire of her.
Unless you wish to buy her from me now.’
I sat up at that, knowing what was coming.
’ The price of her freedom is the container of the Ardakkean substance.’
Whistle for it, I thought angrily.
’ I know you are nearby,’he went on,’since she is here.
I know your ships comm will record this message, and that you will see it before long.
I give you one bio-day exactly to make contact with me and give me your answer.’
I sat staring at the empty screen for a long time, oblivious of everything around me, including Frejji's cursing as she struggled with interfield links.
My head throbbed agonizedly, and with each regular pound I hear Gharr's voice echoing in my mind.
Worse, I could see clearly the image of Mala clinging to him within the circle of the powerful golden arm.
Enamoured, he'd said.
I told myself that she must have been drugged.
I told myself that someone like Gharr imagine that all women adored him.
But doubts and anxieties crept in among my thoughts, riding the cruel thumping of the headache.
tormenting me with the likelihood that Mala was…that Mala would…that Mala had…
Only after a time did I force my attention to the other problem — Gharr's demand for the phetam in return for Mala.
I knew I didn't want to give them up.
But the memory of Mala in that half-embrace with Gharr made me wonder if she had not already…travelled beyond my reach.
In which case, if our relationship was already wrecked beyond repair, I could hold on to the phetam.
I might even be able to think of a n interesting way to make a larger profit that I would by tamely handing or over the Fraxillians.
The God-King and his people couldn't stop me, or retaliate, or even demand their money back.
Not with what I knew about their  crimes against Ardakke.
And Mala wouldn't be there to reproach me for unethical…
’ Del, y' all right?’
Frejji's voice, making me jump, jolted my headache up on to a new level.
’ No’I groaned,’but I'm going to be’.
’ That's good,’she said vaguely.
’ Me, I gotta go downside, get some stuff.
Those ceptor links won't hold — gotta put in replacements.
Back in a couple hours when I get the stuff together.’
I nodded weakly, wished I hadn't, waved a hand more weakly.
Frejji trundled off to get suited up for the short jump to her shuttle, while I walked very slowly to my cabin in search of medication.
Some time later, my headache had receded, my costume was discarded and my bunk was clasping me as tenderly as a mother's arms.
And I was reaching some conclusions about the choice that Gharr had given me.
It was not a choice that I would ever seek.
But now that Gharr had taken Mala away — and had probably been enjoying her, as he'd quaintly put it — I'd began to see that I really had no choice.
Parting from Mala would be painful, and I would miss her.
But such pain and sadness would be eased by the mega-fortune that the phetam would bring.
If I could make a suitable deal…
With such thoughts bringing peace to my troubled, weary being I sank gently into sleep, to dream of the happiness to be found among the galaxy's wonders by someone who had just become immeasurably rich…
’ Curb’
The shriek that jerked me from sleep sounded like Lehrathghan harpy-bat.
But it was on the comm, put straight through to me without warning.
Because the face on the comm was Mala's distraught and even tear-stained in the early morning light of Uulaa-la.
’ Curb, I'm at the spaceport!
Can't get to the pod, there are Gharrgoyles looking for me…
I need help!’
I raised myself from the bunk slowly.
’ Well, well.
Not so happy with the golden boy now, are we’.
Perhaps it was an effect of the screen, but I thought I saw a flush rise on her throat.
’ You…heard from him?’
’ Oh yes’I said, smiling sourly.
’ He was going to sell you back to me.
For a ridiculously high price.
Has he decided you're not worth it’.
Fury flared in her eyes.
’ When he told me this morning that I was his prisoner, not his…not anything else, he left two Gharrgoyles to guard me.
I don't think they took the job too seriously.
So I got away.’
I could imagine — and I knew the guards wouldn't quickly forget her.
Mala is not only FedPol trained in unarmed combat, she is one of the best naturally dirty fighters I've ever seen.
’ But now they're looking for me everywhere,’She went on.
’ Can we talk after you pick me up?’
I raised a cool eyebrow.
’ I don't recall you being so keen to leave while your lover-boy was knocking me around in Fif's last night’.
Her eyes widened to their full luminous extent, and her lips fell open in an expression of total, artless surprise.
’ Was that you, Del?
The Grislewing?
I had no idea’.
I stared back at her.
Part of my mind was trying to point out that the facial expression was wholly unlike her, and she never called me Del unless she wanted something.
But the rest of me ignored those details and clutched hungrily at the reassurance that she hadn't really played a willing part in my humiliation.
’ I'm glad…’
I began.
But then she produced another harpy-bat shrieked and vanished from screen.
I was looking then only at an empty stretch of spaceport beyond the comm-booth that she'd called from.
But I could hear the breathy snarl that Mala makes when she is about to hurt someone quite badly, and with it a menacing series of grunts that could only be Gharrgoyles.
’ Curb!’
Mala shouted, off screen.
’ Get me out of here!’
Then the dark furriness of a Gharrgoyle, limbs flailing, flew into the comm-lens with a splintering crash, and the screen went blank.
’ Posi’I yelled, leaping to my feet.
’ Get down to the planet spaceport, quick!’
’ Attempting a landing would be unwise, Del,’Posi's calm voice replied.
’ The preceptors have become even more unreliable, and could go off-phase…’
’ Were not landing!’
I was spitting with fear and frustration as I yanked on some clothes and flung myself into the control area.
’ Why should we go down to the spaceport, then?’
She asked interestedly.
’ We're going near to ground level,’I snapped.
’ Aim for the comm-booth that Mala called from, and grab her with the Magnigrip when she's in range’.
’ If I can, Del,’Posi said.
’ But many preceptors are in irregular tremor, phasing in and out.
We really should wait for Frejji to come back and fix them.’
I ground my teeth.
’ We have to get Mala now, Posi.
Just do it.’
A few seconds later we were plunging thought atmosphere, and Posi told me cheerfully that one of the in-phase ceptors had locked on to Mala's position.
At full mag the ceptor scream showed a small group of struggling figures — several gnarled and dark-furred, one bright, trim and sleek.
The bright one was moving in a silvery blur, and there were quite a few dark-furred heaps lying crumpled nearby.
But my spine seemed to turn to cold stone when I saw two other groups converging on the scene of combat.
One seemed to be humans dressed in black, the other was a motley group of exters.
Famlio and the pirates, who had clearly learned from spies about Gharr's captive, and her escape.
Then a line of orange flame, like a livid thread on the screen, spat from the had of one pirate towards the tangle of Gharrgoyles.
I leaped as if it had been fired at me, and shrieked at Posi.
Instantly the narrow-focus tractor bean called the magnigrip speared down.
It fastened on Mala like a grasping hand and snatched her into the air.
Seconds later she stumbled in thought the airlock, gasping for breath, her costume ripped, her hands and face grimy and blood smeared.
’ You took enough time,’she panted.
I ignored her.
’ Posi, take us out.
Firstlight at the earliest possible moment.’
’ Are we not going to wait for Frejji?’
Posi asked plaintively.
’ The preceptors…’
’ Out, Posi!’
I yelled.
’ Now!’
The faint surge, as the planetaries swung away, dropped Mala in her pouch-seat, where she slumped exhaustedly.
’ Sorry,’she said to me.
’ I should thank you’.
Still I ignored her, watching the screens.
We were then too high for much detail, but it looked a general melee back where Mala had been.
And while the crooks were fighting each other, they wouldn't be rushing off to throw ships up after us, to lock onto us before we reached Firstlight.
’ Aren't you going to say anything?’
Mala asked.
’ What should I say?
Talk about the weather?
Ask you if you had a nice time?’
’ Curb, stop’she said tiredly.
’ Gharr was at the spaceport when I landed, and he stopped me tight away.
He told me he's infallibly able to recognize women even if he's only seen them once.
He claims it's mutant ability.
Something to do with pheromones…’
’ I'm sure you were giving off plenty of those,’I said bitterly.
Now she was ignoring me.
’ I didn't know, at first, that he's recognized me.
I thought he's just picked me up.
So I had to go along with it, to avoid making him suspicious’.
’ I saw you going along with it, I snarled.
Climbing up him like a vine.’
She was silent for a moment, and my stomach clenched as I saw her face soften, her eyes grow dreamy.
’ He's an amazing man, Gharr,’she said in a faraway murmur.
’ A magnetism like nothing I've ever…totally overpowering.
And so romantic…an gentle…and skilled…’
I swallowed.
’ Skilled?’
I repeated raggedly.
The dreaminess left her eyes as she glance at me.
’ In many ways’, she said quickly.
’ He has many abilities…’
I met her glance, not sure what she was saying.
’ When I saw you in Fif's,’I said tentatively,’you seemed…not under your own control.
as if you were drugged, or hypnotized.’
She nodded slowly, her mouth curving in a small, remembering smile.
’ Perhaps I was, somehow.
In a way, I think I was.’
’ I knew it’I slapped my thigh with delight, making her jump.
’ I knew it had to be something like that.
So it wasn't your fault.
You can't be blamed for…anything.
And we should just forget it.
Just put the whole episode out of our minds, pretend it didn't happen.’
’ Yes’she said quietly, still with the little secret smile.
’ Fine.
Well put it out of our minds.’
’ You must have been furious,’I added,’when he told you this morning why he'd picked you up.’
’ At first,’Her smile faded.’
I suppose I felt used.
But thinking about it —’ the smile grew again —’maybe not.
He never hurt me.
And whatever he may have tried to gain from me, he also gave me a great deal.’
I frowned.
’ Such as what?’
’ Oh…’she glanced quickly at me again, then away.
’ I just mean experience.
A learning experience.’
’ Right,’I said nodding.
’ And the chance to flatten a few Gharrgoyles.’
’ That too,’she said with a grin.
’ And it all worked out.
I'm free now, we're safely away from Uulaa, and we still have the phetam.’
’ I'm not so sure about safely away.
Frejji hadn't finally rationalized the ceptor links.
They're phasing quite a lot.’
’ You mean they might not get us to Fraxilly’.
’ Can't tell.
But anyway, I…um…
I've been thinking.
About Fraxilly.’
She sat up, glowering at me.
’ You can stop thinking, if that means trying to find a way to steal the phetam and sell it somewhere else.
I know you, Curb.
I'm not even sure I should be letting you talk me into taking the phetam to Fraxilly rather than the FedPol.
But we're certainly not going to play highest-bidder games.
Not with some of the worst criminals in the galaxy after us.’
’ And the Ardakkeans,’I said without thinking.
Then I had to tell her about the visit — about most of it — from Sergia and her cohorts.
And that made Mala even more adamant.
’ We wouldn't have a chance,’she insisted.
’ Not against all  of them.
Our only hope is to get the phetam to Fraxilly, get our creds, and find a safe hiding place — until everyones interest in us dies down.’
’ But the ship,’I said lamely.
’ Could we just think about my idea, while look for a place to get the ceptors repaired…?’
’ Posi,’Mala interrupted,’What's the probability of a total preceptor breakdown, leaving you unable to navigate?’
’ The preceptor links are going out of phase at random., Mala,’Posi replied.
’ But up to this moment no single phase out has lasted more than 4.58 bio-minutes.
Nor have all preceptors, as yet, phased out simultaneously.
The probability of a total breakdown of preceptor links, for duration that would inhibit navigation, is 84.91 against.’
’ There’, Mala said to me firmly.
’ We can make it to Fraxilly.
And we're going, Curb.
I want to get clear of this mess before anything else happens.’
I hunched down in my pouch-seat, trying hard to think of a good argument against heading for Fraxilly.
Then I found that something was nudging at my memory.
I tried to play back what we'd been saying.
That was it — when Mala said,’ I want to get clear…’
’ Posi!’,
My yell nearly made Mal jump out of her pouch-seat.
’ Are we clear? of bugs?
Sweep the ship, now.’
The standard security measure would have been second nature to me, on leaving any planet, if I hadn't been burdened with so may excitements and anxieties.
Mala looked a little tense, showing that she'd forgotten as well.
And strangely, for Posi, there was an almost measurable hesitation.
’ Del,’she said.
’ The ship itself is clear.
But is it correct to include Mala's person in such a sweep.?’
Mala sprang from her sear as if she'd been electro-jolted.
’ Me?
There's a bug on me?’
’ Yes, there is,’Posi said primly.
’ Where?’
Mala and I demanded, in the same breath.
’ On your lower back.
It is one of the common forms of the brand called AdhesiMole, resembling a small skin blemish.’
With a strangled cry of rage and disgust, Mala grasped the top of her ragged costume and yanked it all the way down to  her waist.
Then, with a furious hiss as she saw my gaze drop and become a stare, she whirled to present me with her back.
’ Stop gawping and get it off!’
She yelled.
I glanced down at the lissom length of her spine.
’ Can't quite see it,’I mumbled.
Taking hold of her costume, I tugged it farther over the firm buttocks.
’ Get the bug off me, not my clothes!’she spat.
’ There it is,’I said at last.
A small dark spot, very like a mole.
I slid a fingernail under it and peeled it away, leaving a tiny redness on the skin.
Mala jerked her costume up to cover herself and swung around, glaring at the thing furiously.
’ It is a simple tracer mechanism,’Posi told us,’designed to transmit a thread-link along the Netlines.
It is unable to gather or transmit audio-visual material.’
’ He must have intended you to escape,’I said with a frown, if he bugged you.
’ Perhaps,’she said icily.
’ Especially when I told him you were highly unlikely to give up the phetam for me.’
I pretended to ignore that.
’ And it's odd that you didn't notice, when the bug was put on’.
Again Mala's throat showed the faint flush.
’ Gharr probably put it on me when I was asleep,’she said defensively.
’ Asleep?
Where?
When’
’ I was his prisoner for the night,’she snapped.
’ I was given a place to sleep.’
’ And did you sleep alone?’
I asked harshly.
She drew herself up, looking outraged.
’ You have no right to ask that question, Curb.
Were just business partners.
And if you want our partnership to last though this flight to Fraxilly, you'd better do what you said and put the whole Gharr episode out of your mind.’
I stared into her angry eyes for a moment.
’ All right,’I muttered at last , and turned towards the disposal to jettison the bug.
Aware as I went she had dodged the crucial question.
Also aware that I was happier with the evasion that I would have been with a wrong answer…
’ And that bug is your proof,’Mala added,’of what we're up against.
All those criminals with all their resources.
We have  to keep to the plan — get to Fraxilly and away again, fast, then lie low for along as it takes.’
I shrugged reluctantly, not having a counter-argument.
’ It's the only way, Del’, she said quietly.
I opened my mouth to speak, but she forestalled me.
’ Posi,’she said,’Let's start again to lay in a Netline course for a Highlight crossing to the planet Fraxilly.’
World of Conflict
’ Del,’Posi said,’every one of the forward preceptors has gone off-phase.’
The statement was unnecessary, since I was looking at the forward preceptor screens, which showed a silvery shimmer like visible white noise.
The other screens showed that their ceptors were all right— but they displayed only the usual starpitted expanse of deep space.
The forward ceptors had been showing a bright little disc that was the planet Fraxilly, steadily enlarging as we crept near to it on planetary drive.
’ Will we get them back?’
I asked.
’ Or have they hit burnout.?’
’ They have not burned out,’Posi said reassuringly.
’ But the tremor had grown more erratic, and the off-phasings are lasting longer’.
’ Do we need the forwards right now,?’
Mala asked.
’ I can navigate on planetary speed without them,’Posi said,’so long as we do not lose others.’
’ That's all right, then,’I said with more confidence than I felt.
’ Maybe the God-King has some engineers who can fix them before we leave.’
The ship slid, on minutes passed.
Mala and I stared at the enlarging disc that appeared on other screens after Posi revolved the ship to bring the lateral ceptors to bear.
And by the time we had butted our way into orbit around the planet, I was feeling fairly relaxed.
We were in one piece, we still had the phetam, we had reached our destination, no other ships  had emerged from lightspeed behind us, and the second half of that huge fee was almost in our hands.
’ It all seems a bit of an anti-climax,’I said idly.
Mala gave me an amused look.
’ I could always call Tec-huc or Pulvidon on the comm, to get a little excitement going.’
I grimaced.
’ You'd probably call Gharr’.
’ Leave it, Curb,’she said coldly.
I gave her a nasty smile and left it.
As I had done several times on the journey, since I hadn't entirely managed to put out of my mind the events of Uulaa and my suspicions.
Or to stop making sardonic remarks about them.
But then it was time to retrieve the cylinder from its hiding place in my cabin, and make myself ready.
Since delivery only required one of us, I'd undertaken to go down to Fraxilly while Mala stayed with the ship.
I had the feeling that she might be diplomatic when confronted by the God-Kings luxurious life-style.
And when I reminded her of our meeting with the Emissary, she had to agree.
For myself, I anticipated no problems.
I was quite enthusiastic about the chance of meeting a God-King, perhaps establishing some useful contacts among his courtiers.
Provided they weren't all as gruesome as the Emissary.
All the same, with proper professionalism, I checked my weaponry thoroughly as well as my appearance.
I was again in a basic canary yellow, with cerise piping and strips of varying shades of purple on the trim at belt, wrists and headband.
I liked to think that, while discreet enough for an important occasion, the ensemble made its own kind of personal statement.
Then I was ready, ignoring Mala's stifled giggles and her remark that the mauve roll-flaps topping off my boots were going too far.
She was in one of her sloppy coveralls, which put her in no position to be critical.
Normally I would have gone down in the passenger pod, but of course the pod was back on Uulaa.
So the ship was to go briefly near ground-level to set me down by tractor-beam.
I wasn't happy about being ruffled up by the beam, and left untidy and dusty.
But Posi promised to lower me slowly, to raise minimal dist from where the beam hit the ground.
Anyway, there wasn't a choice.
I didn't want to try landing  the ship itself, because coming in to accurate pin-point landing requires delicate navigation, which was impossible with the ship's erratic ceptors.
It wouldn't improve my chances of pleasing the God-King if more ceptors phased out at the wrong moment so that the ship set down on top of something valuable — like the royal palace, the Divine Sanctum.
So once Posi had drifted the ship down near the surface, I prepared myself for my descent — the cylinder in a carry-net slung over one shoulder, a hand raised to hold on to my hairpiece.
Soaring out thought the airlock into the Fraxillian sunshine, I thought of how I must have looked to nay people below.
A godlike figure, I thought, descending lightly but with dignity from the sky.
It was several preceptors phasing out together, Posi later explained, that threw directional control and some other functions out of kilter.
So the tractor bean set me down nowhere near the Divine Sanctum.
Worse, the beam shut off while I was still four-metres from the ground.
I might easily have broken a leg in that fall.
But instead it was the fall that was broken — by a soft heap that was unmistakably, even to an off-worlder, Fraxillian fertilizer.
Luckily, that part of the planet is hot and dry, and the upper surface of the pile had formed a thick crust.
Landing feet first, I broke only partway through the crust, so that nothing but my boots plunged down into the softer material beneath.
Softer, wetter and fouler.
Emitting a stink that would have made a Tyryttiaki swamp mist seem fragrant.
Slightly stunned by the abrupt landing, half dazed by the assault of the overpowering stink, I lay still for a moment on the crust, groaning and gagging.
Somehow then I found the strength to roll away, dragging my boots away from the clutch of the pile's soggy depths.
As I rolled to the ground the stink came with me, from the greenish-black stains on my boots, nearly making me lose my breakfast.
’ Curb, are you all right?’
Mala's voice from my pendant, sounding less anxious that I would have like.
Probably distortion.
’ Just barely,’I said through gritted teeth as I struggled to my feet.
’ What happened’.
’ Some kind of cross-tremor from the interfield,’Mala said.
’ Posi in investigating’.
As I snarled something foul, she went on.
’ Be grateful it didn't cut out when you were higher.
And don't worry about it.
We'll try to get it fixed so we can pick you up after you make delivery.’
I gabbled for a second as shock and rage choked my words.
’ After…?’
I finally yelled.
’ You have to pick me up now!
How do you expect me to get to the Sanctum from here?’
’ Walk’Mala said briskly.
’ You're only about six kilometres from the sanctum, and you have your personal mini-ceptor to guide you.
Stop whining and get going.
We have work to do here.’
And though I yelled a few more descriptive expressions, neither she nor Posi replied.
So I let go of the pendant, gathered myself, and looked around.
And the full awfulness of my landing hit me in a rush.
There was nothing in sight but what appeared to be a dessert landscape of bare ridges and hollows, with occasional patches of scrappy vegetation, close to the ground.
And of course there was the fertilizer pile, next to me — beyond which was a slightly different pile, with sticks thrusting out of it at angles.
Then some creatures emerged from it, through an opening I hadn't noticed, and I realized that the other heap was a dwelling.
Of a sort that would make the word’ hovel’sound to grand.
As the creatures turned towards me, I took an instinctive step back, before reaching the startled conclusion that they were human — more or less.
It wasn't easy to tell, from the filthy and shapeless rags that covered their filthy and shapeless bodies, but I guessed that there was a man and a woman and some smaller ones that were children.
And against all sense and credibility I worked out that I had landed in the midst of what might be called a farmstead, Fraxilly-style.
I smiled at them in friendly fashion.
They stared.
I wished them good day.
They stared.
I apologized for dropping into their fertilizer.
They stared.
I asked if they knew the way to the Sanctum.
They stared.
Finally, in growing anger, I told them to perform an unlikely  act upon themselves — they stared — and turned away.
Behind my annoyance the self-preserving part of my mind was pointing out that the sooner I got going, the sooner I could be a long way from Fraxilly farmland.
So I activated my headband ceptor — and sure enough,.
it fixed on what seemed to be a good-sized urban area in the distance.
That, I reckoned would be the major city of this land mass, near which the Sanctum lay in semi-isolated splendour.
So I strode away, with a casual wave to the family of farmers.
Who stared.
For all I know, they are there yet, staring at the place where I was.
Before long, I saw more signs of agriculture, on a pathetically primitive level.
Herds of scrawny little creatures, local life forms — smooth-skinned, pot-bellied, longer hind legs than some of the more level stretches rows of colourless plants drooped in the sun, scraggy and semi-lifeless but obviously tilled crops.
Once or twice I saw few other shapeless human figures prodding listlessly with crude implements at the dust among such rows.
They seemed too wretched even to stare.
Pastoral life on Fraxilly, I thought, leaves a lot to be desired.
This was a new definition of poor — a depth of misery more nauseating even that the stink that still rose from my stained boots.
If I'd been a religious and I would have thanked one god or another for the large number of kilocreds I was soon to collect, which would keep me from any kind of poverty for a long time.
But then, I told myself with a half-smile, I would be thanking a God-King.
That was the only light moment that came my way on that trek.
Even the fact that I finally found a trickle of scummy water, which let me rinse some of the filth from my boots, did nothing to lift my spirits.
I had not been prepared for a walk across a wasteland under a hot white sun.
I had no way to deal with thirst, heat, dist and all the other miseries afflicting me.
(I couldn't have drunk any of the foul water).
I did allow myself a Metastim tablet from my belt pouch, but even its effect was minimal, and temporary.
Yet when I saw the city, from the top of a sun-blasted ridge, I wondered if the farmland wasn't preferable.
A long kilometre or so later, I entered the city's outskirts.
Now I'm familiar with urban centres on a variety of worlds, human or exter.
They nearly all have some things in common.
Basic city things, like lots of people, and lots of structures to contain them.
And other things that would seem basic, like modes of transport, communication centres, systems of commerce or cultural interaction.
This Fraxillian city apparently had none of those things, except objects that by a stretch definition could have been called buildings.
But they were deserted.
So were the shapeless spaces between the buildings, which could never be called streets.
And the buildings looked as derelict as if they had all been lifted by some force and dropped again.
They were cracked and crumbling, split and broken.
They leaned crazily, with large chunks of roofs or walls fallen away.
Windows and entrances and other holes in their shells gaped blankly like the mouths of imbeciles.
Everything about them was in a state of collapse, because everything was cheap and badly constructed — the low-grade chunki-crete of the frameworks, the corroded metal that trimmed or braced.
In the spaces among the buildings, rubble and litter of every sort were scattered and heaped, forming deeper piles here and there as if they had drifted like sand.
Chunks of crumbled crete, unrecognizable fragments of low-tech machinery, crushed food containers and packaging, junk beyond description, filth beyond imagination.
The stink told me that the heaps were also depositories for organic matter that didn't even have the excuse of being fertilizer.
In short, the place looked dead.
Not so much what ancient writings used to call a’ ghost town’— more like a corpse town.
Lifeless, decrepit, falling alert, putrefying.
And it was indescribably eerie — so that I almost began to wonder if Posi had brought me to the right planet.
Where were the people?
And how could people who lived in places like this, farm or city, manage to support a God-King in limitless luxury?
But of course that was the answer.
All the resources of the place went into keeping up the God-Kings life-style, rather than improving the lives of the people.
Which thought briefly  led me to weave a vision or two.
Of how a man might contrive to open a cylinder of phetam, and perhaps set us up as a God-King himself, on a more salubrious world…
Prowling on through the foul open area, wrapped in such pleasant fantasies, I almost failed to see the furtive movement on the edge of my vision.
But the recognizable impulse from my headband ceptor drew my attention.
Life-forms, nearby.
I stared nervously around, then say it.
A creature skulking past the collapsed corner of a building.
Before it whisked out of sight I got the impression of a bloated grey body standing about hip-high to me on four thin legs.
Then there was another, and others behind it, and I saw the long bare tail like a whip, the narrow head, the yellow teeth that seemed too big for the jaws, the glittering red eyes.
I nodded to myself, knowing the creature.
It was no local Fraxillian life form.
Humanity had brought many things along, inadvertently, when it came out to populate the stars-unseen stowaways like bacteria, flies, fleas.
And this creature, which thrived, and mutated, everywhere it went.
Most human worlds had eradicated it, by my time, but poor Fraxilly clearly couldn't afford to eradicate anything.
Maybe, I thought, the rats had eradicated the Fraxillians, in the city.
I moved on slowly, watching on every side to be sure some monster-rat wasn't creeping up on me.
I was sure that I'd be safe from then when I finally emerged from the city on the far side — it wasn't likely that rats would abe allowed too close to the Divine Sanctum — but I couldn't yet see any sign of a far side.
The buildings were rickety ruins, but there were a lot of them.
So I plodded on.
Growing thirstier and hungrier and wearier and unhappier, as the blistering sun edged across the sky.
And growing more uneasy.
The rats had not shown themselves again, but I'd begun to feel them watching me from shadowed hiding places.
The feeling sent the adrenalin rushing around so fast that it threatened to wear me out before I got to my destination.
And that was another detail making me uneasy.
Was I going to get to the Sanctum before nightfall?
I wasn't sure how long  a day was on Fraxilly — and I didn't want to be wandering Rat City after dark.
I was lifting my pendant to ask Posi a question or two — and to get an update on the state of the ship — when I saw the girl.
I wasn't sure it was a girl, at first, what with the shapeless and grimly robe she wore — ankle-length, made of coarse brown cloth — and the heavy oversized boots in which she was clumping along.
But then I saw her face within her tangle of tawny hair — unmistakably young and female.
Not for past adolescence, I guessed, but far enough.
And possibly pretty, I also thought, under the dirt that smeared all of her visible skin.
She seemed to be in a hurry, striding quickly along with her hands tucked in her large flapping sleeves, boots kicking up dust.
She was also looking carefully around her as went, and watching where she put her feet.
But she wasn't looking up high enough to see something that shifted my pulse rate along a notch or two.
A very large, bulbous rat was crouched on the half-collapsed top of a small building, and the girl was heading straight for it.
She was a few strides away, I was taking a breath to shout a warning, when unexpectedly — by some wary instinct — she looked up, and halted.
I was impressed, for her only reaction was a slight flicker of her eyes.
Then, to my surprise, she grinned.
’ Brother Rat’, she said, in a fetching accent.
’ Do you come to greet me?
That is…’
She stopped.
The Rat's eyes had grown redder, and its hindquarters were bunching.
Then it leaped.
The girls grin did not alter at all as she drew her right hand from her sleeve, holding a large, ancient, projectile-firing pistol, and blew off a large bit of the creature's head.
At which point two other giant rats sprang from the lower part of the building, jaws agape, and flung themselves at her.
Despite robe and boots she moved with graceful speed, and without any flicker of fear.
The ancient pistol fired again, and one of the rats twisted in mid-air and fell, writhing.
Then she  leaped away from the second rat, just in time.
The rat-teeth missed her but caught her robe, slashing it open from hip to ankle, revealing a long and shapely leg.
Then the rat wheeled to attack again.
And the one that had been writhing on the ground recovered itself, lunging towards her from the other side.
And as she raised her pistol again, it misfired.
To my surprise, I found that I was running towards the battle.
As the monster rats charged at the girl, I aimed my wristband blazers and blasted large fiery holes in both of them.