

LICENSING BOARDS
Licensing boards
(1) For the administration of licensing with respect to alcoholic liquor on and after July 1, 1977, Scotland shall have licensing boards constituted in accordance with the provisions of this section.
(2) There shall be a separate licensing board for:(a) each district and islands area which is not divided into licensing divisions under subsection (8) below, and (b) each licensing division.
(3) The council of any district or islands area may from time to time determine whether the district or area shall be divided (or continue to be divided) into licensing divisions for the purposes of this Act, and such a council shall, on making a determination under this subsection, forthwith notify the Secretary of State of such determination and cause notice thereof to be published in two successive weeks in one or more newspapers circulating in the district or area.
(4) Subject to subsection (9) and (13) below, a licensing board shall consist of not less than one-quarter of the total number of members of the district or islands council and in no case shall consist of less than five such members.
(5) Where a district or islands area is divided into licensing divisions, then unless the Secretary of State otherwise directs, not less than one third of the members of the licensing board for a licensing division shall be councillors for a ward or electoral division within the area of the licensing division.
(6) The members of a licensing board for a district or licensing division of a district shall be elected at the first meeting of the district council held after the ordinary election of that council in 1977 and, in the case of subsequent elections, of those members:(a) except in so far as paragraph (b) below otherwise provides, at the first meeting of the council held after each Subsequent ordinary election of the council; and (b) where a determination under subsection (3) above is made (whether or not at such meeting of the council as is mentioned in paragraph (a) above), either:(i) at the meeting at which the determination is made; or (ii) at the first meeting of the council held after such meeting as is mentioned in sub-paragraph (i) above.
(7) The members of a licensing board for an islands area or licensing division of an islands area shall be elected at a meeting of the council of the islands area to be held on a date between May 16, 1977 and June 30, 1977 to be determined by the council, and, in the case of subsequent elections of those members:(a) except in so far as paragraph (b) below otherwise provides, at the first meeting of the council held after each subsequent ordinary election of the council; and (b) where a determination under subsection (3) above is made (whether or not at such meeting of the council as is mentioned in paragraph (a) above), either:(i) at the meeting at which the determination is made; or (ii) at the first meeting of the council held after such meeting as is mentioned in sub-paragraph (i) above.
(8) The term of office of members of a licensing board shall begin with  the day of their election under subsections (6) and (7) above and shall end on the day of the next election of members of the licensing board, but any member of a board shall be eligible for re-election.
(9) A member of a licensing board who has ceased to be a member of the authority by whom he was appointed by reason of an ordinary election to the council of that authority shall continue to be a member of the board until the first meeting of the council after the election.
(10) Any casual vacancy arising in a licensing board from death, resignation, disqualification or other cause may be filled by the election of a duly qualified person at the first meeting of the appointing council following upon the vacancy, and members so elected shall hold office until the date of the next meeting for election to the board.
(11) If a licensing board is not elected at the time at which it ought to be elected, or an insufficient number of members is elected for a board, the Secretary of State may by order provide for the holding of an election or elections for supplying such fault or deficiency in election at such times and in such manner as he may think expedient.
(12) No election held in pursuance of this Act shall be deemed to be vitiated in consequence of any technical defect in the proceedings which has not been prejudicial to the interests of any party concerned in such election.
(13) For the purposes of any proceedings at the quarterly meeting in March in the final year of office of members of a licensing board which are not finally disposed of before the expiry in that year of the term of office of the members, the members of the licensing board in office at the date of the said meeting shall, notwithstanding such expiry, be deemed to constitute the licensing board.
GENERAL NOTE
Amended, 1981. c.23, Schedule 3.
From July 1, 1977 there are separate boards for each district or island area (or division of such an area)(subs.
(2) and (3)).
The membership of a licensing board is to consist of not less than one-quarter of the members of the area island or district council with a minimum membership of five (subs.
(4)), and, where a licensing area is divided into divisions, one-third of the membership must be divisional councillors unless the Secretary of State directs otherwise (subs.
(5)).
The section also provides for the election of board members (subsections (6) and (7)), their term of office (subsections (8) and (9)), and the filling of casual vacancies in the membership (subs.
(10)).
The 1976 Act confers a right of appeal to the sheriff against a determination by a licensing board, and a further right of appeal from the decision of the sheriff to the Court of Session on a question of law.
(For appeals from a decision of a licensing board, see s.39.)
Subs.
(1): "Alcoholic liquor." 
This expression replaces the phrase "excisable liquor" which was used in the 1959 Act, and is defined in s.139(1).
In addition to the function of administering liquor licensing, as provided for by the subsection, the boards also have functions in relation to the granting of permits and licences under the Betting, Gaming and Lotteries Act 1963 and the Gaming Act 1968 (see s.133 and Schedule 7, para. 7).
Subs.
(2) and (3).
There is to be a separate board for each district or islands area or division of such an area (subs.
(2)).
A district or islands area may be divided or continue to be divided by its council into licensing divisions.
A decision to make licensing divisions must be intimated forthwith to the Secretary of State and published for two successive weeks in newspapers circulating in the area (subs.
(3)).
For a list of licensing boards and divisions see Scottish Law Directory ( "The White Book" ).
Subs.
(4).
For the number of members required for a quorum, see s.5(3).
Subs.
(5).
The purpose of the subsection is to ensure that there is local representation on the licensing board for a division.
Subs.
(6).
In the case of a licensing board for a district or division of a district, the members were to be elected at the first meeting of the district council after its ordinary election in 1977 and thereafter after every ordinary election.
Provision is made for the election of members of a new divisional board, either at the meeting at which it was determined that a new division should be established or at the first meeting thereafter.
Subs.
(7).
In the case of a board for an islands area or division of an islands area, the members were to be elected at a meeting of the islands council to be held between May 16, 1977. and June 30, 1977, and thereafter at the first meeting of the council after every ordinary election.
Provision is made for the election of members of a new divisional board, either at the meeting at which it was determined that a new division should be established or at the first meeting thereafter.
Subs.
(8).
For the situation where a member of a board ceases to be a member of the authority which elected him, see subs.
(9).
For the position as regards proceedings before a board which are not completed before the expiry of the term of office of a member or members, see subs.
(13).
Subs.
(9).
Where a member of a board is not re-elected to the authority which appointed him at an ordinary election, he remains a board member until the first meeting of the authority after the election.
Subs.
(10).
Casual vacancies in the membership of a board may be filled by the election of a duly qualified person at the first meeting of the appointing council after the vacancy occurred and the person elected holds office to the next election of the board.
The corresponding provision in the 1959 Act was considered to apply only to vacancies arising in the course of the term of office of a member, and not to vacancies caused by the completion of a term of office (Brown v. Cameron, 19101 S.i.T.
181).
Subs.
(11).
The subsection provides a simple method of solving the difficulty created if a licensing board is not timeously or fully elected.
Subs.
(12).
 "any party concerned in such an election." 
This phrase was considered to mean in the identical provision of the 1959 Act (s.8) a contesting and defeated candidate.
Subs.
(13).
But for this provision, the membership of a licensing board dealing with proceedings at the quarterly March meeting in the year when the board is due for reelection might change during the course of the proceedings as a result of members completing their term of office and new members being elected.
The subsection provides that, for the purpose of such proceedings, the original board members are to remain in office.
Disqualification of interested persons
(1) A person who is, or who is in partnership with any person as, a brewer, maltster, distiller, or dealer in or retailer of alcoholic liquor, shall not act as a member of a licensing board for any purpose under this Act.
(2) A member of a licensing board who holds a disqualifying interest in a company shall not take part in any proceedings before the board in which that company is an applicant or an objector, and in this subsection "disqualifying interest" means a beneficial interest in shares or stocks of a close company within the meaning of section 282 of the Income and Corporation Taxes Act 1970 which have a total nominal value exceeding £ 50 or which amount to more than one hundredth part of the nominal value of the issued share capital, or stock, as the case may be, of the company or any class of such capital or stock.
(3) A person who is an employee of a holder of a licence under this Act and any other person engaged in a business which deals in alcoholic liquor, including directors, officers and employees of companies so engaged shall not act as a member of a licensing board for any purpose under this Act.
(4) A member of a licensing board shall not act in the granting of a licence in respect of premises of which he is the proprietor, tenant or sub-tenant.
(5) If any person knowingly and wilfully contravenes this section, he shall be guilty of an offence.
(6) Anything done by any person in contravention of this section shall be void:
Provided that the grant of a new licence under this Act shall not be liable to objection on the ground that the members of the licensing board, or any of them, were not qualified to grant a licence.
(7) A person shall not be disqualified from acting as a member of a licensing board in relation to any matter by reason only that as a member  of a committee constituted under section 47 of this Act he was concerned with the matter in question.
GENERAL NOTE
A. Disqualification of Members of Courts-General.
This section (1) disqualifies persons in certain trades from acting in any way as a member of a board,(2) disqualifies a person holding a disqualifying interest in a company from taking part in proceedings in which the company is an applicant or an objector,(3) disqualifies an employee of a licence holder under the Act, and any person engaged in a business dealing with alcoholic liquor, including the directors, officers and employees of companies engaged in such businesses from acting as a member of a licensing board,(4) disqualifies a member of a board, who is the owner or tenant of premises, from acting in the granting of a certificate in respect of those premises,(5) makes it an offence to contravene the section,(6) declares, subject to the proviso (that the grant of a new licence is not liable to objection on the ground that one or more of the members of the board who granted it were not qualified to act), anything done in contravention of the section void, and (7) exempts members of a committee to determine the distribution of licences in a new town from disqualification for being members of a board by reason of their membership of the committee.
It is to be noted that the disqualification prescribed by subs.
(1) applies to acting as a member for the discharge of the functions of a board under the Act.
5.133 of the Act makes the licensing board the authority in Scotland for the grant or renewal of bookmakers' permits, betting agency permits, and betting office licences under the Betting, Gaming and Lotteries Act 1963, and for the grant, renewal, cancellation, and transfer of licences and for the purposes of Schedule 9 under the Gaming Act 1968.
Such a grant or renewal is a purpose under the Act of 1963 or the Act of 1968 and not of the 1976 Act.
B. Subsections.
(1) This is an absolute disqualification of the persons mentioned from acting as members of a board for any purpose.
For the less sweeping disqualifications applicable to the licensing justices in England, see s.193 of the Licensing Act 1964.
In England, for example, a brewer is disqualified from acting as a licensing justice only in the county or borough in which he is a brewer.
The position of a shareholder in a brewer's business was discussed in Braithwaite's Trs. v. Linlithgow Justices (Scotsman, January 27, 1909), and he was held not to be a partner for the purposes of a similar provision.
A trustee in a sequestrated estate, part of which consisted of a public house business, who did not himself hold the certificate or retail excisable liquor, was held not to be disqualified under the corresponding provision then in force: Lundie v. Magistrates of Falkirk (1890) 18 R. 60.
(2) 5.282 of the Income and Corporation Taxes Act 1970 (now 5.414 of the income and Corporation Taxes Act 1988) defines, with certain exceptions, a close company as a company under the control of five or fewer participators or of participators who are directors.
(3) This provision extends the classes of persons disqualified by the 1959 Act to include employees of licence holders and persons otherwise employed in the liquor trade.
(4) This is a limited disqualification and applies only to the granting of a licence for premises of which the member of the board is owner or tenant.
He is not disqualified from taking part in refusing a certificate or in granting a certificate for other premises.
A director and shareholder of a limited company which owned the premises was held not, as such, to be a part-proprietor within the meaning of a similar provision: Blaik v. Anderson (1899) S.L.T.299.
(5) For a consideration of "knowingly" and "knowledge" see note to s.68.
The offence must be tried summarily in the sheriff court: s.128(1) (c).
The maximum penalty is a fine of Level 5 (Schedule 5).
(6) The proviso protects the granting of a new licence in respect only of the disqualifications mentioned in the section.
It does not protect the grant of a licence against recall on the ground of one or other of the disqualifications mentioned in note C below.
Ower v. Crichton (1902) 10 S.L.T. 271; Blaik v. Anderson (supra).
Common Law Disqualifications.
A common law disqualification will usually amount to a breach of natural justice and give grounds for either an appeal under s.39(4) (c) or other review of the decision by way of judicial review, reduction, etc.; see 5.39.
A member of a board, although not affected by one of the statutory disqualifications above mentioned, may be so closely associated with the subject-matter of the proceedings as to make it improper that he should act and vote as a member of the board in connection with them.
The principles of the common law invoked in such cases are nemo judex in causa sua  (no man can be a judge in this own cause); or auctor in rem suam (no man should act in his own interest).
On occasions the courts have gone further and disqualified a member of a tribunal or board "if there are circumstances so affecting a person acting in a judicial capacity as to be calculated to create in the mind of a reasonable man a suspicion of that person's impartiality, those circumstances are sufficient to disqualify although in fact no bias exists" ; see Law v. Chartered Institute of Patent Agents [1919]2 Chapter 276; Metropolitan Properties Co.
(F. G. C.) v. London Rent Assessment Panel Committee [1969]1 Q.B.
577; Bradford v. McLeod, 1986 S.L.T. 244.
This is an extension of the principle discussed above, but has been subject of comment; see P. W. Ferguson, "Nemo Iudex in Sua Causa?" 1987 S.L.T. (News) 149.
This principle may be infringed when a member of a board takes part in the granting or the rejection of an application for a licence in which he has a personal interest.
In such a case the proceedings of the board will be reduced if his interest was "such as gives rise to a real likelihood of bias on his part." 
McDonald v. Finlay, 1957 S.L.T. 81, Lord Strachan at p.83.
On this ground the proceedings of the licensing court were either reduced, or the pursuer's averments were held relevant, in the following circumstances: when two of the members of the court had been employed by the applicant as part-time barmen for a number of years, without remuneration apart from money gifts at holiday periods: McDonald v. Fin lay (supra); when three of the members of the court were shareholders, and one was a director, of the company owning the property for which the certificate was sought, and when that company was closely allied with another company, the officials and directors of both being the same persons, on whose behalf the certificate was applied for: Blaik v. Anderson (1899) 7 S.L.T. 299; when a member of the court had recently been a shareholder of the company on whose behalf the certificate was applied for, and he had on previous occasions himself been the applicant on the company's behalf, he being an avowed and pledged advocate of the company: Ower v. Crichton (1902) 10 S.L.T. 271; when members of a court had, in their capacity as members of a local authority, and with a view to street improvement, taken an active part in negotiating the purchase of licensed premises from brewers, who agreed to pay a sum of money to the local authority if a new licence were obtained for other premises, such as the subject of the application: R. v. Sunderland JJ. [1901]2 K.B.
357 (cf.
R v. Tempest (1902) 18 T.L.R. 433, and for another case where members of the court were also city councillors, see R. v. Sheffield Confirming Authority [1937]4 All E.R.
114); when a member of the court was a shareholder of the brewery company which owned the premises in question: R. V. Gee (1901) 17 T.L.R. 374; when three of the members of a compensation tribunal which refused the renewal of a licence had, along with their fellow justices, instructed a solicitor to oppose the renewal before the tribunal: Frome United Breweries v. Bath JJ. [1926]A.C. 586; when three members of the committee which granted and confirmed a licence had been shareholders and directors of the company on whose behalf the licence was applied for, although they resigned as directors and sold their shares before taking part in the proceedings: R. v. Hain (1896) 12 T.L.R. 323.
The canvassing by a member of other members of the court, for or against a forthcoming application, has been said to be improper: Macdougall v. Miller (1900) 8 S.L.T. 284; and has led to proceedings being quashed: R. v. Ferguson (1890) 54 J.P.
101; although a contrary decision was arrived at when the member concerned, although attending the court, took no part in the deliberation: R. v. London)).
(1896) 13 T.L.R. 2 (cf.
R. v. Hertfordshire JJ. (1845) 6 Q.B.
753).
It has been held that a justice who has originated an objection in the lower court is not, on that account alone, disqualified from taking part in the proceedings of the confirmation court or court of appeal: R. v. Leicester) J. 11927]1 K.B.
557.
The principle that no man can be a judge in his own cause may also be infringed if a person has so actively identified himself with the temperance cause, by his actions in campaigning against the granting of certificates, that it would be contrary to elementary justice that he should act as a member of a licensing board.
Mere membership of a temperance society, or the taking of a pledge of total abstinence, or an expression of sympathy with the prohibition of the sale of intoxicating liquor (McGeehan v. Knox, 1913 S.C.
688), or subscription to the funds of a temperance society (Goodall v. Bilsland, 1909 S.C.
1152), will not result in disqualification for this reason.
It has been held, however, that a paid secretary of a temperance society, who prepared and managed objections to the granting of specific licences, was disqualified from acting as a member of a court.
Goodall v. Bilsland (supra), at pp.1177–1178; McGeehan v. Knox (supra), at p. 694.
It has also been said that if a member of a court announced that he would give expression to his views by voting against every licence, he would be disqualified: McGeehan v. Knox (supra), Lord Mackenzie at p.696.
Decisions as to the disqualification of a magistrate or justice of the peace, in his capacity as a judge in a criminal court, are not directly in point, but may be helpful.
Since the function of such a court is solely judicial and in no way administrative, the rule which precludes  interest or bias on the part of the judge may be expected to be enforced more, rather than less, strictly than in the case of a licensing board, which is primarily an administrative body.
With regard to a member of a criminal court it has been said:(1) As a general rule a pecuniary interest, if direct and individual, will disqualify, however small it may be.
(2) An interest although not pecuniary may also disqualify, but the interest in that case must be substantial.
(3) Where the interest…is not pecuniary, and is neither substantial nor calculated to cause bias in the mind of the judge, it will be disregarded, especially if to disqualify the judge would be productive of grave public inconvenience: Wildridge v. Anderson (1897) 25 R. (J.) 27, Lord Moncreiff at p.34.
A magistrate, who was ex officio one of the trustees of a public library, was held not to be disqualified from trying a charge, at the instance of the burgh prosecutor, of wilful and malicious damage to the cushion of a seat in the library: Wildridge v. Anderson (supra).
A magistrate, who, as a member of a licensing court and court of appeal, had taken part in a decision to grant no certificates for the sale of spirits within the burgh, was held not to be thereby disqualified from trying one of the applicants affected by the decision for trafficking in spirits without a certificate: Gorman v. Wright, 1916 S.C.
(J.) 44.
Expenses of members of licensing boards
(1) Sections 45 to 50 of the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973 (which provide for payment of allowances to members of local authorities and other bodies) shall apply with any necessary modifications to members of licensing boards as if the licensing boards were local authorities.
(2) Any amounts by way of allowance payable by virtue of subsection (1) above shall be payable by the council of the district or islands area whose area constitutes or includes the area of the licensing board.
GENERAL NOTE
The section replaces 5.17 of the 1959 Act.
Meetings of licensing boards
(1) For the purposes of the discharge of its functions under this Act, every licensing board (a) shall hold a meeting in January, March, June and October of each year beginning on a date in each such month fixed by the licensing board at least eight weeks prior to the meeting;(ii) may hold such other meetings as appear to the board to be appropriate.
(2) A licensing board may adjourn any meeting held by virtue of subsection (1) above from time to time during the period of one month next following the first day of such meeting, but no longer.
GENERAL NOTE
Meetings of licensing boards.
A licensing board has to hold quarterly meetings in January, March, June and October each year, the precise date to be fixed by the board at least eight weeks before the meeting.
The board is also empowered to hold such other meetings as it considers appropriate.
Certain types of proceedings may only be dealt with at a quarterly meeting (s.5(6)).
The proceedings are those involving any of the decisions specified in s.5(2) (a) to (i).
In cases where there have been failures to make applications to licensing courts in time for them to be heard at statutory sittings, the Court of Session has been petitioned for directions, in virtue of its nobile officium, to licensing courts to hold special sittings to deal with non-timeous applications.
Such petitions were granted in MacDonald Ptr., May 8, 1917, and Walter Ptr., October 29,1917, where the failures were caused by wartime difficulties, and in Bell's Exr.
Ptr., 1960 S.L.T. (Notes) 3, where the executor of a deceased licence holder to whom the licence had been transferred failed, through inadvertence, not only to apply for a renewal at the next half-yearly meeting, but also to request a licensing court to deal with the matter at an adjourned meeting.
The decision in Bell was held to be  of doubtful validity in Maitland Ptr., 1961 S.L.T. 384, where a licensing court was directed to hold a special sitting after it had, per incuriam, failed to declare a provisional grant final.
In the course of his opinion in Maitland, the Lord President (Clyde) observed that the nobile officium should be exercised where a formal step had been per incuriam, omitted, and unnecessary delay and expenditure would result if the whole procedure had to be carried out again; but that it was not to be used as a cloak for incompetence to extend a statutory remedy to a party who had not been given such a remedy, or, by consent of parties, to supplement statutory procedure by what would be an amendment of a statute.
Where an application under the Act for a grant or renewal of a licence or extension of permitted hours, etc., is submitted too late for consideration by a board at a particular meeting, and the applicant has been rejected by the clerk, who has refused to place it before the board for their consideration, that decision may be subject to appeal under either 5.39 (see M. Milne Ltd. v. City of Glasgow District Licensing Board, 1987 S.L.T. (Sh.Ct.) 145) if the particular application was subject to an appeal under 5.39 or to a judicial review if the type of application does not allow of an appeal under 5.39 (see Main v. City of Glasgow District Licensing Board, 1987 S.L.T. 305; Tait v. City of Glasgow District Licensing Board, 1987 S.L.T. 340).
In Tait, where Lord Clyde considered that the clerk should not have rejected the late application, his Lordship ordered the board to hold a meeting to consider the application under s.31(2).
Adjournment of meeting of a licensing board.
Subs.
(2) re-enacts the provisions of 5.18(3) of the 1959 Act relating to adjournment.
A meeting of a licensing board cannot be adjourned beyond the period of one month from the first day of the meeting.
In R. v. Wandsworth Licensing Justices [1937]1 K.B.
144, it was ruled that the somewhat similar provision in the English Act of 1910 against adjourning for over a month struck only at the consideration of new business and that matters before the court at the general or adjourned meeting could be considered at a further adjournment out with the month.
For circumstances where the English court ordered licensing justices to grant a licence when they had adjourned their meeting beyond the statutory times, Seer.
v. Denbigh Justices (1895) 59 I.F.
708.
Arrangements for discharge of functions of licensing boards
(1) Subject to subsection (2) below, a licensing board may arrange for the discharge of any of its functions by a committee of the board, a member or members of the board, the clerk of the board or any other person appointed to assist the clerk.
(2) A licensing board shall not make any arrangements under subsection (1) above for the discharge of any of the following functions:(a) making a decision on the application for the grant, including the provisional grant, of a new licence;(b) making a decision on an application for the renewal of a licence where a competent objection has been lodged; making a decision to refuse to grant the renewal of a licence; making a decision on the permanent transfer of a licence;(c) making a decision on an application for a regular extension of permitted hours;(d) making a decision on the restriction of the terminal permitted hour; making a decision on an application for restoration of restricted hours;(e) making a decision on an application for Sunday opening under Part 1 of Schedule 4 to this Act other than an application and 13 of that Schedule where no objection is made in relation to the application;(f) making a decision as regards a Sunday restriction order or the revocation of such an order under Part II of Schedule 4 to this Act; making a decision on the suspension of a licence; making a decision on a closure order.
(3) One half of the members of a licensing board (and in no case less than three members) shall be a quorum for any meeting of the board to discharge functions mentioned in subsection (2) above.
(4) The chairman of a licensing board or, in his absence, the clerk of the board may, if a quorum is not present for any such meeting of the board, call a further meeting in place of the meeting not held.
(5) A licensing board may, at any such meeting of the board, act notwithstanding any vacancy, if a quorum is present.
(6) A licensing board may only deal with any proceedings relating to matters mentioned in paragraphs (a) to (i) of subsection (2 above at a quarterly meeting of the board held by virtue of section 4.1 a of this Act.
(7) Proceedings relating to matters mentioned in subsection (2) above, including voting in connection therewith, shall be held in public, but a licensing board may retire to consider its decision in any such matter and the clerk of the board shall accompany the board when it so retires unless the board otherwise directs.
(8) The district or islands council concerned shall provide accommodation for the meetings, and otherwise defray any necessary expenses in respect of the proceedings of the licensing boards for their area.
GENERAL NOTE
(1) A. General.
A committee of a licensing board, a member or members of a board, its clerk or his assistant may discharge any of the functions of a board except those involving any of the decisions specified in subs.
(2).
In the case of the excepted functions, a quorum for a meeting to discharge them consists of one-half of the total membership of the board, and, in no case less than three members (subs.
(3)).
The section also makes provisions for the calling of a further meeting in the absence of a quorum (subs.
(4)), meetings where there are vacancies in the membership (subs.
(5)), matters which have to be dealt with at a quarterly meeting (subs.
(6)), the holding of meetings in public(subs.
(7)), and the expenses of meetings (subs.
(8)).
B. Subsections.
(1) For the meanings of "licence" and "licensing board," see s.139(1).
For "clerk of the board" and "person appointed to assist the clerk," see 5.7.
(2)(a) For provisional grant, see s.26.
For meaning of "new licence," see 5.139(1).
(b) and (c) The special provisions relating to the renewal of a licence are contained in s.24.
For an application to be an application for the renewal of a licence, it must be in respect of premises where there is a licence already in force and for a further grant in the form of that licence.
otherwise the application is an application for a grant of a new licence (see definition of new licence in 5.139(1)).
For "competent objections," see 5.16.
(d) For the provisions relating to the permanent transfer of licences, see s.25.
(e),(f) and (g) For the meaning of "permitted hours," see s.139(1).
For the provisions relating to the extension and restriction of permitted hours, see 55.64 and 65.
(3)(j) and (k) For "suspension orders" and "closure orders," see ss.31 and 32, respectively.
(4) The purpose of this provision, which re-enacts the corresponding provision of the 1959 Act, is to deal with the situation which arose in the case of Buchanan, 1910 S.C.
685, where, as a result of there being no quorum at a half yearly meeting of a licensing court, the meeting could not be adjourned under the existing legislation and the Court of Session had to intervene by virtue of its nobile officium in order to prevent the expiry of certificates due for renewal at the meeting.
For the appointment of a chairman to a board, see 5.6.
(5) The provisions of the subsection are in accord with the decision in Brown v. Cameron, 1910 I S.L.T. 181 which was concerned with a meeting of a licensing appeal court under the 1903 Act where, though there was a quorum, two members were absent.
(7) A board must not consider an objection made to it in private.
In R. v. Merthyr Tydvil JJ. (1885) 14 Q.B.D. 584, it was held that an objection made by a chief constable to an application for a licence to the court in their private room was not one to which the court could give effect.
Even if a board retire to consider a decision they must vote in public: Najafian v. Glasgow District Licensing Board, 1987 S.C.L.R. 679.
(8) For the expenses of members of boards as opposed to the expenses of the boards themselves, see 5.3.
Chairman
(1) Every licensing board shall elect annually one of its number to be chairman of the board, and until a chairman is elected, or if the chairman is absent from any meeting, the board shall elect one of its number present at the meeting to be chairman of that meeting.
(2) Where on the election of a chairman an equal number of votes is given for two or more persons, the meeting shall determine by lot which of those persons shall be the chairman.
(3) Subject to subsection (2) above, at any meeting of a licensing board the chairman shall, in a case of equality in voting, have a second or casting vote:
Provided that at a meeting of a licensing board the chairman shall not have a second or casting vote on an application for the grant or provisional grant of a new licence, and such an application shall be granted by the board only by a majority of the members thereof present and voting.
GENERAL NOTE
See Tuzi v. City of Edinburgh District Licensing Board, 1985 S.L.T. 477, which, although concerned with a gaming licence, considers the terms of this section.
Subsections:(1) Though the membership of a licensing board is appointed for a period of four years (s. 1(6)), the subsection desiderates that the chairman is to be elected annually.
(2) Where there is an equality of votes requiring that the election of a chairman is to be determined by lot, the meeting is entitled to determine the form of lot to be used.
(3) The chairman of a licensing board has a second or casting vote when the voting in connection with a decision by the board is equal except where the matter being decided is the grant or provisional grant of a new licence.
The proviso, which provides that the grant or provisional grant of a new licence shall be only by a majority vote is difficult to reconcile with s. 17, which provides that applications for new grants shall be refused if certain grounds are established.
but otherwise shall be granted.
It would appear the application must be granted, unless the motion for refusal on one of the grounds in 5.17 is passed by a majority vote.
In Knowles v. Stirling District Council Licensing Board, 1980 S.L.T. (Sh.Ct.) 87, it was suggested that the vote on a motion to refuse a new grant, was a motion to determine whether one of the grounds for refusal had been established.
If the voting was equal, then there was not a majority vote to the effect that a ground of refusal as provided by 5.17 had been established, and so the application had to be granted.
In Hart v. Edinburgh District Licensing Board, 1987 S.L.T. (Sh.Ct.) 54, the sheriff reached the same conclusion, but for different reasons, holding that 17 effectively repealed the concluding words of the proviso to 5.6(3) on the ground that they were merely an erroneous re-enactment of the corresponding part of the 1959 Act; see also Clive v. Nithsdale District Licensing Board, 1987 S.L.T. (Sh.Ct.) 113.
For "provisional grant," see s.26.
For the meaning of "new licence," see 5.139(1).
Voting at meetings of licensing boards.
When a member of a board is disqualified from voting in a particular application, he should vacate his scat during the hearing: R. v. London County Council [1892]1 Q.B.
90.
If a member of a board arrives late at a meeting, and is not present during the whole of a hearing on an application, he must not vote with regard to that application: Goodall v. Bilsland, 1909 S.C.
1152.
Clerk of licensing boards
(1) Every district and islands council shall appoint and employ, whether on a full-time or part-time basis:(a) an officer to be the clerk of every licensing board having jurisdiction within their area, and (ii) such other persons as may be necessary to assist that officer or to act on his behalf as clerk or assistant clerk of those boards and the clerk of a licensing board shall be an advocate or a solicitor.
(2) Where under an agreement an officer of a regional council is placed at the disposal of a district council for the purposes of this section, that officer may perform the duties of clerk or assistant clerk of the aforementioned boards.
(3) The clerk of a licensing board shall not, himself or by his partner or clerk, act as solicitor to, or agent for, any person in any proceedings before that board or in any appellate proceedings which may result therefrom and, if any person contravenes this subsection, he shall be guilty of an offence.
GENERAL NOTE
The clerkship of a licensing board is not to be held by the incumbent of a particular office but is to be held by an officer appointed and employed by the appropriate district or islands council.
The council may make the appointment full or part time and it may be held by an officer of a regional council but the appointee must be an advocate or a solicitor.
The district or islands council must as necessary appoint other persons to act for or assist the clerk.
The subsection imposes an absolute prohibition on a clerk of a licensing board, his partner, or clerk acting on behalf of any person in proceedings before a licensing board, and makes it an offence to contravene the subsection.
The maximum penalty is a fine of level 5 (Sched. 5).
Fees payable
(1) The Secretary of State may, by order made by statutory instrument, determine the fees payable by any applicant to a licensing board.
(2) The fees mentioned in subsection (1) above shall not include fees payable under the provisions of the Betting, Gaming and Lotteries Acts 1963 to 1971 or of the Gaming Act 1968.
(3) Fees determined by the Secretary of State under subsection (1) above shall, on being paid by any applicant to the board, be paid over by the clerk of that board to the council which defray the expenses of that board.
GENERAL NOTE
The current order is 5.1. 1988 No. 1464: see Introduction, para. 3.10.
THE GENERAL LICENSING SYSTEM
Grant of licences by licensing boards
(1) A licensing board may, in accordance with the provisions of this Part of this Act, grant a licence to any person for the sale by retail or supply of alcoholic liquor by that person.
(2) A licence so granted by a licensing board shall be in respect of premises specified therein, being premises situated within the area of the board.
(3) The types of licence which may be so granted by a licensing board are those specified in Schedule 1 to this Act.
(4) A licence granted by a licensing board shall be in such form as the board may decide.
(5) A licence granted otherwise than at a properly constituted meeting of a licensing board or otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of this Act shall be void.
GENERAL NOTE
Without having obtained a licence under the Act from a licensing board, it is, in general, illegal for any person to sell alcoholic liquor by retail, and such a sale is usually a contravention of s.90 of the Act.
There are certain exceptions to the general rule in virtue  of the provisions of s.138(1), namely trafficking in liquor in services' canteens, theatres erected before January 1, 1904, or with passengers on vessels, aircraft, or railway passenger vehicles.
The section retains the types of licences provided for by the 1959 and 1962 Acts, and introduces two new types recommended by Clayson (paras.
7.16 to 7.21), refreshment licences and entertainment licences.
The 1976 Act specifies in Sched. 1 the types of licence which a board may grant, including the nature of the premises in respect of which any particular certificate may be granted and the authorization conferred on the licence holder by the licence, and provides for specific offences instead of prosecutions for breach of certificate.
The 1976 Act also makes a radical change as regards the grounds for granting or refusing an application for a licence.
The 1959 Act (s.32) enabled a licensing court to grant licences for the sale of alcoholic liquor to "such and so many persons as the court shall think fit." 
This discretion has been considerably narrowed by the 1976 Act which limits the grounds of refusal to those specified in 5.17.
The tenor of the 1976 Act is permissive: a licence should be granted unless good cause is shown justifying refusal.
Subsections.
(1) "Licensing board,"  "licence" and "alcoholic liquor" are defined in s.139(1).
 "Grant" includes grant by way of renewal (s.139(1)).
 "Sale by retail" is not defined in the Act.
The Customs and Excise Act 1952, which contained a definition of "sale by retail" , was repealed in 1981.
In the case of Wood v. Mackenzie, 1925 J.C.
13, the definition of sale by retail was considered and it was held that the sale was defined by reference to quantity sold, not to the person to whom that quantity was sold.
This accords with the dictionary definitions of "retail" and "wholesale." 
It has also been held that a wholesale sale does not become a retail sale because the goods are delivered over a period in retail quantities: Hales v. Buckley [1911]W.N. 32.
The Alcoholic Liquor Duties Act 1979, as amended, contains a definition of "wholesale" .
(2) The subsection confers on the licensing board for the area where the premises to which an application relates are situated jurisdiction over the application.
 "Licensing area" is defined ins.139(1).
(3) For the form of a licence, see subs.
(4).
The types of licence which a board may grant by virtue of Schedule 1 are as follows.
 "Public house licence" which authorises the sale by retail of alcoholic liquor for consumption on or off the premises.
 "Public house" is defined by s.139(1) as including an inn, ale-house, victualling house or other premises in which liquor is sold for consumption on or off the premises.
 "Off sale licence" which authorises the sale of liquor for consumption off the premises in respect of which it has been granted only.
 "Hotel licence" which gives the same authorization to the holder as a public house licence except that the premises to which it applies are hotels.
 "Hotel" is defined by s.139(1) as meaning (a) in towns and suburbs a house containing at least four apartments set apart exclusively for the sleeping accommodation of travellers, and (b) in rural districts and places of a population of less than 1,000 according to the most recent census a house containing two such apartments.
 "Restricted hotel licence." 
This form of licence is granted to an hotel structurally adapted and bona fide used for providing main meals at mid-day or in the evening, or both, to persons frequenting the premises, and does not contain a bar counter.
The holder may supply liquor to persons taking table meals on the premises, to residents or private friends of residents being bona fide entertained by them, to the private friends for their own or the resident's consumption, and to a resident for his own or a private friend's consumption with a meal supplied at the premises but to be consumed off them.
 "Table meal" is defined by s.139(1) as meaning a meal eaten by a person sitting at a table or other structure which serves the purpose of a table and is not used for the service of refreshments for consumption by persons not seated at a table or structure serving the purpose of a table, which definition repeats the definition given by the 1962 Act.
 "Restaurant licence" which authorises the supply of alcoholic liquor to persons taking table meals for consumption as an ancillary to the meal in premises which are adapted for habitually providing meals to persons who frequent them, are principally used for providing main meals at mid-day and in the evening, and do not contain a bar counter.
For "table meal" see note to "restricted hotel licence" .
 "Refreshment licence." 
This is a new type of licence introduced by the Act.
It is granted in respect of premises which are adapted and used for the provision of refreshments including food and non-alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, and which do not contain a bar counter.
The holder is entitled to sell or supply alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises but not off the premises, when food and non-alcoholic beverages are also on sale.
Entertainment licence.
This is also a new type of licence introduced by the Act.
It relates to places of entertainment such as cinemas, theatres, dance halls, and proprietary clubs and permits the sale or supply of liquor for consumption on the premises to persons frequenting them as an ancillary to the entertainment provided.
A licensing board may insert conditions in such a licence to insure that the sale or supply is ancillary to the entertainment.
(4) Unlike the 1959 Act, the 1976 Act does not prescribe any particular form of licence, leaving that to be a matter for the determination of the licensing board granting the licence.
The form must be such, however, as to confer authority for the sale of alcohol in accordance with the type of licence granted with modifications, if any, in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
(5) Where a licence is granted by a board which has not been properly constituted or is otherwise not in accordance with the Act, the licence is void.
Under 5.1(12), however, the election of a board member is not vitiated by a technical defect in the proceedings which has not prejudiced other interested parties in the election, and, under s.2(6), the grant of a new licence is not to be objected to on the ground that any of the members of the board granting it were not qualified to grant the licence.
Application for licence
10. (1) An application to a licensing board of any kind mentioned in subsection (6) below in respect of any premises shall be in such form as may be prescribed, shall be completed and signed by the applicant or his agent, and shall be lodged with the clerk of the licensing within whose area the premises are situated not later than five weeks before the first day of the meeting of the board at which the application is to be considered.
(2) In the case of an application for the grant of a new licence, the applicant shall, along with his application, lodge with the clerk of the board a plan of the premises in respect of which the application is made; and (ii) arrange for the display at the premises, in a place and at a height where it can conveniently be read by the public, of a notice in the prescribed form intimating his application and the type of licence for which he applies, for a period of at least 21 days before the first day of the meeting as aforesaid.
Paragraph (a) of this subsection shall not apply to an application for the grant of an off-sale licence.
(3) In the case of an application for the provisional grant of a new licence, the applicant shall, along with his application, lodge with the clerk of the board a plan of the premises in respect of which the application is made; and arrange for the display at the site of the premises of a notice all as mentioned in subsection (2)(ii) above.
(4) An applicant shall not be treated as having failed to comply with subsection (2)(b) above if the notice is, without any fault or intention of his, removed, obscured or defaced before the first day of the meeting of the board at which the application is to be considered, so long as he has taken reasonable steps for its protection and, if need be, replacement.
(5) In the case of an application for the grant or provisional grant of a new licence, the applicant shall, not later than three weeks before the first day of the meeting of the board at which the application is to be considered, give notice in writing of the application to every occupier of premises situated in the same building as the premises to which the application relates.
(6) The applications referred to in subsection (1) above are as follows: a) an application for the grant or renewal of a licence; b) an application for the provisional grant of a new licence; c) an application for a permanent transfer of a licence; d) an application for a regular extension of permitted hours.
(7) On receipt of an application of a kind referred to in subsection (6) above, and until the first day of the meeting of the board at which the application is to be considered, the clerk of a licensing board shall make the application, together with the documents lodged therewith, available for inspection by members of the public during normal office hours.
GENERAL NOTE
(1) General.
The section applies to applications for the grant or renewal of a licence (including the provisional grant of a new licence), for the permanent transfer of a licence, and for the regular extension of permitted hours (subs.
(6)).
Such applications are to be made in such form as the board may prescribe, by the applicant or his agent, and lodged with the clerk to the licensing hoard at least five weeks before the first day of the meeting at which the application falls to be considered (subs.
(1)).
The board to which an application is to be made is the board for the area in which the premises with which the application is concerned are situated (subs.
(1)).
The clerk is required to make the application available for inspection during normal office hours by members of the public from the date of lodging until the first day of the meeting at which it is to be considered (subs.
(7)).
There arc additional provisions which apply to applications for the grant of a new licence or the provisional grant of a new licence.
An applicant for such a grant requires to lodge with his application a plan of the premises to which the application relates and to display a notice intimating his application at the proposed premises (subss. (2) and (3)).
He is also required, not later than three weeks before the date of the meeting, to give written notice of his application to all the occupiers of premises situated in the same building as the premises to which the application relates (subs.
(5)).
B. Subsections.
(1) For the areas covered by separate licensing boards, see 5.1.
For the meetings of licensing boards, see 55.4 and 5.
(2) "New licence." 
For definition, see s.139(1).
For the meaning of "off-sale licence," see Sched. 1.
(3) For the provisions relating to the provisional grant of a new licence, see s.26.
Under s.26(2), a plan of the premises need not be lodged but only a site plan is required until the provisional grant is affirmed.
(4) The subsection relieves an applicant from the consequences of the failure to exhibit a notice in compliance with subss. (2)(b) or (3)(b) where the failure has been caused by the removal, obscuring, etc., of the notice through no fault of the applicant and the applicant has taken reasonable steps to protect and replace the notice.
For discussion of adequate display of notice, see Tevan v. Motherwell District Licensing Board (No. 1) 1985 S.L.T. (Sh.Ct.) 14, where it was held that display of a notice within a post office was sufficient.
Obiter, the display of a notice within a public house would not be regarded as sufficient.
(5) "Occupier." 
The word was considered to mean, where it was used in s.36 of the 1959 Act, an occupier within the meaning of the Lands Valuation (Scotland) Act 1854 (see Purves, p.44).
(6) For the provisions relating to the renewal of a licence, the provisional grant of a licence, the permanent transfer of a licence, and the regular extension of permitted hours, see ss.24, 25,26 and 64 respectively.
Special provisions for applications made other than by individual natural persons:
(1) Where an application is made for a new licence, or for the renewal or permanent transfer of a licence, by an applicant who is not an individual natural person, the following provisions of this section shall apply.
(2) The application shall name both the applicant and the employee or agent of the applicant whom the applicant intends should have the responsibility for the day to day running of the premises to which the applications relates.
Where an application is granted, the licensing board shall grant the licence or transfer in the names of both persons mentioned in subsection (2) above, and any reference in this  Act to the holder of a licence includes a reference to both of those persons.
(3) Unless a licence is transferred to another employee or agent within eight weeks from the time when the employee or agent named in a licence ceases to be responsible for the day to day running of the premises to which the licence relates, the licence shall cease to have effect.
GENERAL NOTE
A. General.
In virtue of 5.33 of the 1959 Act, a certificate to sell liquor could only be granted under that Act to an individual person.
This provision did not take into account the substantial number of businesses in the licensed trade which are owned and operated by bodies corporate or incorporate and not by individual persons, with the result that the licence holder was a company official who exercised little or no control over the day-to-day running of the premises, or was the manager of the premises, and whose employment could be terminated at any time, irrespective of the date of expiry of the licence, either by his own volition or by his employer's.
The section provides that a non-individual person may be granted a licence in its own name and that of the person responsible for the day-to-day running of the premises.
B. Subsections.
(1) The section applies to the grant of a new licence, or the renewal or the permanent transfer of an existing licence, to a non-natural person.
In the case of the provisional grant, the name of the person responsible for the day-to-day running is required when the grant is declared final (s.26(6) and (7)).
 "New licence" is defined in 5.139(1) of the Act.
For "renewal" and "permanent transfer" of licences, see ss.24 and 25 respectively.
 "An applicant who is not an individual natural person" means bodies either corporate or incorporate which the law recognises as having a separate legal persona.
For discussion of "partnership" and transfer from individual licence holder to partnership, see Singh and Kaur v. Kirkcaldy District Licensing Board, 1988 S.L.T. 286, where it was decided that the licence was held by a partnership with a separate legal persona and that the board were not entitled to look behind that persona at the partners as individuals.
The application by a non-natural person must name the person who is to be responsible for the day-to-day running of the premises, and the licence granted or transferred as a result of the application must name both the non-natural person and the person who is to run the premises.
Where there is a change in the employee responsible for the day-to-day running of the premises, the licence must be transferred into the new employee's name within eight weeks of the change, or the licence ceases to be valid.
5.25(3) makes special provision for an application by a non-natural person to change the name of the employee named in the licence as responsible for the day-to-day running of the premises.
Where an application to transfer a licence on a change of person with day to day responsibility is lodged out with the eight week time limit, see Argyll Arms (McManus) Ltd. v. Lorn, Mid-Argyll, Kintyre and Islay Divisional Licensing Board, 1988 S.L.T. 290, where it was held that the board required to hear the application outwith the eight week period despite the provision that the licence ceases to have effect.
Distinction is drawn between existence of licence and its ceasing to have effect.
For discussion of the meaning of "all competent applications" , see M. Milne Ltd. v. Cit)"of Glasgow District Licensing Board, 1987 S.L.T. (Sh.Ct.) 145, where the clerk to the licensing board refused to accept a late application for renewal in terms of 5.13(2) of the Act.
The clerk argued that it was not a "competent application" .
It was held that the clerk erred in law in not allowing the question of whether the application was competent to be considered by the licensing board.
Publication of list of applications
(1) The clerk of a licensing board shall, in accordance with the provisions of this section, not later than three weeks before the first day of the meeting of the board at which the applications are to be considered, cause to be published in one or more newspapers circulating in the area of the board a list of all competent applications made to the board for the grant, including the provisional grant, of a new licence; the regular extension of permitted hours.
(2) In relation to each application for a new licence, the list mentioned in subsection (1) above shall specify the name, designation and address of the applicant; in the case of an application to which section 11 of this Act applies, the names, designations and addresses of both persons named in the application; the address of the premises in respect of which the licence in desired; the type of licence for which application is made; the first day of the meeting of the licensing board at which the application is to be considered.
(3) In relation to each application for the regular extension of permitted hours, the list mentioned in subsection (1) above shall specify (a) the name, designation and address of the applicant;(b) the address of the premises in respect of which the application is made and the type of licence held in respect of those premises; the nature of the extension of hours for which application is made; the first day of the meeting of the licensing board at which the application is to be considered.
GENERAL NOTE
A. General.
The section provides for the newspaper advertisement of applications for a grant (including a provisional grant) of a new licence and for a regular extension of the permitted hours by the clerk of the board to whom application is made (subs.
(1)).
The specification of the requirements for listing an application for a new licence is contained in subs.
(2), and for listing an application for a regular extension is contained in subs.
(3).
The advertisement is to be made at least three weeks before the first day of the meeting of the board at which the applications are to be considered (subs.
(1)).
B. Subsections.
(1) "Competent applications" should be taken as meaning applications made in accordance with 55.10 and 11 for the grant, including the provisional grant, of, a new licence or a regular extension of the permitted hours to the licensing board for the area (or division of an area) where the premises in respect of which the application is made are situated.
The applicant may also be required to share with other "adjourned" applicants, the cost of the adjourned meeting, in terms of a particular board's regulations.
For the definitions of "grant" and "new licence," see s.139(1).
For the provisions relating to provisional grant and the regular extension of the permitted hours, see ss.26 and 64 respectively.
(2)(b) 5.11 requires, in the case of an application by a non-natural person, that both the non-natural person and the person who is to be responsible for the day-to-day running of the premises be named in the application.
Consideration of applications
(1) A licensing board shall not at any meeting hear the cases of applicants for new licences until all the other cases have been disposed of:
Provided that where more than one application for a licence has been made in respect of any premises, the licensing board may hear and consider such applications together.
(2) Where an applicant for the grant of a licence or an objector there to:(a) has, through inadvertence or misadventure, failed to comply with any of the preliminary requirements of this Act; or (b) having duly lodged his application or objection, has died before the meeting of the board at which such application or objection was to have been heard; the board may, if it thinks fit, and upon such terms as the board thinks proper, postpone the consideration of the application or objection to an adjourned meeting.
(3) At such adjourned meeting the licensing board may, if it is satisfied that the terms specified by the board have been complied with (a) proceed to grant the licence to the applicant or, as the case may be, to his executors, representatives or disponees (being possessed of the premises in respect of which the application has been made);(b) proceed to consider the objection, whether on the part of the objector or, in the case of a deceased objector, on the part of his representatives; as if the preliminary requirements of this Act had been complied with.
GENERAL NOTE
A. Procedure for hearing of applications at meetings of licensing boards.
This section has reference to certain points of procedure which must, or which may, be followed by the licensing board at its meetings.
Subject to the overriding requirements of the Act, the procedure for dealing with applications may also he governed by regulations made by the licensing board itself under 5.37.
The individual board regulations may differ and should be checked in relation to particular procedures for application.
For the meetings of licensing boards, see 55.4 and 5.
B. Subsections.
(1) This subsection provides that certain applications shall not he heard until all the others are disposed of.
The order in which applications are heard may sometimes he important, particularly if the granting of a licence raises the question of the overprovision or similar facilities, a ground of refusal under s. 17(1) (d).
In McEwan v. Fort William JJ., November 18, 1898, a licensing court was ordained by the Court of Session to hear and determine, of new, an application for a certificate which had been disposed of out of its proper order.
The applicants, the hearing of whose cases must be postponed until all the others are disposed of, are the applicants for new licences.
Applicants for new licences.
This is a different expression from that used in the 1959 Act which was "new applicants" and was taken to mean not only applicants for new certificates but also applicants for the renewal or transfer of certificates at present in the name of other persons.
The phrase "new licence" is defined in s.139(1) of the Act as meaning"a licence granted in respect of premises for which, at the time of the application for such grant, either no licence was in force or a licence different from the form of licence so granted was in force.
There is a proviso to the definition which excepts a licence granted to premises which have been rebuilt after destruction in the same form as the previous licence from being a new licence.
 "Disposed of" is not defined in the Act.
It is thought that it does not necessarily mean granted or refused.
Such an interpretation would create procedural difficulties, particularly if, for example, a long adjournment were allowed of an application for renewal under the powers given by subs.
(2) of this section, with the result that no new applicants could be heard until the adjourned meeting or later.
(5.4(2): "no longer than one month" .)
Two applications in respect of the same premises may be heard together, even if one is by a new applicant and the other is not, Such a situation arises, for example, when the present licence-holder and a person claiming, with the owner's consent, to be a new tenant or occupant, both lodge conflicting claims for renewal.
(2) and (3) These subsections apply only to applications for a grant of a licence and objections to such applications and not to transfers, for which see s.25.
They apply in cases of (a) inadvertence,(b) misadventure and (c) death, and empower licences to be granted to the parties in possession of the premises and objections to be considered whereby an objector himself or his representatives if he is deceased in such cases at an adjourned meeting.
That adjourned meeting should be so fixed as to allow those who had not timeously lodged their applications or objections to have these applications or objections timeously lodged for the adjourned meeting of the board.
It is not clear whether such an adjourned meeting requires to take place within one month of the first day of the quarterly board meeting in virtue of the provisions of s.4(2) of the Act.
For circumstances where an English court ordered licensing justices to grant a licence when they had adjourned their statutory meeting beyond the statutory time, see R. v. Denbigh Justices (1895) 59 J.P.
708.
In R. v. Wandsworth Licensing Justices [1937]1 K.B.
144, it was ruled that the somewhat similar prohibition in the English Act of 1910 against adjourning for over a month struck only at consideration of new business, and that matters before the court at the general or adjourned meeting could be considered at a further adjournment outwith the month.
If the omission to apply for a licence or lodge and intimate an objection extends beyond the quarterly meeting of the board  the subsections, of course, are of no avail.
The terms upon which the adjournment is granted will probably provide for intimation by advertisement being given, or publicity being made, at the expense of the applicant or objector.
For the preliminary requirements with which the applicant or objector must normally comply, see 55.11 and 16.
The Court of Session directed a special sitting of the licensing court to be held when an applicant failed to take advantage of this subsection before the conclusion of the statutory sittings: Bell's Exr.
Ptr., 1960 S.L.T. (Notes) 3.
This decision is, however, of doubtful validity, see Maitland Ptr., 1961 S.L.T. 384.
It has been held under an equivalent section in England that, an adjournment having once been allowed on the ground that some requirement was not complied with, the justices had no power to adjourn a second time because another irregularity had occurred: R. v. Poole JJ. [1951]2 T.L.R. 261.
For discussion of the clerk's powers to accept or refuse an application under this section.
see Tait v. City of Glasgow District Licensing Board, 1987 S.L.T. 340 and Main v. City of Glasgow District Licensing Board, 1987 S.L.T. 305.
See also "Late Licensing Applications" , 1987 5.
L.T. (News) 157.
Further application for new licence where previous application refused
Where a licensing board has refused an application for a new licence in respect of any premises, the board shall not, within two years of its refusal, entertain a subsequent application for a new licence in respect of the same premises unless the board, at the time of refusing the first-mentioned application, makes a direction to the contrary.
GENERAL NOTE
The section prohibits a further application for a new licence for premises in respect of which an application for a licence has been refused by a licensing board within two years from the date of the refusal unless the board directs otherwise.
The direction must be given at the time of the refusal.
The purpose of the section is to protect successful objectors from the necessity of having to renew their objections to the same application for a two year period.
The power to direct that the prohibition is not to apply to a refused application enables an applicant, whose application has been refused on grounds which are remediable or because of circumstances which are liable to change, tore-apply within a shorter period.
In Kinross Motor Auction Ltd. v. Perth and Kinross District Licensing Board, 1981 S.L.T. 106, a petition for the exercise of the nobile officium for review of a decision under 5.14 was refused.
It was held that the intention of Parliament was that a 5.14 direction should be final (Maitland, Ptr., 1961 S.L.T. 384, approved).
 "New licence" is defined in s.139(1).
Attendance at meeting of licensing board by applicant or his representative:
(1) A licensing board may decline to consider an application if the applicant or his representative does not attend the meeting at which the application is to be considered:
Provided that an applicant for the renewal of a licence or for the permanent transfer of a licence need not attend or be represented unless the applicant has been cited by the board to attend the meeting.
(2) A licensing board shall not refuse an application for the renewal or permanent transfer of a licence without hearing the applicant or his representative:
Provided that the board may refuse such an application if the applicant, having been cited by the board to attend the meeting at which his application is to be considered, fails to attend such a meeting.
GENERAL NOTE
Except in the eases of applications for the renewal or permanent transfer of licences, a licensing board may decline to consider an application where the applicant or his representative are not in attendance at the meeting at which the application is to be considered (subs.
(1)), see Bury v. Kilmarnock and Loudon District Licensing Board, 1989 S.L.T. 110.
As regards the excepted eases, the applicant need not attend or be represented unless he has been cited to appear (subs.
(1)), and a board is not entitled to refuse his application without hearing him or his representative unless he does not attend after being duly cited (subs.
(2)).
Both subss. (1) and (2) provide that citation is to be by the board.
Accordingly, intimation of an objection to an application for a renewal or a permanent transfer to the applicant in pursuance of 5.16(2) does not amount to a citation to attend.
The form and time of citation are not prescribed by the Act.
The notice given should be reasonable, and the date, time and place at which the applicant's attendance is required should be specified, with a reference to the relevant section of the Act, viz. 5.15.
It was considered that, under the 1959 Act, an informal meeting of the licensing court prior to the statutory meeting to consider and authorise citations was competent, and there is no reason why such consideration under the 1976 Act should not take place under the provisions of s.15(2).
Subs.
(I).
as regards applications other than the excepted applications, provides that a board "may decline to consider" such applications where there is non-appearance.
It does not provide that a board may refuse such applications.
Accordingly, where a board decline to consider an application for a new licence on the ground that there was not any attendance by the applicant or his representatives such a declinature does not bar the applicant from reapplying within two years in virtue of s.14.
See also CRS Leisure Ltd. v. Dumbarton District Licensing Board, 1989 G.W.D. 22–931.
For the provisions relating to "renewal" and "permanent transfer," see ss.24 and 25 respectively.
Objections in relation to applications
(1) It shall be competent for any of the following persons to object in relation to any application to a licensing board for the grant (including the provisional grant) renewal or permanent transfer of a licence, namely:
(a) any person owning or occupying property situated in the neighbourhood of the premises to which the application relates or any organisation which in the opinion of the board represents such persons; a, community, council, which has been established in accordance with the provisions of the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973, for the area in which the premises are situated; any organised church which, in the opinion of the licensing board, represents a significant body of, opinion among persons residing in the neighbourhood of the premises; the chief constable.
(2) Where a competent objector desires to object in relation to any application, he shall, not later than seven days before the meeting of the licensing board at which the application is to be considered:(a) lodge with the clerk of the board a written notice of objection which be signed by the objector or his agent and shall specify the grounds of his objection and (b) intimate his objection to the applicant in the manner provided by subsection (3) below, and an objection shall not be entertained by the licensing board unless it is proved or admitted that such objection was intimated to the applicant as aforesaid.
(3) An objection shall, for the purposes of paragraph (ii) of subsection (2) above, be intimated to the applicant (a) by delivering to him a copy of the notice of objection lodged with the licensing board under paragraph (a) of that subsection; or (ii) by sending a copy of the said notice by registered post or by recorded delivery in a letter addressed to him at his proper address; or (c) by leaving a copy of the said notice for him at his proper address; and, for the purposes of paragraphs (ii) and (c) of this subsection, the proper address in the case of an applicant being an individual natural person shall be his place of abode as specified in his application or, in the  case of such an applicant applying for the renewal of a licence, the premises in respect of which the application is made, and, in the case of an applicant other than an individual natural person, shall be the address specified in the application.
(4) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this section it shall be competent for a licensing board to entertain objections from the chief constable, lodged at any time before the hearing of an application, if the board is satisfied that there is sufficient reason why due notice and intimation of the objection could not be given, and in such a case the chief constable shall cause his objections to be intimated to the applicant before the hearing.
(5) The licensing board may only entertain an objection under this section if the objection is relevant to one or more of the grounds on which, by virtue of section 17 of this Act, an application may be refused, and shall hear any competent objection before arriving at its decision.
(6) The licensing board, if in its opinion any objection to the renewal of a licence is frivolous or vexatious, may find the objector liable in the expenses caused by such objection to such extent as the board thinks fit, or, if in its Opinion any such objection is unauthorised, may find the agent of the objector liable in the expenses as aforesaid; and the amount of any expenses so found due may be recovered in the sheriff court having jurisdiction, and a certified copy of the finding of the licensing board shall be sufficient evidence and authority for discerning for the said amount with expenses.
GENERAL NOTE
A. Objections-General.
This section gives effect to the recommendations of the Clayson Committee as to who should have the right to object, confers the right on organisations representing owners and occupiers in the neighbourhood, also makes it obligatory on all objectors to lodge objections with the clerk to the licensing board and to intimate them to the applicant.
The right of a member of the licensing court to object in the 1959 Act is not retained.
B. Subsections.
(1)(a) Owners or occupiers of property in neighbourhood.
The would-be objector must be either an owner or an occupier of heritable property.
Mere residence in the neighbourhood is not enough.
 "Occupier" means an occupier within the meaning of the Lands Valuation (Scotland) Act 1854, although the entries in the Valuation Roll are not necessarily conclusive of the matter.
A lady who lived in family with her father, whose housekeeper she was, in the house which he owned and occupied, was held not to be an occupier for the purposes of the corresponding provision of the 1959 Act, s.36, and to have no title to object to an application.
McDonald v. Chambers, 1956 S.C.
542.
What is or is not "in the neighbourhood" of the premises must be a question of degree and of circumstances in each case.
The test would seem to be the likelihood or otherwise of the amenity of the objector's property being adversely affected by the grant of any licence, or of a particular form of licence, in respect of the premises, or by the grant of a licence to a particular person.
For a refusal to interfere with an arbitrator's interpretation of "near" under the Workmen's Compensation Acts, see McMillan v. Barclay, Curie & Co. (1899) 2 F. 91.
For a refusal to accept an arbitrator's definition of "about a factory," see Bell v. Whitton (1899) 1 F. 942.
The objector need not be an individual and may be a corporate body: Interpretation Act 1889, s.19 ( "person" ).
(b) "Community council" means a community council established under Part IV of the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973.
The purpose of such a council, as provided for by s.51(2) of that Act is to co-ordinate and express, to local and public authorities for the area which it represents, the views of the community.
(c) "Church" means "a religious society of some sort" (see the judgment of Smith L.J.
in S.C.
[1898]1 Ch. 391).
The issue of whether a church represents a significant body of opinion is a matter for the decision of the licensing board.
For "neighbourhood," see note to subs.
(1)(a).
(d) "Chief constable" means the person appointed by the police authority as chief constable under s.4 of the Police (Scotland) Act 1967 for the area or district where the premises in respect of which a licence is sought are situated.
If there is a vacancy in the office of chief constable.
or if he is absent from duty, the constable responsible for performing his functions may act.
Police.
(Scotland) Act 1967, s.50(d).
All classes of objectors must lodge and intimate a written notice of objection.
See Prime v. Hart/it. 1978 S.L.T. (Sh.Ct.) 71, where intimation of an objection to the applicant's agent/employer was held to be sufficient intimation in terms of the section.
There is an exception ill the case of an objection by a chief constable, for which exception see subs.
(4).
The objection must be taken on a relevant ground (subs.
(5)).
For the specification of relevant grounds.
see subs.
(5) and 5.17.
See also Chief Constable of Grampian v. Aberdeen District Lit., oil Board, 1979 S.L.T. (Sh.Ct.) 2, where it was held that mere reiteration of the wording of s. 17(1) (b) of the Act was insufficient.
Proper specification of the grounds of objection was required.
The objection here was held to be irrelevant.
The objection may be signed by an agent, who, for his own protection ought to obtain a written mandate from those whom he represents: see subs.
(6).
It is considered that only a solicitor can act Mr reward as an agent, as was thought was the position under the 1959 Act.
The notice of objection must be lodged and intimated "not later than seven days before" the first day of the meeting.
This would seem to mean seven clear days from the day of the notice, so that the day of the notice and the day of the meeting are excluded: Wilson (1891) 19 R. 219; Re Railway Sleepers Supply Co. (1885) 29 Ch.D. 204; Mercantile Investment Co.
International Company of Mexico [1893]1 Ch. 484n.; see also Codifying Act of Sederunt, 1913, F. IV.
3.
But a different rule in the computation of time may prevail in Scotland: Lord President Inglis in Ashley and Others v. The Magistrates of Rothesay (1873) 11 M. 708.
In Frew v. Morris (1897) 24 R. (J.) 50, a prosecution under the Food and Drugs Act, the days counted from midnight of the day the sample was bought.
For discussion of "not later than" , see article "Not Later Than Defined" , 1987 S. L.T. (News) 353.
The Interpretation Act 1978.5.7, provides that service by post shall be deemed to be effected by properly addressing, prepaying and posting a letter containing the document sent, and unless the contrary is proved, to have been effected at the time at which the letter would be delivered in the ordinary course of post.
Grounds for refusal of application
(1)(a) A licensing board shall refuse an application of the type described in subsection (2) below if it finds that one or more of the following grounds for refusal, being competent grounds, applies to it (in) that the applicant, or the person on whose behalf or for whose benefit the applicant will manage the premises or, in the case of an application to which section 11 of this Act applies, the applicant or the employee or agent named in the application is not a fit and proper person to be the holder of a licence;(b) that the premises to which an application relates are not suitable or convenient for the sale of alcoholic liquor, having regard to their location, their character and condition, the nature and extent of the proposed use of the premises, and the persons likely to resort to the premises;(c) that the use of the premises for the sale of alcoholic liquor is likely to cause undue public nuisance, or a threat to public order and safety;(d) that, having regard to the facilities of the same or similar kind already available in the locality, or to facilities of the same or similar kind, in respect of which the provisional grant of a new licence is in force, which are to be provided in the locality, the grant of an application would result in the Over-provision of such facilities; and otherwise shall grant the application.
(2) The grounds on which different types of application may competently be refused by a licensing board are those mentioned opposite the respective types of application set out below.
(3) In considering the grounds for refusal mentioned in paragraph (a) of subsection (1) above, the licensing board may have regard to any misconduct on the part of any person mentioned in that paragraph, whether or not constituting a breach of this Act or any byelaw made thereunder, which in the opinion of the board has a bearing on his fitness to hold a licence.
(4) An applicant for the grant of a new licence, including the provisional grant of such a licence, or for the renewal or permanent transfer of a licence may appeal to the sheriff against a refusal of a licensing board to grant, renew or transfer the licence, as the case may be.
(5) Any competent objector who appeared at the hearing of any application mentioned in subsection (4) above may appeal to the sheriff against the decision of the licensing board to grant, renew or transfer a licence, as the case may be.
(6) Any person entitled under this section to appeal to the sheriff against the grant or refusal of a licence may appeal to the sheriff against a decision of a licensing board to attach or not to attach a condition to a licence, being a condition mentioned in section 38(3) or 101(2) of this Act.
GENERAL NOTE
A. General.
The absolute discretion conferred by the 1959 Act is restricted by the 1976 Act to matters of suitability of the applicant and the premises and implications of public order and the environment in relation to immediate locality and the type of licence sought.
No numerical restriction on the number of licences in any particular area is allowed, however the section makes it a ground of refusal that the grant of the licence applied for would result in over provision of facilities of the kind to be provided under the licence.
A licence can only be refused when a ground of refusal under 5.17 of the Act is present.
See D. A. Haddow Ltd. v. < "s" of Glasgow District Licensing Board, 1983 S.L.T. (Sh.Ct.) 5, where refusal to grant a licence on the ground that the grant would disturb the distribution of licences within a limitation area was held to be incompetent.
See note to s.6 regarding majority votes.
B. Subsections.
(1) The subsection prescribes the grounds on which a board is entitled to refuse an application.
The applicability of the grounds to the types of application is specified in subs.
(2).
Unless the board find that one or more of the prescribed grounds of refusal apply to an application, they must grant it.
(a) The ground of the unsuitability of the applicant applies not only to the actual applicant but also, where the applicant is not an individual person, to the person named in the application as the person to be responsible for the day-to-day running of the premises under the provisions of 5.11 and to the person on whose behalf or for whose benefit the premises are run.
See Tominey v. City of Glasgow District Licensing Board, 1984 S.L.T. (Sh.Ct.) 2 at p.4.
In virtue of subs.
(1), the board arc to have regard to any misconduct by the applicant and (where applicable) the person responsible for the running of the premises irrespective of whether the misconduct constitutes a breach of the Act or a byelaw made under it.
(b) This ground is very wide.
In refusing to grant a licence on the ground of the unsuitability of the premises.
a board can take into account not only the location, character and proposed use of the premises.
but also the type of person liable to frequent them.
See Chief Constable.
Strathclyde Police v. City of Glasgow District Licensing Board, 1988 S.L.T. 128.
(c) The causation of the public nuisance or the threat to public order must arise out of the use of the premises for the sale of alcoholic liquor.
 "Alcoholic liquor" is defined in 5.139 (1).
(d) It is the overprovision of the specific facilities of the kind to be provided and not of the types of licence with which this ground is concerned.
See Khan v. City of Glasgow District Licensing Board, 1980 S.L.T. (Sh.Ct.) 49 for consideration of the same or similar facilities  in the locality.
The board, in refusing an application for a restaurant licence, took into account the number of public house licences in the locality where the public houses provided food.
The application was remitted back to the board for reconsideration by the sheriff, who held that the food being provided in the public houses was not similar to the facilities to be provided by the applicant for the restaurant licence.
For further discussion of "facilities of the same or similar kind" , see Collins v. Hamilton District Licensing Board, 1984 S.L.T. 230, where it was held that it is the facilities which have to be the same or similar, not the type of licence.
The board took four off-sale licences in the locality into account when considering an application for a public house licence.
It was held that they were entitled to do so on the basis that a public house licence authorises the holder to sell by retail alcoholic liquor for consumption on or off the premises and an off-sale licence authorises the holder to sell by retail alcoholic liquor for consumption off the premises.
(2) "New licence" is defined in s.139(1).
 "Permanent transfer" is defined in s.25(7).
For "renewal of licence," see s.24.
(3) For a list of offences under the Act, see Sched. 5.
For bye-laws under the Act, see s.58.
(4)(5) and (6) An unsuccessful applicant for the grant (including provisional grant) of a new licence, renewal of a licence, or permanent transfer of a licence and an unsuccessful objector may appeal to the sheriff against the licensing board's decision.
For the procedure and grounds of appeal, see 5.39.
See Wolfson v. Glasgow District Licensing Board, 1981 S. L.T. 17, where an application for a new off-sale licence was granted in restricted form in terms of s.29(1) of the Act.
It was held that such a grant where the application was for a full new licence constitutes a refusal and can be competently the subject of an appeal under 5.17(4).
For a discussion of relevant considerations in relation to over provision, see Crolla v. City of Edinburgh District Licensing Board, 1983 S.L.T. (Sh.Ct.) 11.
Giving of reasons for decisions of a licensing board
(1) A licensing board shall give reasons for arriving at any decisions mentioned in section 5(2) of this Act when required to do so under subsection (2) below.
(2) Reasons for decisions referred to in subsection (1) above ma be required to be given by the board in writing on a request being ma e to the clerk of the board, not more than 48 hours after the decision is made, by the applicant or, as the case may be, by the holder of the licence, or by any objector, or by any complainer who appeared at the hearing.
(3) Where a licensing board gives reasons in writing at the request of a party to the hearing, the board shall give copies of those reasons to all other parties to the hearing.
(4) The period of 48 hours referred to in subsection (2) above shall not include a day which is a Sunday, Christmas Day, New Year's Day, Good Friday, a bank holiday, or a public holiday, or a day appointed for public thanksgiving or mourning.
GENERAL NOTE
In virtue of subs.
(1) a board can only be required to give reasons in connection with the types of decision specified in s.5(2) where the request for a decision is made in accordance with subs.
(2).
In N.D. Wines (Inverness) Ltd. v. Inverness District Licensing Board, 1982 S.L.T. 73, it was held that a request for written reasons for the board's decision required to be in the hands of the clerk within the specified 48 hour period, and that the time limit is mandatory.
See also s.39(2).
The time limit for appeal can only be extended under this section if the reasons stated by the board for its decision are reasons requested in terms of s.18(2).
Subs.
(3) provides that copies of reasons in writing are to be given by the board to all the parties to the hearing in respect of which they have been requested, and subs.
(4) defines the time limit for the giving of reasons laid down by subs.
(2).
In R. W. Cairns Ltd. v. Busby East Church Kirk Session, 1985 S.L.T. 493, it was held that proper specification is required in the statement of reasons for a decision.
The reasons require to be properly set out.
Absence of reference to certain objections in the statement of reasons was held to warrant the conclusion that the board had not exercised its discretion properly.
In giving written reasons for their decision it is not sufficient for the board to reiterate the statutory grounds on which their decision is based: Martin v. Ellis, 1978 S.L.T. (Sh.Ct.) 38  at p.40; Chief Constable of Grampian v. City of Aberdeen District Licensing Board, 1979 S.L.T. (Sh.Ct.) 2, and Troc Sales Ltd. v. Kirkcaldy District Licensing Board, 1982 S.L.T. (Sh.Ct.) 77.
Canvassing
(1) If any applicant for the grant, renewal, or permanent transfer of a licence or for a regular extension of permitted hours, either by himself or by another person at the instigation of the applicant, attempts to influence a member of a licensing board to support his application at any time before its consideration by the board, he shall be guilty of an offence.
(2) If proceedings are pending under subsection (1) above, the licensing board may adjourn consideration of an application to which the proceedings relate until the proceedings are concluded.
(3) If an applicant is convicted of an offence under subsection (1) above relation to an application before the board, the board may refuse to consider the application.
GENERAL NOTE
The section prohibits canvassing in the sense of the attempt of an applicant or of another person at his instigation to influence a member of a licensing board to support his application for a grant, renewal or permanent transfer of a licence, or for a regular extension of permitted hours before the application is considered by the board (subs.
(1)).
Where a prosecution for a contravention of subs.
(1) is pending, a board may adjourn the application with which the proceedings are concerned until the proceedings are concluded (subs.
(2)).
Such a prosecution must be taken in the sheriff court (s. 128(1)) and the maximum penalty for a contravention of subs.
(1) is a fine of level 1 (Sched. 5) with both the convicted licence-holder and the premises liable to disqualification.
Where an applicant is convicted, the licensing board may refuse to consider the application with which the conviction was concerned.
For meanings of "permanent transfer" and "regular extension of permitted hours," see ss.25(7) and 64 respectively.
Register of applications and decisions
The clerk of each licensing board shall keep a register of applications for licences and shall, at the end of each day's meeting of the board enter in the register the decisions taken on the applications.
This register shall be available to any member of the public at times and places to be determined by the clerk.
GENERAL NOTE
The section does not prescribe the form in which the register is to be kept.
Issue of licences
(1) The clerk of each licensing board shall make out and deliver a licence to every person to whom a licence is granted by the board.
(2) The clerk of a licensing board shall, when lawfully required, make out a duplicate of any licence issued by him under this section and shall certify such duplicate to be a true copy of the original licence, and any such duplicate, duly certified as aforesaid, shall be sufficient evidence of the facts therein contained and of the terms of the original licence.
GENERAL NOTE
No form of licence is prescribed in this section.
List of licence holders to be sent to Customs and Excise 22.
GENERAL NOTE
Repealed 1983, c.28, 5.9, Sched. 10.
Special provisions relating to applications for new licence
(1) Subject to subsection (6) of this section, an application for the grant or provisional grant of a new licence (other than an off-sale licence) shall not be entertained by a licensing board unless there are produced to the board, in accordance with the provisions of this section, certificates from the appropriate authority as to the suitability of the premises for which the licence is sought in relation to planning, building control and food hygiene.
(2) In relation to planning, the certificate from the appropriate authority should state that the applicant has obtained in respect of the premises planning permission under the Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act 1972 or, in the case of an application for the provisional grant of a licence, outline planning permission under sections 39 and 40 of that Act, or, in either case, a determination under section 51 of that Act that planning permission is not required.
(3) In relation to building control, the certificate from the appropriate authority (a) in the case of an application for a new licence, should state (i) either that a warrant for the construction of the premises has been granted under section 6 of the Building (Scotland) Act 1959 and a certificate of completion has been granted under section 9 of that Act, or that no warrant for construction of the premises is required; and (ii) either that a warrant for the change of use of the premises has been granted under the said section 6 or that no such warrant is required; and (b) in the case of an application for the provisional grant of a licence, should state (i) that a warrant for the construction of the premises has been granted under section 6 of the said Act of 1959; and (ii) either that a warrant for the change of use of the premises has been granted under the said section 6, or that on completion of the construction of the premises in accordance with the warrant a warrant for the change of use will be granted, or that no such warrant is required.
Expressions used in this subsection and in the said Act of 1959 have the same meanings in this subsection as they have in that Act.
(4) In relation to food hygiene, the certificate from the appropriate authority should, in the case of an application for a new licence, state that the premises to which the application relates comply, or, in the case of an application for the provisional grant of a licence, would comply, with the requirements of regulations made under section 13 of the Food and Drugs (Scotland) Act 1956 relating to construction, layout, drainage, ventilation, lighting and water supply or concerned with the provision of sanitary and washing facilities.
(5) Before granting or making the provisional grant of a new licence, the licensing board shall consult the fire authority for the area.
(6) In relation to building control, food hygiene and consultation with the lire authority, subsections (1),(3),(4) and (5) of this section shall not apply to the application for or the making of a provisional grant of a  licence under section 26(2) of this Act but shall apply to the application for affirmation and to the affirmation of such a grant.
(7) In this section, in relation to planning and building control, the appropriate authority in the case of the Highland, Borders and Dumfries and Galloway Regions is the regional council and, in any other case, is the district or islands council, and in relation to food hygiene, the appropriate authority is the district or islands council.
GENERAL NOTE
(1) A. General.
An application for the grant of a new licence or the affirmation of a provisional grant of a licence is not to be considered by a licensing board, unless there are produced with the application certificates from the appropriate authorities relating to planning, building control, and food hygiene (subs.
(1)).
Further, in the case of such an application, the licensing board are to consult with the fire authority (subs.
(5)).
As regards an application for a provisional grant.
only a certificate from the appropriate planning authority has to be produced (subs.
(6)).
B. Subsections.
(I) "new licence" is defined in 5.139(1).
For "provisional grant" see s.26.
For "appropriate" authority…in relation to planning, building control, and food hygiene,"see subs.
(7).
(2) "outline planning permission" means planning permission granted in accordance with the provisions of a development order with the reservation for subsequent approval by the local planning authority or the Secretary of State of matters (referred to in the section as reserved matters) not particularised in the application (s.39(1) of the Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act 1972).
5.39 of the Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act 1972 provides for the grant of outline planning permission and 5.40 of the Act makes supplementary provisions in that connection.
5.51 enables a person who intends to carry out Operations on land to apply to the local authority for a determination as to whether planning permission is required.
(3) The Building (Scotland) Act 1959 defines "warrant" as meaning a warrant under s.6 of the Act, including (in the case of a warrant which has been granted) any conditions to which it is subject, and any amendment which has been made to it.
5.6 makes it obligatory (with certain exceptions) for a person conducting building operations or changing the use of a building to apply to the buildings authority for a warrant authorising the proposed works.
The warrant is not granted unless the proposed works are in accordance with the appropriate building regulations.
5.6 amended 1974, c. 37, Sched. 7, and repealed in part 1973, c. 65, Scheds. 15.29.
 "Certificate of completion" has the meaning assigned to it by 5.9 of the Building (Scotland) Act 1959 (s.29 (I) of the Act).
5.9 provides for application being made for a certificate of completion, which application is to be granted if the works as completed comply with the warrant under which they were executed.
5.9 amended 1974, c. 37, Sched. 7; 1986, c. 65, s.19; repealed in part 1973, c. 65, Scheds. 15,29.
(4) The relevant regulations are the Food Hygiene (Scotland) Regulations 1959 to 1978, which comprise the original regulations (5.1. 1959 No. 413) and the Food Hygiene (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 1961, 1966 and 1978 (5.1. 1961 No. 622, 1966 No. 967 and 1978 No. 173).
The 1966 amendments are not of importance since they are concerned with stalls and vehicles.
As regards sanitary facilities, the British Standard Code of Practice (CP3, Chap.
VII (1950), tables 8 and 10, give the scale on which such facilities should be provided in the cases of hotels and restaurants.
(5) The general practice of a fire authority, a practice which is followed in relation to their being consulted by a licensing board under the subsection, in considering the safety of a building and its likely occupants from the risk of fire may be summarised as follows.
The authority examine the building for the purpose of determining whether the structure or the use of the building creates undue risk.
It considers whether the building has adequate structural means of escape whereby persons could make their way safely from it by their own unaided efforts.
recommending, if necessary, structural alterations should the means be inadequate.
It also considers the sufficiency of the fire warning and alarm system, including the question of whether automatic detectors should be installed, the sufficiency of the routine to be followed in the event of fire, the sufficiency of the fire fighting equipment to be provided.
and, since licensed premises are in use during the hours of darkness, the question of whether emergency lighting should be provided.
(6) For affirmation of a provisional grant.
see 5.26(3).
Special provisions relating to applications for renewal of a licence
(1) Before granting the renewal of a licence, the licensing board shall consult the fire authority for the area.
(2) On any application for the renewal of a licence, the licensing board may require a plan of the premises to which the application relates to be produced to it and lodged with the clerk.
GENERAL NOTE
For the position as regards the attendance of an applicant for a renewal at the meeting of the licensing board at which his application is to be considered, see s.15.
For the period of currency of a licence, see s.30.
An application is an application for a renewal where it relates to premises in respect of which the applicant has been granted a licence which is due to expire and is for the same type of licence as that previously granted.
Subsections
(1) For consultation with the fire authority, see s.23(5).
(2) Applies to any licence.
Although a licensing board may resolve to call for the production of plans under the subsection in respect of a number of existing licences, a separate requirement must be recorded and intimated to the licence holder in respect of each licence separately.
An adjournment of each application will normally be necessary in order to allow time for the plan to be produced.
Transfer of licences
(1) A licensing board may, on an application made to the board in that behalf, transfer to a new tenant or occupant of any licensed premises the licence then subsisting in respect of those premises.
(2) A licensing board may, on an application made to it in that behalf by:(a) the executors, representatives or disponees of any person who held a licence in respect of premises situated within the area of the board and who has died before the expiry of the licence; or (b) the trustee, judicial factor or curator bonis of any person holding such a licence who has become bankrupt, insolvent or incapable before the expiry of the licence; transfer the licence to the applicant if the applicant is in possession of the premises.
(3) A licensing board may, on an application made to it in that behalf by a person other than an individual natural person, substitute another employee or agent of the applicant for the employee or agent mentioned in section 11 or 26 of this Act.
(4) A licence transferred by virtue of subsection (2) or (3) above shall have effect until the next meeting of the licensing board and, if not renewed at that meeting, shall have effect until the time within which an appeal may be made has elapsed or, if an appeal has been lodged, until the appeal has been abandoned or determined.
(5) Where a licence is transferred under this section to any person, the clerk of the licensing board shall, on payment of the appropriate fee, endorse on the licence a note of the transfer.
(6) Any licence transferred under this section shall be held subject to the conditions on which it was originally granted.
(7) A transfer of a licence under subsection (1) above is in this Act referred to as a permanent transfer.
GENERAL NOTE
A. Transfer of licences-general.
A transfer of a licence can only take place during its currency (for which see s.30).
The section provides for two kinds of transfer, permanent transfer (subss.
(I) and (7)) and the transfer of a temporary nature of the licence to a representative of the licence holder where the licence holder has died, become bankrupt, insolvent.
or incapable during the currency of the licence (subs.
(2)).
In the former class of transfer.
the application has to be made to a quarterly meeting of the board (s.5(6)), and the transfer effected can only be to the person who during the currency of the licence has become the Owner or occupier or the new tenant of the premises to which the certificate relates.
Some boards have made it a procedural requirement in their regulations that evidence of title to a property be produced in support of the application for permanent transfer, where the existing licence holder's consent is not forthcoming, or where there are conflicting applications by prospective transferees.
The consent of the existing licensee is not a statutory requirement, however most boards insist that consent is endorsed on the principal licence or is indicated to the clerk in writing, in order to ensure no dispute arises after the application is considered as to who the correct licence holder should be.
An application for a permanent transfer is an application under Part II of the Act, and it follows that there has to be compliance with the relevant provisions on the part of an applicant making such an application and the licensing board in considering it.
In particular, it is to be noted in that connection that ss.10(1) and (6)(form and time for lodging of application), 11 (applications by non-natural persons), 13 (order in which applications are to be considered by a board), 15 (attendance of applicant), 16 (objections to applications), 17 (grounds for refusing an application), 18 (the giving of reasons by a licensing board), 19 (canvassing), 20 (register of applications and decisions) and 21 apply.
Where an application for a permanent transfer is refused, or granted where the grant involves the repelling of an objection by a competent objector who appeared at the hearing, the unsuccessful applicant or objector may appeal to the sheriff (s.17(4) and (5)), and from the sheriff to the Court of Session on a point of law (s.39(8)).
(For the procedure in appeals, see s.39.)
As regards the transfer of a licence to the representatives of a dead, bankrupt, or incapable licence holder, the application can be heard at any meeting of a licensing board or under an arrangement under s.5(1).
When a licence has been transferred, either under subs.
(1) or under subs.
(2), the transferee holds the licence subject to the conditions on which it was originally granted: subs.
(6); and the original licence-holder may never again sell alcoholic liquor under its authority.
Where a certificate was transferred during the first half-year of its currency, and renewal of the transfer was refused at the October meeting, so that for its second half-year the certificate was in abeyance, the original holder, who resumed occupation of the premises and recommenced business, was held to have been rightly convicted of trafficking without a certificate: Miller v. Linton (1885) 15 R. (J.) 37.
In Campbell v. Neilson (1897) 24 R. (J.) 28, where the circumstances were similar, it was said by Lord Justice-General Robertson at p. 30: "It is the transferee alone who can lawfully carry on business in the premises under the certificate.
The transfer may become null and void, as here, or the certificate may not be renewed, as in Miller, but nothing that can happen to the transfer or transferee will ever revive the right of a man who, ex hypothesi, has removed or yielded up possession of the premises to which the certificate relates."
B. Subsections.
(1) Permanent transfer by licensing board to new tenant or occupant.
This subsection applies to a person who, during the currency of a licence, has become the owner and occupier or the new tenant of the premises to which it relates.
He may obtain a transfer in one way only, from the licensing board, at a quarterly meeting.
The procedure provided by subs.
(2) is not open to him.
If his bargain is concluded between quarterly meetings, he must wait until he obtains a transfer at the next quarterly meeting of the licensing board before he may legally carry on business on his own behalf under the licence.
The definition of "new tenant or occupier" is discussed in Chief Constable of Tayside v. Angus District Licensing Board, 1980 S.L.T. (Sh.Ct.) 31 where it is held that "new" refers to both tenant and occupier and that at 32 "we are dealing with the removal of the licensee, when he yields up possession to a new tenant or a new occupier/occupant" .
(2) Transfer to representative of dead, bankrupt or incapable licence-holder.
This subsection makes provision for the death, bankruptcy or incapacity of a licence-holder during the currency of a licence.
In the case of death the licence is transferred to an executor, representative or disponee, in the case of bankruptcy to the trustee, and in the case of incapacity to the judicial factor or curator bonis, provided, in each case, that the applicant is in possession of the premises and is a fit person to hold a licence.
The question of who is an "occupant" is discussed in Paterson v. City of Glasgow District Licensing Board, 1982 S.L.T. (Sh.Ct.) 37, where a new manager who applied for a permanent transfer of an off sale licence was held not to be an "occupant" where he had no interest in the premises other than as an employee.
However, a distinction is drawn between the position where premises are owned by a company and managed by an employee (Paterson) and a case involving premises owned by an individual and managed by another.
It was decided in the case of  Tominey v. City of Glasgow District Licensing Board, 1984 S. L.T. (Sh.
Ct.) 2 that the latter could be sail to be an "occupant" .
If so desired, there seems no reason why the applicant, instead of applying under this subsection. should not, as an "occupant," apply for a permanent transfer from the licensing board at a quarterly meeting under subs.
(1).
The transfer can be granted through an arrangement under s.5(1).
There is no provision for publication or notice to interested persons.
The two prerequisites for a transfer, apart from the representative relationship with the licence-holder, are possession of the premises and fitness for holding a licence.
The subsection says that the board "may" transfer, but this has been interpreted as meaning shall transfer, if they are satisfied as to fitness.
 "The representatives should as soon as possible furnish themselves with a licence, and they can go to any magistrate at hand without any formality requiring a day's delay" (Cook v. Gray (1891) 29 S.L.R. 249 per Lord President Robertson).
This dictum was followed by the opinion of the Lord Advocate (Mr. Graham Murray) and the Dean of Faculty (Mr. Asher) on November 2, 1893, that "the fitness of the applicant seems to us to be the only question upon which, on an application for a transfer, the magistrates may exercise their discretion" ; and by the opinion of the town clerk of Glasgow (December 18, 1894), that, if satisfied that the applicant is a suitable person, "all usual and more general considerations must be reserved till the annual licensing period." 
(3) In virtue of the provisions referred to in the subsection, where a licence is granted to or a provisional grant confirmed in the name of a non-natural person.
the name of the person responsible for the day-to-day running of the premises must be included.
For the effect of such a transfer on the grant of regular extension of permitted hours see Archyield Ltd. v. City of Glasgow District Licensing Board, 1987 S.L.T. 547, and the notes to s.64(2).
(4) A licence transferred under subs.
(2) requires to be renewed at the next meeting of the board.
C. Purchase and sale of licensed premises.
Purchasers, to avoid difficulties, should make their offers conditional on the licences being permanently transferred by the licensing board.
Where a seller was not in possession of a licence which could be transferred to the buyer at the date of completion of the contract it was decided that, the seller having failed to execute the contract, the purchaser could repudiate it: Day v. Luhke (1868) L.R. 5 Eq.
336; Cowles v. Gale (1871) L.R. 7 Ch. 12.
But the seller is not bound, unless by special contract, to procure to the purchaser a transfer of the licence: Tadcaster Tower Brewery Co. v. Wilson [1897]1 Ch. 705.
Where a contract is made on the footing of the existence of a licence, and it appears that the licence is subject to qualifications, the contract cannot be enforced: Modlen v. Snowball (1861) 4 De G.F. & J. 143.
So where public house premises in England were sold as "fully licensed" whereas the licence was a six-day licence, the court held that the vendor could not enforce specific performance: Fraser v. Pugsley (1920) 37 T.L.R. 87.
Where a purchase of licensed premises was made subject to the purchaser obtaining a transfer of the certificate, and the purchaser undertook to do all in his power to obtain a transfer, and the transfer was refused by the licensing court, and the purchaser refused to appeal or to concur in an appeal against the refusal, it was held that he had failed to do all in his power to obtain a transfer, and was found liable in damages to the seller: Skinner v. Breslin (1905) 13 S.L.T. 91; cf.
M'Cortnick v. Dalrymple (1904) 41 S.L.R. 578.
The position of a trustee for a bankrupt certificate-holder is dealt with in note D below.
The goodwill carries the right to apply for the transfer: flutter v. Daniel (1882) 30 W.R. 801.
Under the Revenue Acts goodwill is situated locally with the business: Inland Revenue v. Muller & Co. [1901]A.C. 217.
D. Bankrupt licence-holders and their trustees.
Where a licence-holder became bankrupt, and thereafter, with the approval of his trustee under the Bankruptcy Acts, applied for, and obtained, an hotel licence from the licensing court, and the goodwill of the business was thereupon sold by the trustee, the bankrupt was ordered to deliver to the trustee his hotel certificate as an accessory to the hotel.
The alleged right of lien led by the bankrupt's solicitor was repelled: Selkirk v. Coupland (1886) 23 S.L.R. 456.
On a certificate-holder becoming bankrupt, the certificate, the permit book, and other documents must be delivered up to the trustee as the property of the creditors: Fraser's Tr. v. Fraser (1896) 23 R. 978.
Delivery and not assignation is the proper mode of divesting one of a certificate: Clift v. Portobello Pier Cia.
(1877) 4 R. 462.
Where, in competition with the liquidator of an insolvent company, a creditor of the company was successful in obtaining a renewal of the certificate (though he had neither right to, nor possession of, the premises in respect of which the certificate was granted) and admitted that he held it in trust for the company's creditors, he was ordered to deliver up the certificate to the liquidator: Wm.
Forbes Ltd. (in liquidation) v. Paterson, 1926 S.L.T. 654.
The trustee ill bankruptcy can sell the goodwill of a business and its trade so as to exclude the bankrupt, when discharged, from commencing a similar business under the same name, or issuing the same or similar trade mark: Melrose-Drover v. Heddle (1901) 4 F. 1120.
An hotel-keeper become bankrupt, the yearly lease terminated and the trustee did not offer himself as a tenant, and the bankrupt's wife became tenant.
Thereafter the trustee applied for the certificate, but the Opinion was expressed that the justices could not grant a renewal or transfer of a certificate to a person who, not being in possession, could not carry on the business: Budge v. Goudie (1895) 2 S.L.T. 406.
As to whether a trustee under a trust deed is an assignee of, or manager for, an insolvent certificate-holder, in a question with the landlord, see Dewar v. Ainslie (1892) 20 R. 203.
An insolvent certificate-holder does not by his declared bankruptcy, or by signing a trust deed for behoof of his creditors, divest himself of his certificate.
He is not contravening the Act in carrying (In his business either by himself, by a manager, or by his trustee.
 "It is not open to question that a licence-holder may lawfully carry on his business through a manager," and "a trust deed is not a matter with which the public authorities are concerned" : per Lord M'Laren, Wylie v. Thom (1889) 16 R. (t.) 90.
In that case a conviction of a manager for an insolvent certificate-holder, who had granted a trust deed, of having trafficked "without having a certificate" was suspended.
A similar opinion was expressed obiter in Rattray v. White (1891) 19 R. (t.) 23.
A judicial factor was appointed on the sequestrated estate of a partner in a licensed business, his share in the partnership property being part of his sequestrated estate.
In the course of the sequestration proceedings in the sheriff court he was sentenced to 30 days' imprisonment for contempt of court, because he had entered the licensed premises and interfered with the management thereof after giving an undertaking that he would not do so.
The sentence was held by the High Court of Justiciary to be competent: Graham v. Robert Younger Ltd., 1955 J.C.
28.
The purchaser (If a licensed business from the trustee of a bankrupt certificate-holder must with reasonable dispatch get the bankrupt's certificate transferred to him.
If that be not done, he is guilty of a technical offence: Brunfaut v. Neilson (1893) 20 R. (t.) 68.
An opinion was expressed that such a purchaser under a suspensory condition (that the money be only handed over on the certificate being got by the purchaser) is not necessarily committing a violation of the Act, "assuming that he shows proper diligence in endeavouring to obtain the certificate, and is acting throughout in bona fide" : per Lord Trayner, ibid.
See also a similar opinion in a civil matter by Lord President Robertson, in Cook and Mearns v. Gray (1891) 29 S.L.R. 247.
In a civil question between the creditors of a deceased and insolvent certificate-holder and his widow, who, without objection by the creditors, obtained the certificate and thereafter carried on the business without any agreement being made regarding her paying her husband's debts, or the application of the profits during her tenancy, it was decided that she was not bound to account to the creditors for the profits earned by her under her own certificate: Stewart's Trs. v. Stewart's Executrix (1896) 23 R. 739.
But she was bound to account to the trustee for the estate received by her, including the goodwill, as at her husband's death.
Provisional grant of licence
(1) A licensing board may, on an application in that behalf made to the board by any person interested in premises about to be constructed or in course of construction for use as licensed premises, make a provisional grant of a licence in respect of those premises if the board is satisfied (a) that the premises will be fit and convenient for their purpose, and that, if the premises had been completed in accordance with the plan thereof lodged with the board in pursuance of section 10 of this Act, the board would on application have granted such a licence in respect thereof.
(2) If on an application under this section the applicant lodges with the board, instead of the plan mentioned in paragraph (b) of subsection (1) above, a plan sufficient to identify the site of the premises, together with such description of the premises as will give a general indication of their proposed size and character (with reference in particular to the sale of alcoholic liquor), then (a) the licensing board shall deal with the application as if made under subsection 1) above; but  (b) any provisional grant of a licence made on an application under this subsection shall become ineffective unless affirmed by the licensing board on application made to the board to that effect within 12 months of the provisional grant of the licence, any such application being accompanied by a plan of the premises.
(3) A licensing board may consider any application made to it under paragraph (b) of subsection (2) above at any meeting of the board held not earlier than 14 days after the making of the application and shall affirm the provisional grant if the board is satisfied that the premises, if completed in accordance with the plan mentioned in that paragraph, will be and convenient for their purpose and that the said plan does not deviate materially from the site plan and description of the premises lodged under the said subsection (2).
(4) A licence of which a provisional grant has been made as aforesaid shall not come into force until such grant is declared final by the licensing board, and subject to subsection (6) below, the board shall, on being so requested, declare the grant final if it is satisfied either:
that the premises in respect of which the grant was made have been completed in accordance with the plan thereof lodged with the board, or (b) that the premises have been completed and that such deviations from the said plan as exist are of minor importance and have not materially altered the character of the premises or the facilities for the supply of alcoholic liquor thereat.
(5) A licensing board shall not entertain a request to declare the provisional grant of a licence final unless the person to whom the grant was made has given to the board such notice of his intention to make the request as may be prescribed.
In the case of a request by a person other than an individual natural person that the licensing board shall declare the provisional grant of a licence final, that person shall include in the notice in subsection (5) above the name of the employee or agent whom it is intended should have the day to day running of the premises, and the board shall not declare the provisional grant final if it finds that the employee or agent so named in the notice is not a fit and proper person to be the holder of a licence.
(7) Where a licensing board declares a provisional grant final in such a case as is described in subsection (6) above, the licence shall be in the names of both persons mentioned in that subsection, and any reference in this Act to the holder of a licence includes a reference to both of those persons.
(8) Until the date of the first renewal of licences provisionally granted under subsection (1) or (2) above after those licences have been declared final, subsections (2) to (5) of section 30 of this Act shall have effect in relation to those licences with the substitution in subsection (3) of section 30 of a reference to one year instead of the reference to three years.
(9) A licensing board may refuse to renew a licence provisionally granted under subsection (1) or (2) above if the board considers that there has been unreasonable delay on the part of the applicant in completing the premises.
(10) An applicant may appeal to the sheriff against a decision of a licensing board to refuse to affirm a licence under subsection (2) above or to refuse to declare a provisional grant of a licence final under subsection (4) above.
GENERAL NOTE
A person wishing to build, or in the course of building licensed premises, may apply to the licensing board for the grant of a provisional licence.
The applicant can lodge with the  board either a full plan of the premises in accordance with 5.10 (subs.
(1)) or a site plan together with a description (subs.
(2)).
The matters about which the board have to be satisfied before making a provisional grant are specified in subs.
(1) and subs.
(2)(a).
Where an applicant proceeds under subs.
(2), he must apply within 12 months of the making of the provisional grant to have the grant affirmed, which application has to be accompanied by a full plan of the premises (subs.
(2)(b)).
This application is not to be confused with an application to have a provisional grant to be declared final under subs.
(4).
The matter of declaring a provisional grant final is dealt with in subss. (4) and (5) with additional provisions for persons other than natural persons in subss. (6) and (7).
The name of such a person may be changed under s.25(3).
The currency of a provisional grant where it is not declared final is to be a period of one year (subs.
(8)), and unreasonable delay in completing the premises is to be a ground for refusing to renew such a grant (subs.
(9)).
A board can only refuse a provisional grant for the reasons specified in 5.17(2), and there is a right of appeal against such a refusal to the sheriff in virtue of s.17(4), and also against the refusal of a board to affirm a licence under subs.
(2) and the refusal of a board to declare a licence final under subs.
(4)(subs.
(10)).
For appeals see 5.39.
It should be borne in mind that an application for the grant of a provisional licence is an application under Part II of the 1976 Act, and must conform with its provisions, in particular with 55.5, 10(1) (3)(5)(7), 12, 17 and 23.
It is to be noted that the provisions contained in s.13(2) (relief from the consequences of failure to comply with the Act), s.15(1) (attendance at the meeting of a board by an applicant or his representative), 5.16 (objections to an application), and s.18 (giving reasons by a board for its decision) apply to applications for a provisional grant.
It is to be noted that subs.
(8) makes it necessary for an application for renewal of a provisional licence, whether granted in terms of subs.
(1) or subs.
(2) to be made at intervals of one year after the provisional grant was made.
A provisional grant of a licence cannot be transferred under s.25 of the Act.
See Baljaffray Residents Association v. Milngavie & Bearsden District Council Licensing Board, 1981 S.L.T. (Sh.Ct.) 106 where it is held that a provisional grant of a licence is not "in force" until declared final.
A transfer can only be effected in respect of a new tenant or occupant of "licensed premises" and licensed premises are premises in respect of which a licence is in force.
See also Ginera v. City of Glasgow District Licensing Board, 1982 S.L.T. 136 where an application for Sunday opening in respect of a provisional grant of licence was held to be incompetent as the licence is not in force and only the holder of a public house licence can make application for Sunday opening.
Grant of provisional licence
A licensing board may grant a provisional licence to the holder of any licence to enable him to carry on business in temporary premises during the reconstruction of his premises.
GENERAL NOTE
A provisional licence may be granted to the holder of any form of licence.
It authorises the carrying on of the licence-holder's business temporarily in other premises, whilst the premises to which his licence applies are being reconstructed.
Licence not to be granted for premises on special roads
(1) Premises shall be disqualified for receiving a licence if they are situated on land acquired or appropriated by a special road authority, and for the time being used, for the provision of facilities to be used in connection with the use of a special road provided for the use of traffic of class 1 (with or without other classes).
(2) For the purposes of this section:(a) "special road" and "special road authority" have the same meanings as in the Roads (Scotland) Act 1984 and (b) "class I" means class 1 in Schedule 3 to the Act, as varied from time to time by any order under section 8 of that Act, but, if that  Schedule is amended by such an order so as to add to it a further class of traffic, the order may adapt the reference in this section to traffic of class 1 so as to take account of the additional class.
GENERAL NOTE
This section amended; 1984, c.54, Sched. 9.
Alcoholic liquor which may be sold under licence
(1) A licence granted under this Act by a licensing board shall authorise the holder thereof to sell by retail spirits, wine, made-wine, porter, ale, beer, cider, perry, and any other alcoholic liquor:
Provided that the licensing board may, when granting a licence or an application for an extension of the permitted hours, restrict the alcoholic liquor which may be sold thereunder to wine, made-wine, porter, ale, beer, cider and perry.
(2) Where by virtue of a decision of a licensing board under the proviso to subsection (1) above only alcoholic liquor other than spirits may be sold, it shall be an offence for the licence-holder or his employee or agent to sell spirits.
GENERAL NOTE
Subsections.
(1) For the meaning of "alcoholic liquor," see s.139(1).
The kinds of alcoholic liquor which may be sold under a full licence are enumerated in the main clause of the section, The group of alcoholic liquors which may be sold under a restricted licence are enumerated in the proviso.
The subsection applies to any type of licence.
The substitution of a restricted licence for a full licence on an application for renewal is a refusal of the application within the meaning of s.15(2), and is incompetent unless the applicant has been heard by the licensing board on the matter, or, having been cited to attend the hoar meeting, fails to attend: Baillie v. Wilson, 1917 S.C.
55; Wolfson v. City of Glasgow District Licensing Board, 1981 S.L.T. 17.
Moreover, it also follows from such a substitution amounting to a refusal that the provisions relating to the grounds on which an application for a renewal of a licence can be refused (s. 17(2)), and the right of appeal against such a refusal are applicable (s.17(4)).
(2) The maximum penalty is a fine of levels with both the premises and the licence-holder liable to disqualification (Sched. 5).
Currency of licence
(1) A new licence shall come into effect on being granted by a licensing board, except that where there were objections at the hearing the licence shall not come into effect until:(a) the time within which an appeal may be made has elapsed, or:(b) where an appeal has been lodged, the appeal has been abandoned or determined in favour of the applicant for the licence.
(2) A renewed licence shall come into effect on being renewed by a licensing board.
(3) A licence shall have effect in accordance with the following provisions of this section until the quarterly meeting of the licensing board three years after the meeting at which the licence was granted or renewed by a licensing board.
(4) Subject to section 13(2) of this Act, if no application is made for the renewal of a licence at the quarterly meeting mentioned in subsection (3) above, the licence shall expire on the first day of that meeting.
(5) If an application is made for the renewal of a licence, the licence in respect of which the application is made shall continue to have effect:(a) until the application for renewal is granted by the board;(b) if the application for renewal is refused, until the time within which an appeal may be made has elapsed or, if an appeal has been lodged.
until the appeal has been abandoned or determined.
GENERAL NOTE A. General.
The section dispenses with the fixed date provisions of the previous legislation.
by enacting that a licence is to come into effect on the day it is granted or renewed (subss. (1) and (2)).
The section makes special provision for the position where an unsuccessful objector appeals against the grant of a licence (subss. (1) and (5)(b)), for the expiry of a licence where there is no application to renew (subs.
(4)), and the continuing of the validity of a licence where an application for a renewal has been made but not determined by the licensing board (subs.
(5)(n)).
For the provisions relating to the currency of the final certificate granted under the 1959 Act, see s.132.
B. Subsections.
(1) For "new licence," see 5.139(1).
An appeal must be taken within 14 days of the decision complained against, or, where a board are required to state reasons under s.18 (,).
within 14 days of the receipt of the reasons in writing (s.39(2)).
(3) For the quarterly meetings of a licensing board, see s.4(1). 5.13(2) enables a hoard, if it thinks fit, to adjourn an application where there has been a failure to comply with the requirements of the Act, or where an applicant has died.
(5) For the time within which an appeal has to be lodged.
see note to subs.
(1).
Suspension of licence on receipt of complaint
(1) Where on a complaint being made to a licensing board by any person or body mentioned in section 16(1) of this Act the board is satisfied that it is in the public interest to do so, it may, in accordance with the provisions of this section, suspend a licence.
(2) A licensing board may order the suspension of a licence on one or both of the following grounds:(a) that the licence-holder is no longer a fit and proper person to be the holder of a licence;(h) that the use of the premises in respect of which the licence is held has caused undue public nuisance or a threat to public order or safety.
(3) In considering a complaint under this section, the licensing board may have regard to:(a) any misconduct on the part of the holder of the licence, whether or not constituting a breach of this Act or any byelaw made thereunder, which in the opinion of the board has a bearing on his fitness to hold a licence;(b) any misconduct on the part of persons frequenting licensed premises occurring in those premises or any misconduct in the immediate vicinity of licensed premises which is attributable to persons frequenting those premises.
(4) On receipt of a complaint under this section, the licensing board shall decide whether or not to hold a hearing on the issue and shall inform the complainer of the board's decision in the matter.
Where the licensing board decides to hold a hearing as mentioned in subsection (4) above:(a) the clerk of the board shall serve on the holder of the licence, not less than 21 days before the hearing, a notice that the board proposes to hold a hearing, specifying the complaint and the grounds upon which suspension of the licence is sought;(b) the clerk of the board shall give notice of the hearing to the complainer;(c) any person or body mentioned in section 16(1) of this Act may, not less than 7 days before the hearing, lodge notice with the clerk of  the board that he or it wishes to be heard in support of suspension of the licence specifying the grounds on which he or it seeks such suspension, an any such notice shall be intimated by such person to the holder of the licence;(d) the board shall not order suspension of a licence without hearing the holder thereof unless after receiving due notice of the hearing the holder fails to appear.
(6) Where a licensing board decides to order the suspension of a licence, the suspension shall not take effect until the expiry of the time within which the holder of the licence may appeal to the sheriff, or, if the holder appeals to the sheriff or thereafter to the Court of Session, until the appeal has been determined in favour of the suspension or has been abandoned.
(7) The period of the suspension of a licence under this section shall be a fixed period not exceeding one year or the unexpired portion of the duration of the licence, whichever is the less, and the effect of the suspension is that the licence shall cease to have effect during the period of the suspension.
(8) The holder of the licence may appeal to the sheriff against any order of a licensing board under this section, including the period of suspension mentioned in the order.
GENERAL NOTE
A. General.
Clayson considered (paras.
8.38 to 8.40), that, should (as the Act has done by the previous section) the currency of a licence be extended to three years, it was desirable that a licensing board should have some form of sanction against the licence-holder where the premises were being misconducted, or where their suitability had deteriorated, and that such a sanction should be the power to suspend a licence.
The section enables a licensing board to suspend a licence on the ground that the licence-holder is no longer a fit and proper person, or that the premises cause undue public nuisance or are a threat to public order or safety (subs.
(2)).
The procedure is that any person or body entitled under s.16(1) to object to the grant of a licence may make a complaint about that licence to the licensing board (subs.
(1)).
The board decide whether the complaint merits a hearing and notify the complainer of their decision (subs.
(4)).
Where the board decides to hold a hearing, notice must be given to the licence-holder and the complainer in accordance with subs.
(5)(a) and (5)(b) respectively.
Any person entitled under s.16(1) to object may support the suspension in accordance with subs.
(5)(c).
In considering a complaint under the section, the board may have regard to the factors specified in subs.
(3), and are not entitled to suspend the licence without hearing the holder unless the holder fails to appear after receiving notice (subs.
(5)(d)).
The maximum period of suspension is one year or the unexpired period of the licence whichever is the less (subs.
(7)).
The holder of a licence may appeal against a suspension order (subs.
(8)), and on an appeal being taken, the suspension remains ineffective until the appeal is finally determined or abandoned (subs.
(6)).
B. Subsections.
(1) "licence" means any licence granted under the Act other than a seamen's canteen licence (see 5.139(1)).
Seamen's canteens are included, however, in virtue of the provisions of 5.45.
(2) and (3) The two subsections should be read together, subs.
(2) specifying the grounds on which a licence may be suspended, and subs.
(3) misconduct to which the board may have regard in considering whether grounds for suspension have been substantiated.
For byelaws generally, see s.38.
Subsection (3) makes it clear that a licence may be suspended not only on the grounds of the actings of the licence-holder but also on grounds attributable to the actings of persons frequenting the premises or the vicinity of the premises.
(4) The purpose of the preliminary decision on the question of whether or not a hearing is to be held is to prevent the licence-holder from being harassed by frivolous or vexatious complaints.
The hearing may be under an arrangement under s.5(1).
(8) For appeals, see 5.39 and Lightheart v. City of Edinburgh District Licensing Board, 1978 S.L.T. (Sh.Ct.) 41.
Other power to suspend licence
(1) Where a licensing board considers that licensed premises are no longer suitable or convenient for the sale of alcoholic liquor, having regard to their character and condition, and the nature and extent of the use of the premises, the board may decide to hold a hearing with a view to making a closure order under this section, and the effect of a closure order is that the licence held in respect of the premises shall cease to have effect while the closure order is in force.
(2) Where the licensing board decides to hold a hearing as mentioned in subsection (1) above:(a) the clerk of the board shall serve on the holder of the licence, not less than 21 days before the hearing, a notice that the board proposes to hold the hearing specifying the grounds on which the board proposes to hold the hearing;(b) the board shall not make a closure order without hearing the holder of the licence unless, after receiving due notice of the hearing, the holder fails to appear.
(3) Where after a hearing under this section a licensing board is satisfied as to any one or more of the matters mentioned in subsection (1) above, the board may order the closure of the licensed premises and any such order shall specify the matters on which the order is based.
(4) The closure order shall remain in force until such time as the board satisfied that the matters which led to the closure order have been satisfactorily remedied.
(5) The licence-holder may apply to the board for the cancellation of the closure order on the ground that the matters which led to the closure order have been satisfactorily remedied.
(6) Where a licensing board decides to make a closure order under this section, the order shall not take effect until the expiry of the time within which the holder of the licence may appeal to the sheriff, or, if the holder appeals to the sheriff or thereafter to the Court of Session, until the appeal has been determined in favour of the closure order or has been abandoned.
(7) The holder of the licence may appeal to the sheriff against the closure order or against a refusal of a licensing board to cancel a closure order.
GENERAL NOTE
A. General.
As in the case of the previous section, the purpose of the section is to give a licensing board a measure of control over licensed premises during the currency of a three year licence.
The section entitles a board to make a closure order where they consider that the licensed premises are no longer suitable for the sale of liquor.
The effect of the order is that the licence for the premises ceases to have effect.
The procedure for making a closure order is contained in subss. (1),(2) and (3).
The matters giving rise to the order must be specified in the order (subs.
(3)) and the order remains in force until these matters are remedied (subs.
(4)).
Where a closure order has been made, the licence-holder has the right to apply to the board for cancellation of the order, on the ground that the cause of the order has been rectified (subs.
(5)).
There is a right of appeal against the making of a closure order (subs.
(7)) with provision for suspending the order where an appeal is taken until the appeal has been determined or abandoned (subss. (6) and (7)).
B. Subsections.
(1) The section differs from the previous section in that it is concerned with the suitability of the premises and not with the fitness of the licence-holder or the orderliness of persons frequenting the premises.
It also differs in that the decision to hold a hearing with a view to making a closure order is initiated by the board itself and not as a result of a complaint to them.
(2) and (3) A closure order hearing must be before a full board meeting, but not necessarily before a quarterly meeting (s.5).
(5) The requirements for a meeting of a board to consider the cancellation of a closure order are the same as those for the making of an order (see note to subss. (2) and (3)).
(6) and (7) For appeals, see 5.39.
Occasional licence for premises other than licensed premises or clubs
(1) A licensing board may grant an occasional licence to the holder of a licence authorising him to sell alcoholic liquor, during such hours and on such day as the board may determine, in the course of catering for an event taking place outwith the licensed premises in respect of which he is the holder of a licence.
(2) A licensing board may grant an occasional licence to a registered club authorising the club to sell alcoholic liquor, during such hours and on such day as the board may determine, at an event held outwith the premises of the club if the event arises from or relates to the functions of the club.
(3) In granting an occasional licence under this section, which shall be in writing.
the licensing board may impose such conditions as it thinks fit including a condition as to the type of alcoholic liquor which may be sold under the licence, and an occasional licence granted to the holder of a restricted hotel licence or a restaurant licence shall be subject to a condition that the sale of alcoholic liquor under the authority of the licence shall be ancillary to the provision of substantial refreshment.
(4) If the holder of the licence or his employee or agent contravenes a condition attached to an occasional licence, he shall be guilty of an offence.
(5) If a condition attached to an occasional licence is contravened as regards any club, every person whose name is, at the time of the contravention, contained in the list lodged under subsection (3)(b) of section 103 of this Act, or as the case may be in the new list last lodged under subsection (5) or (5A) of that section, in respect of that club, shall be guilty of an offence:
Provided that a person shall not be convicted of such an offence if he proves that the contravention in question took place without his knowledge or consent.
(6) The provisions of this Act and of any byelaws or regulations made thereunder, other than provisions relating to permitted hours, shall apply to the sale of alcoholic liquor under subsection (1) above as if the sale took place on licensed premises and to the sale of alcoholic liquor under subsection (2) above as if the sale took place in the registered club.
(7) An application for an occasional licence under this section shall be made in writing to the clerk of the licensing board and shall specify the name and address of the applicant, the premises or place and occasion for which the licence is required, and the hours and period for which the licence is requested.
(8) At the same time as the application is made under subsection (7) above, the applicant shall send a copy of the application to the chief constable, and if an occasional licence is granted under this section the clerk of the licensing board shall send a copy of the licence to the chief constable not less than 24 hours before the beginning of the event to which it relates.
(9) A licensing board shall make such arrangements as it thinks fit as respects the consideration of applications under this section or any objection made thereto.
(10) In subsection (1) above, "the holder of a licence" includes the holder of an off-sale licence but does not include the holder of a refreshment licence or of an entertainment licence.
GENERAL NOTE
Subs.
(5) amended, 1980, c.55, s.21(2).
A. General.
5.60 of the 1959 Act was concerned with the granting of special permission to sell excisable liquor both on the certificate-holder's premises and in other premises or places.
The two purposes of s.60 have been separated in the 1976 Act, 5.33 being concerned with the sale of liquor outwith the licence-holder's premises.
and s.64 with the occasional  extension of permitted hours on the premises.
Under the 1959 Act, only the holder of a public house or an hotel certificate could apply for a special permission, whereas, under 5.33, any licence-holder.
other than the holder of a seamen's canteen, refreshment or entertainment licence.In the case of an application by a licence-holder the occasional licence allows the sale of liquor "in the course of catering for an event taking place outwith the licensed premises" (subs.
(1)).
and, in the case of a registered club, the occasional licence allows the sale of liquor outwith the club premises at an event arising from the club functions (subs.
(2)).
In both cases, the conditions under which liquor may be sold are subject to the provisions of subs.
(6).
Where an occasional licence is granted to the holder of a restricted hotel licence or a restaurant licence, it is subject to the restriction contained in subs.
(3).
Subss. (7) and (8) deal with the procedure for applying.
A board can make its own arrangements for considering such applications (subs.
(9)) and they may be heard under an arrangement under s.5(1).
A board may restrict the type of liquor which may be sold under an occasional licence (subs.
(3)).
Subss. (4) and (5) make it an offence to contravene any of the conditions of an occasional licence.
B. Subsections.
(I) "licence" does not include a seamen's canteen licence (see 5.139(1)), nor a refreshment licence or an entertainment licence (see subs.
(10)).
 "licensed premise" does not include the premises of a seamen's canteen (s. 139(1)).
(2) For the meaning of "registered club," see s.139(I).
(4) and (5) The maximum penalty for a contravention of either of the subsections is a fine of level 3. with both the licence-holder and the premises liable to disqualification, and with vicarious liability on the part of the licence-holder (Sched. 5).
(6) For "byelaws," see s.38 and "regulations," see 5.37.
Occasional permissions
(1) A licensing board may grant an occasional permission to a person representing a voluntary organisation or a branch of a voluntary organisation authorising him to sell alcoholic liquor during such hours and on such day as the board may determine, in the course of catering for an event, arising from or related to the activities of the organisation, taking place outwith licensed premises.
(2) Not more than four occasional permissions may be granted by a licensing board in any one year on behalf of the same voluntary organisation or the same branch of a voluntary organisation.
(3) In granting an occasional permission under this section, which shall be in writing, the licensing board may impose such conditions as it thinks fit including a condition as to the type of alcoholic liquor which may be sold under the permission, and if the person to whom the permission is granted contravenes such a condition he shall be guilty of an offence.
(4) The provisions of section 68 of this Act shall apply to any remises or place in respect of which an occasional permission is granted as they apply to licensed premises, with the substitution of references to the holder of the permission for the references to the holder of a licence.
(5) The provisions of section 85 of this Act shall apply to any premises or place in respect of which an occasional permission is granted as they apply to premises in respect of which a licence (other than an off-sale licence) is in force.
(6) The person to whom an occasional permission is granted shall ensure that the provisions of this Act or any byelaws or regulations made thereunder relating to the conduct of licensed premises are observed in the premises or place in respect of which the permission was granted as if he were the holder of a public house licence, and if he contravenes this subsection he shall be guilty of an offence: Provided that it shall be a defence for any person charged with an offence under this subsection if he proves that he used due diligence to prevent the occurrence of the offence.
(7) Subsections (7) to (9) of section 33 of this Act shall apply in relation to applications for occasional permissions as they apply in relation to applications for occasional licences.
GENERAL NOTE
A. General.
Clayson (para. 15.05) was of the view that small voluntary organisations should be able to supply alcoholic liquor at functions without having to find a willing certificate-holder, and should be able to gain some financial benefit from the sale of liquor to members.
The section allows a licensing board to grant an occasional permission to a representative of a voluntary organisation whereby liquor may be sold during specified hours in the course of catering for a function outwith licensed premises, which function arises from the activities of the organisation (subs.
(1)).
No more than four special permissions may be granted to any one organisation or branch of any organisation in the same year (subs.
(2)).
Application for a special permission is to be made in the same manner as for an occasional licence (subs.
(7)).
The permission is subject to the conditions set out in subss. (3) to (6).
B. Subsections.
(3) The maximum penalty for a contravention of the subsection is a fine of level 3 (Sched. 5).
(4) 5.68 is concerned with the prohibition of the sale of liquor to persons under 18 years of age.
(5) 5.85 gives the police power of entry into licensed premises, and makes it an offence to refuse or obstruct such entry.
(6) For "byelaws" and "regulations," see ss.38 and 37 respectively.
For the maximum penalty, see subs.
(3).
The defence contained in the proviso applies only to a contravention of subs.
(6) and not to a contravention of subs.
(3).
Consent of licensing board required for reconstruction, etc. of certain licensed premises
(1) No reconstruction or extension of or alteration in any premises in respect of which a licence (other than an off-sale licence) is in force, being a reconstruction, extension or alteration which will affect a public or common part of such remises or any communication with such part, shall be made unless the licensing board within whose area such premises are situated has consented to such reconstruction, extension or alteration at a quarterly meeting of the board or at such other time as may be appointed by the board, or unless such reconstruction, extension or alteration is required by order of some lawful authority.
(2) A licensing board shall not give its consent under this section to any reconstruction, extension or alteration which will materially alter the character of the premises in question or materially alter the external appearance, shape or size of the premises and may, before considering an application for the board's consent under this section, require plans of the proposed reconstruction, extension or alteration to be lodged with the clerk of the board at such time as the board may appoint.
(3) Before giving its consent under this section, the licensing board shall consult the fire authority for the area.
(4) If subsection (1) above is contravened, the sheriff may on a complaint at the instance of the licensing board, by order declare the licence which is in force for the premises in respect of which the contravention took place to be forfeited, or may direct that, within a time fixed by the order, the premises shall be restored to their original condition.
(5) For the purposes of this section:(a) "public part" means a part open to customers who are not residents or guests of residents; and (b) "common part" means a part open generally to all residents or to a particular class of them.
GENERAL NOTE
A. General.
The section provides the procedure whereby the holder of a licence (other than an off-sale licence) may obtain the consent of the licensing board to the reconstruction  or alteration of the public or common part of the premises where the reconstruction or alteration is not so material as to be excluded by subs.
(2).
For the meaning of public or common part, see subs.
(5).
Reconstruction or alteration of the premises without this consent may lead to forfeiture of the licence (subs.
(4)).
The licensing board may itself order structural alterations to be executed under s.36.
B. Subsections.
(1) "licence" is defined in s.139(1) as being any licence granted under the Act other than a seamen's canteen licence.
The section does, however, apply to seamen's canteens in virtue of the provisions of 5.45.
 "Alterations in any premises." 
For a discussion of the meaning of these words in a similar English provision, seeR.
v. Weston-super-Mare)).
[1939]1 K.B.
700.
As to how far a licensing board is entitled to impose conditions before sanctioning an alteration, seeR.
v. Wandsworth Licensing)).
[1921]3 K.B.
487.
(2) Where there is such a material alteration, the proper procedure is to apply for a fresh grant.
(3) For consultation with the fire authority, see note to s.23(5).
For appeal, see City of Glasgow District Licensing Board v. MacDonald, 1978 S.L.T. (Sh.Ct.) 74, which confirmed the competent procedure to be a summary application to the sheriff where the alteration had been carried out without consent.
Power of licensing board to order structural alterations on renewal of certain licences
(1) On any a plication for the renewal of a licence in respect of any premises (other tan off-sale premises), a licensing board may require a plan of the licensed premises to be produced to the board and lodged with the clerk, and on renewing such licence the board may order that, within a time fixed by the order, such structural alterations as the board thinks reasonably necessary to secure the proper conduct of the business shall be made in that part of the licensed premises in which alcoholic liquor is sold or consumed.
If the holder of a licence makes default in complying with an order made under this section, he shall be guilty of an offence, and he shall be guilty of a further offence for every day on which the default continues after the expiry of the time fixed by the order.
(4) If the holder of a licence makes default in complying with an order made under this section, the licensing board may order the suspension of his licence and any such order shall specify the matters on which the order is based.
(5) An order under subsection (4) above shall remain in force until such time as the board is satisfied that the matters which led to the order have been satisfactorily remedied.
(6) The licence-holder may apply to the board for the cancellation of the order on the ground that the matters which led to the order have been satisfactorily remedied.
(7) Where a licensing board decides to order the suspension of a licence the suspension shall not take effect until the expiry of the time within which the holder of the licence may appeal to the sheriff, or, if the holder appeals to the sheriff or thereafter to the Court of Session, until the appeal has been determined in favour of the suspension or has been abandoned.
(8) The holder of the licence may appeal to the sheriff against an order made under subsection (4) above or against a refusal of a licensing board to cancel such an order.
GENERAL NOTE
A. Power of licensing court to order structural alterations of hotels and public houses.
The licence-holder may not reconstruct or alter premises without the consent of the licensing board: s.35(l).
Under this section he may be ordered by the licensing board to make alterations, and failure to comply with such an order is an offence.
The board may suspend a licence where there is default in carrying out the order.
The section does not apply to off-sale licences or to seamen's canteens, seamen's canteens being outwith the definition of licensed premises in s.139(1).
B. Subsection. (1) For the meaning of "licence," see s.139(1).
Although the licensing board may resolve to call for the production of plans under this section in respect of a number of existing licences, a separate requirement must be recorded, and intimated to the licence-holder, in respect of each licence separately.
An adjournment of each application will normally be necessary in order to allow time for the plan to be produced.
As to the extent of the structural alterations which the licensing board may order under this subsection. see Bushell v. Hammond [1904]2 K.B.
563, where it was held that it included alterations to passages and means of access.
It has been held, however, that the licensing board is not entitled to make it a condition of the renewal of a licence that the applicant use his premises in a particular way, as, for example, by keeping a door locked: Smith v. Portsmouth JJ. [1906]2 K.B.
229.
See also R. v. Shann [1910]2 K.B.
418; R. v. Watford Licensing JJ. 11929]I K.B.
313.
The order, when made, should be formally intimated to the licence-holder.
There is a right of appeal against the making of an order under this subsection: subs.
(8).
In his own interests the licence-holder, when structural alterations have been completed in compliance with an order, should intimate that fact to the clerk to the licensing board.
A provisional licence may be granted to enable a licence-holder to carry on business in temporary premises during reconstruction of the licensed premises: s.27.
The period has been increased from the five years prescribed by the 1959 Act.
(3) The maximum penalty is a fine of level 3 with an additional fine of £ 5 for every day the licence-holder is in default, with both the licence-holder and the premises liable to disqualification (Sched. 5).
(8) For appeals, see 5.39.
Power of licensing board to make regulations
A licensing board may make regulations with respect to the making of applications for licences (including occasional licences and occasional permissions), extension of permitted hours and restriction of the terminal permitted hours and the procedure following thereon, and such regulations may include provisions designed to assist the board in determining the fitness of applicants to hold licences and the expediency of granting licences for the premises in respect of which application is made; and the board may also make regulations with respect to the procedure to be followed in transferring licences under this Act and with respect to any matters which, by virtue of this Act, may be prescribed.
GENERAL NOTE
A. Subject-matter of regulations made by licensing board.
The regulations which a licensing board may make are concerned with procedure only.
They may be compared in this respect with the wider legislative powers delegated to the licensing board by s.38, in connection with the making of bye-laws.
Regulations may deal only with the making of the types of application specified in the section and the procedure following thereon.
They may include provisions which will assist the licensing board to determine the fitness of applicants and the suitability (in its widest sense) of premises.
Regulations made by a licensing court must be intra vires.
See, on this matter, note A to s.38.
See also note B below.
Regulations may be made at any meeting.
They should state how they are to be published or intimated to persons interested.
B. Regulations must not conflict with provisions of the Act.
Regulations made under this section must not be inconsistent with the provisions of the Act.
The broad principle that  "where a power to make regulations is given to a public body by statute, no regulations made under it can abridge a right conferred by the statute itself" is too clear to need justification: R. v. Bird [1891]Q.B.
340, per Wills J. at p. 345.
R. v. Bird dealt with an English provision regarding the procedure for confirmation of a new licence by a confirming authority which gave the justices power to make rules as to the proceedings to be adopted for confirmation.
The justices made a rule which directed that every person intending to oppose the confirmation of a new licence should, within seven days after the grant of the licence, give notice of his intention to the applicant and to the clerk of the peace, and that no person who had failed to comply with the rule might appear to oppose confirmation.
An objector, who had not given the notice required by the rule, was not allowed to oppose confirmation when he sought to appear before the confirming authority, and the licence was confirmed.
It was held that the rule was ultra vires.
Wills J., at p. 344, said: "Parliament has…given to a person desirous of opposing,…power to appear and to be heard…
The right of the justices to make rules…cannot affect [this]privilege…
These rules…impose fresh conditions upon the exercise of the objector's right…as a necessary preliminary of the right to oppose: something which is not in the statute."
Kennedy J., at p. 346, said: "To make a…rule which has the effect of debarring a man from the exercise of an absolute statutory right, unless he complies with a number of requirements is…clearly ultra vires." 
The confirming authority was directed to hold an adjourned session, to hear and determine the application, and to hear the objector thereon.
Regulations made under this section must not delegate to one or more members of the licensing board, or to officials or other persons, except as authorised by the Act, any responsibility which must be exercised by the licensing board at any of their meetings.
They must not, moreover.
limit in advance the discretion entrusted by the Act to any meeting of the licensing board at which applications are heard and disposed of.
Power of licensing board to make byelaws
(1) Without prejudice to its other powers under this Act, a licensing board may make byelaws for any of the following purposes (a) for closing licensed premises wholly or partially on New Year's Day, and on such other days not being more than four in any one year as the board may think expedient for special reasons;(b) for prohibiting holders of licences from residing in their licensed premises, or for requiring the dwellinghouses of holders of licences to be separate from their licensed premises;(c) for requiring all wines, made-wines and spirits sold by the holder of an off-sale licence to be sold in corked, stoppered or sealed vessels, cans, jars or casks;(d) for requiring every holder of a hotel or public house licence to keep in his licensed premises and to renew from day to day a sufficient supply of drinking water, and such eatables as may be specified in the byelaw, and to display, offer and supply the same as may be required by the byelaw;(e) for printing a list of all applications coming before any meeting of the licensing board, with such other information as may be considered necessary by the board;(f) for the setting out of conditions which may be attached to licences for the improvement of standards of, and conduct in, licensed premises;(g) for the granting of a licence of a type other than that applied for; Provided that a byelaw made under paragraph (c) above shall not apply to licensed premises where no groceries are kept or sold and where a bona fide wholesale business in alcoholic liquor is carried on.
(2) Byelaws made under subsection (1) above shall not have effect until they are confirmed by the Secretary of State, and the provisions of subsections (4) to (12) and (15) of section 202 of the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973 and of section 204 of that Act shall, with any necessary modifications, apply in relation to byelaws to be made or made under this  section as they apply in relation to byelaws to be made or made under that Act.
(3) When granting a licence, a licensing board may attach to the licence any condition set out in a byelaw by virtue of paragraph (1) of subsection (1) above.
(4) The holder of any licence or any employee or agent of his shall be guilty of an offence if he commits a breach of any byelaw or any condition attached to a licence by virtue of a byelaw.
GENERAL NOTE
A. Bye-laws made by licensing board-general.
A bye-law made by a licensing board under this section must be intra vires, i. e. the scope of the bye-law must not exceed the power given by the section.
For examples of bye-laws which were held to be ultra vires, see Scottish General Transport Co. v. Glasgow Corporation, 1928 S.C.
248; Malloch v. Aberdeen Corporation, 1973 S.C.
227.
It must be reasonable, and it must not be repugnant to the general law of the country.
For the subject generally, see Gloag and Henderson, Introduction to the Law of Scotland, 9th ed., p. 5, D. M. Walker, Scottish Legal System, 5th ed., pp. 238–245 and Halsbury's Laws of England, 4th ed., Vol. 28, paras.
1323–1338 and cases there cited.
See also 5.37, note B.
As to evidence of the terms of a bye-law, and of the fact that all the formalities relating to it have been complied with, see note B(2) below.
Any condition that a board may seek to attach to a licence can only be attached by a valid bye-law: Allied Breweries (U.K.) Ltd. v. City of Glasgow District Licensing Board, 1985 S.L.T. 302.5.140(6) provides that bye-laws made under the 1959 Act continue in force.
B. Subsections.
(1) Subject-matter of bye-laws. (a) For an example of a prosecution for breach of a bye-law made under this paragraph in respect of sale or supply of alcoholic liquor on New Year's Day, after the hour appointed by the bye-law for the closing of licensed premises on that day, see Herkes v. Dickie, 1958 J.C.
51.
For an unusual case in which, on an interpretation of a bye-law, Monday, January 2, was held to be properly treated as a Sunday for the purposes of supplying travellers, see Henderson v. Ross, 1928 J.C.
74.
(b) A bye-law made under this paragraph clearly cannot be made to apply to hotel or restricted hotel licences.
(c) For the meaning of "off-sale licence," see Sched. 1.
A bye-law made under this paragraph shall not apply to licensed premises where a bona fide wholesale business in alcoholic liquor is carried on and no groceries are kept or sold (see proviso).
 "Dealing wholesale" means the sale at any one time to any one person of quantities not less than (a) in the case of spirits, wine or made-wine, two gallons or one case; or (b) in the case of beer, four and a half gallons or two cases: Alcoholic Duties Act 1979, ss.65(8) and 4(1).
(e) As to the list of applications of new applicants which the clerk to the licensing court is required by the Act to publish, see s.12.
(g) The granting of a licence other than of the type applied for amounts to a refusal of an application.
(2) 5.202 (as amended) of the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973 prescribes the procedure for the making of bye-laws by a local authority.
S.202B, introduced by s.110 of the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982, provides for a register of bye-laws to be kept available for inspection.
5.204 makes provision for the sufficiency of evidence as regards byelaws.
(4) The maximum penalty for an offence under the subsection is a fine of level 3 with both the licence-holder and the premises liable to disqualification.
The offence is one in respect of which there is vicarious liability on the part of the licence-holder (Sched. 5).
Appeals to sheriff
(1) An appeal which may be made by virtue of any provision of this Act against any decision of a licensing board shall be to the sheriff, and the decision of the sheriff on any such appeal may include such order as to the expenses of the appeal as he thinks proper.
(2) An appeal under this section shall be lodged with the sheriff clerk within 14 days from the date of the decision appealed against or in a case  where reasons for a decision have been given under section 18(2) of this Act, within 14 days from the date of receipt of those reasons, which shall be presumed to have been received on the day after the date on which they were posted, except that in the case of reasons posted on a Friday or Saturday, they shall be presumed to have been received on the Monday next following.
(3) On good cause being shown, the sheriff may hear an appeal under this section notwithstanding that it was not lodged within the time mentioned in subsection (2) above.
(4) The sheriff may uphold an appeal under this section only if he considers that the licensing board in arriving at its decision: a) erred in law; b) based its decision on any incorrect material fact; c) acted contrary to natural justice; or d) exercised its discretion in an unreasonable manner.
(5) In considering an appeal grounded on paragraph (b) of subsection (4) above, the sheriff may hear evidence by or on behalf of any party to the appeal.
(6) On upholding an appeal under this section the sheriff may:(a) remit the case with the reason for his decision to the licensing board for reconsideration of its decision; or (b) reverse or modify the decision of the licensing board.
(7) On remitting a case to a licensing board under subsection (6) above, the sheriff may:(a) specify a date by which the rehearing by the board must take place; modify any procedural steps which otherwise would be required in relation to the matter by or under any enactment; and any decision of a licensing board on any such case shall be valid as if reached at a quarterly meeting as mentioned in section 4(1) (a) of this Act.
(8) If any party to an appeal to the sheriff under any provision of this Act (other than Part VII) is dissatisfied in point of law with a decision of the sheriff, he may appeal therefrom to the Court of Session within 28 days from the date of that decision.
(9) The Court of Session may, by act of sederunt, make rules for the conduct of proceedings under this section.
GENERAL NOTE
A.General.
The section provides, under certain sections of the Act, for a right of appeal against a decision of the licensing authority to the sheriff, and a further right of appeal from the sheriff to the Court of Session on a point of law.
Unless an appeal under the Act is provided for by the particular section, or a right of appeal is available derivatively from another section, any appeal is incompetent; e.g. 5.64, extension of permitted hours; Sloan v. North East Fife District Council Licensing Board, 1978 S.L.T. (Sh.Ct.) 62.
Care should, however, be taken where a section appears to confer no right of appeal, but that section is in fact linked to another section where a right of appeal exists; e.g. under s.62 a licensing board may attach conditions to a grant or transfer of a licence and apparently there is no right of appeal against that section, but in Wallace v. Kyle and Carrick Licensing Board, 1979 S.L.T. (Sh.Ct.) 12, it was held that as s.62 was ancillary to s.10 under which licences were granted, an appeal was competent; see also M. Milne v. City of Glasgow District Licensing Board, 1987 S.L.T. (Sh.Ct.) 145 where an appeal against a decision by the clerk under 5.10(1) refusing to accept a late application for renewal was allowed in respect that the application related to a renewal of a licence under s.17(4).
Where no right of appeal exists a review of the licensing board's decision will have to be by way of a petition for judicial review or an action of reduction/declarator (board acting ultra vires, Allied Breweries (U.K.) Ltd. v. City of Glasgow District Licensing Board, 1985 S.L.T. 302; reduction of decision under s.66, temporary restriction, Elantosh Ltd. v. City of Edinburgh District Licensing Board, 1984 S.L.T. 92, overruled, Grainger v. City of Edinburgh District Licensing Board, 1989 G.W.D. 13–568).
An appeal to the nobile officium is not competent (Fife & Kinross Motor Auctions Ltd. v. Perth and Kinross District Licensing Board, 1981 S.L.T. 106).
It is competent to appeal to either the sheriff or the sheriff principal, but no appeal  lies from the sheriff to the sheriff principal (Troc Sales Ltd. v. Kirkcaldy District Licensing Board, 1982 S.L.T. (Sh.Ct.) 77).
A grant of a licence in a restricted form, when a full licence has been applied for constitutes a refusal and may be appealed (Wolfson v. Glasgow District Licensing Board, 1981 S.L.T. 17).
The right of appeal to the Court of Session does not apply to the decision of a sheriff in an application relating to registered clubs under Part VII of the Act (subs.
(8)).
The decisions which may be appealed are a refusal to grant, renew, transfer or provisionally grant a licence (s. 17(4)), the right of appeal being conferred on the applicant, a grant of a new licence, or a grant of a renewal, permanent transfer, or provisional grant of a licence (s. 17(5)), the right of appeal being restricted to competent objectors who appeared at the hearing of the application.
the attaching or refusal to attach a condition under s.38(3) or 5.101(2) of the Act, the right of appeal being conferred on applicants and unsuccessful competent objectors who appeared at the hearing (s. 17(6)), a refusal to affirm or declare final a provisional grant (s.26(10)), the right of appeal being limited to the applicant, the making of a suspension order (s.31(8)) or a closure order (s.32(7), the right of appeal being limited to the licence-holder), the suspending of a licence under s.36 where the licence-holder fails to execute structural alterations, the refusal to cancel such a suspension (s.36(8), the right of appeal being limited to the licence-holder), the decisions referred to in 5.44 relating to seamen's canteens (the right of appeal being limited to the licence-holder or the applicant), the making of a restriction order (s.65(8)), the right of appeal being limited to the registered club, or licence-holder concerned and any complainer who appeared at the hearing, the granting or refusal of an application by a public house licence-holder for Sunday opening at the premises (the right of appeal being conferred on both an unsuccessful applicant and an unsuccessful objector (Sched. 4, Part I, paras.
8 and 9)), and the making of a Sunday restriction order, by the same parties as entitled to appeal under s.65(8) (Sched. 4, Part II, para. 22).
The appeal procedure is regulated by the Act of Sederunt (Appeals under the Licensing (Scotland) Act 1976) 1977 (5.1. 1977 No. 1622), as amended by 5.1. 1979 No. 1520 (see Appendix).
An appeal is made by initial writ, which is disposed of as a summary application under the Sheriff Courts (Scotland) Act 1907 and 1913 (Dobie, Sheriff Court Practice, p. 101; Macphail, Sheriff Court Practice, para. 27–189; Hutcheon v. Hamilton District Licensing Board, 1978 S.L.T. (Sh.Ct.) 44).
A copy of the initial writ requires to be served on (1) the clerk of the licensing board and (2) all parties who appeared or were represented at the hearing including the applicant if the appeal is by an objector, at the same time as the initial writ is lodged with the sheriff clerk or as soon as may be thereafter (para. 3,5.1. 197711622.
This includes the board and the chief constable; Padda v. Strathkelven District Licensing Board, 1988 5.
C.L.R. 349).
Failure to serve or to serve "as soon as may be thereafter" is fatal to the appeal (Binnie v. Glasgow District Licensing Board, 1979 S.L.T. 286 and Padda cit.).
It is not clear whether the 8.1. is authority for the service or whether a warrant is required from the sheriff clerk.
It is considered prudent to seek warrant for service in the initial writ.
Contrary to some earlier decisions ("z.
Hutcheon, cit.) it is competent for the licensing board to be a party to the appeal (Joe Coral (Racing) Ltd. v. Hamilton District Council, 1981 S.L.T. (Notes) 106).
The chief constable cannot be a party to the appeal, unless he formerly objected to the original application (Hutcheon, cit.).
The chief constable's objections require to be intimated in terms of the Act and require fuller specification beyond a recital of the statutory wording of the grounds of objection (Chief Constable of Grampian v. City of Aberdeen District Licensing Board, 1979 S.L.T. (Sh.Ct.) 2).
The initial writ requires to identify the licensing board's failures and specify the circumstances which are relied on to show that the hoard erred; it is not sufficient to recite without specification all the statutory grounds of appeal (Sutherland v. City of Edinburgh District Licensing Board, 1984 S.L.T. 241).
Subss. (2) and (3) prescribe the time within which an appeal may be taken, subs.
(4) the grounds in respect of which an appeal may be sustained, subs.
(5) permits evidence to be adduced, subss. (6) and (7) deal with the courses a sheriff may take in sustaining an appeal, and subs.
(8) with an appeal to the Court of Session on a point of law.
B. Subsections.
(1) In considering the appeal, the sheriff acts in his judicial capacity and is vested with a wide discretion, which must be exercised reasonably (Martin v. Ellis, 1978 S.L.T. (Sh.Ct.) 38; Botterills of Blantyre v. Hamilton District Licensing Board, 1986 S.L.T. 14).
(2) 5.18(2) confers the right on an applicant, licence-holder, objector or complainer who appeared at the hearing to request that the board give their reasons for their decision in writing.
The licensing board require to give reasonably full reasons for their decision.
A mere repetition of the statutory wording of the grounds for refusal is insufficient (Martin v. Ellis, cit.).
A licensing board will be held to have failed to exercise its discretion in a  reasonable man tier by not giving due consideration to a matter, such as objections, if there is absence of reference to that matter in the statement of reasons (R. W. Cairns Ltd. v. Busby East Church kirk Session, 1985 S.L.T. 493).
(3) A sheriff may hear the appeal, notwithstanding that the request of reasons under 5.18(2) was not made timeously (N.D. Wines (Inverness) Ltd. v. Inverness District Licensing Board, 1982 S.I.T.
73).
(4)(a) For error in law, see Walker, Civil Remedies, pp. 166 to 169.
Error in law includes acting ultra vires(Allied Breweries (U.K.) Ltd. v. City of Glasgow District Licensing Board, cit.), incompetence ID.
& A. Haddow v. City of Glasgow District Licensing Board, 1983 S.L.T. (Sh.Ct.) 5).
(c) For natural justice, see Walker, Civil Remedies, pp. 165 to 166.
There have been appeals under the Betting and Gaming Acts where the question of a breach of the rules of natural justice was raised.
In Prise v. Aberdeen Licensing Court, 19745.
L.T. (Sh.Ct.) 48, an appeal was sustained on the ground that the court proceeded on a consideration which was unknown to the applicant.
In Low v. Kincardine Licensing Court, 1974 S.L.T. (Sh.Ct.) 54, it was held to be a relevant ground of appeal that a rule of natural justice that no interested party should have an opportunity to confer with the licensing court outwith the presence of another party to the cause was broken.
In Cigaro (Glasgow) Ltd. v. City of Glasgow District Licensing Board, 1983 S.L.T. 549 it was held not to be a breach of natural justice to hear only submissions and not to allow evidence to be led, where this was the practice of the licensing board.
It ceases under this Act, e.g. Coppola v. Midlothian District Council Licensing Board.
1983 S.L.T. (Sh.Ct.) 95, it was held to be a breach of natural justice, where a licensing board consulted with the director of environmental health at their deliberations, where he had put in a report objecting to the grant of a licence.
In Moughal v. Motherwell District Licensing Board, 1083 S.L.T. (Sh.Ct.) 84 and Robertson v. Inverclyde Licensing Board, 1979 S.L.T. (sh.Ct.) 16 it was held that the licensing board were not entitled to proceed on local knowledge of the members, where the parties were not given an opportunity to comment thereon.
Whether an obviously biased intervention by a board member and the introduction of new material by an objector, which had not been previously intimated to the applicant amounted to breaches of natural justice was considered in Tennent Caledonian Breweries Ltd. v. City of Aberdeen District Licensing Board, 1987 S.L.T. (Sh.Ct.) 2.
In Mecca Ltd. v. Kirkcaldy Burgh Licensing Court, 1975 S.L.T. (Sh.Ct.) 50, it was held that a licensing court was not entitled to found on information neither adduced in evidence, nor within judicial knowledge.
(d) This is the same ground as that which entitles a sheriff to allow an appeal made to him in his administrative capacity.
The question has arisen whether a refusal on general grounds constitutes a valid exercise of discretion.
In Aitken v. Motherwell and Wishaw Licensing Court, 1071 S.L.T. (Sh.Ct.) 25, it was held that a licensing court had no powers to make policy or blanket decisions (see Re Findlay [1985]A.C. 318), and in Keith v. Dunfermline Town Council, 1068 S.L.T. (Sh.Ct.) 51, the refusal of a permit for amusements with prizes on general grounds was found to be unreasonable.
on the other hand, in Patullo v. Dundee Corporation, 1969 S.L.T. 31, MacIntyre v. Elie and Earlsferry Town Council, 1967 S.L.T. (sh.Ct.) 78, and MacGregor v. Berwickshire County Council, 1967 S.L.T. (Sh.Ct.) 13, appeals were refused where the decision appealed against proceeded on general policy.
For decisions where a licensing court was held not to have validly exercised its discretion, see Mecca Ltd. v. Edinburgh Corporation, 1967 S.L.T. (Sh.Ct.) 43, and Atherlay v. Lanark County Council, 1068 S.L.T. (Sh.Ct.) 71; over-provision, failure to compare like with like, Crolla v. City of Edinburgh District Licensing Board, 1983 S.L.T. (Sh.Ct.)
Il; Lazerdale Ltd. v. City of Glasgow Licensing Board, 1988 G.W.D. 36–1484 (1st Div.) where it was held that a radius of 200 metres was a reasonable "locality" under s. 17(I) (d) within Glasgow, and Bury v. Kilmarnock and Loudon District Licensing Board, 1989 S.L.T. 110, where it was held that the board had exercised its discretion unreasonably in refusing to consider an application for an extension on the basis of non-representation without asking whether that non-representation was material as they had all the facts before them.
(5) Evidence may only be led in respect of a decision based on an incorrect fact (subs.
(4)(b)) and it is incompetent to seek to lead evidence regarding the other grounds of appeal: Johnston v. City of Edinburgh District Licensing Board, 1981 S.L.T. 257; Troc Sales Ltd. v. Kirkcaldy District Licensing Board, 1982 S.L.T. (Sh.Ct.) 77; Cigaro (Glasgow) Ltd. v. City of Glasgow District Licensing Board, cit., all overruling Ladbroke Racing (Scotland East) Ltd. v. Midlothian District Licensing Board, 1981 S.L.T. (Sh.Ct.) 12.
For a detailed criticism of this rule and the problems which it causes, when there is material conflict in the averments made by an appellant and the licensing board, see Tennent Caledonian Breweries Ltd. v. City of Aberdeen District Licensing Board, cit., where it was held that in the case of a conflict of averments, the court could not go behind what appeared in the board's pleadings.  (6) In Jack v. Edinburgh Corporation, 1973 S.L.T. (Sh.Ct.) 64, it was held that where an appeal was considered in circumstances substantially different from those considered by the licensing authority, the proper course was to remit back to the authority for reconsideration.
Where a decision is made to remit back to the licensing board, the interlocutor should include any specification or modification required under subs.
(7).
(8) Appeal lies only to the Court of Session on a point of law.
The licensing board have an interest to maintain an appeal to the Court of Session (Wolfson v. Glasgow District Licensing Board, 1981 S.L.T. 17).
It is not competent to appeal from the sheriff to the sheriff principal (Troc Sales Ltd. v. Kirkcaldy District Licensing Board, cit.).
The court can remit the case back to the sheriff with a direction that he should remit it to the licensing board to reconsider their decision (R. W. Cairns Ltd. v. Busby East Church Kirk Session, cit.) or remit the case to the sheriff to proceed as accords (Collins v. Hamilton District Licensing Board, 1984 S.L.T. 230).
SEAMEN's CANTEENs
Power to authorize grant of licences for seamen's canteens
If a body approved by the Secretary of State have provided or propose to provide a seamen's canteen the need for which has been certified by him after consultation with the Merchant Navy Welfare Board, the licensing board within whose jurisdiction the said canteen is or will be situated may grant a licence under this Part of this Act authorising the person who is the manager of the canteen to sell alcoholic liquor in the canteen.
GENERAL NOTE
 "Alcoholic liquor" is defined in s.139(1).
As to the meaning of "canteen," see s.46 and s.139(I).
Seamen's canteens-general.
This Part of the Act imposes certain duties upon licensing boards in respect of seamen's canteens.
If a seamen's canteen is certified as necessary by the Secretary of State, the licensing board may, and in certain circumstances (see s.41(1)), must, grant a licence.
This licence plays the same part in relation to seamen's canteens as a licence granted under Part It of the Act in relation to licensed premises.
A seamen's canteen licence only permits the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption in the canteen, and it is an offence to supply in or take from a seamen's canteen liquor for consumption off the premises (see s.96).
Procedure for grant of licences
(1) A licensing board shall not refuse to grant a licence under this Part of this Act except under subsection (2) below or on one or more of the following grounds:(a) that the applicant is disqualified by or under this or any other enactment for holding a licence or is in other respects not a fit and proper person to hold a licence under this Part of this Act; or (b) that the premises to which an application relates are not fit and convenient for the purposes of the canteen; or (c) in a case where objection has been made to the situation of the canteen, on the ground specified in the objection; or (d) that the applicant or body providing the canteen has entered into an agreement limiting the sources from which the alcoholic liquor or the mineral waters to be sold in the canteen may be obtained; but nothing in this subsection shall prevent a licensing board from specifying in the licence granted by it the types of liquor (including if the board thinks fit types of liquor other than those in respect of which the application for the licence was made) which may be sold under the licence, and the holder  of the licence or his employee or agent shall be guilty of an offence, if he sells alcoholic liquor of a type other than that specified in the licence.
(2) Before application is made for the grant of a licence under this Part of this Act, draft rules as to the persons entitled to use the canteen shall be prepared for submission with the application, and the licensing board shall refuse to grant the licence unless the body providing the canteen undertake to make rules for the canteen in the form of the draft, with the modifications, if any, required by the licensing board, and not to vary those rules without the consent of the licensing board.
(3) Any licence granted under this Part of this Act shall provide that at all times at which alcoholic liquor is sold, food and beverages other than alcoholic liquor shall also be provided for sale, and if such food and beverages are not so provided, the holder of the licence or his employee or agent, as the case may be, shall be guilty of an offence.
(4) Part I of Schedule 2 to this Act shall have effect as respects the notices to be given and the documents to be served on an application for the grant of a licence under this Part of this Act.
(5) A licence under this Part of this Act may, in a case where it is proposed to construct or convert premises for a seamen's canteen, be a provisional licence to be made final after the proposal has been carried out; and Part II of the said Schedule 2 shall have effect as respects such licences.
(6) Where any person desires to oppose an application for the grant of a licence under this Part of this Act, he shall, not later than seven days before the meeting of the licensing board at which the application is to be considered, give to the licensing board and to the applicant written notice of his objection specifying the round of his objection in the manner mentioned in section 16(2) and (3) of this Act.
(7) Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, it shall be competent for a licensing board to entertain objections from the chief constable, lodged at any time before the hearing of an application, if the licensing board is satisfied that there is sufficient reason why due notice and intimation of the objection could not be given, and in such case the chief constable shall, where practicable, cause his objections to be intimated to the applicant before the hearing.
GENERAL NOTE
A. Power of licensing board to grant or refuse seamen's canteen licence.
The discretion of the licensing board to refuse to grant a seamen's canteen licence is limited by this section.
If the necessary certification from the Secretary of State has been obtained (see s.40), the licensing board must grant the licence except on one or other of the grounds mentioned in subss. (1) and (2).
The licensing board may, however, specify the types of alcoholic liquor which may be sold and these may be other than those in respect of which the application for a canteen licence was made (subs.
(1)).
It is an offence to sell liquors other than of the types specified in the licence.
It must be a condition of all seamen's canteen licences that food and non-intoxicating drinks are always available while alcoholic liquor is being sold: subs.
(3).
Special procedure is provided for provisional licences where building or reconstruction has yet to be done: subs.
(5), Sched. 2, Part I. For the period of currency of a seamen's canteen licence, see s.42.
The special procedure for the making of applications is prescribed in Sched. 2, Part 1.
As to the right to object to the grant of a licence, see note B (1)(c), below.
B. Subsections.
(1) This subsection specifies the only grounds upon which a seamen's canteen licence may be refused.
(a) As to the persons "disqualified by…this or any other enactment" for holding, a licence, see Sched. 5 for list of offences carrying disqualification under the Act.
(b) The applicant is bound to lodge with his application a plan of the canteen and particulars of the means of access, and of the sanitary accommodation: Sched. 2, Part I, para. 1(1) (iii).
(c) Where objection has been made to the situation of the canteen, it may be sustained and the application refused on that ground.
(2) A licence must be refused if the body providing the canteen fails to undertake to make rules in terms of a draft approved by the board, and to refrain from altering them without the consent of the board.
Draft rules regarding the persons who are to be entitled to use the canteen must be submitted to the licensing board along with the application: subs.
(2), Sched. 2, Part two para. 1(1) (ii).
See note to s.103 for rules, relating to clubs, which may have some relevance to rules for seaman's canteens.
The hours for canteens are prescribed by Part V of the Act.
(3) See note to s.08 regarding the requirement to provide meals with the sale of alcohol and what constitutes a "meal." 
Renewal of licences
(1) Section 30 of this Act shall have effect in relation to licences under this Part of this Act.
(2) If the Secretary of State has, in the calendar year in which the licence would otherwise expire, certified that the canteen is still needed, the licensing board may renew the licence.
(3) A licensing board shall not refuse an application for the renewal of a licence under this Part of this Act except under subsection (4) below or on one or more of the following grounds:(a) that the manager is disqualified by or under this or any other enactment for holding a licence or is in other respects not a fit and proper person to be the holder of a licence under this Part of this Act; or (b) that the rules as to the persons entitled to use the canteen have not been observed or that the canteen has in other respects been improperly conducted; or (c) that the manager or the body providing the canteen has entered into an agreement of the kind mentioned in paragraph (d) of section 41(1) of this Act.
(4) On renewing a licence under this Part of this Act a licensing board may by order, to be served on the holder, direct that, within a time fixed by the order, such structural alterations shall be made in the premises comprising the canteen as the board thinks reasonably necessary to secure the proper conduct of the canteen; and if, when application for renewal of the licence is next made after the time fixed by the order has expired, it is not shown to the satisfaction of the licensing board that the order has been complied with, the licensing board may refuse to renew the licence.
If an order under this subsection is complied with, the licensing board shall not make a further order within the six years following the first-mentioned order.
(5) Any person intending to oppose an application for renewal of a licence under this Part of this Act shall, not later than seven days before the hearing of the application, give to the holder of the licence and to the licensing board notice in writing of his intention, specifying the ground of his objection in the manner mentioned in section 16(2) and (3) of this Act.
(6) Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subsection, it shall be competent for the licensing board to entertain objections from the chief constable, lodged at any time before the hearing of the application if the board is satisfied that there is sufficient reason why due notice and intimation of the objection could not be given, and in such a case the chief constable shall, where practicable, cause his objections to be intimated to the applicant before the hearing.
GENERAL NOTE
Renewal of seamen's canteen licences.
The power to renew a seamen's canteen licence is exercisable at the quarterly meeting three years after the meeting at which the licence was first granted (subs.
(1), applying s, 30 to seamen's canteen licences).
For the corresponding provisions regarding renewal of licences, see 55.5, 24 and 30.
The corresponding provision for licensed premises with regard to structural alterations directed by the licensing board will be found in s.36.
It will be noted that failure to comply with a direction regarding structural alterations to a seamen's canteen may result in a refusal to renew the licence It the next application, and not to a fine as under s.36.
The licensing board must renew a licence if, during the calendar year in which, but for renewal, it would expire, the Secretary of State certifies that the canteen is still needed, except on one or more of the four grounds mentioned in subss. (3) and (4).
Intending objectors to a renewal, other than the chief constable, must give notice specifying the grounds of objection, both to the licence-holder and to the board, not later than seven days before the hearing: subs.
(6).
For a consideration of the law applicable to (1) objections, see notes to 55.16 and 39, and (2) a case where rules were habitually broken, see Madin v. McLean (1894) 21 R. (J.) 40; I Adam 376.
Transfer of licences
(1) Where the holder of a licence under this Part of this Act subsequently ceases to be the manager of the canteen, the person for the time being in charge of the canteen may, during the period of 14 days from the date on which the holder of the licence ceased to be the manager, sell alcoholic liquor in the canteen as if that licence had been transferred to him.
(2) A transfer of a licence under this Part of this Act shall not be refused except on the ground that the applicant is disqualified by or under this or any other enactment for holding a licence or is in other respects not a fit and proper person to hold a licence under this Part of this Act.
(3) An applicant under this section shall give the notices required by Part III of Schedule 2 to this Act.
GENERAL NOTE
Transfer of a seamen's canteen licence.
Where the holder of a canteen licence ceases to manage the canteen, the person who is in charge for the time being can, for a period of 14 days from the date"when the holder ceased to be manager, sell liquor as if the licence had been transferred to him.
The procedure for applying for a transfer is prescribed by Sched. 2, Part Ill.
The only ground of refusal (against which there is a right of appeal under s.45) is that the transferee is, disqualified from holding a licence or is not a fit and proper person to hold a canteen licence (subs.
(2)).
For a consideration of "fit and proper," see note to 5.17.
An application for, i transfer does not require to be heard by a quarterly meeting of a board but can be heard by a meeting convened under s.5(1).
Rights of appeal
Where a licensing board:(a) refuses to grant, renew or transfer a licence under this Part of this Act, or (b) on an application for the grant of a licence under this Part of this Act, specifies, as types of liquor which may be sold under the licence, types other than those in respect of which the application for the licence was made, or (c) on an application for renewal of a licence under this Part of this Act, does not comply with any request duly made by the applicant for a change in the specification of the types of liquor which may be sold under the licence, or (d) requires modifications in the rules proposed to be made as to the persons entitled to use the canteen, or withholds its consent to a variation of those rules, or (e) makes an order under section 42(4) of this Act, the applicant or, as the case may be, the licence-holder may appeal to the sheriff from such a decision of the licensing board.
GENERAL NOTE
Appeals against the decision of a licensing board in an application relating to a seamen's canteen licence.
The only persons who may appeal against such a decision are the applicant and the licence-holder.
The decisions which may be appealed against are specified under headings (a) to (e) of the section.
(b) and (c).
5.41(I) enables a licensing board to specify the types of liquor which may be sold under a seamen's canteen licence.
(e) In virtue of s.42(4), a licensing board may order structural alterations to a canteen.
(d) 5.41(2) gives a licensing board power to require modifications of the draft rules desiderated by para. 1(1) (ii) of Part I of Sched. 2.
For appeals.
see 5.39.
Provisions of this Act which apply to licensed canteens
(1) The provisions of this Act mentioned in subsection (2) below shall apply to licensed canteens, to the holders of licences under this Part of this Act and to their employees and agents as if a licensed canteen were a public house and as if the licence-holder of a canteen were the licence holder of a public house.
(2) The provisions of this Act referred to in subsection (1) above are sections 31,35,65,66,71,76,77,78,79,84,85,87,88 and 126.
GENERAL NOTE
The definitions of licence and licence-holder in s.139(1) exclude a canteen licence and its holder.
The purpose of the section is to include, for the provisions specified, seamen's canteen licences and their holders within the meaning of the definitions.
Interpretation of Part III
In this Part of this Act, "canteen" includes a part of a hostel where food or drink is supplied, whether or not the food or drink is separately paid for.
NEW TOWNS
GENERAL NOTE
Pt.
IV, ss.47–52, repealed: 1981, c, 23, s.8, Sched. 4.
THE PERMITTED HOURS
Permitted hours in licensed premises and registered clubs
(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the permitted hours in licensed premises, licensed canteens and registered clubs shall be those set out in the following provisions of this section.
(2) The permitted hours for premises in respect of which a public house licence or a refreshment licence is in force shall be the period between eleven in the morning and half-past two in the afternoon and the period between five and eleven in the evening, except for Sundays when the permitted hours shall be the period between half-past twelve and half-past two in the afternoon and the period between half-past six and eleven in the evening but only in the case of premises in respect of which an application for Sunday opening has been made to and granted by a licensing  board in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Act, which shall have effect.
(3) The permitted hours for premises in respect of which a hotel licence a restricted hotel licence, a restaurant licence, an entertainment licence or a licence under Part III of this Act is in force or which are a registered club shall, on weekdays, be the period between eleven in the morning and half-past two in the afternoon and the period between five and eleven in the evening and, on Sundays, be the period between half-past twelve and half-past two in the afternoon and the period between half-past six and eleven in the evening.
(4) Nothing in this section shall authorise the sale or supply of alcoholic liquor for consumption off the premises, being premises in respect of which a refreshment licence, an entertainment licence, a restricted hotel licence, a restaurant licence or a licence under Part III of this Act is in force.
GENERAL NOTE
A. General.
The section provides for the basic permitted hours in licensed premises, licensed canteens, and registered clubs.
In the cases of premises operated under a public house licence or 1 refreshment licence, the hours for week days are 11 a.m. to 2.30 pm. and 5 p.m. to 11 pm.
The hours for Sundays are 12.30 pm, to 2.30 p.m. and 6.30 pm. to 11 p.m.
As regards Sundays, only premises whose application for Sunday opening has been granted in accordance with Sched. 4 may have permitted hours (subs.
(2)).
In the cases of premises operated under hotel, restricted hotel, restaurant, or entertainment licence or a registered club, the basic permitted hours are the same as for premises operated under a public house or a refreshment licence, but no application is required for Sunday opening (subs.
(3)).
The section expressly prohibits by subs.
(4) off-sales on premises where a restricted hotel, refreshment, entertainment or restaurant licence is in force.
B. Subsections.
(1) "Permitted hours,"  "licensed canteens,"  "licensed premises" and "registered clubs" are defined in s.139(1).
(2) For "public house" and "refreshment licence," see 5.9 and Sched. 1.
Sched. 4 makes provision for applications for Sunday opening including the procedure to be followed, the persons or bodies who can be competent objectors, and the grounds on which such an application can be refused.
The Schedule also confers a right of appeal on an unsuccessful applicant or objector to the sheriff.
For appeals to the sheriff, see 5.39.
For the appropriate timing for such an application, see Ginera Ltd. v. City of Glasgow District Licensing Board, 1982 S.L.T. 136, in which the Second Division considered it would be "odd" if an applicant who had only a provisional grant of a licence, could have permission for Sunday opening before the licence for the premises was in force.
It was decided that such an application was incompetent.
See s.26(1) for provisional grant.
(3) For "hotel licence,"  "restricted hotel licence,"  "restaurant licence" and "entertainment licence," see 5.9 and Schedule 1.
Prohibition of sale and consumption of alcoholic liquor except during permitted hours
(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, no person shall, except during the permitted hours:(a) sell or supply to any person in any licensed premises, or licensed canteen, or in the premises of a registered club any alcoholic liquor to be consumed either on or off the premises, or consume in, or take from, any such premises any alcoholic liquor.
(1) Subsection (1) above shall not apply to off-sale premises or to the off-sale part of premises (within the meaning of section 119 of this Act) in respect of which a public house licence or hotel licence is held.
(2) Nothing in subsection (1) above shall prohibit or restrict:(a) the consumption of alcoholic liquor in any premises at any time within fifteen minutes after the conclusion of the permitted hours in the afternoon or evening, as the case may be, if such liquor was supplied in those premises during the permitted hours;(b) the taking of alcoholic liquor from any premises within fifteen minutes after the conclusion of the permitted hours in the afternoon or evening, as the case may be, if such liquor was supplied in those premises during the permitted hours and was not supplied or taken away in an open vessel;(c) the sale or supply to, or consumption by, any person of alcoholic liquor in any premises where he is residing;(d) the taking of alcoholic liquor from any premises by a person residing there;(e) the supply of alcoholic liquor, in any premises, for consumption on those premises, to any private friends of a person residing there who are bona fide entertained by, and at the expense of, that person, or the consumption by such friends of alcoholic liquor so supplied to them; the ordering of alcoholic liquor to be consumed off the premises or the despatch by the vendor of liquor so ordered;(g) the supply of alcoholic liquor for consumption on licensed premises to any private friends of the holder of the licence bona fide entertained by him at his own expense, or the consumption of alcoholic liquor by persons so supplied;(h) the consumption of alcoholic liquor at a meal by any person at any time within half an hour after the conclusion of the permitted hours in the afternoon or evening, as the case may be, if the liquor was supplied during the permitted hours and served at the same time as the meal and for consumption at the meal;(i) the sale of alcoholic liquor to a trader for the purposes of his trade, or to a registered club for the purposes of the club; or (j) the sale or supply of alcoholic liquor to any canteen in which the sale or supply of alcoholic liquor is carried on under the authority of the Secretary of State or to any authorised mess of members of Her Majesty's naval, military or air forces.
(3) If any person contravenes this section he shall be guilty of an offence.
(4) Nothing in this Act shall be taken to require any premises to be open for the sale or supply of alcoholic liquor during the permitted hours.
GENERAL NOTE
A. General.
This section prohibits the sale or supply of alcoholic liquor in licensed premises and in the premises of registered clubs, or the consumption in, or the taking away from such premises of alcoholic liquor except during the permitted hours.
It also provides certain exceptions to the general prohibition.
Certain premises such as services canteens, and passenger aircraft, vessels and railway trains, although retailer's excise licences are granted in respect of them, are not licensed premises within the meaning of the section because no licences under the Act are first obtained.
To these premises, the permitted hours and the prohibition against the sale, supply and consumption outwith these hours do not apply with the exception of the restrictions on the sale of liquor on passenger vessels on Sundays imposed by 5.93.
For the meaning of "permitted hours," see s.139(1).
B. Subsections.
(1) The subsection imposes the general prohibition.
 "licensed premises,"  "licensed canteen" and "registered club" are defined in 5.139(1).
For the meaning of "alcoholic liquor," see s.139(t).
(1) For the meaning of "off-sale premises," see s.139(l). 5.119 provides for the setting off of part of public house or hotel premises for off-sales only, the part to be known as the "offsale part." 
5.1 to also lays down the permitted hours for off-sale premises.
(2) Exemptions from prohibition.
In addition to the exemptions specified in the subsection, there is an exemption in the case of an international airport (see s.63).
(a) and (h) preserve the additional period for consuming alcoholic liquor or taking away alcoholic liquor supplied in a closed vessel purchased during the permitted hours introduced by 5.3 of the 1962 Act.
The period is increased to 15 minutes.
(c),(d) and (e) "Residents at any premises." 
Such persons are exempted from the provisions  of subs.
(1) as regards the sale or supply to.
consumption of or the taking away by them of alcoholic liquor at or from the premises where they are residing ((c) and (d)).
There is also an exemption in the case of the supply of alcoholic liquor for the consumption of friends of a resident who are being bona fide entertained by him at his expense at the premises where he is residing (e).
(f) Ordering or despatching outwith permitted hours.
Although sale or supply outwith permitted hours is prohibited.
liquor may be ordered outwith permitted hours for consumption off the premises.
or, having been ordered for consumption off the premises, it may be despatched by the vendor outwith permitted hours.
But while the certificate-holder may take the order outwith permitted hours, he must not complete the sale outwith permitted hours, by accepting payment, or handing the liquor to the customer, or delivering the liquor to the customer's house.
In the same way he may only despatch the liquor to the customer outwith permitted hours.
it the contract of sale has already been completed during permitted hours: Valentine v. Bell, 1030 J.C.
51; Sinclair v. Beattie, 1934 J.C.
24.
To complete the sale outwith permitted hours is a contravention of subs.
(1)(a) of this section, and a breach of certificate.
Reference may also be made to the Sale of Goods Act 1893, s.I(3); Timus v. Littlewood [1916]1 K.B.
73,".
Mizen v. Old Florida Ltd. (1934) 50 T.L.R. 348.
(g) Private friends of the certificate-holder.
In Jack v. Thom, 1952 J.C.
41, a party of police constables, who were celebrating the wedding of one of their number, was supplied by the certificate-holder gratuitously on his premises outwith permitted hours.
The constables were known to the certificate-holder personally.
The magistrates were held entitled to find that the constables were not private friends at the certificate-holder bona fide entertained by him, and to convict him of a contravention of subs.
(1)(a) of this section.
For an English decision, see Schofield v. Jones [1955]1 W.L.R. 1133.
The earlier decisions, such as Smith v. Stirling (1879) 5 R. (J.) 24; Boyd v. McJannet (1879) 6 R. (J.) 43; White v. Neilson (1004) 6 F. (J.) 51, which supported the view that the supply of liquor during prohibited hours was not a breach of the licensing laws if it was gratuitous, must now be regarded as of little assistance.
(h) Extra half-hour for consumption only.
 "Meal" is not defined in the Act.
However, the High Court of Justiciary considered the supply of excisable liquor outwith the permitted hours where an extension of the permitted hours had been granted for the sale or supply of alcoholic liquor to persons taking a table meal, and the liquor had been supplied to persons who had not requested or been provided with a meal.
See Stewart v. Dunphy, 1980 S.L.T. (Notes) 93 in which it was decided such persons were guilty of an offence.
 "Half an hour after the conclusion of the permitted hours" means half an hour after the end of the period, in the afternoon or evening as the case may be, during which the consumption of alcoholic liquor is permitted under this Part of the Act.
(i) Sale to a trader or registered club.
The purpose and application of this exemption are not clear.
It should be noted that it is only the sale, and not the supply, of alcoholic liquor outside permitted hours which is authorised by this provision.
(j) Service con teens.
Such canteens are not licensed premises within the meaning at the Act.
(3) The maximum penalty for the sale or supply of liquor outside the permitted hours (subs.
(1)(a)) is a line of level 3 and disqualification of the premises and the licence-holder.
The holder is vicariously liable for a contravention.
The maximum penalty for the consumption of liquor outwith the permitted hours is a fine of level 3 (Sched. 5).
Additional provisions regarding restricted hotel and restaurant licences
On granting or transferring a restricted hotel licence or a restaurant licence in respect of any premises, a licensing board shall, if as regards the use of the premises for the provision of the customary main meals it appears to the board that it is only for the customary main meal at midday or only for the customary main meal in the evening that the premises fall within paragraph (a)(ii) of the restricted hotel licence or paragraph (a)(ii) of the restaurant licence as set out in Schedule 1 to this Act, insert in the licence a condition that there shall be no permitted hours in the evening, or that there shall be permitted hours in the premises only in the evening, as the case requires.
GENERAL NOTE
 "grant" includes grant by way of renewal (s. 139(I)).
For "restricted hotel licence" and "restaurant licence," see 5.0 and Sched.
I.  Restriction of permitted hours for restaurant or restricted hotel licence.
Where a restaurant certificate or a restricted hotel licence is being granted or transferred, if it appears to the licensing board that only a mid-day meal or an evening meal is being provided, it can restrict the permitted hours to the mid-day period, if only a mid-day meal is being provided, or to the evening period, if only an evening meal is being provided.
The restriction is made effective by inserting a condition that there shall be no permitted hours in the evening or only permitted hours in the evening.
Alternative permitted hours in certain athletic clubs during winter
(1) A registered club may apply to the sheriff for any one of the following orders:(a) an order providing that during the winter period the permitted hours in the club on weekdays shall not be those set out in section 53(3) of this Act, but shall instead be the period between eleven in the morning and two in the afternoon and the period between four and half-past ten in the evening or alternatively be the said periods on weekdays other than Saturday, and on Saturday be the period between one in the afternoon and half-past ten in the evening; or (b) an order providing that during the winter period the permitted hours in the club on Sundays shall not be those set out in the said section 53(3), but shall instead be the period between half-past twelve and two in the afternoon and the period between four and nine in the evening; or (c) an order which contains both the aforesaid provisions; and the sheriff shall, if in his opinion the conditions set out in subsection (2) below are satisfied, make the order applied for.
(2) The conditions referred to in subsection (1) above are:(a) that the premises of the club are structurally adapted and bona ride used, or intended to be used, wholly or mainly for the purpose of providing facilities in connection with the carrying on by members of the club and their guests of athletic sports or athletic games;(b) that one or more of such sports or games is or are usually carried on out of doors and, when so carried on, can (unless artificial lighting is used) only be carried on during hours of daylight;(c) that the said premises are regularly used, or are intended regularly to be used, during the winter period, for providing facilities in connection with the carrying on by members of the club and their guests, during the hours of daylight, of such a sport or game as is mentioned in paragraph (ii) above;(d) that having regard to the time at which the said sport or game is usually carried on by members of the club and their guests, the permitted hours set out in section 53(3) of this Act are not suitable for the supply of alcoholic liquor in the said premises to persons who participate in that sport or game.
(3) On an application for an order being made under subsection (1) above by any club, the sheriff clerk shall forthwith give notice thereof to the chief constable who may, within 21 days of the date of the receipt by him of such notice, lodge with the sheriff clerk objections to the making of such order on the ground that one or more of the conditions set out in subsection (2) above has not or have not been satisfied in relation to the club, and shall, on lodging any such objections, send a copy thereof to the secretary of the club; and if any such objections are lodged and not withdrawn, the sheriff shall, as soon as may be, hear parties upon the application and objections and may order such enquiry as he thinks fit, and shall thereafter make or refuse to make the order applied for, and may award expenses against the unsuccessful party.
(4) An order made under this section by the sheriff in respect of an club shall expire on the date on which the certificate of registration which is in force in respect of the club expires.
(5) In this section, the expression "the winter period" means the period beginning with 1st October and ending with 31st March.
GENERAL NOTE
Alternative permitted hours for athletic clubs.
This section permits sports clubs to have alternative permitted hours in the winter where the sport is played out of doors.
The alternative permitted hours are, on weekdays 11 a.m. to 2 p.m. and 4 p.m. to 10.30 p.m., on Saturdays the same hours as for weekdays or alternatively, 1 p.m. to 10.30 p.m., and on Sundays 12.30 pm. to 2 p.m. and 4 pm. to 9 p.m.
In order to qualify for alternative permitted hours, the club must fulfil the following conditions (subss. (1) and (2)), viz.:(a) that the club premises are adapted and used by members and their guests for carrying on athletic sports or games;(b) that at least one of the sports or games is carried on out of doors, and in daylight (unless artificial light is used);(c) that the premises are regularly used during winter and the hours of daylight for a sport specified in (b);(a) that the usual permitted hours are not suitable for the time at which the game or sport is usually played by members and their guests for the supply of liquor to those participating in the game.
The procedure is by application to the sheriff for an order granting the alternative permitted hours on weekdays or Sundays or both.
The sheriff-clerk gives notice of the application to the chief constable who can lodge objections on the ground that one or more of the conditions specified above have not been fulfilled.
The chief constable must make his objections within 21 days of the receipt by him of the notice, and must, on lodging objections, send a copy of them to the secretary of the club.
Where no objections are lodged, the sheriff is bound, if he is satisfied that the conditions have been fulfilled, to grant the order (subs.
(1)).
Where objections are lodged, the sheriff hears parties on the application and objections, orders such inquiry as he thinks fit, and thereafter grants or refuses the order.
He can award expenses against the unsuccessful party (subs.
(3)).
Any order made expires when the certificate of registration of the club expires.
 "Registered club" is defined by 5.139(1) of the Act as meaning a club in respect of which a certificate of registration under Part VII of the Act has been granted and is in force.
 "Winter period" means the period October 1 to March 31 (subs.
(5)).
Extension of permitted hours in the afternoon in certain licensed premises and clubs
(1) This section shall apply to any premises for which a licence (other than an off-sale licence) is held or to the premises of a registered club:(a) if the holder of the licence or, as the case may be, the club gives notice of the application of the section to the premises In accordance with subsection (6) below, and (b) as from such date as may be specified in the said notice: Provided that, in the case of premises for which a public house or a hotel licence is held or the premises of a club, the licence-holder or the club, as the case may be, shall not give notice of application as aforesaid, and this section shall not apply to such premises, unless the licensing board for the area within which the premises are situated is satisfied that the premises are structurally adapted and bona fide used, or intended to be used, for the purpose of habitually providing the customary main meal at midday for the accommodation of persons frequenting the premises.
(2) While this section applies to any premises, the effect shall be that, for the purposes mentioned in subsection (3) below, the permitted hours in those premises in the afternoon shall be increased by the addition of one and a half hours at the end thereof.
(3) The purposes referred to in subsection (2) above are:(a) the sale or supply to persons taking table meals in the premises of alcoholic liquor supplied in a part of the premises usually set  apart for the service of such persons, and supplied for consumption by such a person in that part of the premises as an ancillary to his meal; and (b) the consumption of alcoholic liquor so supplied.
(4) While this section applies to any premises, then for purposes other than those mentioned in subsection (3) above, or in parts of the premises other than the part so mentioned, the permitted hours shall be the same as if this section did not apply to the premises.
(5) This section shall cease to apply to any premises on such day as may be specified in the notice, if the holder of the licence or the club, as the case may be, gives notice of the disapplication of the section from the premises in accordance with subsection) below: Provided that this section shall cease to apply to premises for which a public house or a hotel licence is held, or to the premises of a club, at any time on the licensing board ceasing to be satisfied as mentioned in the proviso to subsection (1) above.
(6) A notice of the application of this section to, or of the disapplication of this section from, any premises:(a) shall be in writing;(b) shall, in the case of a club, be given by the secretary of the club on its behalf;(c) shall, in the case of a notice of application, specify the date from which the section is to apply to the premises and, in the case of a notice of disapplication, state that the section is to cease to apply to the premises on the date specified in the notice;(d) shall be served on the chief constable not later than 14 days before the date specified as aforesaid.
(7) The secretary of any club to the premises of which this section applies shall notify the licensing board for the area within which such premises are situated of any reconstruction or extension of, or alteration in, the premises which affects the facilities available in the premises for the provision of the customary main meal at midday, and if the secretary of any club contravenes this subsection he shall be guilty of an offence.
(8) The holder of the licence for premises to which this section applies shall keep posted in some conspicuous place in the premises a notice stating that this section applies thereto and setting out the effect of its application, and if any person contravenes this subsection he shall be guilty of an offence.
GENERAL NOTE
A. Extension of permitted hours in the afternoon in licensed premises and clubs.
Licensed premises other than off-sale premises and clubs may obtain an extension of the permitted hours in the afternoon, in order to supply alcoholic liquor for consumption, as an ancillary to a table meal, in a part of the premises set aside and adapted for meals.
The procedure is by the holder of the licence or the club giving notice of application of the section to the premises, the notice specifying the date it is intended to apply the section to the premises (subs.
(1)(a) and (b)).
Before, however, notice is given in respect of premises for which a hotel or public house licence is held or in respect of the premises of a registered club, a declaration of the licensing board's satisfaction that the premises are constructed and used (or intended to be used) for providing for the accommodation of persons frequenting the premises the customary main meal at mid-day must be obtained.
Notice of application of the section must (i) be in writing (subs.
(6)(a));(ii) specify the date from which the section is to apply (subs.
(6)(c)); and (iii) be served on the chief constable more than 14 days before the date of application of the section (subs.
(6)(a)).
Once the section has been applied to premises the afternoon permitted hours are extended by one and a half hours for the sale and supply of liquor for the purposes specified in subs.
(3).
The licence-holder of premises to which the section applies must exhibit in a conspicuous place a notice stating that the section applies and the effect of its application (subs.
(8)).
Where a club has applied the section, the secretary must notify the licensing board for the area of any  alteration to, reconstruction of or extension to, that part of the premises where the main meal is provided.
Disapplication of section to premises.
The holder of a licence or a club can disapply the section to premises by giving notice specifying the date of disapplication which fulfils the requirements of subs.
(6).
A licensing board may disapply the section to premises at any time if they cease to be satisfied that the requirements of the proviso to subs.
(1) have been met.
B. Subsections.
(1) For the meaning of "licence" and "registered club" , see 5.139(1).
For the meaning of "off-sale licence," see Schedule 1.
(2) "Permitted tours" are defined in s.139(1).
The effect of the application of the section to premises is to extend the permitted hours in the afternoon to 4 pm.
(3) For the meaning of "table meal," see s.139(1).
(4) The purpose of the subsection is to make it clear that the extension of the permitted hours only applies to the part of the premises set apart for the consumption of main meals by a person having a table meal there.
(5) The maximum penalty for a contravention of the section is a fine of level 3 (Sched. 5).
= (6) The maximum penalty for a contravention of the subsection is a fine of level 1 (Sched. 5).
Extension of permitted hours in the evening in certain licensed premises and clubs
(1) This section shall apply to any premises for which a licence (other than an off-sale licence) is held or to the premises of a registered club:(a) if the holder of the licence or, as the case may be, the club gives notice of the application of the section to the premises in accordance with subsection (6) below, and (b) as from such date as may be specified in the said notice: Provided that, in the case of premises for which a public house or a hotel licence is held or the premises of a club, the licence-holder or the club, as the case may be, shall not give notice of application as aforesaid and this section shall not apply to such premises, unless the licensing board for the area within which the premises are situated is satisfied that the premises are structurally adapted and bona ride used, or intended to be used, for the purpose of habitually providing, for the accommodation of persons frequenting the premises, substantial refreshment to which the sale and supply of alcoholic liquor is ancillary.
(2) While this section applies to any premises, the effect shall be that for the purposes mentioned in subsection (3) below the permitted hours in those premises in the evening shall be increased by the addition of two hours at the end thereof.
(3) The purposes referred to in subsection (2) above are:(a) the sale or supply to persons taking table meals in the premises of alcoholic liquor supplied in a part of the premises usually set apart for the service of such persons, and supplied for consumption by such a person in that part of the premises as an ancillary to his meal; and (b) the consumption of alcoholic liquor so supplied.
(4) While this section applies to any premises, then for purposes other than those mentioned in subsection (3) above, or in parts of the premises other than the part so mentioned, the permitted hours shall be the same as if this section did not apply to the premises.
(5) This section shall cease to apply to any premises on such day as may be specified in the notice if the holder of the licence or the club, as the case may be, gives notice of the disapplication of the section from the premises in accordance with subsection (6) below: Provided that this section shall cease to apply to premises for which a  public house or a hotel licence is held, or to the premises of a club, at any time on the licensing board ceasing to be satisfied as mentioned in the proviso to subsection (1) above.
(6) A notice of the application of this section to, or of the disapplication of this section from, any premises:(a) shall be in writing;(b) shall, in the case of a club, be given by the secretary of the club on its behalf;(c) shall, in the case of a notice of application, specify the date from which the section is to apply to the premises and, in the case of a notice of disapplication, state that the section is to cease to apply to the premises on the date specified in the notice;(d) shall be served on the chief constable not later than 14 days before the date specified as aforesaid.
(7) The secretary of any club to the premises of which this section applies shall notify the licensing board for the area within which such premises are situated of any reconstruction or extension of, or alteration In, the premises which affects the facilities available in the premises for the provision of substantial refreshment, and if the secretary of any club contravenes this subsection he shall be guilty of an offence.
(8) The holder of the licence for premises to which this section applies shall keep posted in some conspicuous place in the premises a notice stating that this section applies thereto and setting out the effect of its application, and if any person contravenes this subsection he shall be guilty of an offence.
GENERAL NOTE
Extension of permitted hours in the evening.
The section enacts similar provisions to the previous section for the purpose of enabling the extension of the permitted hours by two hours in the evening.
In the case of such an extension, the premises have to be adapted and used for providing substantial refreshment to which the sale and supply of liquor is ancillary (subs.
(1)), whereas, in the case of an afternoon extension, the premises have to be adapted and used for providing the customary main meal at mid-day.
Restaurants in public houses may have permitted hours on Sundays in certain cases
(1) This section shall apply to any premises for which a public house licence is held and in respect of which an application for Sunday opening has not been granted under Schedule 4 to this Act:(a) if the holder of the licence gives notice of the application of the section to the premises in accordance with subsection (6) below, and (b) as from such date as may be specified in the said notice: Provided that a licence-holder shall not give notice of application as aforesaid, and this section shall not apply to the premises for which he holds his licence, unless:(i) the licensing board for the area within which the premises are situated is satisfied that the premises are structurally adapted and bona ride used, or intended to be used, for the purpose of habitually providing the customary main meal at midday or in the evening, or both, for the accommodation of persons frequenting the remises, and that the part of the premises mentioned in subsection 3) below does not contain a bar counter.
(ii)[repealed 1981 c. 23, Sched. 4.](2) While this section applies to any premises, the effect shall be that for the purposes mentioned in subsection (3) below there shall be permitted  hours in those premises on Sundays, such permitted hours being the period between half-past twelve and half-past two in the afternoon and the period between half-past six and eleven in the evening (3) The purposes referred to in subsection (2) above are:(a) the sale or supply to persons taking table meals in the premises of alcoholic liquor supplied in a part of the premises usually set apart for the service of such persons, and supplied for consumption by such a person in that part of the premises as an ancillary to his meal; and (b) the consumption of alcoholic liquor so supplied.
(4) While this section applies to any premises, then for purposes other than those mentioned in subsection (3) above, or in parts of the premises other than the part so mentioned, or except as otherwise provided by this Act, there shall be no permitted hours on Sundays.
(5) This section shall cease to apply to premises on such day as may be specified in the notice if the holder of the licence gives notice of the disapplication of the section from the premises in accordance with subsection (6) below: Provided that this section shall cease to apply to premises at any time on the licensing board ceasing to be satisfied as mentioned in paragraph (i) of the proviso to subsection (1) above.
(6) A notice of the application of this section to, or of the disapplication of this section from, any premises:(a) shall be in writing; shall, in the case of a notice of application, specify the date from which the section is to apply to the premises and, in the case of a notice of disapplication, state that the section is to cease to apply to the premises on the date specified in the notice;(b) shall be served on the chief constable not later than 14 days before the date specified as aforesaid.
(7) The holder of the licence for premises to which this section applies shall keep posted in some conspicuous place in the premises a notice stating that this section applies thereto and setting out the effect of its application, and if any licence-holder contravenes this subsection he shall be guilty of an offence.
GENERAL NOTE
Permitted hours for restaurants in public houses on Sundays.
The section only applies to public houses (for meaning of "public house," see s.139(1)) in respect of which applications for Sunday opening have not been granted under Sched. 4, and, in respect of which, part of the premises have been adapted and set aside for the provision of the customary main meal at mid-day or in the evening or both, The procedure for applying the section to the premises is similar to the procedure under 5,57, Before a licence-holder can apply the section to his premises, he has to obtain a declaration of satisfaction from the licensing board that part of his premises are adapted and used or intended to be used for habitually providing the customary main meal at mid-day or in the evening and that the adapted part does not contain a bar counter (subs.
(1)).
(For the meaning of "bar," see 5"139(1).
For the requirements excluding places at which meals are served or places at which alcoholic liquor is dispensed from being within the meaning of "bar counter," see s.139(2)).
Once the section has been applied to premises, liquor can be supplied for consumption at a table meal (for the meaning of "table meal," see s.139(1)) as an ancillary to the meal in that part of the premises set aside for meals between 12.30 p.m. and 2.30 p.m. and 6.30 pm. and 11 pm. on Sundays (subss. (2) and (3)).
A notice stating the application of the section to premises and its effects must be exhibited, otherwise the licence-holder commits an offence (subs.
(7)), the maximum penalty for which is a fine of level 1 (Sched. 5).
The mode of disapplication of the section to premises is the same as that prescribed by 5.57.
Other provisions as respects extension of permitted hours on Sundays
(1) This section shall apply to any premises for which a hotel licence, restricted hotel licence, or restaurant licence is held and to any premises for which a public house licence or refreshment licence is held and in respect of which an application for Sunday opening has been granted under Schedule 4 to this Act if the licence-holder gives notice of the application of the section to the premises in accordance with the provisions of section 58(1) of this Act, and the effect of the application of this section to those premises shall be that, for the purposes mentioned in section 58(3) of this Act, the permitted hours on Sundays shall be extended by, the addition to them of the hours between five and half-past six in the evening, and subsections (4),(5),(6) and (8) of that section shall apply accordingly.
(2) This section shall apply to any premises for which a public house licence is held and to which section 59 of this Act applies if the licence holder gives notice of the application of the section to the premises in accordance with the provisions of subsection (1) of section 59 of this Act, and the effect of the application of this section to those premises shall be that, for the purposes mentioned in subsection (3) of section 59 of this Act, the permitted hours on Sundays shall be extended by the addition to them of the hours between five and half-past six in the evening, and subsections (5) to (7) of that section shall apply accordingly.
GENERAL NOTE
Extension of permitted hours on Sundays.
The section prescribes the procedure under which premises operated under an hotel licence, a restricted hotel licence, a restaurant licence, a public house licence, or a refreshment licence (where, as regards premises operated under the latter two types of licence, an application for Sunday opening has been granted in virtue of Sched. 4) may have permitted hours on a Sunday which commence at 5 p.m. (subs.
(1)).
The section also makes similar provisions for premises operated under a public house licence to which 5.59 applies (subs.
(2)).
Six-day licences
(1) On granting or transferring a hotel licence, a restricted hotel licence, a restaurant licence or an entertainment licence in respect of any premises, a licensing board shall, if the applicant so requests, insert in the licence a condition that there shall be no permitted hours in those premises on Sundays.
(2) A licence in which such a condition has been inserted is in this Act referred to as a six-day licence.
GENERAL NOTE
On Sundays, premises in respect of which a six-day licence is in force are only entitled to supply alcoholic liquor to such persons as they are entitled to outwith the permitted hours.
Seasonal licences
(1) On granting or transferring a licence in respect of any premises, a licensing board may, if the applicant so requests and if the board is satisfied that the requirements of the area for which the board is constituted make it desirable, insert in the licence a condition that, during such part or parts of the year as may be specified in the condition (being a part which is not longer, or parts which taken together are not longer, than 180 days).