

cos it makes a fun funny humming  or buzzing noise because it picks up the vibrations through the table otherwise.
Now then  Pen and pencil would  would be a useful idea.
Now what did we do before?
Erm we've done  time signatures, compound time signatures.
Erm 
Yeah  didn't we?
tonics all that sort of stuff, diminished, augmented
We did some intervals 
intervals.
Yes.
Right.
Now  can you tell me about time signatures?
What, what are the two types of time signatures?
Compound
Mhm.
and erm what's the other one?
Simple.
Simple.
Yeah.
Just ordinary simple and compound.
And there's 
Simple and compound.
Yeah.
Compound's things like six nine, six nine erm 
Nine twelve 
Yeah.
That sort of stuff.
At the top.
That's the top number.
Erm.
And compound is three four.
Tha that's comp that's compound.
Now compound is always six.
Oh.
Simple is just ordinary three beats a bar,
Yeah.
four beats in a bar, two beats in a bar.
It's the compou think of compound as being the one that's more difficult to think about.
Six eight times, nine eight times.
Yeah.
Right.
Still leaves three two three or four beats in a bar, but they're compound times.
They're dotted beats.
That's really all that compound means.
It means dotted beats.
Erm  what would twelve  twelve four?
Think about twelve four cos that's a compound time.
It's got twelve at the top.
Erm it may help to look at it.
Cos you can't think about it straight away.
Think  twelve, and it'll be twelve what?
Dotted semi-quavers.
No.
What does four stand for in an ordinary time signature?
Oh crotchets.
Right so 
So.
if there are twelve of those.
Twelve crotchets.
One two three four five six seven eight nine ten eleven twelve.
Think of them in groups of threes  and that gives you four  dotted?
Quavers.
No.
Semi-quavers.
You're, you're going small
Yes.
and you've got to go the other way.
Oh yeah.
It's erm
If there are tw if there are twelve crotchets and each of those are in groups of three.
Dotted minims.
So you've got four dotted minims.
So twelve, I mean if you can remember them twelve stands for four beats in a bar anyway
Yeah.
and  if you just think what twelve crotchets are going to be divided up into
Mm.
it's going to dotted minims.
Cos you know it's going to be dotted something or other.
And if you were to see  er an extract of music  for example here's a twelve eight one.
This one actually tells you it's in twelve eight time.
And it's asking you to put in the bar lines.
Where would you  put those bar lines do you think?
It would al I think it probably also asks you to  to group them properly.
But just for the moment we won't worry about the grouping aspect.
I think, assume everything starts on the first beat of the bar as well.
Okay.
It'll tell you if it doesn't.
Erm
Eight stands for ?
Quavers.
Right  
One two three four five six seven eight nine ten eleven twelve .
So obviously the first one would be there.
And probably if it's going to be a whole one 
One two three four five six seven eight nine ten eleven twelve.
So in fact there are just two bars.
Now how would you actually group  those notes?
Erm  it'd be groups of three again wouldn't it?
In groups of three.
Those two've got to be grouped together.
One two three four 
Er  it'd be sort of half of that.
Half of the erm crotchet.
I don't know how you do that.
Can we go backwards.
One two three four five 
You can only do it if you miss out that.
One two three.
One two three.
And that leaves you with a  a little bit  
Right.
Yes.
It actually explains it.
Exactly what they want you to do.
Er where you've got a note that obviously goes over a beat  as in that one there
Yeah.
you're, you're going to have to write two quavers and tie them.
Is that what you said?
Yeah.
It might have been what you said .
So those two  okay.
That one will be joined to a quaver beat, so that you'll have a group of three.
And another quaver, those two will be tied  the join taking them onto the next group of three and so on.
So basically you're splitting this in compound time?
Yes.
So it it'd still sound
Cos that, that actually looks as though it's the half way part of the bar too doesn't it?
So, and you, you don't actually go over the half 
Yeah.
way part of the bar with one single note.
If you've got a note it's got to be held.
You actually split into two an and use a tie.
If you're in two time or four time which you are.
You're in four  four dotted  crotchets beats there aren't they?
You will sometimes be asked to  er look at something like that and then put the time signature in.
These have got the time signature in but you're, they're asking you to put in the bar lines and then grouping the notes properly.
As in that one, you've go you've got to alter what they actually put there.
Not going to alter the sound of it.
The sound must still be the same but you've got to alter the notes for grouping purposes.
That may happen in any of those.
I wonder if they've got any here now that haven't got  any time signatures, because that's the other thing that they  they like to give you.
Down here.
Add time signatures.
Alright.
Let's see what you can make of first of all that one.
And whether they're all compound, they may not all be compound.
Some may be, some may not.
I don't know.
Find the simplest bar  in each one.
this one.
Looking through it that is the simplest one cos you can see 
Yes.
at a glance there are two 
It's all, it's all 
groups of three aren't there?
Yeah.
So that's obviously going to be in compound time.
What though?
Erm
Fairly easy to put in a time signature.
Six twelve.
Six er  now wait a minute.
What's  four is for crotchets.
Eight is for quavers.
Double it again, sixteen.
Six sixteen.
It's gonna be sixteen.
So six sixteen.
And that actually means two dotted crotch two dotted quavers I mean, doesn't it?
Cos each group adds up to a dotted quaver.
Mm.
So it
Yeah.
As you've got here.
That's right.
In fact, if anything, which is the easiest way round of doing it?
To be, if you're asked to put in a time signature?
It's not always so easy to  to group notes.
I think people find that more difficult than actually saying what a time signature is.
Mhm.
What about that one?
Erm
Take the simplest bar.
Three quavers.
So the time signature is?
Erm  three eight.
Three eight.
Now 
And it's grouped in a dotted crotchet.
Yes it is.
Now is that compound or is that simple?
Three eight is simple.
It's simple because it's just got three at the top.
Mm.
It looks as if it ought to be with the compound ones but it's not.
It's just an ordinary simple one.
But it's quaver beats instead of crotchet beats, that's all.
So that was a simple one, that one was a compound one.
We'll do one more.
What about this one?
Is there an easy ?
No they're, they're all, virtually all exactly the same
Erm
timing aren't they?
They're not quite the same.
two three  four five six
Yeah.
six erm  six four.
Yes.
Six four which is dotted?
Minims.
Two dotted minims.
Yes, yes.
 
Two dotted minims in a bar.
That's one of them.
And that, in fact that's probably the simplest bar isn't it?
Because
Mm.
that's a group of three.
Much the same as a dotted, dotted minim.
Erm simple or compound time then?
It's 
Six 
six four
four
that's simple.
No, compound.
Compound.
Two, three, four or five would be simple times.
Six, twelve  They sound more complicated 
Mm.
so think of them as being compound.
Right.
That way round then isn't so difficult.
That I think you  I think most people find it more difficult having to group the notes in the right, in exactly the right way.
So  I think.
This is actually a grade four one.
We'll lead up gradually  to grade five .
Yeah.
I'm not going to go all the way back through  grades two and three.
You started on two I think.
Or you've got Book Two.
We'll go, we'll go from 
I think .
here.
And anything that you find you don't know then we can perhaps go back on just the bits that you don't know.
Because you're not going to have to go back on many of the things.
This book, these books are quite good because they do give you a little bit of explanation.
You've also got er other books or another book at home which you can refer to if you need any extra.
Erm it might be an idea to go back.
You won't find you're going to take much time doing some of these.
If you do exercise one  for the time being don't worry about that one, exercise three.
Shall I write it down?
Yes, it would be a good idea, wouldn't it?
Mm.
Do you want to write on the back of  
It would be  because you've already got some in here haven't you?
I think I probably 
Yeah.
Actually I'll carr I'll carry on on  
 
And the date today is  the 
The twenty  eighth I think.
Ah the twenty eighth.
It's the next thing on isn't it ?
So if you're looking in the grade four book  put down page four, exercise one.
If you have a look at each one of those.
Rather than write them in the book, just put the answers down either on a  on a piece of paper.
As long as you put clearly what it is you're putting in.
Then I can just use these books over and over again.
It's a bit pointless writing in them.
When it comes to exercise three  that's on page five, exercise three.
When it says add bar lines it won it won't hurt you to actually write those out.
Because 
Okay.
you really need to group the notes.
Well the notes are grouped but you're gonna add the .
Write it out because it's all good practice for 
 
for you actually.
At er writing out notes as well.
So  you can do exercise three.
Not that one for now because that's doing something different.
Now which are the ones that you've got to  to group?
So far  over here.
Right.
Page  page eight starts  exercise six.
In fact do  all of those.
Do A through to F.
And that's grouping notes  plus the bar lines.
The later ones are always quite hard.
And they've given you  they've actually given you, not in this one, but they do give you the clefs here.
They've given you the clefs.
Did we look at those before?
Alto clefs and tenor clefs?
Er  don't think so.
Have you come across those before?
come across these.
You've come across the treble and the bass right?
and the bass, not these alto or whatever.
Erm if  just take  just think of singers at the moment.
Soprano is the highest, then an alto 
Soprano, then an alto , tenor, bass 
tenor and bass.
Soprano is the highest voice.
Then comes the alto.
Then the tenor and then the bass at the .
Oh right.
So is
So 
that's that's alto.
So is that  one up from
It's one down from 
 
the treble.
Think of it as being the next lot down if you like.
Then there would be a tenor clef and then a bass clef.
The only reason that, that you're using a different clef is that it's actually putting middle C in a different place.
On the stave.
So that for example an alto doesn't need so many  notes, high notes, but needs a few more lower notes.
So if you just kept your treble clef you'd have a lot of lines possibly that you weren't using at all.
And having to add a lot of low ledger line notes.
That saves doing that.
Because they position middle C.
Middle C's actually positioned between those bits there so the middle line there becomes middle C.
Which means that you're unlikely to have to have quite so many ledger line notes.
Although this has got one or two.
But not as many as you would have if you were using the treble clef because you'd probably end up with a lot of lower  this is wha , that isn't a particularly good example really because  it hasn't given a lot of lower notes but normally you'd expect to see more notes down on these  lines.
Soprano wouldn't go down that far.
A soprano would only go down to about  erm  oh about what?
Middle C is probably a bit too low for, for most sopranos.
But an alto would go a lot lower, would go down probably to an F or a G.
So that these notes would be low.
If that's middle C you can te what would the bottom line actually be?
Bottom line?
That's C
Er it would
It's here.
er G.
C A F, you're right, yes.
Erm so that in fact  a true alto would be using most of the notes there.
And just a few ledger lines above.
Unlikely to be using  whereas if they were using the treble clef for most of the time   
F G.
Yes.
And then the other one, the tenor clef.
Have they given you a tenor clef?
No.
They'll give you a tenor clef a little bit further on.
They may not actually put the tenor clef in till grade  grade five now I come to think about that.
But there's no point in
Not learning it 
about it now because it's  just as easy really.
Tenor clef looks exactly the same but middle C is now there.
Next line up in fact.
So  because a tenor sings a little bit lower  you've got more of the lower notes and fewer of the higher  notes before you need to add  start adding ledger line notes.
Sometimes of course you'll, they'll still need ledger line notes up there.
And perhaps one down there but  not very likely.
So it's just to make it much more comfortable to look at.
Just means you have to get used to thinking, right if that's  if, if that's er er a tenor clef then that note won't be  it would be, be an A in a bass clef and F in a treble clef.
What will it be for that clef?
In this  erm  oh 
Going downwards going backwards is, is more difficult isn't it?
Yeah.
Much easier working upwards from C.
That line's C.
So that line 
C. 
would be?
C A F D
Er C A  E  You go one below it.
Oh yeah.
You know F is next in fact C yes.
That's A, that's F, that would be D so it's between the two which, which is an E.
And if you were going above of course, that note would be?
E.
E and remember that it's the E just above middle C.
And that's the E
Does the middle C 
 
always come up on a line?
Well it's  yes it does in fact.
Mm.
I hadn't actually thought of that before.
But yes it does seem to.
I suppose theoret theoretically you could actually move middle C to wherever you wanted to have it.
But generally speaking they us they use just the four clefs.
Now  certain instruments use the  alto clef.
Just a minute.
Hello.
Oh hello.
Alright.
Right I'll fetch him, I'll fetch him.
Yes he's here.
Oh somewhere he is.
He's jus just upstai he's just upstairs so I shan't be a moment I'll go and call him .
Gosh she's going to have fun with this tape.
Go on out you go.
Right  Yes.
So middle C then can be almost anywhere.
Yeah.
What instrument  do you know about  do you think  that uses something other than the treble clef  and a bass clef?
Or have you come across the one that
Erm  instrument that I know.
Well that, that you might know.
It's not actually a percussion one but it's er  in fact I don't, I think most of the percussion ones tend to use a  a bass clef don't they?
Yeah, yeah.
If you see one at all.
Yeah or  erm  xylophones  and glocks and those.
Except they use treble and bass 
They use the treble don't they?
Yes.
Er  Bass or whatever.
Yeah.
Xylophone.
Yes, it's a treble.
And a vibraphone?
Just   I've got one of those nice little  
Yes.
It's just like a, a small  sort of piano.
Doesn't have a very long 
 
key keyboard.
It doesn't I don't think.
Quite an 
It's a piano and it's 
odd range.
It's very high.
Because in fact although it's written from there all the way up to there, erm  that is it starts at the C above middle C and goes up 
Yeah.
to very high  the unfortunate thing 
snare drum.
I think that's played  on the bass  what would be on the piano an A.
Yes.
It, it, they 
 
use cert certain lines don't they?
They use yeah erm  
So that you, you get to know what is 
I think it's er
what is what.
A is the bass drum.
Yeah.
er
I think it's G they use as the high-hat and there's all sorts of things.
Yeah.
I don't thing they  one thing they don't give in this book is a complete score
Yeah.
which  oh do they?
No they don't.
No.
Which of course I'll ask yeah I've got plenty of those sort 
Mm.
of things anyway.
You have to know an awful lot you know for grade five.
You, you've gotta have quite a wide knowledge.
You, you don't have to, need to know anything in, in depth but you've got to know 
But you've got to know shallow a wider range.
Yes that's right which means in a way that you've got to know quite a lot.
There's  erm an alto, no, yes an alto clef, isn't it?
For  trombone, no, it's not, it's for, yes it's for one of the trombones, isn't it?
Tuba.
Oh I erm found out what that  brass instrument we couldn't think of.
What was it?
Euphonium.
Euphon yes.
You're erm   isn't it silly
Mm.
I've, I've 
because  you see I could see wh exactly what you were talking about in my mind 
Mm.
but I could not think of its name.
Yeah.
I got into the car and I was still erm thinking all about this 
It's, it's, yeah.
and my mother said straight away, oh you're thinking of a euphonium.
Yeah.
That's the one.
Yes.
It's so silly isn't it when er  you know that you knew it all the time.
Now then.
The one I'm looking for is what, have I got to the strings yet?
No I haven't got back to the strings.
 
These just use the bass or the treble clef.
And when you get back  to the    There we are.
The strings.
It's the viola that we're actually looking for.
Sort of bass violin.
Sort of bass violin, yes .
There we are.
That's the one that uses it.
So that you see even in a score it would be written like that.
So that's the only, only instrument that you generally see, actually see using it  in most, most schools.
Unless you're going into some of the tenor  erm  and alto 