

Colin A Russell
,Alexander Crum (1838–1922), chemist, was born in Edinburgh 26 March 1838, the only son of the second marriage of a United Presbyterian minister, John Brown [q.v.], to Margaret Crum, sister of the chemist Walter Crum FRS, and a descendant of Ebenezer Erskine [q.v.].
His half-brother John Brown MD [q.v.]was famed as an author, their grandfather being John Brown of Whitburn [q.v.], and their great-grandfather John Brown of Haddington [q.v.].
Crum Brown was educated at the Royal High School, Edinburgh, and Mill Hill School.
He read medicine at the University of Edinburgh, though it is doubtful if he ever intended to practise.
His great love was chemistry, which he then studied at Heidelberg and Marburg.
He returned to Edinburgh to teach medical students, becoming lecturer in chemistry in 1863 and professor from 1869 to his retirement in 1908.
He obtained his FRCP (Edin.) in 1865.
Consistent with his medico-chemical interests was his Edinburgh MD thesis ‘On the theory of Chemical Combination’(1861), in which he proposed a new way to represent chemical constitution: each atom was to be indicated by the chemical symbol for the element concerned, bonds between atoms being symbolized by lines.
Essentially this was the system of notation later employed universally.
For clarifying atomic relationships within a molecule, according to the new valency theories of (Sir) Edward Frankland [q.v.]and Kekulé, this simple device was of untold value and greatly facilitated the emergence of the theory of structure upon which later chemistry was predicated.
It transformed the teaching of organic chemistry, particularly in the hands of Frankland, becoming known, somewhat unfairly, as ‘Frankland's notation’.
The system was introduced to a wider audience at a lecture on ‘chemical constitution and its relation to physiological action’, reported in Chemical News complete with the new ‘graphic formulae’.
His name is remembered now chiefly for the Crum Brown–Gibson rule, enunciated with his assistant J. Gibson (1855–1914) in 1892, concerning substitution in a benzene molecule.
Though his most enduring concern was the establishment of a truly mathematical theory of chemistry (in which he was unsuccessful) he also worked on optical activity, organo-sulphur compounds, and electrolytic synthesis of half-esters.
He wrote on the physiology of the inner ear, was proficient in Japanese, and an expert in systems of knitting.
His other interests included the university senate, the Royal Society of Edinburgh, and the synod of his church.
He was the first holder of a London D.Sc.
(1862), received honorary degrees from all four Scottish universities, and became FRSE in 1863 and FRS in 1879.
He was president of the Chemical Society from 1891 to 1893.
In 1866 he married Jane Bailie (died 1910), daughter of the Revd James Porter of Drumlee, county Down.
There were no children.
Crum Brown died 28 October 1922 in Edinburgh.
[Obituary in Journal of the Chemical Society , vol. cxxiii, 1923, p. 3422; C. C. Gillispie (ed.),
Dictionary of Scientific Biography , vol. ii, 1970;The Times , 31 October 1922.]
Paul Brand
(ante 1260–1321), administrator and judge, makes his first appearance in surviving records in 1281.
The context suggests that he must already by then have been of age and so was born in or before 1260.
He probably came from Rothbury in Northumberland and the Hugh of Rothbury who was a clerk of the Common Bench justice, William of Brompton, in the 1280s may have been his brother.
The provisions made by his executors to establish loan chests at the universities of Oxford and Cambridge after his death suggest that Gilbert may have received some sort of university education.
During the 1280s he was probably one of the clerks serving the justices of the ‘northern’ eyre circuit.
It is in 1290, however, that he first comes into prominence with his appointment to the responsible post of clerk of the king's council.
At the same time he also became the first known clerk of Parliament and thus was responsible for beginning the compilation of the rolls of Parliament.
Only a much less comprehensive record had hitherto been kept of business done in Parliament.
Rothbury was probably not himself responsible for the change, merely the executor of a policy determined by others.
Rothbury ceased to be clerk of the council when he was appointed a justice of the court of King's Bench in 1295, but he remained clerk of Parliament till at least 1307 and perhaps as late as 1314.
The few surviving reports of cases heard in King's Bench during the period he was a justice (1295–1316) do not suggest that he made a major contribution to the work of the court.
His senior colleague, Roger Brabazon [q.v.], evidently had the sharper legal mind.
In 1316 Rothbury was transferred to the Common Bench of which he remained a junior justice until the time of his death.
Again there is little evidence to suggest that he made a significant contribution to the work of the court.
In 1297 an Irish attorney acting for the abbot of Mellifont in a case before King's Bench suggested to the abbot that he would be guaranteed success in his litigation if he paid Rothbury a bribe of twenty marks through the attorney.
This appears simply to have been a trick on the part of the attorney, and not evidence that Rothbury was known to have been corrupt.
Surprisingly for a royal justice of this period, there is no evidence of Rothbury accumulating lands or other property, although he did come to hold a number of benefices and in 1306 and 1307 received papal dispensation to do so.
He died some time between early February 1321 (the end of Hilary term) and 4 May 1321 (the beginning of Easter term).
[Public Record Office, JUST 1/501, mm.
48d, 49; King's Bench and Common Pleas Plea Rolls (KB 27 and CP 40) of the reigns of Edward I and Edward II; published and unpublished reports of cases in King's Bench and Common Bench;Select Cases in the Court of King's Bench , vol. i, pp. lx–lxi;Calendar of Papal Registers , vol. ii, pp. 3–4, 25, 175, 178–9; H. G. Richardson and G. O. Sayles,The English Parliament in the Middle Ages , 1981.]
Edgar Samuel
or , Sir Solomon or Diego (c. 1650–1730), commissary general to the land forces of the grand alliance in the Low Countries in 1706–11, was born in Bordeaux c. 1650, a younger son of Francisco de Medina, merchant, and his wife Gracia Pereira, who were both of Portuguese Jewish origin.
In 1662 the family moved to Middelburg in the Netherlands, where they openly professed Judaism.
Medina trained as a merchant in Amsterdam, moved to London in 1670, and from 1672 until 1677 lived in Great St Helens, where he became well established as a merchant.
In 1686 he supplied imported silks and other luxury textiles to the Duchess of Somerset and in 1689–90 to Queen Mary II.
By 1696 he had moved to Pall Mall, near to the court.
From 1689 onwards he acted as London factor for Antonio (or Moses) Alvarez Machado and Jacob Pereira, the providiteurs general to the Dutch army in England and to the land forces of the allies in the Low Countries.
Medina's function was to collect sums owing to the partnership from the English Crown and, when necessary, to provide short-term loans to both parties.
This led on to contracts for shipping grain to Flanders.
On 18 November 1699 King William III dined at his house in Richmond and, on 23 June 1700, in recognition of his services, the king knighted him at Hampton Court.
He was the first professing Jew to be knighted in England.
In 1702, after the king's death, he settled in the Netherlands, where he continued to work in close collaboration with Machado and Pereira.
When Machado died in 1706, Medina succeeded him as contractor for supplying bread and wagons to the land forces of the grand alliance, initially on his own and later in partnership with his older brother, Joseph de Medina of Amsterdam, and with Joseph's son, Moses.
As commissary general, he fed the allied troops throughout the campaigns of John Churchill, first Duke of Marlborough [q.v.].
He handled large sums of money but lost much of his wealth on the 1709 contract, when the price of corn rose unexpectedly.
In 1711 he was summoned before the parliamentary commissioners for examining and stating the public accounts and testified that he and his predecessor had regularly paid commission on their contracts to the duke of Marlborough, amounting to some £6,000 a year.
The duke claimed that this was a customary perquisite of the commanding general.
Medina's evidence was used by the Tories to bring about Marlborough's downfall.
Medina comes across as an able and honest merchant, who gave important services to the grand alliance.
When questioned under oath he told the truth without shame or political motivation.
His only wife, Esther Azevedo, survived him by eight months.
Their only surviving child, Deborah, married his nephew, Moses de Medina.
He died in The Hague 15 September 1720, leaving an estate of under £20,000, and is buried in the Jewish cemetery at Ouderkerk.
[Lucien Wolf,Jews in the Canary Islands , 1926; Oskar K. Rabinowicz,Sir Solomon de Medina , 1974; Diane de Marly, ‘Sir Solomon de Medina's Textile Warehouse’,Transactions of the Jewish Historical Society of England , Miscellanies xii, 1982, p. 155; L. D. Barnett,El Libro de los Acuerdos , 1931.]
J C Sainty
or ,Henry (1577–1635), clerk of the parliaments, belonged to a family which came originally from Duxworth in Cambridgeshire and was baptized 21 August 1577 at St Dunstan in the West, London.
He was the eldest of the three sons and second of the four children of another Henry Elsynge, merchant tailor of the same parish, who died in 1582, and his wife Frances, the daughter of Edmund Browne, also a merchant tailor of St Dunstan's.
In 1584 Frances married Henry Knyvett (died 1601), an elder half-brother of Robert Bowyer [q.v.], later clerk of the parliaments.
Elsynge was educated at St Alban's School.
He entered Caius College, Cambridge, as a pensioner on 14 October 1597 but did not graduate.
He was admitted a student at the Middle Temple on 19 February 1597 and was called to the bar on 19 April 1605.
In 1604 he was appointed, jointly with Robert Bowyer, keeper of the records in the Tower of London, an office which they held until 1612.
On 27 November 1609 Bowyer succeeded to the office of clerk of the parliaments and shortly afterwards brought Elsynge to assist him in the House of Lords.
On 1 September 1613 Elsynge was granted the reversion of the office of clerk of the parliaments, to which he succeeded on Bowyer's death on 15 March 1621.
He held the office until his death although he ceased to officiate in the House of Lords at the dissolution of Parliament in March 1629.
Thereafter he lived principally at his manor of Cornwell in Oxfordshire.
Elsynge played an important part in the codification of the procedure of the House of Lords and in the development and preservation of its records.
His principal claim to recognition is as a scholar and historian of Parliament, using the original documents to which his official positions at the Tower and at Westminster gave him access.
His studies formed the basis of his treatise on Parliament entitled The Manner of Holding Parliaments in England or Modus Tenendi Parliamentum apud Anglos which remained unfinished at his death.
Subsequently various parts have been published.
Book one first appeared in 1660.
A chapter on judicature, formerly attributed in error to John Selden [q.v.], appeared in an imperfect form in 1681 and in a corrected version in 1990.
A further chapter, entitled Expedicio Billarum Antiquitus , was published in 1954 (ed.
Catherine S. Sims, University of Louvain publications).
A tract entitled The Manner of Passing Bills in Parliament , published in 1685, may have formed part of the same work.
Elsynge's notes of debates in the House of Lords 1621–8 were published in 1870, 1879, and 1929.
Elsynge married first 12 July 1600 Blanche (or Alse)(died 1612), daughter of Richard Hyett and niece of Robert Bowyer.
They had two sons of whom the elder, Henry (1606–56, q.v.), was clerk of the House of Commons 1639–49.
By his second wife Jane, daughter of Richard Hardy of Dorset, Elsynge had a further four sons and one daughter.
He died, probably in the month of November, in 1635.
[M. F. Bond, ‘The Formation of the Archives of Parliament, 1497–1691’,Journal of the Society of Archivists , vol. i, 1957, pp. 151–8; E. R. Forster, ‘The Painful Labour of Mr. Elsyng’,Transactions of the American Philosophical Society , vol. lxii, part 8, 1972.]
Donald Woodward
,Henry (c. 1592–1645), landowner and farmer, was born c .1592, probably in Hutton Cranswick, east Yorkshire, the second of five sons and the second of six children of James Best, yeoman of Hutton Cranswick (later gentleman of Elmswell, east Yorkshire), and his wife Dorothy, whose background and maiden name are not known.
James Best married for a second and third time, and had two daughters and a son by his second wife.
Nothing is known of Henry Best's early years, although his collection of books and his literary ability indicate a good education.
When his father died in April 1617 he was living in Braintree, Essex, probably working in the shop of John Lawrence, grocer and apothecary, and one of the leading townsmen, whose daughter Mary he married at about this time.
In the summer of 1617 Best travelled back to Yorkshire to manage the family estate at Elmswell, near Driffield, which had been bought by his father in 1598, and to supervise the upbringing of his young siblings and half-siblings.
The estate, of nearly 1,300 acres, had been left to his elder brother, Paul [q.v.], a scholar at Cambridge, but it was bought by Henry in 1618.
He spent the next twenty-seven years at Elmswell, overseeing his farms and estate, building a new house in the 1630s, and only occasionally visiting places out of the district.
In the early 1640s Best compiled an account of his farming methods and other country matters, such as‘the fashions att our Country weddings’, for the benefit of his son, John (1620–69), who succeeded him as lord of the manor.
Unfortunately, parts of the original manuscript, especially those dealing with tillage and the management of stock other than sheep, have been lost, but what remains of this farming book comprises the most detailed contemporary account of seventeenth-century farming practice.
Throughout his control of the Elmswell estate Best also kept a memorandum book, in which he recorded in a haphazard fashion things he wished to remember: the wages agreed with servants; debts owed and owing; the number of sheep in the shepherd's care.
Although not an agricultural innovator, he was an astute farmer and businessman: he took great care in selecting seed and breeding stock; he knew the best markets in the region for a wide variety of products; and he endeavoured never to miss an opportunity for profit.
He was always an active manager, out in the fields, exhorting his workers, ever watchful for the tricks of ‘theevish and ill-disposed servants’ or the lackadaisical habits of maids ‘of a sluggish and sleepy disposition’.
He was a man to whom fair dealing came naturally and he was a just, if firm, master.
Best had five sons and two daughters.
His wife died in 1639 and he was predeceased by a son and a daughter.
He was buried in Little Driffield, 22 June 1645.
[D. Woodward,The Farming and Memorandum Books of Henry Best of Elmswell 1642 , British Academy, Records of Social and Economic History, NS, vol. viii, 1984.]
Sybil Oldfield
,Louise Ernestine , Lady Howard (1880–1969), classicist, international civil servant, and ecological pioneer, was born 26 December 1880 at 10 Priory Grove, Kensington, London, the third daughter of Carl Hermann Ernst Matthaei, commission merchant, and his wife Louise Henriette Elizabeth Sueur, musician.
Of German, French, and Swiss stock, she was educated at South Hampstead High School and at Newnham College, Cambridge, where, in addition to several scholarships and prizes, she obtained firsts in both parts of the classical tripos (1903 and 1904), followed by a research fellowship.
In 1909 she became lecturer and director of studies in classics at Newnham, where she gained a reputation as a rigorous but very stimulating and sympathetic teacher.
In 1918 she published Studies in Greek Tragedy , focusing on the role of tragic accident.
Anti-German feeling in World War I caused Louise Matthaei to leave the academic world in 1916 and in 1918 she became assistant editor to Leonard Woolf [q.v.]on the International Review .
In 1920 she sat the competitive examination to enter the International Labour Office in Geneva and joined its agricultural service.
In 1924 she was promoted to chief of that section and in 1935 she published Labour in Agriculture, an International Survey .
During the 1930s and 1940s she helped German refugees from Nazism.
In 1931 she married (Sir) Albert Howard, MA, FLS, economic botanist to the government of India, the widower of her elder sister Gabrielle, who had been a botanist.
He was the son of Richard Howard, a Shropshire farmer.
Like her sister before her Louise devoted herself to furthering her husband's work.
He was a passionate campaigner against the use of chemicals to restore fertility to the depleted soils of the world, being a doughty champion of compost and manure instead.
He argued that the plant should be studied together with its environment as a single unit and that mankind should respect the traditional wisdom gained from the trial and error of generations of peasants the world over.
Together, the Howards brought out Farming and Gardening for Health or Disease (1945) and in 1947 Louise Howard published The Earth's Green Carpet , which foreshadowed the later ecological movement's central concerns, with its chapters on ‘Soil Fertility and Human Health’, ‘The Wheel of Life’, ‘The Growth of the Plant’, and ‘The Retreat of the Forest’.
Louise Howard's hope for a world without frontiers fused with her advocacy of ‘a free exchange between the nations of the direct and indirect products of sunlight’(and of a fertile soil) as the birthright of all races.
After her husband's death in 1947 she co-founded the Albert Howard Foundation, which in 1953 merged with the Soil Association, of which she became honorary life vice-president.
To all three of her careers, as classics don, international civil servant, and publicist of organic husbandry, Louise Matthaei Howard brought wide social sympathies, a highly cultivated mind, and a large measure of dry humour.
She died 11 March 1969 in Blackheath, London.
She had no children.
[L. E. Howard,Sir Albert Howard in India , 1953;Mother Earth , October 1953;Newnham College Roll , 1969; Virginia Woolf,Diary , vol. i, 1977.]
Jellicoe
,Robert Blair (1915–1955), lieutenant-colonel, was born 11 January 1915 in Newtownards, county Down, the third son in the family of four sons and three daughters of William Mayne, who ran the family's prosperous wine and grocery business, and his wife Margaret Vane.
He was educated at Regent House School and later articled to a solicitor, reading law at the same time at Queen's University, Belfast.
An outstanding sportsman, in 1936 he became Irish universities' heavyweight boxing champion and two years later he received the first of six rugby international caps for Ireland, touring South Africa in 1938 with the British Lions.
At the outbreak of World War II, Mayne served with various units, including the Royal Ulster Rifles.
When the Special Air Service (SAS) was formed in North Africa in 1941 by Captain (later Colonel Sir) David Stirling, Mayne volunteered to join it.
Initially called ‘L Detachment SAS Brigade’, this force consisted of seven officers and sixty other ranks.
Its aim was to disrupt Axis lines of communication in the desert, in particular by attacks on enemy airfields.
The first operation in which the new unit was engaged and in which Mayne participated — parachute raids on two German airfields in November 1941 — was a disastrous failure, owing to atrocious weather conditions.
After this Stirling decided the approach must be made by jeep.
Mayne quickly established himself as the most exceptional officer in Stirling's rapidly expanding SAS force, which became the 1st Special Air Service Regiment in September 1942, with Stirling in command as lieutenant-colonel.
Mayne received his first DSO for a raid on Tamet airfield, only three weeks after the initial disaster, destroying fourteen enemy aircraft and damaging ten others.
Three weeks later he repeated this raid on the same airfield, destroying another twenty-seven aircraft.
Mayne personally, together with the patrols which he led with such skill and dash, almost certainly destroyed, during some fourteen months of constant raids from desert bases deep behind enemy lines, more aircraft than any fighter ace on either side in World War II.
Following Stirling's capture in early 1943, the SAS was reorganized into two parts, with Mayne in command of the Special Raiding Squadron, 1 SAS.
The SRS played a notable part in the invasion of Sicily.
On the night of 9–10 July 1943, landing from the sea, it put out of action two Italian coastal batteries at Cape Murro di Porco, and followed this two days later by a daylight landing and attack on Augusta, which was strongly defended by troops of the Hermann Goering division.
For his part in these attacks Mayne received his first bar to a DSO.
Later, on 4 September, the SRS attacked Bagnara Calabria, capturing a vital bridge, thus facilitating the advance of the Eighth Army.
A month later the SRS, together with 3 and 40 Commandos, captured Termoli, albeit incurring serious casualties.
This was Mayne's last action in Italy.
On his return to England the SRS was expanded, becoming 1 SAS Regiment, with Mayne promoted to lieutenant-colonel, forming part of the SAS brigade.
The strategic function of the brigade was deep penetration by parachute and jeep behind the enemy lines, during and after the opening of the second front.
In August 1944 Mayne was parachuted into France, west of Dijon.
He subsequently played a notable part, harassing the enemy behind the lines, and was awarded a second bar to his DSO.
During the later stages of the campaign in Europe, the role of the SAS became more tactical.
Mayne took command of two jeep-borne SAS squadrons which helped to clear the way, working with 4 Canadian Armoured division, for the capture of Kiel and Wilhelmshaven.
In these operations, often in close and difficult country, 1 SAS incurred serious casualties.
But its success, as always, owed much to the presence right forward of Mayne, who received a third bar to his DSO.
Mayne's prowess as an officer of rare quality was recognized by the almost unprecedented award of four DSOs.
Although the SAS owed its inception and early inspiration to Stirling, the run of successes which Mayne achieved in its early formative months assured its immediate future.
The unit's subsequent successes in Italy, France, and Germany made the postwar renaissance of the SAS, as a permanent part of the British defence forces, that much easier to achieve.
Mayne was an unusual and complicated person.
He was cool and fearless in wartime, and an excellent leader.
He could be ruthless and on rare occasions callous.
The life of this normally gentle giant of a man was also punctuated from time to time by acts of sudden, often inexplicable, violence, usually associated with an over-generous intake of alcohol.
He had a deep concern for the welfare of his men and their families and in his later years lavished much care on his invalid mother.
He never really adjusted to peacetime routine, suffering much in his later years, as secretary to the Incorporated Law Society of Northern Ireland, from wartime injuries.
He was unmarried.
He died in a car accident in Mill Street, Newtownards, 14 December 1955.
[Roy Bradford and Marion Dillon,Lt.-Col. Paddy (Blair) Mayne D.S.O. , 1987; William Seymour,British Special Forces , 1985; John Strawson,A History of the SAS Regiment , 1984; private information; personal knowledge.]
Michael Turnbull
,Joseph Dewar (1884–1977), operatic tenor and teacher in the tradition of Francesco Lamperti, was born at 16 Bowmont Place, Edinburgh, 5 April 1884, the second child in the family of two sons and two daughters of Joseph Dewar Hislop, painter and decorator, and his wife Mary White Lunn.
He was educated in the choir school of St Mary's Episcopal Cathedral, Edinburgh.
Having trained as a photo-process engraver, he took up the post of demonstrator in a firm in Gothenburg, Sweden, in 1907.
In his spare time he sang in a male voice choir.
His potential was recognized in 1910 by a visiting soloist who introduced him to Dr Gillis Bratt in Stockholm.
Hislop trained with Bratt and made his début as a principal singer at the Royal Swedish Opera, Stockholm, as Faust in C. F. Gounod's opera on 12 September 1914.
He sang for a season at the San Carlo Opera in Naples in the spring of 1920.
He made his Covent Garden début on 14 May 1920 as Rodolfo in Puccini's La Bohème .
In 1920 and 1921 he appeared in Chicago and New York, touring America three times.
A return to Italy in 1923 saw him in Venice, Turin, and at La Scala, Milan.
Hislop made a farewell British tour in 1934.
He became a Swedish citizen in 1937 in order to take up the offer of teaching posts in the Royal Opera School and the Music High School (later renamed the Royal Academy of Music), Stockholm, where he had great influence on a generation of singers, including Birgit Nilsson and Jussi Björling, whom he taught privately.
In 1949 he became professor of singing at that academy.
From 1948 to 1954 he was an artistic adviser to the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden, and Sadler's Wells.
In 1952 he became a professor of singing at the Guildhall School of Music before retiring to Fife in 1964, where he continued to teach for many years.
Hislop was awarded the gold medal Litteris et Artibus in 1922 by Sweden for achievement in the arts.
In 1926 he was made a knight of Dannebrog (Denmark) and in 1929 made a knight of the Vasa (Sweden).
In 1915 he married Karin, daughter of Olof Asklund, owner of a large Gothenburg bakery firm.
They had one son and two daughters, one of whom, Geraldine, trained as an actress and singer and appeared with some success before her death in 1984.
Divorced in 1940, in the same year Hislop married Agnes (‘Nancy’) Fraser, daughter of Walter Passmore, character comedian in the Savoy Opera Company.
There were no children of the second marriage.
Hislop died 6 May 1977 at his home in Upper Largo, Fife.
[M. F. Bott, ‘Joseph Hislop’,Record Collector , vol. xxiii, nos. 9 and 10, June 1977, and vol. xxv, nos. 1 and 2, March 1979;idem , ‘Joseph Hislop — a Centenary Tribute’,Opera , July 1984, pp. 730–4; Robert Hay, ‘Talking with Joseph Hislop’,Scots Magazine , May 1973, pp. 173–8; M. T. R. B. Turnbull, ‘Joseph Hislop (1884–1977): a Cultural Ambassador’,Review of Scottish Culture , no. 6, 1990, pp. 21–6.]
J R Maddicott
, Sir (c. 1238–1328), soldier, crusader, and diplomat, was the eldest son of Peter de Grandson, lord of Grandson, on the shore of Lake Neuchâtel, and his wife Agnes, daughter of Count Ulric of Neuchâtel.
His move away from the family home and into English affairs resulted from his father's position as the household knight and dependent of Peter of Savoy, Earl of Richmond [q.v.], uncle of Henry III's queen, Eleanor [q.v.], and a powerful influence at Henry's court.
Occasionally in England between c .1245 and his death in 1258, Peter de Grandson was receiving an annual fee of £20 from Henry by 1249–50, and his son Otho was possibly introduced into the household of Edward, Henry's eldest son and heir, about this time.
He first appears, in company with several of Edward's retainers, in October 1265, when he received a grant of confiscated property in London, and by 1268 he was certainly one of Edward's knights.
He rapidly became one of the prince's closest friends, accompanying him on his crusade of 1270–2 and appearing as one of his executors in the will which Edward made at Acre in June 1272.
When he returned to England as king in 1274 Grandson emerged as ‘one of Edward's most trusted henchmen’(Prestwich).
Henceforth his considerable services to the Crown were partly military but mainly diplomatic.
He fought as a banneret in the first Welsh war of 1277–8, visited Gascony and Paris on Edward's business in 1278–9, and fought again in the second Welsh war of 1282–3.
In March 1284, after its conclusion, he was made justiciar of north Wales.
Essentially viceroy of the newly conquered lands, his position suggests the confidence which Edward placed in him; and he may have had some influence, as his Savoyard friends and kinsmen certainly did, on the design of the castles by which Wales was to be held down.
In 1286 he joined Edward in Gascony, after an embassy to the papal curia , and in 1289–90 he journeyed once again to the curia to discuss,inter alia , the granting of a papal dispensation for the marriage of Edward of Carnarvon, Edward's son, to Margaret of Scotland, the Maid of Norway [q.v.], and Edward's projected crusade.
Although Edward never again went on crusade, Grandson himself led a small expedition to the east in 1290 and was present at the fall of Acre in May 1291.
He may have been the author of a memorandum written between 1289 and 1307 concerning plans for a new crusade.
After the débâcle at Acre he retired to Cyprus, whence he visited Armenia and Jerusalem before returning to Grandson and finally to England in 1296.
His involvement in the Anglo-Scottish war, then just beginning, followed the pattern of his earlier work for Edward.
He was present at the surrender of Dunbar in May 1296, which marked the victorious conclusion of Edward's first campaign, but his main work continued to be high-level diplomacy.
He was active in building up Edward's anti-French coalition in the Low Countries in 1296–7, negotiated for a truce with France in 1298, attended the papal curia in 1300–1, helped to settle the terms for a final French peace in 1303, and was among those sent again to the curia by Edward in 1305 to seek the suspension of Robert de Winchelsea [q.v.], archbishop of Canterbury.
Grandson was rewarded by Edward with extensive land grants in England, especially in Kent, and also in Ireland, and in 1275 with the wardenship of the Channel Islands, later transformed into a life grant.
This last proved a source of constant conflict and friction with the islanders.
After Edward I's death in 1307 he left England for ever, returning to his ancestral home at Grandson.
Although he was occasionally called out of retirement to represent English interests at the curia and at the French court, his main interests were now religious.
He took the cross again in 1307 and was a notable benefactor to the Franciscans and Carthusians of his homeland.
He died in April 1328 and was buried in Lausanne Cathedral.
John de Grandison, bishop of Exeter, 1328–69 [q.v.], was his nephew.
It is hard to think of any comparable figure in medieval English history who lived so long, travelled so widely, or had a career so diverse and adventurous.
[Calendar of Liberate Rolls, 1251–60 ; C. L. Kingsford, ‘Sir Otho de Grandison (1238? –1328)’,Transactions of the Royal Historical Society , 1909; E. R. Clifford,A Knight of Great Renown , 1961; A. Taylor,Studies in Castles and Castle Building , 1985; C. Tyerman,England and the Crusades, 1095–1588 , 1988; M. Prestwich,Edward I , 1988.]
Margaret DeLacy
,Edward (1747–1823), surgeon, was born 23 October 1747 in Newton-le-Willows, Lancashire, the son of John and Margaret Alanson.
He was apprenticed to William Pickering, a surgeon to the Liverpool Infirmary, in 1763.
In 1768 he went to London, and became a house pupil of the surgeon and natural scientist John Hunter [q.v.].
In 1770 he became a surgeon to the Liverpool Infirmary.
Four years later he left the house of William Pickering and moved to Cable Street, Liverpool.
In 1777 he became a partner of Henry Park [q.v.], who was also a surgeon to the Infirmary, and in the same year he moved to Basnett Street.
Alanson became one of the first three surgeons appointed to the Liverpool dispensary in 1778.
In 1779 he published Practical Observations on Amputation and the After-treatment .
At about the same time he helped to found the Liverpool Medical Library and the Liverpool Blind Asylum.
In 1790 he moved to Wavertree, near Liverpool.
He resigned his post at the Infirmary on the grounds of poor health four years later and moved to Aughton near Ormskirk, where he continued to practise surgery.
In 1808 he returned to Wavertree.
Alanson is best known for his improvements in the technique of amputation, and his important suggestions for hospital reform were a vital adjunct to his new surgical methods.
In the early part of the eighteenth century, amputations were generally performed by a circular incision perpendicular to the limb.
A large open wound remained which was dressed by dry lint and the arteries were tied off by passing a ligature around the entire mass of vessels.
Alanson urged that operations be carefully planned in advance.
He championed the ‘flap’ technique, which had recently been revived by a few English surgeons.
In this procedure the surgeon cut obliquely inwards towards the bone.
The muscles were divided so that the cut end of the bone was covered and a flap of skin was left that could be used to cover the wound.
Alanson suggested that the wound be cleansed with warm water and bandaged so the edges formed a straight line across the stump: no dressings were to be used.
He also urged that the arteries be drawn out and tied individually.
Although it had been common for surgeons to expect suppuration of the wound as an inevitable concomitant of amputation, Alanson demonstrated that by these methods it was possible for these wounds to heal ‘by the first intention’, that is, without significant infection.
Wounds healed with little fever or discharge and patients seldom needed opium to control post-operative pain.
Moreover, the cushion of muscle provided a more useful and less vulnerable stump.
Alanson reported that, of forty-six traditional amputations that he had witnessed, ten patients died and the survivors suffered prolonged complications.
Following his adoption of the new methods, there were no deaths and only a few minor complications in thirty-five patients treated without selection at the Liverpool Infirmary.
This was the best record until the development of antisepsis by Joseph (later first Baron) Lister [q.v.].
Alanson and his colleagues obtained these results by making hospital reform an important part of their work.
It is reported that he never performed an operation without washing his hands.
He also urged that hospital wards be vacated and thoroughly cleansed every four months, that iron beds be used, that patients be washed on admission and dressed in clean clothes and that their own clothing be cleaned before discharge, that infectious patients be denied admission, that patients with offensive sores and surgical patients be placed in separate rooms, that hospitals remain uncrowded, that the windows of each ward be opened daily, and that infirmaries remove patients to country houses for recovery.
Alanson's innovations evolved in close consultation with his gifted colleagues at the Liverpool Infirmary — the surgeons Henry Park [q.v.]and John Lyon, and the physicians Matthew Dobson, Henry Richmond, and Thomas Houlston — as well as with several other innovative surgeons and local reformers.
He himself did not claim to have originated many of his improvements, but his work is notable for the way in which many details of care and technique were combined to produce a dramatically improved outcome, and for the rigour with which he analysed his work.
Together, these amounted to a significant advance in the practice of surgery.
In June 1775 Alanson married the daughter of Nehemiah Holland, a Liverpool merchant.
Alanson died 12 December 1823 in Wavertree.
His wife died a year later; they were survived by five of their twelve children.
[R. W. Murray,Edward Alanson and his Times , 1914; T. H. Bickerton,A Medical History of Liverpool from the Earliest Days to the Year 1920 , 1936; John A. Shepherd,A History of the Liverpool Medical Institution , 1979.]
J D Fleeman
,Lawrenceson Fitzroy (1881–1975), scholar, was born at 235 Cowley Road, Oxford, 9 August 1881, the youngest of the seven children of Harry Powell (1830–1886), a trumpeter who was wounded in the charge of the Light Brigade of 1854 and who published his Recollections in 1876, and his wife Anne Budd of Oxford.
He was named after two of Harry Powell's regimental officers.
Only one of his siblings, a brother, survived to adulthood.
He was educated at an orphanage in Blackheath.
Powell began work in the library of Brasenose College in 1893, and in 1895 became a boy helper at the Bodleian Library under E. W. B. Nicholson [q.v.].
In 1901 he joined the team of (Sir) William Craigie [q.v.]on the New English Dictionary .
In 1914 Powell was declared unfit for active service, but joined the Admiralty in 1916.
After the war he returned to the Dictionary.
In 1921, supported by Joseph Wright and (Sir) Charles Firth [qq.v.], he was appointed librarian of the Taylor Institution, from which he retired in 1949.
Thereafter he supervised many graduate research students, and was recognized by honorary fellowships at St Catherine's and Pembroke colleges in 1966, and an Oxford D.Litt. in 1969.
It was one of his few boasts that he had never taken an academic examination in his life.
Powell's lexicographical work under Craigie laid the foundations of his scholarship, enforcing an interest in Samuel Johnson [q.v.].
In 1923 R. W. Chapman [q.v.]invited him to revise the edition by G. Birkbeck Hill [q.v.]of James Boswell [q.v.].
The four volumes were published in 1934, and acknowledged with the award of a D.Litt. by Durham University in 1935.
Thereafter, as for Johnson, the title was inseparable from his name.
The emergence of more Boswellian material from Malahide Castle and Fettercairn House led to a full edition of Boswell's Tour to the Hebrides .
A motoring tour of Scotland with James Marshall Osborn in 1935 was followed by annual excursions with Esmond de Beer to Raasay, where he prepared articles and papers in tranquil surroundings and pursued the intricacies of Highland genealogy.
This edition was published in 1950 as volume v of his Boswell , together with a separate Index to the whole.
Powell's scholarship ranged from work on the letters M–N, Q–R, Si–St, and U–V, for the Oxford English Dictionary , an edition of the translation by Nicholas Love of Bonaventura's Meditationes Vitae Christi of c .1410, studies of the Adventurer of John Hawkesworth [q.v.], the bibliography of Samuel Johnson, Thomas Percy, Thomas Pennant, and Robert Southwell [qq.v.], contributions to the Cambridge Bibliography of English Literature , vol. ii (1940) and the Yale edition of Johnson (1963), to a collaboration with John Munro on ‘The London Shakespeare’(1958).
His published works are listed in Johnson, Boswell and their Circle (1965).
Equally important contributions are recorded in the acknowledgements of Johnsonian and Boswellian scholars, who benefited from his advice.
Powell's career displayed native tenacity.
An orphan boy with few material advantages, he was largely self-taught, undeterred by difficulties, ever alert for information, and he kept his memory in full activity.
A formidable indexer, he rightly considered his memory superior to card indexes, and drew together disparate source material, references, and recondite information, with effortless skill.
For his pupils he resembled Johnson without the danger: cheerfulness was always evident.
He was eminently ‘clubbable’, loved a bon mot or anecdote, and despised gossip.
He defied the doctors of 1914 with energetic pedestrianism, and in his eighties would sometimes trick unwary visitors by suggesting a stroll.
A shrewd and learned editor, a patient mentor, and a courteous friend, his Boswell is a lasting memorial.
In 1909 he married Ethelwyn Rebecca (died 1941), daughter of James Slatter Steane, wine merchant, of Oxford.
They had one son.
Powell died in a nursing home in Banbury 17 July 1975.
[Mary M. Lascelles (ed.),
Johnson, Boswell, and their Circle.
Essays presented to Lawrence Fitzroy Powell , 1965; Mary C. Hyde (ed.),
Our Friend L.F. Recollections of Lawrence Fitzroy Powell (keepsake for The Johnsonians ), privately printed, 17 September 1976; J. S. G. Simmons, ‘Lawrence Fitzroy Powell, 1881–1975: a Tribute’,New Rambler , 1976; information from Viscountess Eccles (Mrs Mary Hyde), Mary M. Lascelles, Paul Morgan, J. S. G. Simmons; personal knowledge.]
Alfred P Smyth
, Saint, Earl of Orkney (c. 1080–1116), saint and martyr, was the son of Earl Erlend of Orkney and grandson of Earl Thorfinn the Mighty, who introduced missionary Christianity into the Northern Isles in the middle of the eleventh century.
His mother, Thora, was a relative of the saintly bishop, Jón, of Hólar in northern Iceland.
Magnus is said to have led a blameless childhood and in the Longer Magnúss Saga he is said to have had a good schooling which enabled him to learn ‘holy writings’.
While his father, Erlend, and his uncle, Paul, got on well together as joint earls of Orkney, their sons became rivals and enemies.
Hakon, Paul's son, eventually went into exile in Sweden leaving his cousins, St Magnus and his brother Erling, ruling Orkney.
There is an admission that Magnus, in his early manhood, kept evil company with Viking marauders, participating in their atrocities.
A turning-point was reached in the life of Magnus in 1098 when King Magnus Barelegs (or ‘Barefoot’) of Norway led his first major military expedition against the British Isles.
King Magnus seized the ageing earls, Paul and Erlend, and compelled their sons — the rival cousins, Hakon and the brothers Erling and St Magnus — to join him on a foray against the Hebrides and north Wales.
In a battle in the Menai Straits the Norwegians defeated a Norman force and slew one of its leaders, Hugh of Montgomery, second Earl of Shrewsbury and Arundel [q.v.].
A key tradition claims St Magnus refused to arm himself for this battle and chose to sing from his psalter on King Magnus's ship, surviving unhurt in the midst of the fray.
King Magnus construed the saint's conduct as treachery and St Magnus escaped from the king's ship while it was anchored off the Scottish coast.
He spent the next five years in exile at the court of the Scottish king, Malcolm (recte Edgar, q.v.), and with an unnamed Welsh bishop.
The exile of St Magnus and the death of his brother Erling left the rival cousin, Hakon, sole ruler of Orkney.
On the death of Magnus Barelegs in 1103, St Magnus returned to Orkney, where Hakon was persuaded to share the earldom with him.
St Magnus joined Hakon in suppressing Viking lawlessness in the Northern Isles and he is said to have married a daughter of a Scottish chieftain — both parties preserving their chastity for ten years.
Eventually the old quarrel was renewed between St Magnus and Hakon, which was to have been settled by a meeting between the two parties on Egilsay.
Hakon cheated by turning up with seven or eight warships as opposed to the agreed number of two ships adhered to by St Magnus.
Magnus was either dragged out of sanctuary from a church on Egilsay or he voluntarily surrendered himself to his enemies.
Hakon, egged on by his followers, had Magnus slain by the blow of an axe to his head delivered by one Lifolf, Earl Hakon's cook.
The date of Magnus's slaying is uncertain but it was most likely 16 April 1116 or 1117.
He is said to have been tall and handsome, a brave warrior and a good speaker.
He was a just judge, stern with lawbreakers but generous to the poor.
His enemies refused him Christian burial at first, but he was later interred in his grandfather's kirk at Birsay.
In spite of many miracles and wonders effected at his tomb, it took twenty-one years before the sceptical Bishop William of Orkney was persuaded to translate the bones of St Magnus into a shrine on 13 December 1137.
The relics were finally housed in the new cathedral dedicated to St Magnus at Kirkwall soon after 1137 and they were rediscovered in that same building in 1919.
[Alan Orr Anderson,Early Sources of Scottish History A.D. 500–1286 , vol. ii, 1922;Magnus Saga , ed.
G. Vigfusson and translated G. W. Dasent, Rolls Series, vol. lxxxviii, 1, 3, 1887–94; H. Pálsson and P. Edwards,Orkneyinga Saga , 1978.]
John Bastin
,Francis (1740–1794), founder of the settlement of Penang, Malaysia, was baptized 15 December 1740 in the parish church of Dallinghoo, near Woodbridge in Suffolk, the natural younger son of William Negus, a prominent landowner of Melton, near Woodbridge, and Mary Light.
He was educated at Seckford's Grammar School at Woodbridge and entered the Royal Navy in 1759 as a midshipman aboard HMS Captain .
He transferred shortly afterwards to the Dragon as an able seaman, but in 1761 he joined the Arrogant as a midshipman.
In 1763 he was paid off and two years later he embarked for India.
At Madras he obtained command of a country ship belonging to a syndicate of European merchants with interests in Sumatra and the northern regions of the Malay peninsula.
He established trading connections with the sultan of Kedah, by whom he was offered in 1771 the port and the coast as far as the island of Penang in return for help against the Bugis of Selangor.
He urged on his superiors in Madras the advantages of accepting this offer and on the East India Company the desirability of acquiring Penang as a commercial centre.
Missions led by Edward Monckton and Charles Des Voeux were despatched by the Company in 1772 to north Sumatra and Kedah, but without results, because the East India Company refused to promise aid against Selangor.
Light continued to engage in private trade during the 1770s and early 1780s, notably in Salang off the north-west coast of Thailand.
Growing Dutch power in the region led to new interest in establishing a British base in the Straits of Malacca, and in 1786 he obtained a renewal of the offer of Penang from the sultan of Kedah, on condition of a defensive alliance with the East India Company.
This offer was accepted and he was appointed superintendent of the island, which was formally acquired as a British possession on 11 August 1786 and called Prince of Wales Island.
From then on he administered Penang with great skill and energy, which led to a considerable growth in population and trade.
He also successfully defended the island against an attempt by the sultan of Kedah in 1791 to reclaim it because of the failure by the East India Company to observe the defensive clause in the treaty of cession.
There is no portrait of Light and his appearance and personality are something of an enigma.
Light lived with a Portuguese Eurasian, Martina Rozells, and they had five children, the eldest being William Light [q.v.], the founder of Adelaide.
Light died 21 October 1794 in Penang.
[H. P. Clodd,Malaya's First British Pioneer: the Life of Francis Light , 1948.]
Julie W Speedie
,Ada Esther (1862–1933), novelist, was born in London 10 October 1862, the oldest child in the family of four daughters and four sons of Samuel Henry Beddington, a wool merchant resident in Hyde Park Square, London, and his wife Zillah, daughter of (Sir) John Simon [q.v.],
Liberal MP.
Her mother was an outstanding amateur pianist.
Educated at home, Ada became well read in English, French, and German literature and the classics.
On 6 December 1881 she married Ernest David, son of George Bazett Colvin Leverson, a diamond merchant.
They had a son, who survived only twenty-one weeks, and a daughter.
From 1892 Ada Leverson published numerous stories and sketches in Punch and other magazines.
Her Kensington home became a meeting-place for writers and artists, particularly those associated with the Yellow Book .
Her friends included Aubrey Beardsley,(Sir) H. Max Beerbohm, George Moore, and, most notably, Oscar Wilde [qq.v.].
It was Wilde who christened her the ‘Sphinx’, the name by which she was thereafter known to her friends.
When the Wilde scandal broke in 1895, Mrs Leverson stood out against public opinion and took him into her home on his being released on bail, an act of courage and loyalty for which she has become justly renowned.
She was one of the few people who rose early in the morning to greet him on his release from prison in 1897.
Around 1902 the Leversons lost money through an unsound investment.
Never particularly happy together, they now agreed to separate, Ernest emigrating to Canada in 1900 (he died in 1921) and Ada remaining in London.
The publisher Grant Richards encouraged her to turn to novel writing, and between 1907 and 1916 she produced six books which are the perfect expression of her personality: frivolous and witty, but with an underlying sense of melancholy.
Ill health and the onset of deafness did little to diminish Ada Leverson's enjoyment of life.
Shortly after World War I she met (Sir) F. Osbert,(Sir) Sacheverell, and (Dame) Edith Sitwell [qq.v.], who became close friends.
During the 1920s she frequently stayed in Florence, where she befriended (Sir) Harold Acton and Ronald Firbank [q.v.].
Though viewed by many as a relic of the 1890s, she never lost her enthusiasm for new artistic trends.
Ada Leverson was small but of striking appearance, with bright golden hair and a profile said to resemble that of Sarah Bernhardt.
She was famous for her witty, outrageous remarks, which she delivered in a low, purring voice.
Her outwardly cynical manner concealed a warm heart, and she was devoted to those she loved.
That her novels are not better known is due largely to her extreme modesty about her literary abilities; but there is no doubt that her concise, deceptively light prose style, reliance on dialogue to carry the plot, and delight in satirical exaggeration influenced both Firbank and Evelyn Waugh [q.v.], and that she has thus left her mark on the development of the twentieth-century novel.
Ada Leverson died in London 30 August 1933, having published her last book,Letters to the Sphinx from Oscar Wilde, with Reminiscences of the Author , in 1930.
[Violet Wyndham,The Sphinx and her Circle: a Biographical Sketch of Ada Leverson 1862–1933 , 1963; Osbert Sitwell, ‘Ada Leverson’, in Noble Essences or Courteous Revelations: Being a Book of Characters and the Fifth and Last Volume of Left Hand, Right Hand!, 1950.]
Sheila Fletcher
,Sophie (1850–1922), educationist, Irish patriot, and suffragist, was born in Sandymount near Dublin 15 February 1850, the third of the six children of the Revd William Alexander Willock, fellow of Trinity College, Dublin, mathematician, and his wife, daughter of J. P. Morris of Skreen Castle.
As a child she was mainly taught by her father, but in 1866, three years after the family moved to England, she won a scholarship to Bedford College, London.
The Cambridge local examinations had only just been opened to girls and her performance in mathematics placed her alone in the first class.
She married in 1869 but her husband Dr William Hicks Bryant died the next year.
In 1875 she was appointed by Frances Buss [q.v.]of the North London Collegiate School to teach mathematics.
The conventional view that this was not a subject for girls was challenged by Sophie Bryant's success, notably in sending a succession of North Londoners to study mathematics at Girton.
She worked at the same time for her own degree and in 1881 took a B.Sc.
(London), gaining a first in mental and moral science and a second in mathematics, while three years later she became the first woman to be awarded a D.Sc.
George Bernard Shaw [q.v.], a friend of her youth, remembered ‘Sophie had a sunny personality that was very engaging’; and this personal warmth, combined with intellect, moral purpose, culture, and commitment to making girls think, launched her as an outstanding teacher, Frances Buss's right hand and natural successor.
By the time she herself became headmistress of the North London in 1895 she was well-known in wider circles, as a member of the London county council's technical education board and of the Bryce commission on secondary education, and as the author of Educational Ends (1887) and of many articles in journals of education and philosophy.
She was an apostle of teacher training and as the first woman to be elected to the senate of London University promoted the foundation of the London Day Training College and the accompanying chair in education.
‘Ireland was in the heart of her heart,’ said Sir Michael E. Sadler [q.v.], and she always felt a touch of the exile's longing.
A Gladstonian Liberal, she backed home rule, pressing that cause among English people.
In Ireland she heartened the embryonic movement for the higher education of women by personally securing the involvement in it of the Roman Catholic convent-school nuns.
Three of her ten books were about Ireland and she was honoured in 1904 with an honorary D.Litt. from Dublin University.
Her feeling for freedom as ‘the condition of all development’ infused her teaching, her patriotism, and her support for women's suffrage.
In Hampstead she was president of the local committee of the National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies.
She took great delight in physical freedom, was one of the first women to cycle, loved to row, and climbed the Matterhorn twice.
She retired in 1918.
On holiday in 1922 she disappeared, climbing alone near Chamonix.
After a search her body was found 28 August 1922.
[Sara Burstall et al .,
Sophie Bryant D.Sc., Litt.D. 1850–1922 (for private circulation), 1922; Eleanor Doorly, ‘Mrs Bryant’, in The North London Collegiate School 1850–1950 , 1950 (ed.
R. M. Scrimgeour).]
Paul Slack
or , Sir Rowland (c. 1520–1593), merchant and alderman of London, was the eldest son of George Hayward of Bridgnorth, Shropshire, and his wife Margaret, daughter of John Whitbrooke.
He was educated at Bridgnorth School, and then apprenticed to a London clothworker, becoming a freeman in the Clothworkers' Company of London in 1541 or 1542 (and its master in 1559).
By 1560, when he was elected alderman, he was already a substantial figure in London, and he became one of the City's commercial magnates.
He was a Merchant Adventurer (he had traded at Antwerp before 1553), exporting cloth, importing fustians, camlets, and buckram, and dealing in silk.
He was a founder-member of the Russia Company in 1555, and remained active in its affairs, serving as governor eight times between 1567 and 1587.
He was a promoter of the third slaving voyage of (Sir) John Hawkins [q.v.]in 1567 and a governor of the Mineral and Battery Works from 1568 onwards.
These varied interests brought him considerable wealth and influence.
In 1553 he bought property in four counties, some of it ex-monastic, and by his death he had seventeen manors in five counties, besides London property.
He had a large house, Elsinge Spital, in the City, and, from 1583, a country residence, King's Place, Hackney, where he entertained the queen, to whom he also lent money.
A major figure in the politics as well as the business of the City, Hayward emerges from the records of the Corporation as the most active and energetic of Elizabethan aldermen, a man with a finger in every pie and an obsessive devotion to committee work.
He was president of St Bartholomew's Hospital from 1572 to his death, comptroller-general of all the hospitals from 1581, and MP for the City from 1572 to 1583, naturally serving on House of Commons committees concerning London, trade, and industry.
He was lord mayor in 1570–1, when he was knighted, and again in 1591, when he stepped in on the death of a mayor in mid-term.
As father of the City (senior alderman) from 1586, he was involved in matters as various as military preparations in case of Spanish attack, the management of the City's property, and the furtherance of its interests in Parliament.
He was a mainstay of City government in the crisis caused by plague in 1593, when he was in his seventies, just as he had been thirty years before, in the devastating epidemic of 1563.
Hayward married twice, first Joan Tillesworth, daughter of a London goldsmith, and then Catherine, daughter of ‘customer’ Thomas Smith [q.v.]and granddaughter of alderman Sir Andrew Judde [q.v.].
Nine children survived infancy: two sons, both subsequently knights, George, who died childless at the age of twenty-eight, and John, who settled in Kent; and seven daughters, including Elizabeth, who married Thomas, Baron Knyvet of Escrick [q.v.], and Joan, wife of John Thynne, son of the builder of Longleat.
Hayward's fortune was dispersed at his death, his personal estate being divided according to the custom of London between his widow, his children, and various legacies.
He left money for the poor and the sick, and an endowment of £20 a year for Bridgnorth School.
He died 5 December 1593, and was buried at St Alphage, London Wall.
[W. Jay, ‘Sir Rowland Hayward’,Transactions of the London and Middlesex Archaeological Society , new series, vol. vi, 1933, pp.509–27; P. W. Hasler (ed.),
The House of Commons 1558–1603 , 1981; T. S. Willan,The Muscovy Merchants of 1555 , 1953; F. F. Foster,The Politics of Stability: a Portrait of the Rulers in Elizabethan London , 1977.]
W J Milner
,Henry (1876–1947), engineer, was born 3 June 1876 at 36 Pilgrim Street, Tranmere, Liverpool, being the first of three sons and two daughters of Edwin Greenly, railway guard, and his wife Sophia, daughter of John Howard, the owner of a wood-turning factory in Newington Butts, south London.
Henry started his education at a boarding-school in Birkenhead but in the spring of 1887 the family moved to the Queen's Park district of west London, where he continued his education at Beethoven Street School in Kilburn Lane until 1890, when he left to work in the jewellery workshops of William Whiteley [q.v.]of Bayswater.
His stay was short and was followed by employment at the Commercial Travellers Institute and then Smith, Fawdon & Law, solicitors.
In 1894 he was awarded a London county council scholarship with distinctions, which took him to the Kenmont Gardens Science School (1894–7) and in 1896 he was awarded an evening exhibition to the Regent Street Polytechnic.
The turning-point in what became a distinguished career came on 22 February 1897, when he started work in the drawing office of the Metropolitan Railway Company at Neasden works, where he pursued both mechanics and architecture, being ultimately appointed as assistant to the chief surveyor and architect.
As early as 1895 he was a regular contributor to the Engineer and Engineering , taking the great engineers of the day to task over technical issues, and he soon became well known.
As a result, on 15 October 1896, he was appointed to a sub-committee at the Science Museum alongside twenty-five other distinguished engineers, with the objective of establishing a permanent railway museum.
With the introduction of the Model Engineer and Amateur Electrician magazine in 1898 he became a regular contributor and was a founder-member of the Society of Model Engineers.
He published numerous books throughout his career, such as Model Electric Locomotives and Railways (1921), which became the ‘bible’ for the model railway world.
The Model Railways and Locomotives magazine was founded by him in 1908 and became a platform from which he could share his knowledge and expertise with others.
His association with Bassett-Lowke Ltd. of Northampton, the world-famous model engineering company, as design consultant led to a remarkable career in the early development of miniature passenger-carrying railways.
Apart from many ventures, such as the Rhyl Miniature Railway and the Ravenglass and Eskdale Railway, his most notable success was his involvement with the Romney, Hythe, and Dymchurch Railway in Kent (1925–9).
In 1915 he joined the design staff of the Royal Aircraft Factory in Farnborough, where he invented the ‘flash eliminator’ for machine-guns and in 1937 patented an inductor relay for lift control and automatic train control.
On 29 September 1901, at the church of St Bartholomew, London, he married Lilley Maria, daughter of Henry Richardson, a London businessman.
They had a daughter and two sons.
By 1942 Greenly was in ill health but still carried on the family model-engineering business.
He died at his home at Heston 4 March 1947 and is buried, with his wife (died 1967) at Heston parish church.
[Ernest A. Steel and E. H. Steel,The Miniature World of Henry Greenly , 1973; information from Eleanora H. Steel (daughter).]
Robert K G Temple
,John (1607–1651), MP, parliamentary officer, and regicide, was baptized at Preston 4 April 1607, the eldest in a family of four sons and three daughters of Henry Alured MP (1581–1628) of the Charterhouse, Hull, and his wife Frances (d .
1626), daughter of Francis Vaughan of Sutton-upon-Derwent, Yorkshire.
Alured's father, uncle, grandfather, and great-grandfather had all been MPs.
The poet Andrew Marvell [q.v.]lived next door, fourteen years Alured's junior, and received his early introductions to the Fairfaxes and others through Alured.
Alured was heir in 1628 to much land and £400 to £500 a year income.
He was admitted to Gray's Inn 11 August 1628.
He married 17 November 1631 his cousin Mary Darley, daughter of Sir Richard Darley JP, of Buttercrambe, Yorkshire (died c .1654), having three sons and a daughter.
The eldest son, Colonel John Alured, has often been confused with his deceased father in the 1650s.
Alured married secondly Mary Arnold of London c .1640 (possibly mother of the two youngest children).
On 4 July 1638 Alured got into serious trouble with the court for saying of the Scots that ‘they did well’ in opposing the king and he hoped ‘they would reform this land by a parliament as well as they have done theirs already’.
He was confined to London on a £2,000 bond.
He signed the petition of the gentry of Yorkshire to the king (28 July 1640), although the printed list by John Rushworth [q.v.]omits his signature.
He was elected MP to his late uncle Thomas Alured's seat at Hedon for both the Short and Long Parliaments in 1640.
Alured was commissioned captain of horse 10 August 1642 and became colonel in May 1643.
In June 1642 he became collector of customs at Hull.
Alured's civil war activities were concentrated in two committees: he seems to have been chairman of the committee of the East Riding, and he was an equally active member of the committee of the Northern Association (sometimes called ‘the committee at York’, though wholly distinct from the committee of Yorkshire, also at York).
He was a close friend of Sir Thomas Fairfax (later third Baron Fairfax of Cameron, q.v.) and travelled in his entourage to London on 18 February 1645 when Fairfax went to take up his command of the New Model Army.
Alured was named to the high court of justice to try the king, attended the first meeting on 8 January, attended the first sitting on 20 January, was present when sentence was pronounced, and signed the king's death warrant.
On the day of the king's execution, 30 January, he was named to the Commons committee for repealing past legislation in the order to lay the foundations for a republican form of government.
Alured was ruined by the civil war, his house having been destroyed in the fighting.
He had advanced thousands of pounds of his own money to keep the parliamentary forces of Yorkshire going.
On 28 August 1651, while Alured was evidently on his deathbed, James Chaloner [q.v.], the Yorkshire MP, reported to the House that Alured was owed £8,769 and asked for it to be paid.
But Alured soon died, and by 20 November 1651 his widow Mary petitioned, equally unsuccessfully, for the money which never came.
Alured's son John became a colonel in Ireland but did not survive him by many years.
A younger son, Thomas, became a barrister and recorder of Beverley.
A portrait of Alured survives, showing a strikingly handsome and sensitive countenance, dark hair, and an elegant beard.
[M. F. Keeler,The Long Parliament, 1640–1641 , 1954; R. L. Greaves and R. Zaller (eds.),
A Biographical Dictionary of English Radicals of the Seventeenth Century , 3 vols., 1982–4; private research.]
George W Carpenter
,James (1807–1885), locomotive builder, was born in Leeds 27 October 1807, the eldest of six children of a licensed victualler and his wife.
He may be the James Kitson who was baptized in Leeds 3 January 1808, the son of William Kitson.
He was educated at local schools and at the Leeds Mechanics' Institution and Literary Society, where he was a diligent student in drawing and mathematics.
Encouraged by his studies of A Practical Treatise on Rail-Roads , by Nicholas Wood [q.v.], he quickly realized the great potential future of steam locomotive traction and in 1837 he joined Charles Todd, who had been apprenticed to James Fenton of the locomotive builders Fenton, Murray & Jackson, and David Laird, a farmer and financier, in establishing Todd, Kitson & Laird at the Railway foundry in Leeds, manufacturers of machinery and locomotives.
In 1838 six locomotives were built for the Liverpool and Manchester Railway.
In 1839 Kitson and Laird withdrew from this partnership and established the Airedale foundry, also in Leeds, whose first locomotives were built for the North Midland Railway in 1840.
David Laird withdrew in 1842 and the firm was reconstituted as Kitson, Thompson & Hewitson.
Large numbers of locomotives were built for home and overseas railways.
Amongst these was the 0–6–0 type (1849) with inside cylinders and frames, for the Leeds and Thirsk Railway, a design which established the standard for freight locomotives in Britain over many decades.
The first export locomotives (for the Orléans–Bordeaux railway) were built in 1846, followed by those for the Kiel–Altona line in 1848, and many more for India, Australia, South Africa, South America, and elsewhere.
Kitson's great organizing ability, technical ingenuity, and grasp of industrial developments was the mainspring of these activities.
In 1854 he felt it desirable to acquire a source of good Yorkshire iron for the Airedale foundry and established the Monk Bridge ironworks nearby, which was managed by his sons, Frederick William and James (later first Baron Airedale, q.v.), the former having previously been principal locomotive designer at Airedale.
After the retirement of Isaac Thompson in 1858 and the death of William Hewitson in 1863 the Kitson family took complete control of the firm, and later James Kitson junior and the third son, John Hawthorn, who managed the Airedale foundry from 1863, became partners with their father.
James Kitson senior retired in 1876.
Kitson was a man of wide interests and many activities outside his industrial work.
Very musical and with a fine voice, in his youth he had built an organ in an outhouse of his father's premises.
Later he became chairman of the orchestral committee for the Leeds music festival.
He was also chairman of the Leeds Northern Railway and later a director of the North Eastern Railway.
He was vice-chairman and later chairman of the Yorkshire Banking Co.
An alderman of Leeds in 1858–68, he was mayor in 1860–1, as well as being a magistrate for Leeds borough and for the West Riding of Yorkshire.
On 20 September 1828 he married Ann, daughter of John Newton, owner of a painting and decorating firm.
They had four sons and two daughters.
His first wife died and on 24 January 1868 he married Elizabeth, daughter of the Revd John E. Scroope Hutchinson, vicar of East Stoke, Nottinghamshire.
They had two sons and two daughters.
Kitson died in Leeds 30 June 1885.
[Engineering , vol. xl, 3 July 1885; Edwin Kitson Clark,Kitsons of Leeds, 1837–1937 , 1938; E. L. Ahrons,The British Steam Railway Locomotive 1825–1925 , 1927.]
Paul Laxton
,Peter Perez (c. 1734–1793), surveyor, map-maker, draughtsman, and engraver, was probably born in Eastwood, Essex, in 1734 or 1735, the only son of William and Elizabeth Burdett.
His Christian names derive from his maternal grandfather, the Revd Peter Perez, vicar of Eastwood (1697–1748), from whom he inherited a small estate.
Of his first twenty-five years there is little record.
By the early 1760s he lived in Derby and had launched a career as a cartographer.
His map of Derbyshire at a scale of one inch to a mile, begun in 1763 and published in 1767, won him the £100 premium offered by the Society of Arts.
His many talents in the arts and sciences brought him a wide circle of acquaintances in Derbyshire, especially the painter Joseph Wright [q.v.], in several of whose paintings he appears, notably in ‘A Philosopher giving a lecture on the Orrery’(1776) where Burdett is seen sketching.
In 1765 Wright painted a fine portrait of Burdett and his first wife Hannah which hangs in the Narodnie Galerie, Prague.
Wright, who lent him money that he never repaid, continued to consult him on technical matters after he left Derby; Burdett in turn seems to have procured purchasers for some of Wright's pictures, including Washington Shirley, fifth Earl Ferrers [q.v.], and Catherine the Great.
In 1768 he moved to Liverpool and launched, in his impetuous way, several cartographic and artistic projects.
His experiments with printmaking included aquatint, for which his claims to be the inventor are strong: he certainly published, in 1771, the first aquatint in England after a painting by his friend John Hamilton Mortimer [q.v.], and, ever short of money and frequently in debt, sold the process to Paul Sandby [q.v.], to whom it is usually credited, for £40.
His interest in transferring aquatinted designs to pottery led him in 1771 to approach Josiah Wedgwood [q.v.], who after considerable interest finally lost patience with the headstrong Burdett, who had hopes of years of lucrative work from his process.
Frederick the Great of Prussia and Benjamin Franklin, with whom he corresponded over several years, were equally discouraging; Franklin remarked that the colonies were not yet ready for Burdett.
A fine draughtsman and noted expert in perspective, he was the first president of the Liverpool Society of Arts and exhibited in London at the Society of Artists.
His ambitious but financially unprofitable venture with George Perry, ironmaster for the Coalbrookdale Company, to publish views of Liverpool by Michael Angelo Rooker [q.v.], a map (1769), and a history of the town, was completed after Burdett withdrew to chase more promising interests, but his drawings of public buildings, engraved by Edward Rooker [q.v.], appeared in the history, published in 1773.
A plan to survey Lancashire failed for lack of sufficient subscribers.
His map of Cheshire, begun in 1774, must have been completed by assistants, for early in 1775 he entered the service of the margrave of Baden, leaving a wife with his considerable debts.
He was engaged to conduct the official survey of the margravate, reaching the rank of major.
From the school of surveyors and mathematicians he founded grew the Karlsruhe Technical School.
On 11 June 1787 he married Friedericke Kottewski (the fate of his first wife is unknown).
Their daughter Anne married Count Friedrich Nostitz.
Burdett died in Karlsruhe 9 September 1793.
[B. Nicolson,Joseph Wright of Derby.
Painter of Light , 1968; P. Laxton and J. B. Harley,A Survey of the County Palatine of Chester by P. P. Burdett 1777 , 1974; J. Egerton,Wright of Derby , 1990; Baden Generallandesarchiv, Karlsruhe; information from David Fraser and Lubomir Slavicek.]
Alan Powers
,Oliver Falvey (1887–1968), architect, was born 15 June 1887 at 89 Queen's Gate, London, the third son and seventh of eight children of William Neave Hill, manufacturer, of London, and his wife Kate Ida, daughter of Martin Franks.
He was educated at Uppingham School.
Having decided to become an architect, he was advised by Sir Edwin Lutyens [q.v.], a family friend, to gain experience in a builder's yard.
This developed his sense of texture and materials.
Simultaneously, he trained his colour sense by studying Persian and Chinese ceramics in the Victoria and Albert Museum.
Between 1909 and 1911 Hill attended evening classes at the Architectural Association while a pupil of William Flockhart.
Hill's first major commission was the reconstruction of the house and garden at Moor Close, Binfield, Berkshire, in which his love of rich colour and baroque forms was displayed.
He served in World War I in the London Scottish Regiment and attained the rank of captain.
Returning to architecture, he designed Cour, Argyllshire (1921–3), a picturesque country house in local stone, and a series of houses either thatched and timbered or in neo-Georgian style, such as Cock Rock, Croyde, Devon (1926) and Woodhouse Copse, Holmbury St Mary, Surrey (1926).
Hill designed furniture and paid great attention to interiors and colour schemes.
He became a fashionable architect for London houses and flats, and designed two much-publicized houses in Gayfere Street, Westminster, for Wilfrid Ashley (later Baron Mount Temple, q.v.) in 1926 and 1931.
In these, his use of mirrors and simple room arrangements indicated his developing interest in the modern movement in Europe, which became the main theme of his work in the 1930s, although never to the exclusion of other styles.
Among Hill's modernist houses were Joldwynds, Holmbury St Mary (1930–2), for Wilfred (later Baron) Greene [q.v.];
Holthanger, Wentworth, Surrey (1935); and Landfall, Poole, Dorset (1938).
He also designed the Midland Hotel, Morecambe, Lancashire, in 1933 as a pioneer modernist public building, and was involved in the attempt to build a modernist seaside resort at Frinton Park, Essex.
As designer of the exhibition of British industrial art in the home at the Dorland Hall, London, in 1933 and the contemporary industrial art in the home exhibition (1934) in the same hall, Hill promoted modernism in architecture and household objects.
He was architect of the British pavilion at the Paris exhibition of 1937, and was involved in designing displays and selecting exhibits under the chairmanship of Frank Pick [q.v.].
His approach to modernism was aesthetic rather than sociological or mechanistic, although he built a fine primary school at Whitwood Mere, near Castleford, Yorkshire (1939).
Architects and critics with purist views were suspicious of Hill, but he helped to popularize the modern style.
He was notable for commissioning works of art for buildings and displays from (A.) Eric Gill, Eric Ravilious [qq.v.],
John Skeaping, and others.
After 1945 Hill suffered neglect, although completing some fine work, notably Newbury Park bus station in Essex (1949) and Uppingham School library and war memorial in Leicestershire (1949).
He organized the Cotswold Tradition exhibition at Cirencester in 1951 with considerable panache, and retired to Daneway House, Sapperton, Gloucestershire, where he created a new garden.
He wrote several books on architecture, notably English Country Houses: Caroline 1625–1685 (with John Cornforth, 1966).
He loved being out of doors, often without clothes, and kept many animals.
He was tall and rather deaf, an unselfconscious eccentric, with a great appetite for work.
In 1953 Hill married Margaret (‘Titania’), daughter of Sam Beverley, architect, who shared in the creation of a lifestyle of unworldly fantasy at Daneway, where he died 29 April 1968.
They had no children.
[Documents in British Architectural Library; private information.]
Gillian Sutherland
,Eva Marian (1886–1949), social reformer and feminist, was born at 23 Oxford Square, London, 13 April 1886, the second child and elder daughter in the family of two daughters and two sons of (Sir) Meyer Adam Spielman, stockbroker (later inspector of Home Office schools), and his wife Gertrude, daughter of George Raphael, banker.
After St Felix School, Southwold, Eva persuaded her parents to allow her to go up to Newnham College, Cambridge, in October 1905.
This was the formative time of her life intellectually — she received a second class (division I) in part i of the economic tripos (1907) and a first in part ii (1908)— and emotionally, through enduring friendships formed.
Her circle included Rupert Brooke [q.v.],
Dudley Ward, the Olivier sisters, Dorothy Layton, Ka Cox, and Shena Potter.
In 1911, after voluntary social work for the London county council and for the suffragists, she married Francis William, son of John Hubback, corn merchant of Liverpool.
He had been a Cambridge friend and was then lecturing in classics and economic history at Manchester University.
She shared his love of strenuous holidays by the sea and in the mountains, which she kept throughout life.
Two daughters and a son were born to them before ‘Bill’ was killed on the western front in February 1917.
Eva Hubback taught economics briefly at Newnham in 1916–17 before becoming parliamentary secretary to the suffragists, in 1919 transformed into the National Union of Societies for Equal Citizenship.
She rapidly mastered the art of lobbying, working on all legislation concerning women and children, from franchise reform to divorce law.
Her organizational flair complemented the charisma of Eleanor Rathbone [q.v.]in the campaign for family allowances.
In 1927 Eva succeeded Barbara Wootton (later Baroness Wootton of Abinger, q.v.) as principal of Morley College, which provided non-vocational adult education in Lambeth.
She secured new buildings; and her recruitment of distinguished lecturers and performers from many spheres brought intellectual excitement and cultural richness.
Morley became well known for its music (Sir Michael Tippett), its theatre and ballet (Rupert Doone), and its art (Eric Ravilious, q.v., and Edward Bawden).
Morley took up her evenings but daytime was given to voluntary work.
Her initiatives led to the creation in 1930 of the Townswomen's Guilds; the founding, with Sir Ernest Simon (later first Baron Simon of Wythenshawe, q.v.), of the Association for Education in Citizenship, 1934; and the launching of the Children's Minimum Committee, 1936, to campaign for better standards of care and nutrition.
She became a JP in 1939 and an LCC Labour councillor in 1946.
Her work for the Eugenics Society and the Family Planning Association gave her a keen interest in population issues.
Many considered she should have been a member of the royal commission on population (1946–9) but she did give evidence and published her widely read The Population of Britain in 1947.
Perhaps her very strengths, her enthusiasm and drive for so many causes, led to inadequate public recognition of her work.
Illness and death came suddenly: it was as if , over many years, she had simply worn herself out.
She died at Edgware General Hospital in London 15 July 1949.
[Archives of Newnham College, Cambridge; Diana Hopkinson,Family Inheritance, a life of Eva Hubback , 1954, and The Incense-Tree , 1968; Brian Harrison,Prudent Revolutionaries , 1987; family information.]
R G Davies
,John (c. 1350–1416), civil servant, was Welsh by birth, from the diocese of St Davids, and probably from Carmarthenshire, but he had family ties across the border, especially with the Prophetes, Plowfields, and Hores around Hereford and the Felds of Ombersley (Worcestershire), all in the lower strata of county society.
His nephew, Thomas Feld, DCL (d .
1419), lived and worked with his uncle and aspired shamelessly to his cast-off offices and preferments.
Their wills catalogue the family.
Prophete was a chief trustee to Sir John Oldcastle [q.v.]and his kinsman, probably through Catherine ap Jevan, first wife of the heretic and rebel.
He also did business with another heretic, Sir John Cheyne of Beckford, but no suspicion ever fell upon himself.
As a notary, he followed William Courtenay [q.v.], bishop of Hereford (1369–75), to London (1375–81), where he recorded the controversial ‘confession’ of the rebel John Ball [q.v.], and to Canterbury, where he served as registrar of the provincial court, 19 February 1382–18 November 1384, and thereafter as secretary, trusted adjutant, and friend for life.
When Courtenay, by rank rather than enthusiasm, headed the reform commission imposed on Richard II in 1386, Prophete was seconded to the king's household as a watchdog.
After Richard's critics moved against the king and his friends in 1387–8, Prophete was assigned to service the proceedings of the council through which Richard II was now obliged to work.
Although formally designated as a clerk of the Privy Seal (1389) and the holder of the office of secondary there (1394), his status and duties had only nominal connections with that place of drudgery.
By 1392 he was formally ‘clerk of the council’ and had, by shrewd organization of its records, contributed greatly to its claims to political authority.
Richard II recognized this by his brusque dismissal of Prophete in 1395.
Prophete spent his exile in and around his deanery of Hereford until, after the revolution of 1399, he was recalled at once to become one of the most active attenders on the royal council, doubtless to contribute bureaucratic flair to a government badly needing to prove its administrative competence.
In 1402 he even acted briefly as secretary to Henry IV.
On 4 October 1406, when Henry's government was at its nadir, he finally became keeper of the Privy Seal.
There he remained through nearly nine years of sharp ministerial changes, an unprecedented term, perhaps indicative of a unique standing in the civil service but lack of personal political clout.
To his nephew's bitterness and despair, he never gained the bishopric that customarily ended the keeper's term.
By Prophete's own analysis, this was because he would not stoop to intriguing for one on his own account.
Possibly his several masters thought him indispensable or, less graciously, simply a workhorse.
But he held such a plurality of rich benefices already (reckoned at £750–£900 p.a.) that, with his £100 salary on top, only certain bishoprics were worth considering: by chance, next to none of these fell vacant in his time and those that did were too politically important to fall to him.
Between 1378 and 1407 he enjoyed thirty-five benefices (although never more than twelve at once).
In his heartlands of Hereford (where he was dean) and Wales, he was Trollopian in touch, and a generous kinsman.
A letter-book (British Library MS Harley 431) may not be his compilation but is the memorial to his intrigues.
Yet, after becoming dean of York in 1406 he did one more reshuffle of his holdings, then never changed them again.
Did such brokerage seem ill-becoming to one in great office?
On 3 June 1415 (as Henry V was leaving for France) he resigned, just when his licence for absenteeism from his deanship of York ran out.
None the less, it was in London that he made his will on 8 April 1416, characteristically dedicated to his kin, staff, and domestic servants.
To them he gave detailed care now as always: most had been with him for many years.
Somewhere, affection had crept in on both sides.
Similarly, Prophete still had a shrewd and not unaffectionate eye on his several scattered preferments.
He had always been willing to spend on them.
With Archbishop Courtenay long dead, there was no one from a greater world to consider.
He died before the end of April 1416 and was buried in Ringwood, Hampshire, in accordance with his directions to be buried there should he die within the province of Canterbury.
[A. L. Brown, ‘The Privy Seal Clerks in the Early Fifteenth Century’, in The Study of Medieval Records , ed.
D. A. Bullough and R. L. Storey, 1971; T. F. Tout,Chapters in Medieval Administrative History , 1920–33, esp.
vol. v;North Country Wills (Surtees Society), vol. cxvi, 1908; E. F. Jacob (ed.),
The Register of Henry Chichele, Archbishop of Canterbury, 1414–43 , vol. ii, 1938, p. 652.]
L Stanley
,Emily Wilding (1872–1913), feminist, was born in Blackheath, London, 11 October 1872, the second of three children and elder daughter of Charles Davison, businessman, and his second wife Margaret Caisley, who had been a housekeeper before marriage.
There were also six sons and four daughters of Davison's first marriage.
Davison's investments failed, leaving the family in straitened circumstances when he died in 1893.
Mrs Davison then returned to Morpeth, Northumberland.
Emily was educated at Kensington High School from 1885 to 1891, and then at Royal Holloway College.
Her father's death caused her to take a governess post in 1893, but she studied part-time and obtained a London BA in 1897, and then worked in teaching and governess posts until 1908.
In 1906 Emily Davison discovered feminism and joined the Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU).
She quickly achieved national prominence and became one of the WSPU's first full-time organizers, in late 1908.
Her opposition to control of the WSPU by the Pankhursts [qq.v.]led to her removal from this key organizational role in 1911.
Emily was imprisoned eight times for stone-throwing, window-breaking, and setting fire to postboxes; she was forcibly fed over one hundred times, mainly during her last imprisonment.
Through these and other exploits, such as hiding in the House of Commons broom cupboard (where there is now a memorial to her) on census night in 1911, she became a key militant figure.
During her last imprisonment in Holloway in 1911–12, when several hundred women were being forcibly fed, she thought her death would end this mass torture and tried to kill herself by throwing herself downstairs; although seriously injured, she survived.
By May 1913 it was expected that Emmeline Pankhurst would die from hunger and thirst strikes.
Emily Davison planned a public show of militancy by tying a WSPU flag to the king's Derby horse, then making a speech on feminist issues in court, as she had done previously.
However, a reported ‘practice run’ led her to underestimate the speed of Derby horses; she was struck, and died three days later of head injuries 8 June 1913.
She was buried in Morpeth.
She never married.
Emily Davison and friends such as Mary Leigh, Rose Lamartine Yates, Elinor Penn-Gaskell, Edith Mansell-Moullin, Mabel Capper, and Gladys Evans represented the socialist and pacifist opposition within the WSPU: women who were nationally known and admired and consequently could not be banished from the organization.
Their socialist, pacifist, and anti-imperialist work continued during the war of 1914–18 in the anti-Pankhurst ‘suffragettes of the WSPU’ and from Emily's death through the 1920s in the work of the Emily Wilding Davison fellowship.
[Gertrude Colmore,The Life of Emily Davison , 1913; Liz Stanley with Ann Morley,The Life and Death of Emily Wilding Davison , 1988.]
Valerie Pearl
or ,Maurice (1604–1676), merchant, was born in Watton, Hertfordshire in 1604, the eldest son and third child in the minor gentry family of five sons and four daughters of Robert Thompson of Cheshunt and his wife Elizabeth, daughter of John Halfehead.
One of his brothers was George Thomson [q.v.], parliamentarian.
He arrived in Virginia at the age of twelve or thirteen, perhaps as one learning seamanship.
He quickly established himself near the settlement of William Tucker [q.v.], who had married his sister Mary and brought over three of their younger brothers.
Thomson and his partners enjoyed a short-lived monopoly to market the entire tobacco crop, supplied provisions amid protests by the planters about engrossing (1632–3), participated in a huge land grant (1636), and came to dominate the tobacco trade, Thomson paying the largest duties on imports into England (1642).
With other partners he developed wider markets.
He brought slaves to their 1,000-acre plantation on St Christopher's (1626), entered the North American–Canadian fur and provisioning trades (1631), re-exported tobacco to Europe with an agent in Amsterdam (1638–9), and interloped against the Levant and Guinea companies.
Other triangular trade  centred on the East Indies, where he had been associated with the interloping of Sir William Courteen [q.v.]against the East India Company from the late 1630s.
Leading dissident merchants, he was elected a director of the company in 1647, gaining a majority for a ‘free well-regulated trade’ and an expansive policy including colonization, voyages to the Far East, incorporation of the West African trade, and compensation from the Dutch for the interlopers (1649–50).
The council of state ordered a settlement, but Thomson's group won only a partial victory.
The East India Company was re-capitalized, Thomson was elected governor, but the joint-stock system was retained (1657).
He had been prominent in trade, colonization, and legalized piracy in the Caribbean, and enterprises such as Providence Island, favoured by Sir Philip Warwick, John Pym [qq.v.], and opposition leaders (1639–42).
He presented to the king in York a huge petition from Londoners for a Parliament, and signed Pym's petition against Spain (1640) and another critical of the Lords after the Irish rebellion (1641).
He was much involved in Irish land investment and naval actions and led a mission to Holland for relief of Irish Protestants (1643).
He was an early recruit to the Honourable Artillery Company (1628), to the London militia committee (1642), and to his local Tower Hamlets militia (1647–60).
Among the three richest men in Billingsgate ward in 1640, he was a commissioner for contributions in London, Middlesex, and Westminster (1642), and for customs (1643–7), a plum of parliamentary finance.
A stream of offices followed, showing both his high standing with the parliamentary leadership and his commercial prominence: joining in the pacification of Kent, recovering mutinous ships in Holland; and appointments to trade committees, the high court of justice, and the excise (1645–54).
Thomson and other merchants were consulted by the government when some of the colonies sought independent policies.
Trade with them was forbidden, Thomson himself sailing with the fleet in an expedition which forced the colonies to submit (1650–5).
He was a major war contractor whose interests extended to nascent industrial enterprises, such as the growing sugar capitalism of the West Indies, the mines, works, and specialist timbers of the East, and saltpetre imports and gunpowder production at home.
He influenced the first Navigation Act (1650) when foreign ships were banned from the colonies, but in the second Act (1651) the trade was opened.
The new merchants lacked the political power to prevail.
When Thomson and other radicals signed a petition against the dismissal of the Rump (1653), Oliver Cromwell dismissed them from their offices and contracts.
But Thomson was soon back in favour again, receiving instructions on the management of the impending war with Spain in the Caribbean from the Protector, who told him to liaise with the fleet commanders (1654), and joining an enlarged trade committee (1655).
His religious outlook was consistently that of an Independent puritan, a petitioner in St Dunstan's in the East for a radical lecturer (1642), a regularly elected vestryman and parish leader, a Trier (1645–8), and a Middlesex commissioner judging scandalous ministers (1654).
Thomson was left undisturbed at the Restoration, although he lost his place as a Trinity brother.
An informer's report (1666) accusing him of treason with the Dutch and always opposing ‘kingly government’ was ignored.
He even sailed with the fleet to Barbados (1667).
Almost to the last he kept his director's seat in the East India Company, attending over half the courts in a year (1672–3).
He was married twice, firstly to Ellen Owen in 1628, and secondly to Dorothy Vaux.
Their children were John (later first Baron Haversham, q.v.),
Maurice, who died in infancy, and four daughters, Mary, Katherine, Martha, and Elizabeth.
Thomson died in 1676, leaving in his will (PCC Bence 57) one pound each to ‘100 poor silenced ministers’, and properties in England, Ireland, Virginia, and throughout the Caribbean.
[R. P. Brenner, ‘Commercial Change and Political Conflict’, Ph.D.
thesis (1970) for Princeton University; Valerie Pearl,London and the Outbreak of the Puritan Revolution , 1961;Calendars of State Papers Domestic, Colonial ;Calendars of the East India Company .]
Mary R S Creese
,Catherine Alice (1855–1945), geologist and educationist, was born at 13 Camden Terrace, Camden New Town, 24 April 1855, the daughter of (Daniel) Francis Raisin, pannier-man at the Inner Temple, and his wife Sarah Catherine Woodgate.
She was educated at North London Collegiate School and at University College London, which she entered in 1873.
She studied botany, taking the honours examinations as a private student, and also geology and mineralogy.
When University of London degrees were opened to women in 1878, she prepared for the B.Sc., studying geology under T. G. Bonney and zoology under T. H. Huxley [qq.v.].
She took her B.Sc.
with honours in geology and zoology in 1884, and stayed on at University College as a voluntary research assistant to Professor Bonney.
In 1898 she was awarded the D.Sc., becoming the second woman geologist to receive this degree from the University of London.
She was elected a fellow of University College in 1902.
She served as demonstrator in botany at Bedford College for Women from 1886 to 1890, when she succeeded Grenville A. J. Cole as head of the geology department, thus becoming the first woman to take over the headship of a geology department in a British university.
She held the post till her retirement thirty years later.
She was also head of the botany department from 1890 to 1907, and vice-principal of the college from 1898 to 1901.
The London Geological Society awarded her the Lyell Fund in 1893.
She was the first woman to receive such an honour, and it had to be accepted by Professor Bonney on her behalf, since women were not allowed to attend meetings of the society.
She became one of the first women fellows in 1919, when women were finally admitted.
Much of her work was in microscopic petrology and mineralogy, interests which she had developed when training under Bonney.
She was known as an excellent microscopist.
Her published work included field and laboratory studies of rocks from western regions of the British Isles, the Ardennes, and Switzerland, and the petrography of rock collections from the Himalayas and many parts of Africa.
She published twenty-four scientific papers between 1887 and 1905.
Her best-known work was her detailed investigation of the serpentines, and her joint paper with Bonney in 1905 on the microscopic structure of minerals forming serpentine was of special interest.
Remembered as a charming woman, she was also a ‘character’, who ruled absolutely in her own department and dealt summarily with opposition.
She paid close attention to the teaching of her assistants, and was always solicitous about the welfare of her students, among whom she was affectionately known as ‘The Raisin'.
In committee she was a doughty and sometimes intimidating fighter.
One of Britain's first professional women geologists and a noted pioneer among late nineteenth-century women educationists, Catherine Raisin always took a keen interest in all aspects of women's advancement.
In the late 1870s she founded and organized a discussion group for women, the Somerville Club, which, when it opened in 1880, had 1,000 members.
She served as its honorary secretary and then as chairman.
After she retired from the headship of her department in 1920 she gave much time to various women's groups and to societies for the promotion of women's interests.
She was a member of the Geologists’ Association for sixty-seven years, and latterly its most senior member.
She died 12 July 1945, at a nursing home in Cheltenham.
She was unmarried.
[Doris L. Reynolds, ‘Dr. Catherine Alice Raisin',Nature , vol. clvi, 1945, pp. 327–8; E. J. G., obituary in the Quarterly Journal of the Geological Society , vol. cii, 1946, pp. xliv–xlv; L. H., obituary in the Proceedings of the Geologists’ Association , vol. lvii, no. 1, 1946, pp. 53–4.]
Eric Midwinter
,William Thomson (‘Will’)(1888–1949), comedian, was born 6 December 1888 in Stockton-on-Tees, the second of three sons and the third of six children of William Robert Hay, engineer of Inverness-shire, and his wife Elizabeth Ebden, the daughter of a Barnsley fish merchant.
He was educated at local authority schools in Lowestoft, Hemel Hempstead, and London, and evening classes in Manchester.
While working as a commercial correspondent in Manchester, he married on 7 October 1907 Gladys, daughter of Thomas Perkins, postmaster, of Broughton, Salford.
They were to have three children; Will junior, Gladys (both of whom went on the stage), and Joan.
The marriage broke down in 1934, but the couple were never divorced.
Soon after his marriage Will Hay embarked upon a music-hall and concert-party career, basing his initial sketch, ‘Bend Down’, on the tales of his schoolteacher sister, Elspeth.
After valuable experience with the Fred Karno [q.v.]troupe, he concentrated on his character of ‘the Schoolmaster Comedian’, and his main sketch, ‘the Fourth Form at St Michael's’, soon became something of a national institution.
In 1925 the sketch was featured in the royal command performance.
Will Hay created the role of the seedy, blustering, and ineffectual teacher to such effect that his name remains a byword for the caricatured schoolmaster, and, usually with a small company of two or three ‘boys’, he topped variety bills across the country, made successful trips overseas, and became a noted radio performer.
He was also a self-educated man, with a particular interest in astronomy, and in 1933 he discovered a white spot on the surface of Saturn.
He was a fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society.
He transferred his mastery of comic timing and expression more successfully to film than many British comedians.
Most notably in concert with Graham Moffatt, as the fat boy, and Moore Marriott, as the old man, he made some seventeen films.
He rang the changes on his characterization of grudging, evasive, and inadequate authority by playing, for instance, a prison governor, a sea captain, and a police sergeant, as well as the schoolteacher.
‘Oh, Mr Porter!’(1937), with Will Hay the stationmaster of Buggleskelly, is regarded as both the popular and critical pick of the genre, and has been favourably compared with the work of the Marx Brothers.
He died 18 April 1949 at his Chelsea flat.
[Ray Seaton and Roy Martin,Good Morning Boys: Will Hay, Master of Comedy , 1978; Eric Midwinter,Make ‘Em Laugh: Famous Comedians and their Worlds , 1979.]
P C Seaward
, Sir John , first baronet (1615–1680), merchant, financier, and MP, was baptized 10 January 1615, the son of William Robinson, DD, archdeacon of Nottingham in 1635–42, of Long Whatton, Leicestershire, and his wife Sarah, daughter of William Bainbridge of Lockington, their third, but second surviving son.
He began life with strong connections with the Caroline Church: his father was half-brother to Archbishop William Laud [q.v.].
Robinson spent the years of the civil war and Interregnum building up business interests and achieving prominence in City politics.
During the 1650s he served as master of the Clothworkers' Company and an assistant of the Levant Company.
From 1655 until his death he was an alderman of London, and was sheriff in 1657–8.
After the death of Oliver Cromwell, Robinson worked to promote a Stuart Restoration.
He was involved in the Royalist plot of 1659, and in February 1660 negotiated with General George Monck (later first Duke of Albemarle, q.v.) on the City's behalf during its confrontation with the Rump Parliament.
Robinson established a close relationship with Monck and was himself returned to the Convention Parliament for London.
After the Restoration Robinson continued to serve in Parliament, although he and his allies in London were spectacularly defeated in the election of 1661.
He was returned in November for Rye instead, and was also elected to the 1679 Parliament for the same seat.
But Robinson was more important to the restored monarchy as financier and metropolitan administrator.
He was one of the most regular lenders to the government, and in 1662 he became head of a syndicate which contracted to farm the excise for London, Middlesex, and Surrey.
His appointment as lieutenant of the Tower in June 1660 placed him in a position vital to the maintenance of order in the City.
In 1662–3 he served as lord mayor of London.
During the 1660s and 1670s he was one of the principal means by which the government sought to influence City politics.
His position, both in the City and at the Tower, impelled him into political controversy, particularly during the exclusion crisis, when he was accused of suppressing information on the Popish Plot, and when his removal was demanded by the House of Lords and his conduct inquired into by the House of Commons.
The king succumbed to the pressure and dismissed him in May 1679.
Robinson continued an active City merchant.
He was a member of the new Company of Royal Adventurers trading into Africa from its inception, and was an assistant 1666–8 and 1670–1; he was a committee member of the East India Company in 1666–7, 1668–74, and 1675–7; deputy governor of the Hudson's Bay Company in 1670–5; and an elder brother of Trinity House from 1670 to his death.
Samuel Pepys [q.v.]regarded him as boastful and empty-headed; but his bombast must have concealed political shrewdness and commercial acumen.
In 1660 he was knighted, and created baronet.
He married in December 1654 Anne (died 1699), daughter of Sir George Whitmore [q.v.]of Balmes, Hackney, Middlesex, lord mayor of London in 1631–2.
They had four sons (the eldest of whom died in 1679) and five daughters.
Robinson died in February 1680 and was succeeded by his second son John (born 1660).
[B. D. Henning,The House of Commons 1660–1690 , 1983, and sources cited there.]
N G Coley
,James (1834–1915), chemical manufacturer and inventor, was born in May 1834, in Hoarstones, Pendle Forest, Lancashire, the eldest of the seven sons of John Hargreaves, schoolmaster.
Hargreaves's education began at his father's school in Slaithwaite.
In 1844 his father left schoolmastering to become a druggist and Hargreaves was introduced to medicine and chemistry.
In 1856 he turned to technical chemistry, especially the problem of recovering sulphur from alkali waste.
John Mercer [q.v.]persuaded him to contact William Gossage [q.v.], who had been experimenting on similar lines, and in 1859 Hargreaves joined Gossage's soap works.
Here he invented methods for recovering chromates used for bleaching oils and fats in soap manufacture and bleaching common brown soap.
He was also the first to prepare blue mottled soap.
Leaving Gossage in 1865 Hargreaves worked for two other soap manufacturers in Runcorn and Liverpool; in 1871 he and his youngest brother John set up as consulting chemists in Widnes.
Turning to metallurgy, James proposed a modification of the Bessemer process for the manufacture of steel, using sodium nitrate instead of air.
James Heaton of Widnes tried this on a small scale at Langley Mill, Nottinghamshire, but the cost proved too high.
Hargreaves also devised a method for recovering phosphorus from blast-furnace slag; the by-product, ferric chloride, was converted into ferric oxide and chlorine.
About 1872 Hargreaves, with Thomas Robinson, an iron-founder, invented a process and plant for making saltcake from salt without using sulphuric acid.
The Atlas Chemical Co., Widnes, was formed in 1873 to make saltcake and hydrochloric acid by Hargreaves's method.
Hot gases from pyrites burners, mixed with steam, were passed over small blocks of moulded salt, a process which worked successfully for many years; the works was absorbed by the United Alkali Co. in 1890 and the last Hargreaves–Robinson saltcake plant closed in 1918.
With Thomas Bird, an electrical engineer, Hargreaves in about 1893 invented an electrolytic process for decomposing common salt, using an asbestos diaphragm.
After trials the General Electrolytic Alkali Co. was established in 1899 with Hargreaves as a director and production began at Cledford Bridge near Middlewich in 1901.
In 1914 the company was reorganized as Electro-Bleach and By-products Ltd.
The process, which was highly efficient, was extensively adopted in Europe and America.
Hargreaves's inventions were numerous and diverse; besides his innovations in the soap, alkali, metallurgical, and electrochemical industries, his ‘thermo-motor’ anticipated the idea of the diesel engine, and he was among the first to advocate the use of gaseous chlorine for treating sewage.
Shrewd in business, he had a ready wit and a distinctive appearance, with a full beard and piercing eyes.
Hargreaves had one son and five or six daughters.
He died in Widnes 4 April 1915.
[Journal of the Society of Chemical Industry , vol. xxxiv, 1915, p. 409;Widnes Examiner , 5 April 1915;Widnes Guardian , 5 April 1915; D. W. F. Hardie,A History of the Chemical Industry in Widnes , 1950; P. J. T. Morris and C. A. Russell,Archives of the British Chemical Industry 1750–1914 , 1988, pp. 85–6.]
M K C MacMahon
,James (fl. 1774), clergyman, teacher, and lexicographer, was for many years a curate at All Saints' Church, Edmonton, Middlesex, and a teacher at schools in Goodman's Fields and Tottenham.
In 1763 he published What is Meant by Coming to Christ , the text of a sermon he had delivered in one of the London churches.
His fame, however, rests on his A Complete and Universal English Dictionary , first published in 1774; it was to pass through at least twenty-three reprints and editions by 1848.
(The editions of 1813, 1841, and 1848 were revised by William Shorton, Henry W. Dewhurst, and Bernard Bolingbroke Woodward, q.v., respectively.)
Despite its title, the work took account of only a selection of English vocabulary, including ‘Difficult Words and Technical Terms in all Faculties and Professions’.
The stress-point in words was marked, and words were noted which were apparently synonyms.
Barclay was the first English lexicographer to attempt the latter.
In addition, the reader was provided with information more usually to be found in an encyclopaedia than in a dictionary.
Thus, there were articles on politics and society, both past and present (for example, a listing of important historical events, descriptions of major towns and cities in the world, and details of Britain's trading relationships with the rest of the world), and on religion (the denominations of the church) and literature (a listing of Greek, Roman, and English classics).
Illustrations accompanied some of the entries.
Barclay's interest in linguistic matters per se is evidenced by the inclusion of an article on the origin of language by the Frenchman Abbé Antoine Anselme (1652–1737) and by a series of articles on the history, grammar, pronunciation, and orthography of English, very probably by Barclay himself.
The Dictionary met with immediate acceptance amongst the public, especially the lower classes, for whom it acted, until well into the Victorian age, as an important means of self-education.
Barclay's son James, who died in 1771 at the age of twenty-four, was the youthful author of An Examination of Mr Kenrick's Review of Mr Johnson's Edition of Shakespeare (1766).
[W. Robinson,The History and Antiquities of the Parish of Edmonton , 1819; H. B. Wheatley, ‘Chronological Notices of the Dictionaries of the English Language’,Transactions of the Philological Society , 1865.]
T C Graham
(fl. 1180), architect, Nothing is known of William's life before 1179, when he was appointed master architect at Christ Church Cathedral, Canterbury.
He replaced William of Sens, who in 1178 had crippled himself in a fall from scaffolding while rebuilding the eastern end of the cathedral, devastated by fire in 1174.
The Canterbury chronicler Gervase [q.v.]reported that William of Sens's place was taken by ‘another William, of English nationality, small indeed in body, but exceedingly subtle and able in various types of work’.
Between 1179 and 1184 William the Englishman completed the work begun by William of Sens in the choir, eastern transepts, and presbytery, and designed and built the Trinity chapel as a mausoleum for the relics of St Thomas Becket (d .
1170, q.v.).
Gervase recorded the year-by-year progress of his work, which still survives.
William was the first Englishman to build in the Gothic style, evolving on the Continent for a generation.
In completing William of Sens's work, he showed that he was more deeply influenced than his French predecessor by contemporary Continental developments.
In the transepts, for example, he stilted the rib vaults to enhance the elegance of their appearance and to allow an increased flow of light.
He pierced the end walls with rose-windows which are among the earliest in existence.
For the Trinity chapel beyond the presbytery, William was unhampered by an existing structure.
He produced one of the most remarkable designs of his day.
Adopting and extending the Gothic taste for punctuating walls with large windows, he built a skeletal structure depending for its stability on the skilful use of flying buttresses.
Those at Canterbury are among the earliest datable flying buttresses.
Equally innovative was William's detached arcading of the aisles, where the piers and slender marble shafts supporting the vaults stand free of the walls.
William completed the east end of the Trinity chapel with a tall polygonal chapel, the corona, whose unique design was intended to evoke the ‘crown of martyrdom’ which Becket had won.
The closest Continental precedents for William's work are at Reims and Laon.
He may have trained in north-eastern France.
His career after leaving Canterbury is unknown.
His work at Canterbury influenced later English architecture, for example, at Glastonbury Abbey and Chichester Cathedral.
The architectural parallels between Canterbury and Chichester suggest that William may have been the master architect at Chichester during the rebuilding of 1187–99.
The date of William's death is unknown, but he is possibly identifiable as the William ‘Anglicus’ by whose will Canterbury Cathedral Priory received a bequest of forty shillings from the hands of the abbot of St Radigund's, near Dover, in 1214.
[William Stubbs (ed.),
The Historical Works of Gervase of Canterbury , vol. ii, 1880; R. Willis,The Architectural History of Canterbury Cathedral , 1845; John Harvey,English Mediaeval Architects , 1984; Francis Woodman,The Architectural History of Canterbury Cathedral , 1981.]
John Reid Hebden
, Sir John (1612–1670), Russia Company merchant, agent for Tsar Alexis, and envoy to Russia, was born in 1612, probably in London, the elder son and eldest of three children of John Hebden, merchant tailor of London, whose family came from Yorkshire, and his wife Elizabeth, daughter of Richard Pope of Oxfordshire.
He is first recorded in Russia in 1640, and in 1651 he was a signatory for a loan from Tsar Alexis to Charles II of 20,000 roubles (£10,000), paid in furs and grain.
Possibly as a result, Hebdon became a roving agent for Alexis from 1652, buying to order arms and many examples of western craftsmanship, recruiting military and other professional men to the tsar's service, and acting as partial translator at audiences with Oliver Cromwell's envoy to Russia in 1654.
In 1656 he arranged ships to carry the tsar's embassy to Venice (from Archangel to Leghorn).
After the Restoration Hebdon settled in Tooting, but remained Alexis's agent.
He addressed two remonstrances to the king, urging him to send ambassadors to Russia, and arranged accommodation for Russian ambassadors in England.
When Charles II repaid the Russian loan, in the presence of Russian envoys in May 1663, Hebdon was knighted and appointed a privy councillor.
Soon afterwards he accompanied Charles Howard, Earl of Carlisle [q.v.], as envoy to Alexis, but was not admitted to the negotiations, the Russians probably suspecting him of changing masters.
Carlisle's negotiations for the restoration of the long-standing English trading privileges withdrawn on the execution of Charles I were unsuccessful, as were Hebdon's own efforts when he returned to Russia in 1667 for the last time, this time as envoy himself.
He and his wife Phillippa had four sons and two daughters.
The eldest son John was envoy to Russia in 1676.
The second son, Richard, a merchant, died in January 1668, and the third son, Thomas, died while accompanying Thomas Bryan (who also died), Sir John's son-in-law, on a mission to Persia in 1669 for Alexis.
Sir John died in Tooting 5 June 1670 and was buried in the old church; his will shows a debt due from the tsar and an amount still owed him for his allowance as ambassador.
His portrait, now in the Helen Campbell Blaffer Foundation, Houston, Texas, was painted by Ferdinand Bol in 1659.
[Russia Company minutes; Public Record Office SP91/3, PC2;Calendars of State Papers ;Thurloe State Papers ;Calendar of Clarendon State Papers ; S. Konovalov, ‘England and Russia 1666–1668’,Oxford Slavonic Papers , vol. xiii, 1967, pp.47–71; Geraldine Marie Phipps, ‘Britons in Seventeenth-Century Russia’, Ph.D.
thesis (1971) for the University of Pennsylvania; Philip Longworth,Alexis, Tsar of all the Russias , 1984.]
John Schofield
,Ralph (c. 1540–1616/17), painter-stainer and surveyor, was the son of Robert Treswell alias Baker of St Albans and his wife Margaret Langley.
His date of birth is not known, but the first reference to him at work is 1567–8, and he may therefore have been born around 1540.
He was by trade a painter-stainer, a craft which in 1581 included face painters, history painters, arms (heraldic) painters and house painters; Treswell was probably an arms painter, for he painted streamers and banners for several City companies.
He must have become a fairly senior member of his own company, since he was one of the receiving trustees of Painter-Stainers' Hall in 1580, and one of those releasing the hall to others in 1605.
From at least 1580 Treswell was also drawing pictorial surveys, all of rural estates.
These included estates in Northamptonshire of Sir Christopher Hatton [q.v.], and lands of City institutions such as St Bartholomew's Hospital, Christ's Hospital (of which he was a governor from 1603/4 to his death), and the Brewers', Clothworkers', and Leathersellers' Companies.
Other clients for single surveys included Magdalen College and Christ Church, Oxford.
From at least 1607 he also drew up plans of properties in London to accompany leases of Christ's Hospital.
In 1610–11 the Hospital, and in 1612 the Clothworkers' Company, decided to obtain a comprehensive survey of their London estates.
Both these surveys have survived, and they provide an important and unique view of housing conditions in London before the great fire of 1666.
Treswell, like other heraldic painters, transferred his skills to map-making to meet the increasing demand for estate plans in the vigorous property market after the dissolution of the monasteries and the Reformation.
Being in London, he could exploit both the court and the merchant community as patrons, and would have been exposed to the new developments in surveying in the published works of Leonard and Thomas Digges [qq.v.]and others.
He thus became one of the first modern land surveyors.
From 1583 he took part in the administration of Aldersgate ward in the City of London, where he lived; from 1606 he was the ward's senior common councilman.
He married three times.
His first wife was Cicely Cresley, by whom he had three sons: Robert, who became Somerset herald in 1597, Ralph (also a surveyor), and Christopher.
His second wife was Anne Kentish, and his third Elizabeth Bachelor.
He died intestate between July 1616 and March 1617.
[J. Schofield,The London Surveys of Ralph Treswell , London Topographical Society Publication 135, 1987.]
Bernard Capp
,John (1605–1671), encyclopaedist, baptized 26 September 1605 in Ickleton, Cambridgeshire, was the eldest son of John Swan, vicar of nearby Sawston from 1600 to 1639, and his wife Sarah, daughter of Thomas Adams of Wisbech.
In 1622 Swan followed his father to Trinity College, Cambridge, graduating BA in 1626 and MA in 1629; he later described himself as BD.
He was ordained deacon and priest in 1629, and occurs as minister (probably curate) in Duxford St Peter, Cambridgeshire, in 1630.
With no patron, and numbering himself among men of ‘retired lives, and small-grown fortunes’, his progress in the church was painfully slow, and he probably remained at Duxford until 1647.
He was vicar of Sawston and rector of nearby Whittlesford from 1647 to 1670, with an apparent break at the former in 1662–4 and the latter in 1659–62; they were both poor livings, valued at £20 and £23 p.a. respectively in 1650.
Unlike his father, a pugnacious Laudian, Swan had Puritan leanings, and these may explain his temporary displacement around the Restoration.
On being intruded briefly as vicar of Duxford late in 1646 he had been labelled ‘a godly and orthodox divine’.
Swan's importance rests mainly on his encyclopaedia,Speculum Mundi (1635 and later editions), which was loosely based on Du Bartas's Divine Weeks .
He organized his material around the six days of creation, concentrating on cosmology, meteorology, mineralogy, zoology, and botany.
Though essentially traditionalist, the work shows a critical spirit and a lively interest in recent discoveries and debates.
On cosmology he generally followed Tycho Brahe, whose scheme he reproduced in diagrammatic form.
Swan was also keenly interested in astrology, both natural and judicial.
His interpretation of the nova of 1572 as a harbinger of Gustavus Adolphus reflected his religious and political outlook, and he counted the parliamentarian astrologer, John Booker [q.v.], among his friends.
He vigorously defended astrology in a sermon (later published as Signa Coeli: The Signs of Heaven , 1652) preached the day before the notorious ‘Black Monday’, the solar eclipse of 29 March 1652.
Swan compiled a series of almanacs published in Cambridge from 1657, and may have been responsible too for other titles such as those ostensibly by ‘Swallow’ and ‘Dove’.
A chronology of the ancient world,Calamus Mensurans: the Measuring Reed or, the Standard of Time , published in 1653 and dedicated to Bulstrode Whitelocke [q.v.], reflected his other scholarly interests.
Swan married Frances Rudland at Sawston in 1634; she died in 1667.
A second wife, Helen, survived him, as did three of his children.
He died in 1671, and was buried in Sawston 17 March.
[F. J. Bywaters, ‘The Clergy of Sawston, 1197 to 1948’,Proceedings of the Cambridge Antiquarian Society , vol. xlii, 1948; T. F. Teversham,A History of Sawston , 1942–7; A. G. Matthews,Walker Revised , 1948; information from parish registers and institution books, collected by D. M. Owen and J. M. Farrar; B. S. Capp,Astrology and the Popular Press , 1979.]
Basil Greenslade
,Robert (c. 1596–1651), divine and mathematician, was born c .1596 in Abingdon, Berkshire, one of the eight children of Robert Payne of Wantage, woollen-draper and four times mayor of Abingdon, and his wife Martha, daughter of William Branch of Abingdon.
From Abingdon Grammar School he entered Christ Church, Oxford, in 1611, graduated BA 1614, and proceeded MA 1617.
In 1624 he was elected charter fellow of the newly founded Pembroke College, Oxford, as founder's kin.
He contributed poems to Iusta Oxoniensium (1612), on the death of Prince Henry, and Funebria Sacra (1619), on the death of Queen Anne.
By 1630 he had come to the notice of William Cavendish, Earl (later Duke) of Newcastle [q.v.], who presented him to the living of Tormarton, Gloucestershire, and made him his chaplain at Welbeck, Nottinghamshire, where, in collaboration with Newcastle's brother, the mathematician Sir Charles Cavendish [q.v.], he maintained a correspondence, especially on optics, with mathematicians such as Walter Warner and John Pell [qq.v.], and with Thomas Hobbes [q.v.], whose references to Payne indicate respect for his character and abilities.
In 1636 Payne translated Galileo's Della scienza mecanica from a manuscript probably brought from Italy by Hobbes.
Payne was appointed canon of Christ Church in 1638, and in November 1642, in Royalist Oxford, he was made DD.
But by 1646 he had been deprived of his parish and in 1648 he was expelled from Christ Church.
He retired to his native Abingdon, and from that retirement, 1649–51, came a remarkable handful of letters (in MS Harley 6942), written to Gilbert Sheldon [q.v.], all that survives from a busy correspondence.
The recurrent topic is Hobbes, with whom he was in frequent contact by letter — Hobbes's manuscripts, their prospects of publication, the emergence of Leviathan , and his attempts to argue with Hobbes as he wrote; reported, as best he could, to Sheldon.
As for the man himself, he seems to have been universally liked.
To Ben Jonson [q.v.]he was ‘my beloved friend’.
Hobbes wrote of his ‘love…to Mr Payne, bred out of private talke’.
Payne died early in November 1651.
He was unmarried.
[J. Foster,Alumni Oxonienses , 1891; F. Madan,Oxford Books , 1912; A. G. Matthews,Walker Revised , 1948; Historical Monuments Commission,Portland II; British Library, Harley MSS 6796, 6942, Lansdowne MSS 93, 841, Add.
MSS 4279, 4458;Annals of Science , vol. viii, pp. 13–27;Theologian and Ecclesiastic , vol. vi, 1848, pp. 161–73, F. Tönnies,Studien , ed.
Jacoby, 1975, p. 145; G. A. G. Rogers and Alan Ryan,Perspectives on Thomas Hobbes , 1988, pp. 15–18, 51–4.]
Elizabeth Longford
,Harriett (1793–1834), diarist, was born 10 September 1793, the third and youngest daughter and third youngest of the ten children of Henry Fane, MP, of Fulbeck Hall, Lincolnshire (second son of Thomas Fane, eighth Earl of Westmorland), and his wife Anne, daughter of Edward Buckley Batson, banker.
On 31 January 1814 she married Charles Arbuthnot [q.v.],
MP and joint secretary to the Treasury and responsible for patronage, as his second wife.
There were no children.
Despite the age gap — she was twenty-six years his junior — they had twenty years of extremely happy marriage.
Author of The Journal of Mrs Arbuthnot , Harriett was obsessed with politics.
This partly explains her choice of the middle-aged widower as a husband, since he was the recipient of political secrets which she shared.
He was ‘more largely mixed up with the principal people and events of his time than any other man’(Charles Greville,Greville Memoirs , 1874–8).
While Arbuthnot was tactful and exceedingly good-natured, Harriett was equally discreet but with a sharper mind.
She was soon well-known in her own right.
Her valuable political Journal , however, was secreted in her room until her death, then kept at Apsley House and not published till 1950.
Her contemporary reputation depended on her friendship with statesmen.
An extreme Tory, Mrs Arbuthnot passed her adult life mainly under Tory governments.
This gave her the entrée into many whispering galleries of politics and the drawing-rooms if not the corridors of power.
When the Whigs returned to power she lost interest and in 1832 dropped the Journal abruptly in mid-sentence.
She had decided to overcome her natural ‘laziness’ and keep a diary on the fourth day of George IV's reign, 1 February 1820.
Eight days later the first Duke of Wellington was calling on her with reports of a coming clash: the king's desired divorce from Queen Caroline.
Mingling genuine news with ‘street talk’, she produced a lively compilation.
Among important events dealt with in her two volumes were the Cato Street conspiracy, Queen Caroline's trial, Catholic emancipation, and parliamentary reform.
The two heroes of the Journal were Lord Castlereagh and Wellington.
Mrs Arbuthnot's admiration for Castlereagh was entirely uncritical: his ‘dignity and nobleness’ were ‘never seen in any other man’.
The modified Toryism of George Canning and Sir Robert Peel filled her with contempt.
Canning, she wrote, was ‘always having some dirty underplot’.
Towards Wellington she could be both critical and devoted, and her portrait of him is the most useful.
The Arbuthnots and Wellingtons had met in Paris in 1814.
Their friendship has been called a unique political ménage à trois .
If things had been otherwise, Mrs Arbuthnot would have made an ideal wife for the duke.
He liked a clever woman —‘she sees what you mean’— which his wife Kitty did not.
Nor was his wife ‘sensible’ like Harriett, who found Kitty ‘silly’.
This was not sexual jealousy, though Charles Greville [q.v.]sent Harriett an anonymous letter accusing her of being in love with Wellington.
Their relations are best described as amitié amoureuse .
Both Wellington and Harriett lacked imagination but relied instead on keen observation.
Unlike Wellington, Harriett was a political animal through and through, whose ambition was that her men should succeed.
Harriett, said Arbuthnot, had been his ‘guardian angel’, looking after everything including his finances.
After she died the heart-broken husband gave Woodford Lodge, Northamptonshire, where Harriett had spent her married life, to his son by his first wife, and went to live with Wellington.
It was a no less remarkable ménage à deux .
The memory of her graceful figure, wide-apart eyes, heart-shaped face, and alert expression remained their joint possession until Arbuthnot's death in 1850.
Renowned in life for her guarded silences, Harriett Arbuthnot speaks out now through the 441 pages of her Journal .
She died of cholera 2 August 1834 at her husband's home, Woodford Lodge.
[Francis Bamford and the Duke of Wellington (eds.),
The Journal of Mrs Arbuthnot 1820–1832 , 2 vols., 1950; Elizabeth Longford,Wellington: Pillar of State , 1972.]
Henry Charnock
,Eric Thomas (1915–1966), meteorologist, was born 5 September 1915 at 51 Devonshire Road, Ealing, London, the elder child and only son of Thomas Christopher Eady, civil servant with the Post Office, and his wife Charlotte Anderton.
He was educated at Ealing County Grammar School, where he was awarded a state scholarship and a minor open scholarship to Christ's College, Cambridge, where he graduated as a senior optime in the mathematical tripos (part ii) in 1935.
After short periods as a lecturer in mathematics at King Alfred's Teacher Training College in Winchester and as a technical researcher in aircraft vibration for de Havilland, he joined the Meteorological Office as a technical officer in 1938, where he served as a weather forecaster in fighter and reconnaissance groups.
Following his commission as flight lieutenant RAFVR he specialized in upper-air analysis and forecasting for bomber groups.
His last posting was to Lagos, Nigeria, before he was demobilized in February 1946.
He had spent much of his spare time working on a theory for the formation of atmospheric depressions and decided to devote all his time to it; he resigned from the Meteorological Office to become a graduate student at Imperial College.
He was not accepted into the department of meteorology but registered as a student in the department of mathematics, where he wrote a doctoral thesis on ‘The Theory of Development in Dynamical Meteorology’.
The novelty and importance of his work were appreciated even before he was awarded the Ph.D.
degree in 1948: he proceeded rapidly from research student to lecturer and then to reader in dynamical climatology (in the department of meteorology) by 1949.
He was invited to discuss his work at leading meteorological institutes round the world.
Since then the ‘Eady problem’ has become a classical reference in the subject: J. G. Charney, the leading US worker in the same field, acknowledged that Eady's treatment was exceptional, being more comprehensible and more physically realistic than his own seminal contribution.
But Eady published little of his work.
It was not that he could not write, as he spoke, fluently and well: talking with him was one of the pleasures of life.
He continually broadened his professional interests to include the ocean, the earth's core, motions in the atmospheres of planets, the theory of fluids, biophysics, and biochemistry.
Eventually he became depressed by the sheer difficulty of his subject, by the realization that he was not, as he put it, going to be able to build a cathedral.
He isolated himself more and more from his friends and colleagues; he died, after an overdose of painkillers, in Guildford Hospital 26 March 1966.
In 1949 he married Marjorie, daughter of Edgar Currie, formerly a warehouse foreman for a removals firm, but incapacitated during World War I. There were no children.
[H. Charnock and others,Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society , vol. xcii, 1966, pp. 591–2; information from Mrs Marjorie Eady; personal knowledge.]
Jennifer Loach
, Sir Thomas (ante 1514–1559), courtier, was the son of William Cawarden, variously described as a shearman, clothworker, and fuller of London.
Little is known about his family, and his date of birth can be inferred only from the fact that he was apprenticed to a mercer in 1528.
Nothing further is known of him beyond a minor land acquisition in 1538 until, in 1540, he suddenly emerged as a gentleman of Henry VIII's privy chamber, a post he was to retain under the young Edward.
As such he accumulated considerable property, as well as a reversion of the manor of Bletchingley, where he lived from 1546, and a number of stewardships and keeperships of royal manors, including that of the new palace of Nonsuch.
He was left £200 in Henry's will.
In 1544 Cawarden became keeper of the tents.
He played a major role in the organization of the royal expedition to Boulogne of that year, and was knighted at the end of the campaign.
The following year his position at the tents was formally united with the newly created office of master of the revels.
Increasingly, the monarchy was involved in courtly display, and it was as the administrator of such functions that Cawarden was to win fame, providing costumes for men and horses and complicated scenic devices.
He expanded the revels office, and moved it from Warwick Inn to the dissolved monastery of Blackfriars, where he himself owned a considerable property.
Cawarden's entrepreneurial skills were used for his own benefit as well as that of the monarch.
He lived in great style with a hundred servants, keeping house ‘right bounteously’— in 1554 his military equipment at Bletchingley alone filled seventeen wagons.
In 1542 and 1547 he represented Bletchingley in Parliament, before moving in a by-election to the more prestigious position of knight of the shire.
He was successfully recommended by the council to the Surrey electors in March 1553, and served the county again in Mary I's third and Elizabeth I's first Parliaments.
A translation of Cato's precepts dedicated to Cawarden praised him as the embodiment of ‘politique wisdom’.
He certainly survived and prospered, despite serving four monarchs with very different religious, and therefore iconographical, aims.
Cawarden's own religious views are unclear, although he had a number of radical associates.
In 1543 he was questioned over his links with those who subsequently became ‘the Windsor martyrs’, but was pardoned, together with his wife Elizabeth.
Cawarden was an active church commissioner in Edward's reign, stripping the parish church at Bletchingley of furniture and carvings, which were removed to Blackfriars.
He acquiesced in the attempt of Lady Jane Grey [q.v.]to seize the throne from Mary, and came under suspicion at the time of the rebellion of Sir Thomas Wyatt [q.v.], but within a few weeks was back at his duties.
He was arrested when the plot of Sir Henry Dudley [q.v.]was uncovered in 1556, but was again released without indictment.
Cawarden probably welcomed the accession of Elizabeth, who appointed him joint lieutenant of the Tower, but he died soon afterwards, on or shortly before 29 August 1559.
He had no children, and his heir was his brother Anthony's son, William.
[Loseley MSS, Guildford Museum and Folger Library, Washington; E. K. Chambers,Notes on the History of the Revels Office under the Tudors , 1906; E. and M. Feuillerat,Documents Relating to the Revels at Court in the Time of King Edward VI and Queen Mary , 1914; S. T. Bindoff,The House of Commons 1509–1558 , 1982.]
John A Bagley
, Sir George , sixth baronet (1773–1857), aeronautical pioneer, was born 27 December 1773 in Scarborough, Yorkshire, the only son of Sir Thomas Cayley and his wife Isabella Seton, who also had four daughters.
After brief schooling in York he was educated privately by George Walker FRS (1734? –1807, q.v.) in Nottingham and George Cadogan Morgan [q.v.]in Southgate, Middlesex, two Nonconformist ministers selected by his mother.
He succeeded his father as baronet in 1792, and lived at Brompton Hall, between Pickering and Scarborough, throughout his life.
As a landowner, he was actively interested in agricultural improvements, and in 1800 took a leading part in obtaining an Act of Parliament for the Muston drainage scheme, covering ten thousand acres frequently flooded by the rivers Derwent and Hertford.
Cayley was chairman of the directors of the scheme, which was executed by the engineer William Chapman [q.v.], who developed a novel system using drainage ditches parallel to the main river channels.
Throughout his life Cayley showed keen interest in science and engineering developments, particularly in aeronautics.
As early as 1799 he formulated the concept of the classical fixed-wing aeroplane with separate mechanisms for generating lift and propulsion, and soon afterwards began experiments with a whirling arm rig to measure the lift of wings.
In 1809 he experimented with a glider capable of lifting a man, and he published a paper in Nicholson's Journal (November 1809–March 1810) setting out clearly the basic principles of aeroplane flight.
This paper was thought sufficiently perceptive and important to be reprinted in England in 1876, in France in 1877, and in the USA in 1895.
He also experimented with lighter-than-air flight: he wrote three papers on airships in the Philosophical Magazine (February 1816–July 1817) of Alexander Tilloch [q.v.], and in 1820 he successfully flew a model airship at Brompton.
In a period when ballooning was an activity only for itinerant showmen, any interest in flying invited ridicule, but he made several unsuccessful attempts to form a society to encourage aeronautical developments.
He continued to speculate on the subject, and wrote letters to various journals, but seems to have done little further practical work until 1849, when a glider large enough to carry a small boy was launched in free flight at Brompton.
This was followed by a full-sized machine, reputedly piloted by his coachman, in 1853.
Although the evidence for these flights is little better than anecdotal, sufficient information is available in his published and private papers to make possible the construction of a reproduction of the latter machine, which was successfully flown for a television film in 1972.
The aeronautical pioneers in the nineteenth century were constrained by the lack of a lightweight power source.
Cayley was convinced that the steam engine would never be suitable, and he experimented from 1799 with hot-air engines, and from 1807 with engines fuelled by gunpowder.
Nothing came of the latter, but about 1838 he demonstrated a fairly successful hot-air engine in London, suitable for a road vehicle.
Letters published in Mechanics' Magazine from 1826 to 1856 attest to Cayley's interest in many technical topics, including a projected caterpillar tractor, the safety of railway travel, projectile design, and an artificial hand made for one of his tenants.
Convinced that the general public had an unsatisfied thirst for knowledge, he took an active part in several educational activities.
He was president of the York Mechanics' Institute from its foundation in 1827, and was a founder member of the Yorkshire and Scarborough Philosophical Societies, and of the British Association, which first met in York in 1831.
In London, he supported the formation of the Adelaide Gallery at the Strand, where lectures and demonstrations and an exhibition of machines and models were intended to educate and amuse the public.
When it appeared that the intent to educate had been overwhelmed by the need to amuse, Cayley became chairman of the Royal Polytechnic Institution at Regent Street, which from 1838 sought to do what the Adelaide Gallery had failed to do.
The polytechnic also provided evening classes for training students in science, navigation, engineering, and even the principles of railway-engine driving.
From early youth Cayley was a keen proponent of parliamentary reform, and he took an active part in local Whig politics.
He became president of the York Whig Club from 1821 to 1827, and was MP for Scarborough from 1832 to 1834.
Among a wide circle of friends and correspondents, Cayley seems to have been recognized as a generous and modest man of great personal charm.
In July 1795 he married Sarah, the daughter of his first tutor, the Revd George Walker; they had three sons and seven daughters, of whom three children died young.
Cayley died in Brompton 15 December 1857, and was succeeded in the baronetcy by his only surviving son, Digby (born 1807).
[Obituaries in The Times , 18 December 1857, and Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers , vol. xviii, 1858, p. 203; J. L. Pritchard,Sir George Cayley , 1961; C. H. Gibbs-Smith,Sir George Cayley's Aeronautics , 1962; Gerard Fairlie and Elizabeth Cayley,The Life of a Genius , 1965; P. Brett,The Rise and Fall of the York Whig Club , 1989.]
Anne Laurence
,Paul (d. 1666), Particular Baptist and preacher, variously described as a tailor and a surgeon, first appears in the early 1640s as a member of the London separatist congregation of John Spencer and John Green.
By 1644, when he joined the parliamentary army, he and Thomas Gower had established their own Particular Baptist church in London and were signatories of the Confessions of Faith of 1644 and 1646.
Hobson served first with the Eastern Association regiment of Charles Fleetwood [q.v.], becoming a captain, and was soon well known for preaching wherever he went.
In June 1645 he and Captain Beaumont preached at Newport Pagnell, where they complained that they were abused by the garrison's officers.
The governor, Sir Samuel Luke [q.v.], in his turn objected to their conduct and appeals were made by both sides to Sir Thomas Fairfax (later third Baron Fairfax of Cameron, q.v.).
Hobson left the army in 1645 or 1646, but had rejoined by 1647, as major of the regiment of Colonel Robert Lilburne [q.v.], which he accompanied to Newcastle upon Tyne, where Sir Arthur Hesilrige [q.v.]was governor.
In 1648 he was promoted lieutenant-colonel and deputy governor and signed a letter protesting at the treaty with the king at Newport.
He was probably involved in founding, with Thomas Gower, a Baptist congregation in Newcastle in 1649.
For most of the next two years he served with the army in Newcastle, though in 1650 the council of state declared him to be unfit to be deputy governor of the garrison.
He remained in the north as elder of a Durham Baptist congregation and became involved in a lengthy dispute with the Baptist minister at Hexham, Thomas Tillam.
In 1653 he was appointed one of the commissioners for propagating the gospel in northern counties.
In 1654 he became chaplain of Eton College, a post he held until he was ejected in 1660.
He strongly supported Barebone's Parliament (July–December 1653) and deplored the Protectorate, proposing that members of his congregation who swore the oath of loyalty be excommunicated, though he did not join its more militant opponents.
After the Restoration in 1660 he took part in a scheme for establishing a godly commonwealth in the Palatinate and maintained his connection with the Durham Baptists, while practising as an apothecary in London.
He was arrested in 1661 and 1662 but did not engage in seditious activity until 1663, when he became involved in the Farnley Wood or Yorkshire plot.
He was held in the Tower of London and then at Chepstow Castle and was released in 1665 without having been tried, on the understanding that he sailed for Carolina, which gave rise to the belief that he had turned informer.
Soon afterwards he was accused of wanton conduct with three members of the Devonshire Square congregation.
He did not go to Carolina.
Hobson retained a consistent theology during his life, advocating believers' baptism and frequently engaging in public disputes with his opponents.
His published sermons reveal a man who was well versed in the Bible rather than in classical learning, with a clear and direct message to his audience.
He was married to Hester and had a son and three daughters, leaving to them property in Durham when he died in England in 1666.
[A. G. Matthews,Calamy Revised , 1934; R. L. Greaves and R. Zaller,Biographical Dictionary of British Radicals , 1983; T. Edwards,Gangraena , 1646; H. Tibbutt (ed.),
The Letterbooks of Sir Samuel Luke 1644–5 , 1963; Paul Hobson,A Garden Inclosed , 1647; R. L. Greaves,Saints and Rebels , 1985.]
Michael Holroyd
,(Edward) Hesketh (Gibbons)(1887–1964), actor and biographer, was born 20 February 1887 in Hawford, Worcestershire, the second of two sons and four children of Thomas Henry Gibbons Pearson, gentleman farmer, churchwarden, and amateur sportsman, and his second wife Amy Mary Constance, eldest daughter of George Hesketh Biggs, vicar of Ettington.
He attended Bedford Grammar School.
As a man without qualifications he drifted towards a commercial career but, after two and a half years in a city shipping office, was rescued by a legacy of £1,000 from an aunt.
Having spent almost all this money on adventurous travelling in South America, the United States, and Canada, he returned in 1908 and was rescued this time by his brother, who employed him as manager of his motor-car showroom in Brighton.
Pearson used these years to provide himself with an artistic education, listening to music, reading widely, and growing increasingly responsive to the beauties of the English countryside.
He was particularly influenced by the work of Oscar Wilde and G. Bernard Shaw [qq.v.], and the Shakespearian productions of Herbert Beerbohm Tree [q.v.].
Wilde, Shaw, Shakespeare, and Tree, the four authors of what he called his ‘revelations’, were all to be subjects of his biographies.
In 1911, despite his lack of training and regardless of parental disapproval, Pearson joined Tree's company and subsequently acted also in the productions of Harley Granville-Barker and Sir George Alexander [qq.v.], whom he often understudied.
Though invalided out of the infantry in 1915 with tuberculosis, Pearson volunteered the following year for the Army Service Corps, and was commissioned and served for three years in Mesopotamia and Persia.
He rose to the rank of captain and was awarded the MC.
He almost died from a combination of dysentery, malaria, septic sores, and a head wound, and attributed his unexpected recovery to reciting Shakespeare's plays, several of which he knew by heart.
In the 1920s Pearson resumed his acting career but also began publishing short stories, essays, and journalism.
His anonymous volume of pen portraits,The Whispering Gallery by an Ex-Diplomat (1926), led to his arrest on a charge of ‘obtaining or attempting to obtain money under false pretences’, but under cross-examination his engaging candour appealed to the jury which found him not guilty.
In 1931 he left the stage to write biographies, beginning with a life of his maternal ancestor Erasmus Darwin [q.v.], and following this with The Smith of Smiths (1934), a still popular biography of the Revd Sydney Smith [q.v.]which carried an inviting introduction by G. K. Chesterton [q.v.].
Pearson's technique as a biographer derived from his career on the stage.
To some extent he acted his subjects on the page.
He did not take his readers back into history so much as bring Thomas Paine, William Hazlitt, Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, Sir Walter Scott [qq.v.], and others forward, as if they had suddenly walked in from the street.
His treatment was informal and impressionistic, depending on entertaining anecdotes, skilful use of quotation, and the dextrous building up of incidents for its effect.
Over the 1930s and 1940s he became the most popular biographer in Britain.
Assessing his impact on the reading public, Graham Greene wrote that he had ‘some of the qualities of Dr Johnson — a plainness, an honesty, a sense of ordinary life going on all the time’.
Pearson's work owed something to the influence of his Johnsonian friend, Hugh Kingsmill [q.v.].
He was to pay tribute to Kingsmill after his death in an exchange of letters with Malcolm Muggeridge, published as About Kingsmill (1951), and recalled what had been the deepest friendship of his life between the lines of Johnson and Boswell (1958), the last book written at the height of his powers.
Impetuous, opinionated, athletic, good-looking, and full of fun, Pearson was an attractive figure to many women.
He felt no competitiveness with other writers and was encouraging to people younger than himself.
His genial temperament was, however, punctuated by uncontrollable flashes of temper.
These sudden rages, which he attributed to his head wound but which may have been connected with the suppression of inherited melancholy, always passed quickly and disappeared in late life.
In 1912 he married the actress Gladys Rosalind Gardner, daughter of Julius Carl Bardili, a German brewer, and his English wife Emma Gardner.
They had one son who died in 1939.
Shortly after his wife's death in 1951 he married Dorothy Joyce Ryder, daughter of Frank Bonham Ryder, an electrical engineer.
He died 9 April 1964 at his home in London.
[Hesketh Pearson, by Himself , 1965; Richard Ingrams,God's Apology , 1977; Ian Hunter,Nothing to Repent: the Life of Hesketh Pearson , 1987; personal knowledge.]
Isobel Grundy
,Jane (1710–1754/5), novelist, was born in 1710, one of the four children (two daughters and two sons) of the Revd Arthur Collier [q.v.]and his wife Margaret, daughter of Nicholas Johnson, paymaster of the army, and niece of Sir Stephen Fox [q.v.].
Her father was rector of Langford Magna, Wiltshire, from 1704, a friend of Bishop Gilbert Burnet [q.v.], and a metaphysician.
In 1716 money troubles made the family move to lodgings in Salisbury, where they may have become friends of Henry Fielding [q.v.]and his family.
Jane and her sister Margaret learned Greek and Latin.
Their father died in 1732 ‘in embarrassed circumstances’.
Jane's writing was probably encouraged by the example of Sarah Fielding [q.v.], a published novelist from 1744.
One of the sisters was living in the family of Samuel Richardson [q.v.]in 1750.
Jane Collier's attitude to female authorship is unclear, but Henry Fielding, in a letter from Lisbon in 1754, praised her ‘for an understanding more than female, mixed with virtues almost more than human’.
On 4 October 1748 she wrote to Richardson to argue against his proposed alterations to Sarah Fielding's The Governess, or Little Female Academy .
The reasons she advances for maintaining the book's integrity are based on modesty of intention: it is better not to divulge the precise methods of punishment used by its Mrs Teachum, since the book is addressed less to teachers than to pupils.
Richardson duly published it (1749) in its original form.
Her critique of his Clarissa , written for the Gentleman's Magazine , never appeared there.
Jane Collier's first known appearance in print is An Essay on the Art of Ingeniously Tormenting (1753).
The daughter of James Harris [q.v.]later claimed that a ‘great part’ of it was written by him, but she offered no evidence.
Its frontispiece shows a cat and mouse with the motto Celebrare domestica facta .
Quoted by Samuel Johnson [q.v.]in volume two of his Dictionary (in spirit, if not literally, one of his few infringements of his principle of excluding living authors), it is couched in the Scriblerian tradition of ironic instruction in undesirable skills.
Under this guise it probes the ‘labyrinths and inward turns of the mind’ in abuse of power in human relationships, especially that of mistress to servants or ‘humble companion’, with acute psychological insight, no doubt won while living as a dependant.
Jane Collier produced her second work,The Cry: a New Dramatic Fable , in 1754, jointly with Sarah Fielding, who was apparently thought by Richardson and other readers to be sole or chief author.
It is both experimental and learned, aiming ‘to strike a little out of’ the beaten track of novels and essays, with scenes and dialogue borrowed from the drama, an allegorical framework explicitly borrowed from Edmund Spenser [q.v.], scholarly footnotes, and invented words like ‘turba’for a legion of evil passions, ‘trouble, bustle and confusion’(vol. i, pp. 194–5).
Jane Collier died unmarried between mid-1754 and late 1755.
[Forster collection, Victoria and Albert Museum; Anna Laetitia Barbauld (ed.),
The Correspondence of Samuel Richardson , vol. ii, 1804; Robert Benson,Memoirs of the Life and Writings of the Rev. Arthur Collier , 1837; T. C. Duncan Eaves and Ben D. Kimpel,Samuel Richardson: a Biography , 1971; Martin C. Battestin,Henry Fielding: a Life , 1989; Maureen Mulvihill (ed.),
The Cry: a New Dramatic Fable , 1986.]
Nigel Smith
,Joseph (fl. 1647–1655), sectarian, was briefly prominent as a Ranter between March 1650 and 1651, although his writings approximate to a Seeker position between 1647 and 1649.
His origins remain obscure: he was known in Coventry and Wiltshire, and later in Kent.
Salmon served in the New Model Army, probably between 1647 and 1649, as soldier and chaplain in the regiment of Commissary-General Henry Ireton [q.v.].
He preached in Coventry on 10 March 1650, where the Ranter Abiezer Coppe [q.v.]had been imprisoned since January.
Salmon was imprisoned too, along with Andrew Wyke, and was released on condition that he published a recantation, which appeared in August 1651 under the title Heights in Depths .
During his imprisonment, he is purported to have preached through the gratings of the prison and to have composed his most Ranterish tract.
George Fox [q.v.]visited him and disputed with him.
After his release he lived in Kent, preaching regularly in Rochester Cathedral and laying the foundations for what became the Quaker community there.
He recommended Richard Coppin [q.v.]as his successor and emigrated to Barbados in about 1655, where he may later have been investigated for organizing conventicles.
Doubts have been raised concerning the precise nature of Salmon's religious identity and experiences, but the salient details are unproblematic.
Like many radical religious figures in this period, Salmon ‘crept out of the shell of Episcopacy’ and, during the early and mid-1640s, passed through Presbyterian, Independent, and Baptist forms of worship.
Eventually he found all forms of religion involving ‘externals’ and ordinances unsatisfying, and he describes how he became aware of the sufficiency of a personal and inward inspiration ‘(as one inspired with a supernatural life) sprang up farr above my earthly center, into a most heavenly and divine enjoyment’.
This sense of transcendence from earthliness coincided with his appreciation of the power of God, which had moved successively through monarchy, Parliament, and New Model Army, each time effecting a further spiritual refinement of terrestrial life.
From these perceptions developed the inversions of accepted moral behaviour in the name of spiritual liberty which were labelled ‘Ranter’ by contemporaries.
In Coventry, Salmon is reported to have committed ‘wicked Swearing, and uncleaness, which he justified and others of his way,That it was God which did swear in them, and that it was their liberty to keep company with Women, for their Lust ’.
The reliability of this report has been questioned, and the situation has not been aided by the fact that Salmon's one definitely Ranter publication,Divinity Anatomized (1650?), does not survive.
None the less, Salmon did know and correspond with other Ranters and sectarians associated with them, and he was imprisoned with Coppe and Wyke.
Also, the writings of the Coventry period which do survive show the figural playfulness which is characteristic of Ranter discourse.
Even if he was less transgressive than the more notorious Ranters Coppe and Laurence Clarkson [q.v.], he was associated with them and expressed a form of their Antinomianism at the height of Ranter activity.
His later position was less socially provocative but no less mystical.
It is not difficult to see from Salmon's publications why more orthodox contemporaries saw atheistical or extreme heretical ideas in them, although his four pamphlets, which were read widely in radical religious circles, were really a highly personal attempt to articulate a nearly inexpressible sense of union with the divine.
[J. F. McGregor, ‘The Ranters: A Study in the Free Spirit in English Sectarian Religion, 1648–1660’, B.Litt. thesis (1968) for the University of Oxford; N. Smith (ed.),
A Collection of Ranter Writings from the Seventeenth Century , 1983; J. C. Davis,Fear, Myth and History: the Ranters and the Historians , 1986.]
Margaret Pelling
,Robert (d. 1653), physician and author, seems to have spent most of his working life in the cloth town of Cranbrook in Kent.
He may have been connected with the Pemyll family of Egerton.
Nothing is known of his education except that he did not lay claim to any degree.
He was probably the Robert Pemel who obtained an archiepiscopal licence to practise medicine around 1632.
He may have shared in the Puritan tendency of Cranbrook; his published works were all printed for the London theological bookseller, Philemon Stephens, and produced in the early 1650s, at a time when publication in both the learned languages and the vernacular greatly increased.
Pemell's last work, on the diseases of children, was only the second ‘monograph’ on the subject in English, the first being that of Thomas Phaer [q.v.]a hundred years earlier.
General ‘advice books’, directed at women, parents, or householders, were, however, already a well-established genre.
At various points Pemell's book on children directs the reader to fuller discussions contained in his earlier publications.
Pemell's publications were all in the vernacular, but showed some knowledge of Latin, and were derived from classical and contemporary learned authors, with a few references to his own experience.
As ‘R.P.’ he first published De morbis capitis; or, of the chief internall diseases of the head (1650).
A dedicatory Latin poem was contributed by John Elmeston, schoolmaster of Cranbrook.
In the same year appeared πτωXOφAPMAKON, seu Medicamen miseris, or Pauperum pyxidicula salutifera.
Help for the poor (1650).
This was aimed less at the poor themselves than at those able to help them and ‘not able to make use of Physitians and Chirurgians’.
A later edition (1653) included an appendix on whether to let blood in smallpox.
Pemell's productivity continued with Tractatus de simplicium medicamentorum facultatibus.
A treatise of the nature…of such simples as are most frequently used…(1652).
This was helpfully structured for ‘the vulgar capacity’ and young practitioners.
A second part,Tractatus de facultatibus simplicium , followed in 1653.
His final work, on children, he advertised as fulfilling his promise to follow up the Tractatus , but in ‘more hast’, because ‘I see my glasse runs apace’:De morbis puerorum, or, a treatise of the diseases of children…very useful for all such as are housekeepers (1653).
Pemell's will (Public Record Office, PCC Allchin 1654) was dated 7 April 1652, he being then in ‘good health’; he was buried in Cranbrook 3 June 1653.
He left a widow, Elizabeth, and three children, all under age.
The eldest, Thomas, was to have ‘all my books in case he betake himself to the study and practice of physic’.
[J. H. Raach,A Directory of English Country Physicians 1603–1643 , 1962; G. F. Still,History of Paediatrics , 1931; Charles Webster,The Great Instauration: Science, Medicine and Reform 1626–1660 , 1975.]
Roger Bowers
,Nicholas (c. 1490–1557), composer, was chief musician at St Stephen's, Westminster, Of his family, birth, and education, nothing is known.
During 1521 he was admitted to membership of the Fraternity or Guild of St Nicholas, London — the guild of the parish clerks of the city's parish churches, augmented by the professional musicians employed in the parish and other churches of London and its immediate neighbourhood.
By this date Ludford was probably already employed at the collegiate church of St Stephen, Westminster, and on 30 September 1527, as already in occupation of his offices there, he was confirmed in his appointment as verger of the chapel.
Originally administrative and curatorial, this highly paid office had long before been transformed into a post for the chapel's principal musician; Ludford's duties included those of participating in singing the services and playing the organ, and, doubtless, directing the performance of polyphonic music.
Probably all of Ludford's surviving compositions were written for his choir at St Stephen's.
There remain six Marian votive antiphons (four able to be completed), six settings of the Mass (plus one in a fragmentary state, and three lost), one Magnificat, and a complete weekly cycle of seven three-part alternatim settings of the Lady Mass.
This latter, a unique survival, is preserved in manuscripts bound not later than 1529; the Magnificat and four Masses (including Lapidaverunt Stephanum , an evident patronal piece) survive in the choir-book of c .1525 prepared (probably under Ludford's direction) for use at St Stephen's, and now belonging to Caius College, Cambridge.
The other major repository of his works is the ‘Peterhouse Part-books’ of c .1539–40.
Among composers of his generation, only the music of John Taverner (fl .
1530, q.v.) appears to have been more highly regarded, more widely circulated, and now better preserved.
Ludford was a master of the expansive, sonorous, and virtuosic polyphony of his time, and his surviving works suggest that, unlike Taverner, he felt no inclination to experiment with the more concise and concentrated style of the later 1530s and 1540s.
Upon the dissolution of the choir and college of St Stephen's in March 1549, Ludford lost his employment, but was granted a substantial annual pension for the rest of his life.
While employed at St Stephen's, he lived within the parish of St Margaret, Westminster, and he was active in parish life at least from 1522 onwards; during 1552–4 he served as one of the churchwardens.
He died in 1557, and was buried in St Margaret's churchyard on 9 August; his first wife Ann had been interred there on 9 December 1552, and he was survived by his second wife Ellen.
His will mentions no surviving children.
[Accounts of churchwardens of St Margaret, Westminster, archives department, Westminster City Library; Public Record Office, Exchequer — Ancient Deeds, E40, Chantry Certificates, E301: State Papers, Henry VIII, SP 1; John Bergsagel, ‘Nicholas Ludford’,The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians , ed.
Stanley Sadie, vol. xi, 1980;idem , ‘An Introduction to Ludford’,Musica Disciplina , vol. xiv, 1960, pp. 105–31;idem (ed.),
‘Nicholas Ludford: Opera Omnia’,Corpus Mensurabilis Musicae , vol. xxvii, 1963; P. M. Roe, unpublished research.]
Owen Stinchcombe
,Elizabeth (1828–1916), educationist and pioneer of rural district nursing, was born 29 October 1828 in Chelsea, the eldest of the eleven children of Henry Whitehead, solicitor, of Chelsea, and his wife Frances Ann, youngest child of Francis Maguire, British army surgeon.
She received a scrappy education at a dame school near her grandmother's home in Northfleet, from governesses at home and, for a year at the age of fourteen, at a Unitarian school in Clapton.
She had an anxious childhood; her father had lost clients through becoming a Unitarian, the bailiff was a frequent caller, and both parents were often away attending political rallies.
At fifteen she accepted responsibility for bringing up her brothers and sisters.
Appalled by the poor quality of her own education, she was determined to do better by her siblings and worked out her own teaching methods from studying everything available on educational theory.
By the age of twenty-four she was free to seek work outside the home, finding temporary positions as amanuensis and governess.
In 1854 she was appointed teacher at the experimental Portman Hall School endowed by Barbara Leigh Smith (later Barbara Bodichon, q.v.).
Accepting enthusiastically the school's principles of unsectarianism, coeducation up to the age of eleven, mixing middle- and artisan-class children, and making lessons short and pleasurable, she threw herself wholeheartedly into the teaching until forced to resign through ill health.
In May 1857 she married Frank Rodbard Malleson (died 1903), son of a Unitarian minister and partner in a Holborn firm of vintners.
They lived in St John's Wood and later in Wimbledon, and were to have three daughters and a son.
After becoming involved with the Working Men's College, established by Frederick Maurice [q.v.]in 1854, Elizabeth Malleson was inspired to found a counterpart for women.
Her Working Women's College opened in Queen Square, Bloomsbury, in 1864, offering tuition in a wide range of subjects at very low fees.
She personally recruited university-trained teachers, who were prepared not only to provide their services free but also to participate in the social life of the college.
Although the enterprise flourished, Elizabeth Malleson remained convinced that adult education ought not to be organized on a single-sex basis and, after failing to persuade the Men's College to merge, converted the Women's College to coeducation in 1874.
While still in London she worked for many other causes, campaigning from 1869 for the repeal of the Contagious Diseases Acts and organizing relief for the refugees from Turkish atrocities against the Bulgars in 1876.
After moving to Dixton Manor near Winchcombe in 1882, she continued her educational work, helping to set up workers' colleges in Cheltenham and organizing technical education in the Winchcombe district on behalf of Gloucestershire county council.
She published Notes on the Early Training of Children in 1884 and, with her husband, started reading-rooms and libraries in nearby villages.
But she recognized that the most urgent problem in the countryside was the lack of trained district nurses.
When her first attempt to sustain a local nursing service failed, she decided that the first essential was a national organization to provide loans, train nurses, and monitor standards.
She launched her Rural Nursing Association in August 1889, after securing backing from many doctors and nurses — and overriding opposition from Florence Nightingale [q.v.].
Finding that the recently established Queen Victoria's Jubilee Institute of Nursing concentrated on urban areas, she persuaded its council to accept her association as its rural district branch.
She effectively ran this autonomous branch from the position of secretary until 1894 and remained as consultant until it was fully absorbed into the Institute in 1897.
She also managed a local nursing association from 1889 until 1916.
She died 27 December 1916 from influenza at home at Dixton Manor.
[Hope Malleson (ed.),
Elizabeth Malleson, 1828–1916, Autobiographical Notes and Letters , privately printed, 1926.]
Jacquetta Hawkes
,Dorothy Anne Elizabeth (1892–1968), field archaeologist and prehistorian, was born 5 May 1892 in London, the second of four children and only daughter of (Sir) Archibald Edward Garrod [q.v.], later first professor of medicine at St Bartholomew's Hospital and regius professor at Oxford, and his wife Laura Elisabeth, daughter of Sir Thomas Smith, first baronet [q.v.], surgeon.
Two of her brothers were killed in World War I and the third died in the influenza epidemic while waiting to be demobilized.
After education at home (9 Chandos Street), Isabel Fry's classes proved valuable; she was prepared for Cambridge entrance at Birklands School, St Albans.
At Newnham College, Cambridge, she read history (1913–16), obtaining a second class, division II.
After war work in France she moved to Oxford in 1920 and was inspired by the teaching of R. R. Marett [q.v.]to a distinction in her Oxford diploma in anthropology before returning to France with a Mary Ewart scholarship (1922–3) and introductions to leading archaeologists.
At Count Begouen's Pyrenean château she saw the cave art nearby and met the Abbé Breuil.
Her career was determined when she became Breuil's pupil at the Institut de Paléontologie Humaine (1922–4).
She assisted at French cave excavations, including La Quina in Charente, where she was introduced to Neanderthal man and his Mousterian culture, thereafter to be a central interest.
Her own first excavation was at the Devil's Tower, Gibraltar, where she found Neanderthal skull fragments.
The rare ability shown in the digging and publication (1928) of this site gave her a promising place in Palaeolithic studies, reinforced by her first book,The Upper Palaeolithic Age in Britain (1926).
The year 1928 saw her first visit to western Asia.
She recognized a Mousterian and Upper Palaeolithic presence in Kurdistan; in the Judaean cave of Shukbah she found and named a new Mesolithic culture, the Natufian.
There followed an urgent summons to direct a rescue excavation of three caves on the slopes of Mount Carmel, with T. D. McCown as assistant.
This work (1929–34) was to prove the most important in her archaeological career.
The three cave occupations spanned some 100,000 years with ten distinct cultural horizons.
The Skhul cave contained a unique cemetery of fossil hominids and another skeleton came from the Tabun cave.
They showed an exceptional blending of Neanderthal with fully ‘sapient’ features.
A skilled typologist, Dorothy Garrod established a cultural sequence from the tens of thousands of implements from the Carmel caves.
It reached almost unbroken from the Lower Palaeolithic to the Natufian, enabling her to impose order on the hitherto incoherent archaeology of the Levant (D. Garrod and D. M. A. Bate,The Stone Age of Mount Carmel , 1937).
On Carmel Dorothy Garrod was to display all her qualities, personal and professional.
Small (5 ft. 2 in.), composed and neat beside her fellahin workers — girls in brightly ballooning skirts and a few lusty pick-men — her command of them was absolute.
When a builder tried to cheat her she overwhelmed him, thumping the table, her normally calm eyes glaring.
In the cool peace of evening after a good dinner there were a few classical records to be played or she might take up her flute.
Her talk (low-pitched) was sometimes witty, always congenial.
In 1934 she was back in Cambridge to write and lecture.
Earlier she had been a research fellow (1929–32) at Newnham College, now she was director of studies there (1933–42); she was to serve intermittently as an associate and on the governing body.
In 1939 appointment to the Disney chair of archaeology distinguished her as the first woman professor in the university.
Characteristically she left it to enlist as a section officer in the photographic intelligence unit of the Women's Auxiliary Air Force (1942–5).
With the end of the war she returned to professional duties and reorganized departmental teaching, particularly expanding part ii of the tripos in archaeology and anthropology.
Meanwhile old bonds with France were strengthened by collaboration with Suzanne de St Mathurin in the excavation (1948–63) of the Angles Cave (Vienne) and its extraordinary Magdalenian sculptures.
On retirement (1952) intellectual rigour took her back to Palestine, determined to relate her Carmel culture sequence to the geochronology of the late glacial raised beaches of the Levantine coast.
Five years of strenuous digging produced a tentative correlation.
Her heart was overtaxed.
In 1962 she had to deliver the Huxley lecture seated and the next year was her last in the field.
In June 1968, soon after receiving the gold medal of the Society of Antiquaries, she had a stroke.
At her request as a Roman Catholic she was moved to Hope House, Cambridge.
She died there 18 December 1968.
She had an Oxford D.Sc.
and honorary degrees from Pennsylvania, Toulouse, and Poitiers; and she was elected to fellowship of the British Academy in 1952.
She was appointed CBE in 1965.
She was unmarried.
[Gertrude Caton-Thompson in Proceedings of the British Academy , vol. lv, 1969; Suzanne de St Mathurin in Newnham College Roll Letter , 1970; biographical notes on research fellows in Newnham College Register ; information from Grahame Clark; personal knowledge.]
Paul Slack
,William (c. 1631–1685), apothecary, of St Giles-in-the-Fields, London, was born c. 1631, the son of William Boghurst of Ditton, Kent, and served his apprenticeship with a London apothecary, Francis Drury.
The great epidemic of plague of 1665 expanded his medical practice and made his name.
He stayed in the city throughout the epidemic, treating by his own account ‘40, 50 or 60 patients a day’ and advertising his medicines and services in the Intelligencer .
By the end of the year his reputation was sufficient to attract offers from the corporation of Norwich, which tried to employ him when the infection reached there.
He described the symptoms of the disease, and remedies for it, in ‘Loimographia, Or an Experimentall Relation of the Plague’(1666).
This manuscript, which was clearly intended for publication, reflects his personal observation as well as drawing on the published literature on the disease.
Boghurst was critical of the established practice of quarantining infected households — a policy ‘oft enough tried and always found ineffectual’— and in general doubtful about the conclusions drawn from theories of contagion.
He also criticized the standard treatments of bleeding and purging.
He described the symptoms of the disease with great accuracy, and his work is both a testimony to the critical acumen of a seventeenth-century general practitioner and the most reliable eyewitness account of bubonic plague in 1665.
He also wrote a poem in praise of London, ‘Londinologia, sive Londini Encomium’.
In later life his fortunes appear to have declined: he could not afford the livery of his company in 1682.
He died in London 2 September 1685 and was buried in Ditton.
[J. F. Payne (ed.),
Loimographia , by William Boghurst, 1894; Paul Slack,The Impact of Plague in Tudor and Stuart England , 1985; C. Wall, H. C. Cameron, and E. A. Underwood,History of the Worshipful Society of Apothecaries , 1963.]
Brent Elliott
,Edward (1819–1884), gardener, was born 20 January 1819 in Darley, Derbyshire, the eldest of the two sons and six children of Henry Milner, sawyer and later gardener, and his wife Mary Scales.
By 1826 Henry Milner was in the employ of William Cavendish, sixth Duke of Devonshire [q.v.], at Chatsworth, where he served in a variety of posts, including gardener and porter.
He was educated at Bakewell Grammar School, and then apprenticed to the duke's head gardener, Sir Joseph Paxton [q.v.].
In 1841 he went to Paris, where he studied at the Jardin des Plantes, before returning to England to become Paxton's assistant.
Paxton made him foreman of works at Prince's Park, Liverpool, in 1844, and after completion he remained as superintendent.
While there he assisted Paxton in works at Osmaston Manor, Derbyshire (1846–9).
In 1852 Paxton began work on Crystal Palace Park, Sydenham, and once again hired Milner as superintendent of works.
Milner moved to Oak Lodge, Norwood, and later to Hillside, Dulwich Wood Park.
These works continued until 1856, when he again worked with Paxton in creating People's Park, Halifax, for (Sir) Francis Crossley [q.v.], carpet manufacturer and philanthropist.
From the mid-1850s Milner worked as an independent landscape gardener.
Among his commissions were Bryn-y-Neuadd, Llanfairfechan; Hartsholme Hall, Lincolnshire, for Joseph Shuttleworth; Stancliffe Hall, Derbyshire, for (Sir) Joseph Whitworth [q.v.]; the initial garden at Bodnant, Tal-y-Cafn, for H. D. Pochin; Rangemore Hall, Staffordshire, for M. T. Bass [q.v.];
Iwerne Minster, Dorset, for G. G. Glyn, second Baron Wolverton [q.v.];
Highbury, Birmingham, for Joseph Chamberlain [q.v.]; and Locksbrook cemetery, Bath.
In 1862 he received a commission from the town of Preston to design a series of parks, to be laid out as a scheme for relieving unemployment caused by the cotton famine; Moor Park, Miller Park, and Avenham Park were eventually opened in 1867.
He landscaped the Lincoln arboretum (opened 1872), and the grounds of the Buxton Pavilion (1871), as well as Stoney Royd cemetery, Halifax.
Among his works abroad were: Schloss Anholt in Westphalia for Prince Salm-Salm, and Knutenborg Park, Denmark, for Count E. C. Knuth.
In 1881 the Crystal Palace Company set up the Crystal Palace School of Gardening, and Milner became its principal.
He now took his son Henry Ernest [q.v.], for several years his principal assistant, into partnership.
Milner never published a treatise on landscaping, but Henry Ernest's book The Art and Practice of Landscape Gardening (1890) was based to a great extent on his practice.
In 1844 he married Elizabeth Mary Kelly of Liverpool.
They had five sons and six daughters.
Milner died 26 March 1884 in Norwood, London.
[Gardeners' Chronicle , 5 April 1884, p. 459;Garden , 12 April 1884; H. E. Milner,The Art and Practice of Landscape Gardening , 1890; A. Hodges, ‘A Victorian Gardener: Edward Milner (1819–1884)’,Garden History , vol. v, no. 3, 1977, pp. 67–77; information from Mrs Alison Hodges.]
Padmanabh Gopinath
,(Clarence) Wilfred (1909–1973), international jurist and an architect of the post-war system of international organizations, was born 7 March 1909 in Bootle, Lancashire, the son of Richard Jenks, who was in the merchant navy, and his wife Alice Sophia Craig.
Educated at the Collegiate School, Liverpool, he graduated in 1930 with distinction in history and law from Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, where he won the Cecil Peace prize (1928) and became president of the Union (1930).
He was called to the bar by Gray's Inn in 1936.
His early interest in international co-operation drew him to Geneva and in 1931 he joined the International Labour Office.
It was the beginning of a lifelong association, during which he rose through successive levels of the organization to become director-general in 1970.
During that period he witnessed the dissolution of the League of Nations, and was present at the creation of the new order, participating in both the Bretton Woods (1944) and San Francisco (1945) conferences.
Jenks believed international organizations were not mere conference secretariats, but should be active participants in shaping the postwar world.
Such a role called for financial autonomy, an independent international civil service, and collaboration between world organizations.
With characteristic vision and energy, Jenks seized an unparalleled historical opportunity to turn these ideas into reality.
He was co-author of the declaration of Philadelphia of 1945 which set postwar goals for the ILO, and affirmed that economic and financial policies were to be judged by their contribution to social justice.
It was a view which the General Assembly of the UN was to adopt some twenty-five years later.
His influence extended far beyond the ILO: between 1944 and 1973 he left his mark on the evolution of the system of international organizations as a whole.
Soon after his election as director-general, the ILO was involved in a political controversy which touched upon the principle of universality in international organizations.
It was a principle he consistently defended.
‘The world community’, he remarked, ‘is not a club of the mutually congenial.’
The financial and political consequences of the dispute clouded his tenure of office, which was cut short by his premature death.
Jenks charted new courses in two worlds: in the domain of international law; and in the theory and practice of international organizations.
Both were inspired by the potential of law to create a disciplined framework for global technological and social change.
The range and quality of Jenks's contribution placed him among the foremost writers on international law of his generation.
His Space Law (1965), for example, anticipated many issues space exploration was to raise in succeeding decades.
It was but one of his many books.
Jenks recognized that the future could not be shaped merely by the projection of legal principles: they had to be embodied in appropriate global institutions.
His works on international immunities (1960) and international adjudication (1964) were virtual textbooks on the law of international organizations.
But for Jenks thought was always the precursor to action.
He pioneered new processes and procedures within the ILO to provide international guarantees for human rights, particularly those relating to freedom of association, and freedom from discrimination and forced labour.
And his involvement with industrial relations in such countries as Japan, Portugal, and Greece set the pattern for their future development while creating new techniques of international supervision.
He was awarded several honorary degrees in recognition of this intellectual and institutional contribution.
Jenks was an imposing figure, both physically and intellectually, with an incandescent energy and uncompromising integrity.
Never intolerant of individuals, he had little patience for pettiness of mind.
But to those in distress, and towards unrecognized or emerging talent, he was unfailing in his generosity and support.
A genial and stimulating host, his ‘Homeric laugh’ was the delight of a generation of international lawyers, politicians, officials, and young people who were entertained in his book-lined apartment in Geneva.
He was married in 1949 to Jane Louise, daughter of Frederick S. Broverman, businessman, of New York City, whose charm complemented his intellectual austerity with warmth and grace.
They had two sons.
Jenks died in Rome 9 October 1973.
His portrait, by Benedict Rubbra, is now in the International Labour Office in Geneva.
[The British Yearbook of International Law , 1972/3; private information; personal knowledge.]
Michael Prestwich
or  (d. 1314), soldier, diplomat, and royal minister, came from Champagne, and styled himself lord of Vaucouleurs.
He was a younger son of Simon de Joinville; his eldest brother was Jean de Joinville, biographer of Louis IX of France.
Geoffrey came to England in 1251.
His half-sister was the wife of Peter of Savoy, Earl of Richmond [q.v.], one of the queen's uncles, and he was linked to a powerful group of Savoyards at court.
He was closely associated with the heir to the throne, the future Edward I, and was with him in Gascony in 1255.
Through marriage in 1252 to the widow of Peter of Geneva, Matilda de Braose, a granddaughter and co-heiress of Walter de Lacy, sixth Baron Lacy [q.v.], he acquired lands in the Welsh marches, at Ewyas Lacy and Ludlow, and in Ireland, where he and his wife held half the county of Meath.
His power there was centred on the great castle at Trim, which he held at the king's pleasure.
Edward, the heir to the throne, used the Geneville castle at Ludlow in the days after his escape from custody in 1265.
Geoffrey also provided important assistance in Ireland in that year.
He showed great political skill in reconciling Montfortian and royalist supporters, enabling Edward to receive significant support from Ireland in the campaign that culminated in victory at Evesham.
There was a strong crusading tradition in the Geneville family, extending back to the mid-twelfth century: Geoffrey and his brother William duly accompanied Edward on crusade in 1270, but returned before him.
Geoffrey was then appointed justiciar of Ireland in 1273, a post he held until 1276.
He served in Edward's Welsh wars, but his interests increasingly centred upon Ireland: in 1283 he granted his English lands to his son Peter.
Later in Edward I's reign he and his wife had a series of disputes with the Dublin government.
They had been successful in the 1250s in recovering the original franchisal rights, as they had existed under Henry II, in their liberty of Trim.
In 1293, however, the liberty of Trim was taken into the king's hands, following a dispute over a case of imprisonment.
The liberty was restored two years later in recognition of Geoffrey's service in Wales.
It was confiscated again in 1302, but eventually, after a long struggle, he succeeded in maintaining his palatine rights.
Geoffrey was fortunate in having the support of the king in his arguments with royal officials in Ireland.
Geoffrey was an experienced diplomat: he took part in negotiations with the Welsh prince Llewelyn ap Gruffydd [q.v.]in 1267, and in 1280 he acted as Edward's proctor in Paris.
In 1290 and 1300 he went on missions to the papal curia , and in 1298 and 1299 took part in Anglo-French peace negotiations.
His major role in domestic politics came in 1297, when he supported the king in the crisis caused by royal demands for men and money for the French war.
Edward summoned troops to London, and demanded that Roger Bigod, fifth Earl of Norfolk, and Humphrey de Bohun, third Earl of Hereford [qq.v.], enrol them, in their capacities as marshal and constable.
This the earls refused to do, so the king replaced them in their offices with Geoffrey de Geneville and Thomas de Berkeley respectively.
Geoffrey's appointment was appropriate, as he had been assistant to the marshal in the Welsh war of 1282.
Once the crisis was over, the office reverted to the Earl of Norfolk.
Geoffrey de Geneville outlived his two sons, Geoffrey and Peter, and died in 1314, far from his native Champagne and full of years, at the Dominican priory of Trim, to which he had retired in 1308.
His heiress, his granddaughter Joan, married Roger Mortimer, eighth Baron of Wigmore [q.v.], lover of Queen Isabella [q.v.].
[A. Clarke et al .
(eds.),
Foedera , 1816–69; G. E. Cokayne,Complete Peerage , new edn., vol. v, 1926; M. C. Prestwich,Edward I , 1988; G. H. Hand,English Law in Ireland 1290–1324 , 1967; R. Frame, ‘Ireland and the Barons’ wars', in Thirteenth Century England , vol. i (ed.
P. R. Coss and S. D. Lloyd), 1986; S. D. Lloyd,English Society and the Crusade 1216–1307 , 1988.]