

H F Oxbury
, Sir John (1853–1941), veterinary pioneer, was born 17 June 1853, the younger son in the family of two sons and two daughters of Andrew McFadyean, tenant farmer, of Barrachan, Wigtownshire, and his wife Jane McKissoch.
He left school at the Ewart Institute, Edinburgh, at the age of sixteen and worked on his father's farm, which was mainly concerned with a herd of dairy cattle, a small flock of sheep, and some pigs and horses.
When high rents and falling prices threatened the farm with insolvency he decided to use the experience he had obtained with domestic animals by training to become a veterinary surgeon.
In 1874 he entered the Royal (‘Dick’) Veterinary College, Edinburgh, and in 1876 became MRCVS.
He was also awarded the gold medal of the Highland and Agricultural Society.
From 1876 to 1891 he was lecturer in anatomy at the college, and in 1891 he was appointed dean and professor of pathology and bacteriology.
Early in his career McFadyean recognized that the study and teaching of veterinary anatomy were handicapped by the lack of detailed knowledge of the subject and the consequent inadequacy of the textbooks then in use.
Having considered the absence of any work on the anatomy of animals comparable with that obtained by medical students in the dissection of the human body he decided, first, to obtain qualifications in medicine, and secondly, to undertake his own studies in the anatomy of animals.
Accordingly, in 1883 he obtained his MB and B.Sc.
at Edinburgh University.
Meanwhile, he was carrying out his own investigations on the carcasses of horses which led to the publication in 1884 of his The Anatomy of the Horse — a Dissection Guide , followed in 1889 by The Comparative Anatomy of the Domesticated Animals .
As his experience increased his interest turned from the study of animal anatomy to problems in the fields of bacteriology and pathology, and at the same time his reputation as a pioneer in veterinary surgery steadily increased.
In 1888 he founded the Journal of Comparative Pathology and Bacteriology .
In 1892 McFadyean was appointed principal of the Royal Veterinary College, London, and he held that post until his retirement in 1927.
In 1901, as a member of the British congress on tuberculosis, he created something of a sensation.
Before a distinguished audience Dr Robert Koch, the eminent Berlin bacteriologist, who in 1882 had described the tubercle bacillus, lecturing on the subject of the disease, stated positively that the bacillus found in infected animals could not be transferred to human beings.
At the end of Koch's discourse McFadyean took the floor, disagreed with the eminent doctor, and described his own research in which he was certain that infected cows' milk was responsible for tuberculosis in young children.
His researches, which led to the discovery of the causes and means of treatment of bovine tuberculosis, were eventually published in his Tuberculosis as regards Heredity in Causation and Elimination from Infected Herds (1911).
From 1889 to 1904 McFadyean was also keenly interested in the problems of anthrax disease in animals.
The importance of his work was recognized with a knighthood in 1905.
He was president of the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons from 1906 to 1910 and again in 1930–1; from 1904 till 1928 he was honorary consulting veterinary surgeon to the Royal Agricultural Society of England.
In 1930 he presided at the eleventh International Veterinary Congress in London.
In the course of his career he received many honours from medical, veterinary, and agricultural societies both at home and abroad, including an honorary fellowship of the Royal Society of Medicine.
When he retired he had come to be regarded as the founder of modern veterinary research.
In 1883 he married Mara Eleanor (died 1929), daughter of Thomas Walley, principal of the Royal Veterinary College, Edinburgh.
They had three sons and two daughters.
The eldest son,(Sir) Andrew McFadyean [q.v.], became a Treasury official, diplomat, and businessman.
McFadyean spent the years of his retirement in Leatherhead and died in a Hindhead nursing home 1 February 1941.
The Times obituary said ‘By his death the veterinary world has lost one of the last of the band of pioneers who successfully converted veterinarianism into the great profession which is constantly advancing both in scientific knowledge and in public esteem.’
[The Times , 4 February 1941; Iain Pattison,John McFadyean: a Great British Veterinarian , 1981.]
Asa Briggs
,Peter Pendleton (1892–1963), broadcasting engineer, was born in La Puebla, Mexico, the third son and third and youngest child of William Alfred Eckersley, railway engineer, and his wife Rachel, daughter of Thomas Henry Huxley [q.v.], physiologist.
Educated at Bedales, he was apprenticed with the Manchester firm of Mather & Platt before entering Manchester University in 1912.
He graduated with a certificate of electrical engineering in 1915.
After serving with the Royal Flying Corps as a wireless equipment officer, a time which included a formative spell at the Wireless Experimental Station, Biggin Hill, Eckersley joined Marconi's Wireless Telegraph Company in 1919 as head of the experimental section of its designs department.
He worked at Writtle, near Chelmsford, where he was the leader of an able, if unconventional, team that provided regular transmissions of programmes for radio amateurs at the request of the Radio Society of Great Britain.
A lively and energetic character, enjoying publicity and recognized by his contemporaries as a ‘personality’, Eckersley did more than any other person to lay the technical foundation of broadcasting in Britain.
In 1923 he was hired personally by John (later first Baron) Reith [q.v.]as chief engineer of the recently formed British Broadcasting Company, staying in the post until 1929, by which time it had become a public corporation, fully in charge of the ‘spreading of the service’, and converting his own idea of a ‘regional plan’ for radio transmission into a reality.
He was highly successful both in negotiating behind the scenes with the Post Office and in informing and interesting listeners in the implications for them, which included alternative programmes, of developing communications technology.
He also played a prominent part in the first international meetings on wavelength allocation and in the preparations for empire broadcasting.
The high point of his BBC career was the opening in 1929 of the first dual transmitter high-power section in Brookmans Park, near London.
At the height of his influence, Eckersley was compelled overnight to leave the Corporation after a painful divorce in the same year.
The parting with Reith, temperamentally completely different from him, who had been a friend as well as a colleague, was difficult for both men, as difficult as a second marriage was to prove for Eckersley.
In 1917 Eckersley married Stella, daughter of Julius Charles, son of Sir George Grove [q.v.], writer on music; they had one son and one daughter.
His second wife was Frances Dorothy Clark, daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Arthur James Stephen, a member of the distinguished Stephen family, whose pro-Nazi views, the last of her enthusiasms, were to lead her to broadcast occasionally for Germany during World War II.
Eckersley himself for a time worked for Sir Oswald Mosley [q.v.], joining the New Party and involving himself subsequently in commercial broadcasting schemes which interested Mosley also.
He continued, however, to develop his often original ideas on communications technology, regarding himself as ‘an inventor of mechanisms to serve ideas’.
Fascinated by the possibilities of wire broadcasting, he was one of the founders in 1931 of Rediffusion, the name of which was suggested by him.
He also interested himself in radio advertising.
Some of his ideas were set out in his only book, the highly readable The Power behind the Microphone (1941), which also charts, highly selectively, his own experience.
The Institution of Electrical Engineers has listed his various papers and publications.
Eckersley's last years were frustrating, as were his business ventures, which included the exploitation of his ‘talking telephone’.
He died 18 March 1963 at West London Hospital, Hammersmith, shortly after returning from a trip to the Cameroons.
[P. P. Eckersley,The Power behind the Microphone , 1941.]
Leslie Howsam
,Eliza (1848–1937), conveyancer and social investigator, was born 25 December 1848 in Hampstead, the fifth of six daughters and the seventh of eight children of Charles Orme, distiller, of Southwark, and his wife Eliza, eldest daughter of the Revd Edward Andrews of Walworth.
She attended Bedford College for Women and entered University College London in 1871, where she studied law and political economy, winning in 1876 first prize in Roman law and the Hume scholarship in jurisprudence.
Among her mentors were John Elliot Cairnes, W. Leonard Courtney, and W. A. Hunter [qq.v.], from whom she learned an attachment to laissez-faire economics and liberal political principles.
In 1888 she was the first woman in Britain to earn the degree of LLB from the University of London.
The English bar and the Law Society, however, were not prepared to admit women to their ranks.
From 1875 until about 1904, from an office in Chancery Lane, she conducted a prosperous business, ‘devilling’ for lawyers as a conveyancer and patent agent.
She also worked for women's suffrage and employment, writing and lecturing on these and other contemporary subjects.
She was a founding member of the Women's Liberal Federation in 1887, editing their Women's Gazette and Weekly News from 1889 to 1891, and of the Women's National Liberal Federation in 1892, writing the life of the founder (Lady Fry of Darlington , 1898).
In 1892 she became senior lady assistant commissioner to the royal commission on labour, investigating women's work in Ireland, in the Black Country iron industry, and in London public houses.
She opposed protective labour legislation for women workers.
In 1894 she was a member of the departmental committee on prison conditions, examining the situations of female prison staff and inmates.
Orme remained unmarried, living with her sister Beatrice at Tulse Hill from the early nineties.
She left no personal papers, and little is known about her private life, but she was regarded as a formidable person by Beatrice and Sidney Webb (later Baron Passfield), George Gissing, and George Bernard Shaw [qq.v.].
She was critical of what she called ‘strong-minded women’, who went in for stridency and useless eccentricity, preferring the ‘sound-minded women…who can take a journey by railway without an escort, who can stand by a friend through a surgical operation, and who yet wear ordinary bonnets and carry medium-sized umbrellas’.
She died 22 June 1937 in Lambeth.
[Information from census records and London directories;Law Journal , 12 December 1903, p. 620;Englishwomen's Review , 1873–1904,passim Leslie Howsam, ‘Sound Minded Women’: Eliza Orme and the Study and Practice of Law in Late-Victorian England’,Atlantis , vol. xv, part 1, 1989.]
Kenneth O Morgan
,David (1818–1890), industrialist, was born in Llandinam, Montgomeryshire, 18 December 1818, the eldest of the nine children of David Davies, farmer and timber sawyer, and his wife Elizabeth (probably née Felix).
He left the village school at the age of eleven, and helped his father in farming and sawing timber.
When his father died in 1846 he had to support the family, but his career took on a dramatic new turn when he was asked to undertake a contract to build a bridge over the River Severn near his home.
He showed talent as both engineer and entrepreneur, and other bridges and roads followed.
He then turned to becoming a major builder of railways.
In 1855 he built the first section of the Llanidloes- Newton line, and later extended his operations all over Wales.
By the early 1860s he had covered much of mid-Wales with a network of railway lines, many of them in partnership with Thomas Savin, with whom he later fell out.
In 1862 he travelled to the island of Sardinia to advise on the developing railway system there.
He embarked on a new career in 1864 when he took a lease of mineral property between Ton Pentre and Treorchy in the upper Rhondda valley, not hitherto a coal-producing area.
After two years of anxiety, one of the finest seams of steam coal in the world was struck in the Maendy pit, Cwmparc, and the Ocean Collieries Company was set up in 1867 with an authorized capital of £240,000.
New pits were sunk at Dare (1870) and Bwllfa (1877): by 1900 the four collieries of the Ocean Company were producing over a million and a half tons of coal annually, and many other pits had also been sunk profitably.
In 1887 Davies set up a limited liability company, the Ocean Coal Company, with a nominal capital of £536,000.
The Rhondda valleys were now a booming industrial concern, Davies was a millionaire, and the Ocean stood second only to Powell Duffryn as a mass producer of quality Welsh steam coal.
Davies's rivalry with the Bute estate, which controlled Cardiff docks and the Taff Vale railway that served it, led him into another dramatic new venture, the building of new docks at Barry, ten miles to the west of Cardiff, as a rival entrepôt for Rhondda coal.
After a fierce struggle, a private act of Parliament was passed in 1884, and Barry docks came into being a year later.
It grew rapidly and by 1913 had even outstripped Cardiff to become the major coal-exporting port in the world.
A devout Calvinist Methodist and strict advocate of temperance, Davies became a patron of Nonconformist and other charitable and educational causes.
He backed the movement for Welsh higher education and became a governor of the newly formed University College of Wales, Aberystwyth, founded in 1872.
In 1875 Davies became treasurer of the college, resigning in 1886.
He also took a close interest in Liberal politics.
He stood unsuccessfully for Cardigan district against a local Whiggish landowner, Sir Thomas Lloyd, in 1865, but in 1874 won the seat and was returned unopposed in 1880.
He was elected for Cardiganshire in 1885, but he opposed the first Irish Home Rule Bill introduced by W. E. Gladstone in June 1886.
At the resulting general election he was defeated by nine votes by a fellow Liberal, Bowen Rowlands, who backed Irish home rule.
He was elected to the first Montgomeryshire county council in 1889.
Davies was a rugged, frugal, self-made capitalist, a relentless business competitor, who remained close to his chapel roots.
Severely puritanical and sabbatarian in outlook, he also had a great fund of homely anecdotes about village mores, in both Welsh and English.
He was a public-spirited philanthropist, and was perhaps the most influential Welshman of his time.
In 1851 he married a local girl, Margaret Jones of Llanfair Caereinion, the daughter of Edward Jones, a farmer.
They had one son, Edward, who was to die in 1898.
His grandson, David, became first Baron Davies [q.v.].
David Davies died 20 July 1890 in Llandinam.
[Davies of Llandinam Papers, National Library of Wales; Ivor Thomas,Top Sawyer , 1938, new edn. 1988; E. D. Lewis,The Rhondda Valleys , 1959; Donald Moore (ed.),
Barry, the Centenary Book , 1985.]
Alan F Rodger
,William Murray (1865–1934), legal scholar, was born at 27 India Street, Edinburgh, 15 March 1865, the eldest in the family of one son and three daughters of William Ellis Gloag (later Lord Kincairney, q.v.),
Scottish judge, and his wife Helen Stark, daughter of James Burn, writer to the Signet, Edinburgh.
He was educated at Edinburgh Academy and Balliol College, Oxford, obtaining a first class in modern history in 1887.
He attended law classes at Edinburgh University and became an advocate in 1889.
Success as a pleader eluded him and, like many counsel in that position, Gloag became a law reporter.
With J. M. Irvine he published Law of Rights in Security Heritable and Moveable including Cautionary Obligations (1897) and the future direction of his career was set.
Two years later Gloag became assistant in Scots law at Edinburgh University and in February 1905 he was appointed regius professor of law at Glasgow University.
Gloag moved to Glasgow where, with an unmarried sister, he set up home in the university.
In 1909 he was made a KC.
A dedicated scholar, Gloag was an inspired teacher, even for students attending lectures at 8 a.m.
He spoke without notes and sprinkled his trenchant remarks with a dry wit which some claim to glimpse in Carmina Legis, or Verses Illustrative of the Law of Scotland (1920).
Though reserved, he was popular with his students.
To the best among them he offered opulent breakfasts ending with stronger drink than coffee.
He was a founder of the student law society.
During term, Gloag's life centred on the university.
He acted as dean of the law faculty and served on the court.
Outside the university, in July 1915 he became a chairman of the Glasgow munitions tribunal, but he proved ill-suited to handling its rowdy proceedings and was dismissed the following year.
Spells as a sub-commissioner under the National Service scheme and as assessor to the Glasgow dean of guild court (from 1926) were successful.
His leisure was spent at the Western Club and, on Saturday afternoons, at Prestwick Golf Club.
Vacations found him at his estate at Murthly, Perthshire, or, after its sale in 1921, on Speyside and in St Andrews.
Gloag was an assiduous golfer and bridge player.
He achieved a hole in one in Troon in 1907.
In 1914 Gloag published The Law of Contract (2nd edn., 1929), the principal Scottish monograph on the subject and his lasting memorial.
He assembled, organized, and analysed a mass of authorities, both Scottish and English.
The resulting exposition is so authoritative that practitioners and the courts departed from it only rarely unless subsequent developments made this necessary.
In 1917 he received the LLD degree from Edinburgh University.
Ten years later, with Professor R. Candlish Henderson, he produced an Introduction to the Law of Scotland (9th edn., 1987), a succinct and accurate statement of the law.
Gloag had a deformity of the right arm and a somewhat high-pitched voice, but overall made a forceful impression.
He was unmarried.
Having become ill in Prestwick, he was admitted to Park Nursing Home, Glasgow, where he died two days later, 5 February 1934.
[David M. Walker,The Scottish Jurists , 1985; G. R. Rubin,War, Law, and Labour , 1987.]
Terence R Sackett
,Francis (1822–1898), photographer, was born 7 October 1822 in Chesterfield, Derbyshire, the only son and the second of three children of Francis Frith, cooper of Chesterfield, and his wife Alice.
Born into a Quaker family, Frith's childhood combined firm morality with the indulgence given to an only son.
His wanderings in the nearby Derbyshire dales laid the foundations for his lifelong love of landscape.
Between 1834 and 1838 he attended the Quaker Camp Hill School in Birmingham.
He was a mediocre scholar but loved poetry, science, and travel books.
After leaving he was apprenticed to William Hargreaves, of a cutlery firm in Sheffield.
The internal conflicts caused by his strong Quaker beliefs and lack of prospects caused a breakdown when he was twenty-one.
For two years he travelled through Britain convalescing.
In 1845 he started a wholesale grocery business in Liverpool, and later a printing business; hard work and a good business sense allowed him to sell these for a small fortune in 1856.
In 1853 Frith had been a founder-member of the Liverpool Photographic Society.
Fascinated by photography, he embarked on the three journeys to the Middle East that were to make his reputation.
Between 1856 and 1859 he travelled to Palestine and Syria and up the Nile beyond the sixth cataract; he believed he was only the second European to have gone so far.
His photographs of the landscape and monuments were taken under dangerous and difficult conditions.
He slept in tombs and caves and was attacked by wild dogs and brigands; inside an unventilated tent he worked in desert temperatures with collodion chemicals that boiled on the glass-plate negatives.
Back in London his work was praised by the Photographic Society and The Times .
He lectured and exhibited and published his photographs in a series of successful books.
In 1860 Frith set up a photographic company in Reigate to record as many locations in Britain as he could.
The arrival of the railways had made cheap holidays widely available, and Frith's prints made popular souvenirs.
Frith & Co. became the largest photographic publisher in the world.
Frith took thousands of the photographs himself and commissioned many fine photographers, including Francis Bedford.
Success allowed Frith to devote more time to leisure and to his family; he remained a convinced Quaker.
Among his publications, the most influential was A Reasonable Faith: Short Religious Essays for the Times (1844).
For the last twenty years of his life his bronchitis made him take holidays on the French Riviera; Frith says of these later years that he ‘fell back upon books and art, nature, love and poetry’.
After his death in 1898 his sons Eustace and Cyril continued the business.
The Frith & Co. archive in Reigate became one of the most important collections of topographical photographs in existence.
In 1860 Frith married Mary Ann (died 1901), daughter of Alfred Rosling of Reigate, timber importer.
They had five sons and three daughters.
Frith died 25 February 1898 at his home, La Petite Bastide, in Cannes, France, and was buried there.
[Bill Jay,Victorian Cameraman: Francis Frith's Views of Rural England 1850–1898 , 1973; Frith & Co. records, Andover.]
Graham Murphy
,Hardwicke Drummond (1851–1920), Anglican priest and co-founder of the National Trust, was born 18 September 1851 in Shiplake-on-Thames, the second of six sons and fourth of ten children of the Revd Robert Drummond Burrell Rawnsley, rector of Shiplake, and his wife Catherine Ann, daughter of Sir William Franklin and niece of the Arctic explorer Sir John Franklin [q.v.].
Educated at Uppingham, where he gained a scholarship and won prizes for athletics and literature, he went on in 1870 to Balliol College, Oxford.
Here he also distinguished himself in athletics and rowing.
He received a third class in natural science in 1874.
Under the tutelage of John Ruskin [q.v.]he joined the ‘Hinksey roadmenders’, and through him was later introduced to Octavia Hill [q.v.].
Ordained deacon in 1875, he became the first chaplain of Clifton College Mission.
His success in winning the confidence of the people in one of Bristol's poorest areas paradoxically led to his dismissal.
In 1877 he was ordained priest and in 1878 took up his ministry in Wray-on-Windermere.
Eliciting the support of Ruskin, Octavia Hill, and (Sir) Robert Hunter [q.v.], solicitor to the Commons Preservation Society, in 1883 Rawnsley successfully spearheaded the campaign to prevent the construction of railways through the Vale of Newlands (Derwentwater) and Ennerdale.
This protest, the first of numerous campaigns to protect the region, led to his foundation of the Lake District Defence Society.
In 1883 he also became vicar of Crosthwaite and rural dean of Keswick, where, with the help of his artistically talented wife, he founded the Keswick School of Industrial Arts.
His far-sighted ideas on education subsequently led to the foundation of Keswick High School as an experiment in coeducation, and the introduction of music and dance into the curriculum.
From 1888 he served on the new Cumberland county council, opposing the construction of roads over Lakeland passes, reducing mining pollution, and organizing the proper signposting of footpaths.
His persistence and single-minded determination made him enemies, and his opposition to the granting of new liquor licences offended vested interests and lost him re-election in 1895.
Unabashed, he went on in later years to inveigh against pornography and violence in the cinema.
In 1893 he was appointed honorary canon of Carlisle Cathedral and five years later declined the bishopric of Madagascar.
Refining ideas which Ruskin had been the first to promulgate,(Sir) Robert Hunter, Octavia Hill, and Rawnsley met in the offices of the Commons Preservation Society on 16 November 1893 and founded the organization which, eight months later, was inaugurated under the presidency of Hugh Lupus Grosvenor, first Duke of Westminster [q.v.], as the National Trust for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty.
Rawnsley, honorary secretary until his death, oversaw the acquisition of large areas of countryside.
A keen traveller, in 1896 Rawnsley was sent as a newspaper correspondent to cover the coronation of the tsar in Moscow, and three years later toured the eastern states of the USA as ambassador for the National Trust.
He had previously made visits to Egypt and the Holy Land and undertaken several walking and painting tours in the Alps with his wife.
In 1912 he was appointed honorary chaplain to George V, having organized bonfire celebrations for Queen Victoria's jubilees and the king's coronation.
In 1918 he chaired a war memorials committee and organized nationwide pyrotechnic displays in celebration of the armistice.
In addition to pamphlets and articles Rawnsley published more than forty books, many of them about the life, history, and literary associations of the Lake District, and, influenced by Alfred, Lord Tennyson and William Wordsworth [qq.v.], a vast output of poetry.
He also wrote children's songs and rhymes.
His close friendship with Beatrix Potter [q.v.]encouraged her to publish her earliest books and later to become a generous donor of land to the National Trust.
Rawnsley was impulsive, eloquent, irascible, and mercurial, with a stocky figure, piercing blue eyes, and bristling beard.
He was at once gentle, compassionate, and amusing, as at home with a fell shepherd as with royalty.
In 1878 he married Edith, daughter of John Fletcher of Croft, Ambleside.
They had one son.
Edith died in December 1916 and seventeen months later Rawnsley married his secretary, Eleanor Foster, daughter of William Frederick Simpson of Grasmere.
There were no children of this second marriage.
Rawnsley retired from the ministry in 1917, died at Allan Bank, Grasmere, 28 May 1920, and was buried in Crosthwaite.
Friars Craig in Derwentwater was purchased by public subscription and given to the National Trust in his memory in 1922.
[Eleanor F. Rawnsley,Canon Rawnsley , 1923; Graham Murphy,Founders of the National Trust , 1987; family papers; private information.]
John H Appleby
,Moses (fl. 1695–1714), iatrochemist and mineral master general, was one of the eleven children of Richard Stringer of Loughborough, Leicestershire.
He practised, paramedically, before leaving the Newcastle under Lyme area in 1690 and obtaining a medical licence at Chester in July 1691.
Stringer was admitted a member of the Society of Mineral and Battery Works in December 1692 and of the Society of Mines Royal in June 1693.
After studying chemistry and medicine under Benjamin Woodroffe [q.v.], principal of Gloucester Hall, Oxford (later refounded as Worcester College) in 1692, he taught chemistry and experimental philosophy at Gloucester Hall till about 1696, by which time he was working ‘at his Refineries in the High Peak, Derbyshire’.
In March 1698, settled in the Strand, Stringer published a congratulatory poem to Peter the Great on the tsar's arrival in England, together with accounts from the Protestant Mercury of his dramatic cure of a person bitten by a viper and his spectacular experiments with metals and minerals for the tsar at the Deptford manor-house belonging to John Evelyn [q.v.].
In his 1699 pamphlet,English and Welsh Mines and Minerals Discovered , ‘M.S.’ advocated to the House of Commons the employment of the poor for profitable mining.
The following year he moved to Hugh's Court, Blackfriars, considerably extending the premises with a large laboratory and foundry.
In 1701 the Admiralty ordered a squadron to the West Indies, commanded by John Benbow [q.v.], to carry out the first recorded naval therapeutic trials of two chemical medicines invented by Stringer to combat scurvy and fevers.
Admiral Sir Clowdisley Shovell [q.v.]may also have used them in the Mediterranean.
Three editions of Stringer's tract,Variety of Surprising Experiments (1703, 1705, and 1707), supplemented by three published open letters to Woodroffe (in 1704 and 1707) evince his skill in devising these and other chemico-mineral medicines along Paracelsian lines.
State Papers and other sources indicate that Stringer ran a large foundry business, owned ships for exporting and importing metals and ordnance, and planned to set up a company for colonizing West Indian islands.
The Societies of Mines Royal and Mineral and Battery Works, incorporated in 1568, had become virtually moribund by 1695.
Stringer, whose book,Opera Mineralia Explicata (‘By M.S., M.D.’, 1713), presents a detailed history of the societies, played a decisive part in preserving their records, salvaged by Sir Isaac Newton [q.v.], and in renewing their rights and charters.
They amalgamated under him as mineral master general in 1709–10.
He persuaded the bishop of London to be a governor and Newton to become a deputy governor.
Sir Christopher Wren [q.v.]helped build a new meeting-room above Stringer's laboratory in Blackfriars.
Robert Boyle [q.v.]was one of several distinguished members of the societies.
Stringer's titles of chemist and physician to King William, and chemist, physician, and mineralist to Queen Anne in some of his publications were probably honorary designations.
A controversial character, he was incarcerated in the Fleet prison on three occasions.
In January 1713 Stringer issued an advertisement to scotch rumours of his death occasioned by the demise of the empiric William Salmon [q.v.]in Blackfriars.
Stringer was married by 1692.
He and his wife Mary had at least seven children.
He died intestate in the autumn of 1714.
[Leo Loewenson, ‘People Peter the Great met in England.
Moses Stringer, Chymist and Physician’,Slavonic and East European Review , vol. xxxvii, 1959; William Rees,Industry before the Industrial Revolution , vol. ii, 1968; John H. Appleby, ‘Moses Stringer (fl .
1695–1713): Iatrochemist and Mineral Master General’,Ambix , vol. xxxiv, 1987.]
Charles Wintour
,(Paul) Julius de , Baron (1816–1899), news agency pioneer, was born Israel Beer in Kassel, Germany, 21 July 1816, the third son in the family of four sons and one daughter of Samuel Levi Josaphat, provisional rabbi of Kassel, and his wife Bette Sanders of Kassel.
Soon after the early death of his father in 1829, Israel appears to have become a clerk in an uncle's bank in Göttingen, remaining there for ten years.
He eventually moved to Berlin, where he changed his name to Reuter.
He was baptized in the Christian religion in 1844.
He took a share in a bookshop and publishing business, but the firm's radical pamphlets may have incurred official displeasure and Reuter moved to Paris in 1848.
There he first worked as a translator in the news agency run by Charles Havas, who was later to become his friend.
He soon switched his attention to bridging the 100-mile gap between the Franco-Belgian telegraph wire which ended at Brussels and the German one at Aachen.
By renting pigeons he was able to beat the mail train by several hours, but by Christmas 1850 the gap was finally closed and his service became redundant.
Having now accumulated a small amount of capital and a tiny corps of agents in European cities, Reuter moved to London in 1851 and set up an office in the Royal Exchange Buildings.
He made use of the new Dover–Calais cable to transmit information, which he sold to clients, between the London and Paris stock exchanges.
Although other contracts followed, he found it hard to sell a wider news service, and The Times was particularly recalcitrant.
Eventually in 1858 he persuaded the Morning Advertiser and other newspapers to take his service on a fortnight's free trial.
This was a success and at last even The Times , under pressure from rising costs, succumbed.
Reuter, who was naturalized in 1857, energetically expanded and developed his agency, showing a keen appreciation of the value of exclusive news ‘beats’ and using new cables whenever he could.
In 1865 he broke the news of President Abraham Lincoln's assassination several hours ahead of any rivals.
So that his firm could lay its own line to Germany, he floated Reuters as a £250,000 public company in 1865, taking the post of managing director.
The company made a large profit when that line was nationalized.
In 1870 Reuter formed a news agency cartel with Havas in Paris and Wolff in Germany, which survived until the 1930s.
He secured his most spectacular coup in 1872 when he won a concession from the shah of Persia covering the exploitation of all industrial and mineral rights.
Due to religious pressure and intervention from Russia, this was soon rescinded.
Reuter retired in 1878, handing over control of the agency to his son Herbert.
The success of Reuter's agency lay in its objectivity, speed, and even-handed treatment of clients.
The profits of the news business were never substantial and much was ploughed back into expansion.
Adorned with lavish side-whiskers, Reuter, succinct of speech but a superb salesman, was short and lively; he gazed sharply at visitors through pince-nez spectacles.
A strong supporter of the British empire, he ran his business in patriarchal fashion.
In 1871 he was ennobled by the Duke of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha.
In 1891 Queen Victoria, to whom Reuter had been careful to send copies of important cables, allowed him to ‘enjoy the privileges of the foreign nobility in Britain'.
In 1845 he married Ida Maria Elisabeth Clementina, daughter of Sigismund Matthaeus Magnus, banker, of Bury Street, St Mary Axe in the City of London.
They had two sons and two daughters, one of whom died in 1846.
Reuter died 25 February 1899 in Nice, France.
[Graham Storey,Reuters’ Century , 1951; Reuters archives.]
R G Davies
,Nicholas (c. 1355–1424), royal servant and bishop, was born in Menthorpe, East Riding of Yorkshire, and brought up in nearby Bubwith.
The Revd T. S. Holmes speculated that he was the son of Thomas and Isabel de Bubwith and had two brothers, Henry and Thomas.
His protégé and servant, Thomas Bubwith (son of William) was almost certainly a kinsman.
If he was ever at Oxford University, he left no mark.
His family evidently had existing contacts with royal administration, and he may well have been a Chancery clerk as early as June 1379, enjoying church preferment regularly thereafter, although only on 7 February 1387 was he first called ‘king's clerk’.
His career in Chancery remained solid if unspectacular throughout the 1390s.
During Richard II's two Irish expeditions (1394–5 and 1399), he served as attorney in England for many leading participants.
Early in 1399 he was promoted master in Chancery.
The revolution of 1399 affected him not at all.
Briefly, in 1402, he became Henry IV's secretary, proof of that king's continuing difficulty in running an effective government rather than of special intimacy.
He returned to his Chancery career as keeper of the Rolls from 24 September 1402.
In these years he was frequently a proctor for prelates and religious institutions in Parliament.
In March 1404 he was nominated to serve on the king's council, again as proof to sceptics of the king's intentions to provide competent government.
None the less, he did not attend until becoming keeper of the Privy Seal on 2 March 1405, a post he held until his promotion to the episcopate.
In faction-ridden and difficult times for governments, Bubwith's value had been his simple ability to keep the wheels turning, and for that he was well rewarded.
In March 1403 his numerous benefices were reckoned to be worth over £800 a year.
Since July 1400 he had been archdeacon of Dorset, absentee but perhaps not without interest.
In 1401–2 he briefly also held the powerful northern archdeaconry of Richmond.
On 26 September 1406 he was consecrated at Mortlake after his promotion to the see of London.
In the midst of fraught domestic politics and Anglo-papal aggravations, Bubwith was twice translated in reshuffles in 1407, first to Salisbury (which he never visited as bishop) and then to Bath and Wells, not unwillingly.
Still a councillor, he was persuaded on 15 April 1407 to become treasurer of the realm, and he rode out yet another financial crisis before retiring on 14 July 1408.
Even thereafter, when factional purges were regular, Bubwith was always named to the council.
In fact, he rarely came out of Bath and Wells, where he was proving a conscientious diocesan, predictably of a brisk administrative turn of mind.
Such congenial rustication was unexpectedly disturbed by his appointment as a principal envoy of Henry V to the council of Constance on 20 October 1414.
Whilst his colleague, Robert Hallum of Salisbury [q.v.], was chosen to provide the intellectual lustre, Bubwith was selected for his safe pair of hands.
Only in spring 1418 could Bubwith return to England and his diocese.
His vigour left him in September 1422.
His deathbed will (10 October 1424) reflected him fairly: considerable wealth, portioned out in particular for the completion of ambitious rebuildings of Bubwith church (£300) and Wells Cathedral (£667), roadworks in Somerset (£667), and prayers for his soul, especially by poor priests in Oxford and friars in London and his diocese (£667).
It was in character that he referred to detailed oral instructions about all this.
He died 27 October 1424 and was buried in the chantry chapel in Wells Cathedral which, of course, he had already constructed.
[A. B. Emden,A Biographical Register of the University of Oxford to A.D. 1500 , vol. i, 1957; J. Otway-Ruthven,The King's Secretary and the Signet Office in the XV Century , 1939; E. F. Jacob (ed.),
The Register of Henry Chichele, Archbishop of Canterbury, 1414–43 , vol. ii, 1938, pp. 298–302 (includes will); T. S. Holmes (ed.),
The Register of Nicholas Bubwith, Bishop of Bath and Wells, 1407–24 , Somerset Record Society, vols. xxix–xxx, 1914; episcopal registers in Guildhall Library, London, and Salisbury Diocesan Record Office.]
J R Harris
,Thomas (1737–1802), industrialist, was born 13 May 1737, the eldest of the five sons (there were no daughters) of Owen Williams of Cefn Coch in Llansadwrn in Anglesey, and his wife Jane, daughter of Thomas Lloyd of Hendre Hywel.
He was put to the law, and his brother John to the church, indicating a family of means.
His early career in Anglesey was remarkably successful; he acted as attorney and man of business for important local families, especially for Sir Nicholas Bayly, for whom he was also political agent.
In 1761 copper mines had been opened on Bayly's lands at Parys mountain near Amlwch, but significant progress was only made from 1768, when a mass of easily worked copper was located which was soon worked under lease by Charles Roe & Co. of Macclesfield.
A major lawsuit arose over part of the mineral area jointly owned by Bayly and by a lesser gentry family, whose entail devolved on the Revd Edward Hughes's infant son (later first Baron Dinorben).
Williams represented the lesser family against Bayly, and his legal skill and tenacity were influential in obtaining a favourable Chancery decision.
Bayly's part of the jointly owned mine was by 1778 leased to a partnership of Revd Edward Hughes (‘sleeping’), Williams, and the London banker and East India director, John Dawes.
From the outset Williams dominated.
The full extraction of profits from the mine was hampered by the existence in the copper industry of a most powerful cartel, the Associated Smelters, who had controlled prices and profits and dominated the mining interest of Cornwall, the main copper-producing area, for decades.
Williams broke the hold of the cartel by founding his own smelting, manufacturing, and sales establishment, with smelters at Middle Bank in south Wales and Ravenhead in Lancashire and powerful rolling mills and battery plant at Holywell in north Wales.
In the early 1780s Birmingham experts working for him solved the problem of making hard cold-rolled copper bolts, and this patented invention in turn solved the problem of galvanic action in copper-sheathed ships which were iron-fastened.
A great threatened market was thereby secured.
The capture of the huge East India contract signalled Williams's market success over the cartel, just as Sir Nicholas Bayly's successor, the second Earl of Uxbridge (later first Marquis of Anglesey, q.v.), decided to mine the mines originally discovered with Williams as managing partner, thus giving the lawyer management of all the Anglesey mines.
Oppressed by the low ore prices given by the Associated Smelters, the Cornish copper mines, led by John Vivian, with the assistance of Matthew Boulton and John Wilkinson [qq.v.](concerned for the steam-engine market at the mines), revolted against the smelters' power and founded the Cornish Metal Company, a cartel to purchase, arrange for smelting, and sell all the smelted ores of Cornwall.
To avoid competition with Anglesey an agreement was signed between the company and the Anglesey companies on prices and a division of markets.
Thus 1785 saw a revolution in the copper trade.
By 1787 the Cornish Metal Company was virtually insolvent, due to gross business inefficiency, and Williams effectively took it over, controlling it until its articles of agreement expired in 1792.
For five years he consequently exercised a remarkable monopoly of the national copper market.
Declining mine output in Anglesey, opposition by Birmingham consumers, and an improving international copper market prevented the monopoly persisting, but Williams continued to influence the industry strongly till his death, and his activities were looked at by the select committee on the copper trade of 1799.
At that time he admitted controlling an industrial capital of £800,000.
In business terms his power was greater than any of the other industrialists of the period.
Apart from the two Anglesey mining companies, their subsidiaries and branches, including a sulphuric-acid plant, he directly owned factories on the Thames, founded again with the Revd Edward Hughes as sleeping partner, and the Chester and North Wales Bank.
He also operated a small fleet of ships, issued the largest and arguably the finest British token coinage, purchased the two-member pocket borough of Great Marlow, for which he was MP from 1790, and built there Temple House, designed by Samuel Wyatt [q.v.].
Williams married Catherine, daughter of John Lloyd of Llanfihangel Tre'r Beirdd, in about 1763.
They had two sons and three daughters.
Williams died 29 November 1802 in Bath, worth about half a million pounds.
[J. R. Harris,The Copper King , 1964; Henry Hamilton,The English Copper and Brass Industries to 1800 , 2nd edn. with introduction by J. R. Harris, 1967; G. C. Allen, ‘An Eighteenth Century Combination in Copper Mining’,Economic Journal , vol. xxxiii, 1923; J. R. Harris and R. O. Roberts, ‘Eighteenth Century Monopoly: the Cornish Metal Company Agreements of 1785’,Business History , vol. v, no. 2, June 1963.]
Brent Elliott
,Henry Ernest (1845–1906), landscape gardener, was born 18 April 1845 in Liverpool, the eldest of five sons and eleven children of Edward Milner [q.v.]and his wife Elizabeth Mary Kelly.
He was educated by a private tutor in France and Germany, and in 1862–4 worked in the London office of the builder Sir Samuel Morton Peto [q.v.], who then sent him to Russia as an assistant engineer on railway works.
In 1868 he was appointed a resident engineer on the Windsor and Minneapolis Railway in Nova Scotia.
On his return to England Milner joined his father's practice as a landscape gardener, and in 1878 was made a member of the Institute of Civil Engineers.
Among his commissions after his father's death were Victoria Park, Glossop (1887–8); Yeatton Peverey, Shropshire (1890); and Keszthely, Hungary (1885), for Count Festetics.
In 1890 Milner published The Art and Practice of Landscape Gardening , with most of the examples drawn from his father's work.
It was well received in the horticultural press, but drew fire from the advocates of formal gardening, especially (Sir) Reginald Blomfield [q.v.]in his The Formal Garden in England (1892).
In the wake of his book Milner received several of his most important commissions: the grounds of Wembley Park, for the tower proposed by Sir Edward Watkin [q.v.]in 1891; the enlargement of Princes Street Gardens, Edinburgh (1891); Gatton Park, Surrey, for (Sir) Jeremiah Colman; Friar Park, Oxfordshire, for Sir Frank Crisp; Gisselfeld, Denmark (1896–8); and various works on the Swedish royal gardens, for which he was invested with the award of the North Star in 1899.
In 1892 he began an involvement with Earls Court, by laying out the grounds for the international horticultural exhibition; but the industrial exhibition of 1894, of which he was a director, was a financial failure, and Milner made himself responsible for some of the debts.
In 1897 he was one of the original recipients of the Victoria medal of honour in horticulture, presented by the Royal Horticultural Society.
Milner was known for his charm and the ease with which he made friends.
In 1869 he married Mary, daughter of Senator Robert Barry Dickey of Amherst, Nova Scotia.
They had a son and a daughter.
Milner died 10 March 1906 at Gipsy Hill, Norwood, and was buried in Darley.
His son Barry Ernest Milner entered his firm, but Edward White, who married his daughter Winifred, became the dominant force in Milner, White & Partners.
[Figaro , 22 June 1892;Gardeners' Chronicle , 17 March 1906;Landscape Design , no. 156, August 1985, pp. 9–13; press cuttings book, Royal Horticultural Society, London; information from Mrs Alison Hodges.]
Bridget Hadaway
, Sir John Alexander (1871–1949), author and editor of popular works of reference, was born in Alexandria, Dunbartonshire, 27 February 1871, the second in a family of two sons and one daughter of James Hammerton, clog-maker of Oldham, and his second wife Janet, shopwoman, daughter of Alexander Lang, mason.
His father died when he was aged three, and the family, then living in Manchester, returned to the home of their maternal grandmother in Scotland.
He attended first the Freeland School, Glasgow, and then Alexander's Endowed School in the same city.
As the breadwinner in the family, he left school at fourteen, and for the next four years he was apprenticed as a sculptor and tomb-cutter to the firm of stonemasons, J. & G. Mossman.
During this time he attended evening classes at the City School and at Glasgow University.
He was known to his friends as ‘Sandy’.
The most successful creator of large-scale works of reference that Britain has known, he began his journalistic career in 1889 as a reporter on the Scottish temperance paper, the Reformer .
His light, humorous sketches began to appear regularly in London newspapers and in periodicals such as Punch .
A succession of posts in journalism took him to Bolton, Blackpool, Nottingham, and Birmingham.
In 1900 he settled in London, where his lively, robust style of writing caught the eye of the founder of modern popular journalism, Alfred Harmsworth (later Viscount Northcliffe, q.v.).
In 1905 Hammerton was invited to join Harmsworth's Amalgamated Press, then the largest periodical-publishing empire in the world, and for the next seventeen years his employer's energetic and ‘radium-like personality’, as described by Hammerton, provided him with the background to his life's work.
Of the more than ten million bound editions that bear his name as editor or author, he was proudest of the fortnightly Harmsworth's Universal Encyclopedia (1920–2) which, under the slogan of ‘a penny a day's subscription’, sold twelve million copies throughout the English-speaking world and was translated into six languages, including Japanese.
In 1911–13 he lived in Buenos Aires where he edited El Diccionario Encyclopédico Hispano-Americano .
He also wrote under pseudonyms, most notably a novel,The Call of the Town (1904), light reminiscences, and biographies of, among others, Arthur Mee and Sir J. M. Barrie [qq.v.].
Despite the shortage of paper and the requisitioning of most commercial photographic glass negatives for the war effort, he was never happier, as he recounts in his autobiography,Books and Myself (1944), than during those days in World War I when he worked late into the night to the background of a pavement barrel-organ in the Farringdon Road, alert to imminent air attacks on the city.
His formative influence as a boy had been John Cassell's Popular Educator , first published in 1852.
In 1934 Hammerton was able to consummate, in his own words, ‘one of the romances of modern publishing’, by revising and reissuing the work under the new title Practical Knowledge for All , which was, in turn, to become the most familiar series of educational books in millions of homes for a new generation.
To Hammerton's gifts of communication must also be attributed that most popular of all gestures of the twentieth century: the ‘V’ sign.
In late 1940 he reported in the War Illustrated his sighting of a ‘V’ for victory sign apparently blazed by a Hawker Hurricane in the sky over the village of Firle in Sussex.
Within months the sign had replaced the customary ‘thumbs-up’ and had been adopted throughout beleaguered Europe as a symbol of defiance to Nazism.
A lifelong enthusiast of the stage, Hammerton first fell under the spell of music-hall as a boy in Glasgow; from then on he attended performances of all the great variety artists of the day, and for a brief spell managed his own theatre company in Eastbourne.
In 1926 he settled near Eastbourne, where he became a familiar sight driving at speed in his superb Lagonda through the Sussex lanes.
In 1895 he married Rhoda, daughter of Colin Gibb Lawrence, bookkeeper, of Brechin.
After her death in 1948 he married in 1949 his long-time friend and collaborator, the actress and journalist (Kate) Janet Maitland, daughter of Charles Dallas Alexander, of independent means, and widow of the actor Lauderdale Maitland.
He was knighted in 1932 and was subsequently made a fellow of the Royal Society of Arts and of the Royal Society of Edinburgh.
He died 12 May 1949 at the Mayfair Hotel in Westminster, London.
[J. A. Hammerton,Books and Myself , 1944, and With Northcliffe in Fleet Street , 1932; Reginald Pound and Geoffrey Harmsworth,Northcliffe , 1959.]
P Collinson
,George (1529–1590), soldier, magistrate, entrepreneur, MP, and Puritan, was born in 1529, the second son of John Carleton of Walton-on-Thames, Surrey, and Brightwell Baldwin, Oxfordshire, and his wife Joyce, daughter of John Welbeck of Oxenheath, Kent.
His maternal grandmother was Margaret Culpepper, an aunt of Queen Catherine Howard [q.v.].
Carleton's father was receiver to the abbot of Westminster and later deputy receiver-general to the dean and chapter, a connection which secured his son a Westminster exhibition at Christ Church, Oxford, whence he passed to Gray's Inn in 1552.
In 1557 Carleton served as a captain at St Quentin and later in life (1573) renewed his military career as treasurer to the Irish expedition of Walter Devereux, first Earl of Essex [q.v.].
Carleton built up a sizeable estate in the eastern and midland counties, partly by inheritance, partly through the second of his three marriages, to Elizabeth Mohun, a Northamptonshire widow who brought him the manor of Overstone, where he mostly resided.
He was a JP in Oxfordshire, Northamptonshire, Lincolnshire, and the Isle of Ely, and he sat in four sessions of Parliament: for Poole in 1571 and for Dorchester in 1572, 1576, and 1581, boroughs in which Francis Russell, second Earl of Bedford [q.v.], had a commanding interest.
He employed his considerable legal and managerial powers in business partnerships, trusts, and other, sometimes disordered, financial affairs of various kinsmen and friends, and he was a persistent litigant.
In the Lincolnshire fens he had public responsibilities as a commissioner for sewers and private interests as an early ‘adventurer’, ‘one of the very first that inned any marsh in Holland’, and a pioneer of windmills and other ‘engines’, ‘toys’, and ‘gewgaws’.
He became superintendent of the Jesuits and other Catholic recusants imprisoned in Wisbech Castle.
Carleton's diverse interests were connected and charged with a kind of demonic energy by his ardent Puritanism.
In Parliament, most of his activity was directed towards a further reformation of the Church along Presbyterian lines.
He supported the successive initiatives of William Strickland, Paul Wentworth, and his brother Peter, ‘my beloved in the Lord’[qq.v.], as well as the principles of parliamentary liberty for which these Puritan members stood.
Carleton believed that hard-line Protestants like himself were the queen's only reliable subjects, her very ‘bowels’.
These ‘servants of God’ should be concentrated in the counties nearest London as a militia to protect the regime from Catholic subversion.
Alternatively, they should be encouraged to settle in Irish plantations, which in Carleton's thinking look like blueprints for both Ulster and New England.
In the last year of his life Carleton's connections with the tightly knit Puritan gentry of the midlands involved him in the Puritan literary conspiracy of the Marprelate tracts.
In 1589 he married the widow Elizabeth Crane, in whose house at East Molesey the first tracts were printed and who was heavily fined in Star Chamber for her involvement.
The Marprelate press then moved to Fawsley, the Northamptonshire seat of Sir Richard Knightley [q.v.], an enthusiast not entirely compos mentis whose affairs were in Carleton's hands.
Several elusive references in the tracts themselves suggest that Carleton's involvement in this illicit venture may have been more than merely managerial.
He died early in January 1590.
[P. W. Hasler (ed.),
The House of Commons 1558–1603 , 1981; Patrick Collinson,The Elizabethan Puritan Movement , 1967; J. E. Neale,Elizabetha I and her Parliaments, 1559–1581 , 1953.]
George MacDonald Fraser
or ,Thomas (c. 1784–1818), prizefighter, was born a Virginia slave, and is reputed to have won his freedom in the American prize-ring.
He came to England in 1810, intent on the championship, then equivalent to the world heavyweight title.
Under the management of Bill Richmond, a fellow-black and ex-pugilist, Tom Molineaux beat Blake of Bristol (‘Tom Tough’) in Margate on 21 August 1810, and was matched with the champion, Tom Cribb [q.v.], in East Grinstead on 18 December 1810.
After twenty-eight rounds Cribb was unable to come to scratch, but a ruse by his seconds gave him time to recover, and Molineaux retired in the thirty-third round.
He demanded a rematch, which took place on 28 September 1811 at Thistleton Gap, Wymondham, Leicestershire, before a fiercely partisan crowd of 20,000, alarmed at the prospect of a black foreigner taking the title.
In the event Cribb, rigidly trained by Captain Barclay (Robert Barclay Allardice, q.v.), won easily in eleven rounds.
After this, Molineaux's fortunes declined; he won other fights, but his drinking, reluctance to train, and general self-indulgence led to quarrels with Richmond, and he was reduced to fighting exhibitions and wrestling matches on tours of Scotland and Ireland.
Molineaux was the first of the great black boxers.
Although just over five feet eight inches tall, and seldom well trained, at his best he was strong, fast, and skilful enough to hold his own with Cribb, reputedly the best of all bare-knuckle boxers, and but for his fondness for high living, might well have been champion.
He died, ‘a wasted skeleton’, 4 August 1818 in Galway, where he had been befriended by two black soldiers of the 77th Regiment.
[Henry Downes Miles,Puglistica, The History of British Boxing , vol. i, 1906, pp. 253–8, 278–88; Pierce Egan,Boxiana, or Sketches of Pugilism , vol. i, 1812, pp. 360–71;Sporting Magazine , vol. ii, 1818.]
D W Hayton
, Sir Rowland (c. 1658–1726), Whig politician, was born about 1658, the eldest son of George Gwynne of Llanelwedd, Radnorshire, an MP under the Protectorate and in the 1660 Convention, and his wife Sybil, only child of Roderick Gwynne of Llanelwedd.
He attended St John's College, Oxford, was entered at Gray's Inn, and in 1681 was elected a fellow of the Royal Society.
Having barely attained his majority he was returned to the first Exclusion Parliament for Radnorshire, and, although knighted by Charles II in 1680, threw himself with an almost desperate zeal into the cause of Exclusion, with the result that in 1683 he went into voluntary exile in Holland, suspected of complicity in the Rye House plot.
Having wasted his own considerable inheritance and his wife's fortune, he stood in need of a greater reward at the Revolution than the minor place of treasurer of the chamber, which, aside from various local dignities, was all he received.
In 1692 he forfeited even this office when a characteristic political gamble backfired.
He laid an information before Queen Mary accusing the Irish lord lieutenant, Henry, Viscount Sidney (later Earl of Romney, q.v.), of corruption, but was unable to prove the charge.
Deprived of royal favour, and hounded from Radnorshire politics by his great rivals the Harleys, he sought out a new patron, Thomas Grey, second Earl of Stamford [q.v.], a new parliamentary seat (first for Breconshire and then as Stamford's nominee for Bere Alston), and a new reputation as an energetic House of Commons man.
It was Gwynne who in 1696 proposed the introduction of a loyal association, in response to revelations about the assassination plot, and who in 1698 led the inquiry into clandestine trade with France during the nine years' war.
By 1701 he was serving as chairman of the influential elections committee, and was even talked of as a possible Speaker.
In politics he was a thoroughgoing Whig, committed to the maintenance of the Revolution settlement and the Hanoverian succession.
Indeed, he was selected to carry up the bill of settlement to the Lords, and in 1702 piloted through Parliament a measure to attaint the pretender.
He was thus a particular target for the Tories, and according to his own account lost his seat at the 1702 election after a specific campaign against him inspired by the Tory leaders.
Harassed by creditors, and pressed by the Treasury to render his long overdue chamber accounts, he fled to Hanover, where he attempted to ingratiate himself with the electoral family.
In 1706 Gwynne blundered badly once more in permitting his name to be subscribed to a paper written by the philosopher Leibniz, in support of moves in England to invite over the Hanoverian heir presumptive to the throne, published in the form of an open Letter to Lord Stamford, the effect of which was to alienate both Queen Anne and the Electress Sophia.
Gwynne retired to Hamburg, a sad and lonely figure, ‘rusting for want of the conversation I was used to’, until Queen Anne's death opened the way for him to return to England.
Although he sailed over with King George, as some twenty-five years previously he had accompanied the Prince of Orange on his voyage to claim the crown, he received only an annuity of £400 from the new monarch, was soon deep in debt again, and ended his days in a debtor's prison.
Gwynne married Mary, daughter and heiress of William Bassett of Broviscan, Glamorgan, but produced no issue.
At his death her entailed estate returned to her family.
He himself was able to bequeath only plate and household goods, and to request in his will to be buried under a ‘plain black stone’ with a simple inscription recording his Christian belief.
Gwynne died in the King's Bench prison 24 January 1726.
[B. D. Henning,The House of Commons 1660–1690 , 1983; unpublished biography, History of Parliament Trust; D. R. L. Adams, ‘The Parliamentary Representation of Radnorshire, 1536–1832’, MA thesis (1969) for the University of Wales; British Library, Add.
MS 61147, Stowe MS 223; Public Record Office, PCC 6 Brook.]
Patrick Nairne
,Charles (1667–1733), writing-master, was born in London 4 June 1667, the son of Berry Snell, vintner, and his wife Winifred.
In 1675, by which time his father had died, he was admitted to Christ's Hospital from St Giles, Cripplegate; he left the school in 1681 to be apprenticed to the writing-master, William Brooks, in the City of London.
Here he made his own career as a writing-master; he also published books on book-keeping and was occasionally employed as an auditor.
He became a bright star in a contemporary galaxy of writing-masters.
In 1694 he published his first copybook,The Pen-man's Treasury Open'd .
This contained his first critical attack, following the current practice of vituperation between writing-masters, on the overelaborate style of ‘his brother Quills’.
In 1700 he succeeded John Seddon [q.v.]as master of the Sir John Johnson's Free Writing School, where he remained until his death thirty-three years later.
The year 1712 saw his second copybook,The Art of Writing in its Theory and Practice , with a similarly critical preface.
In 1715 he published his own writing rules, rigid and meticulous in form, entitled The Standard Rules of the Round and Round-text Hands .
This book became the focus of a notable quarrel with another distinguished writing-master, John Clark [q.v.], which, with criticisms and counter-criticisms, lasted for several years, incidentally increasing Snell's copybook sales.
In 1711 he produced handwriting plates included in Penmanship in its Utmost Beauty and Extent (1731), by George Bickham [q.v.].
Snell has been criticized for causing a decline in handwriting by promoting his dull copperplate style, but his practice and teaching of a simpler and standardized mode of handwriting most effectively met the needs of clerks in the growing number of commercial houses.
That is his principal claim to fame.
Snell's wife was Susannah and he apparently had one son.
He died at his London home in Sermon Lane in 1733.
[Christ's Hospital Children's Register 1669–1687, Guildhall Library; William Massey,The Origin and Progress of Letters, an Essay in Two Parts , 1763; Ambrose Heal,The English Writing-Masters and their Copy-books, 1570–1800 , 1931; Joyce Irene Whalley,English Handwriting, 1540–1853 , 1969; Donald Jackson,The Story of Writing , 1981.]
Richard Greene
,Mary (1707–1778), poet, was born in Oxford 8 March 1707, the second of four children of Oliver Jones, cooper of St Aldates, Oxford, and his second wife, who was one of the daughters, probably Mary (born 1670), of Thomas Penn, a yeoman of South Newington near Banbury.
Mary Jones's elder brother Oliver became chanter of Christ Church Cathedral, and later senior chaplain of Christ Church.
Two younger brothers did not survive infancy.
Jones learned French and Italian from a master, and could translate from Italian by the age of sixteen.
She may subsequently have worked as a governess or tutor.
By the early 1730s she had made friends among an aristocratic circle which included the Lovelace, Clayton, and Bowyer families.
One of her closest friends was Martha Lovelace, daughter of John, fourth Baron Lovelace of Hurley [q.v.].
Martha Lovelace became a maid of honour to Queen Caroline in 1732 and in 1756 was appointed housekeeper of Windsor Castle.
Jones often visited Lovelace at the castle and later at New Lodge in Windsor Forest, where Lovelace moved after her marriage to Lord Henry Beauclerk in June 1739.
Jones was modest about her poetry and concealed it from her friends in Oxford.
She was surprised to discover in April 1742 that her ballad ‘The Lass of the Hill’ had been published in London.
At about this time another poem of hers, on the death of Lord Aubrey Beauclerk [q.v.], was published anonymously in London.
Around 1745 she published A Letter to Dr. Pitt , comically chiding a neighbour for the state of a wall between their properties.
In 1750 her Miscellanies in Prose and Verse was published by subscription in Oxford.
The volume was warmly received and the London Magazine published excerpts throughout 1752.
Jones's characteristically gentle satires on the lot of talented women who lack means are among the most accomplished poems written by women in the eighteenth century.
Jones had numerous literary acquaintances, including Samuel Johnson, Joseph Spence, and Thomas Warton [qq.v.].
Warton wrote to James Boswell [q.v.]in 1786: ‘She was a very ingenious poetess…and, on the whole, was a most sensible, agreeable, and amiable woman.’
Jones appears to have lived in Oxford throughout her life.
In 1772 her address is recorded as 16 Fish Street (later St Aldates); she remained at this address until her death.
She was postmistress of Oxford at the end of her life.
She died in Oxford 10 February 1778 (Jackson's Oxford Journal , 14 February 1778).
[Parish register of St Aldates, Oxford, registers of South Newington, and will of Thomas Penn, 1727, MS Wills Oxon.
145/3/30, Oxfordshire County Record Office, Oxford; H. Salter (ed.),
Survey of Oxford in 1772 , 1912;European Magazine , vol. xix, 1791, pp. 247–8; Janet Todd (ed.),
A Dictionary of British and American Women Writers , 1984; Roger Lonsdale (ed.),
Eighteenth Century Women Poets: an Oxford Anthology , 1989.]
W R Ward
,William Trewartha (‘Billy’)(1794–1868), Methodist revivalist, was born at Twelveheads, in the parish of Kea near Truro, 1 June 1794, the only son and eldest of three children (one of the daughters was of unsound mind) of William Bray, Methodist tin-miner, and his wife Ann, daughter of Robert and Jane Trewartha of Chengenter, Gwennap.
At the age of seventeen he left home to pursue his trade as a tin miner in Devon, succumbed to drink and a profligate lifestyle, and on 16 July 1821, at Kea church, took a wife, Joanne, who had also abandoned Methodism.
A return to Cornwall after seven years eventually opened the way to a conversion in which Bray's family past reasserted itself against his recent deviations, and, without transforming his personality, reinforced it against the mental weaknesses to which his sister succumbed.
The manner of Bray's conversion, gradually accomplished in November 1823, assisted by the reading of John Bunyan [q.v.]and driven by fear of the consequences of drunkenness for his family life, also indicated that a religious original was about to emerge.
The crucial step began with a determination to rise and pray in the middle of the night; he continued in prayer the following morning, and took for spiritual nutriment the Bible and the Wesleyan hymn-book.
It was only afterwards that he roared away his ‘load’ at the Bryanite (or Bible Christian) meeting.
Twelveheads was near Wesley's revival centre at Gwennap pit; Bray's grandfather had been one of his converts and had helped to build the Twelveheads chapel.
Bray now became a locally celebrated revivalist on his own account, labouring outside as well as within the Bible Christian denomination to which he gave lifelong allegiance, and built many chapels with his own hands.
The distinctive thing about him which made him a legend in his lifetime and made his biography one of the Methodist best sellers of the century, was an immediate apprehension of the divine glory which issued naturally in leaping, dancing, and cheerful controversy with the world.
His claim that ‘if they were to put me into a barrel,I would shout glory out through the bunghole !’ was not a facetious pose, but the normal expression of an irrepressibly good-humoured Christian.
He died 25 May 1868 at Twelveheads and was buried in Baldhu.
[F. W. Bourne,Billy Bray, the King's Son , 1871 (enlarged edn. 1877); Thomas Shaw,A History of Cornish Methodism , 1967.]
Ronald M Birse
,John (1826–1896), boiler and engine manufacturer, was born in Manchester 18 July 1826, the son of William Galloway, millwright and iron-founder, and his wife Elizabeth.
He was educated in Southport, Lancashire, and at the age of fourteen was apprenticed in the business of W. & J. Galloway, millwrights and iron-founders, which had been established in 1835 by his father and his uncle, John Galloway senior (1804–1894).
From small beginnings the firm became well-known as makers of boilers and stationary steam-engines, renowned particularly for their economical ‘Galloway’ boiler, patented in 1851.
Together with his cousin Charles John, the son of John senior, he became a partner in the business in 1856, and the firm was renamed W. & J. Galloway & Sons.
By this time it had become one of the principal Manchester manufacturers of engines and boilers, with a considerable export trade to Russia and India; up to 1866 it had built over 1,800 boilers and about 200 engines since starting in business in 1835.
The firm took a leading part in the introduction in 1855–6 of the new steel-making process devised by (Sir) Henry Bessemer [q.v.], and the continuing expansion of their business made it necessary to build a separate boiler-making works in Ardwick, employing 500 men and producing six boilers a week.
The original Knott Mill ironworks employed about the same number of men making engines and other types of machinery.
Galloway was actively involved in the management of the business while it was expanding rapidly, but after it was formed into a limited company under the name of Galloway Ltd. in 1889 it was Charles John, the chairman and managing director, who effectively held the reins.
Over the years John Galloway had acquired many other business and financial interests, in such firms as Earle's Shipbuilding & Engineering Company in Hull, the Carnforth Hematite Iron Company, and the North of England Trustee, Debenture & Assets Corporation Ltd.
He was chairman of the finance committee of the royal jubilee exhibition in Manchester in 1887, a JP for the city of Manchester and the county of Lancashire for over thirty years, and with his wife (the daughter of William Crippin of Manchester) devoted much time to philanthropic and charitable undertakings.
In 1872 he was elected a life honorary member of the Manchester Association of Engineers.
He was survived by one son, William J. Galloway, at the time the MP for Manchester South-west, who was also involved in the family firm.
He died 16 December 1896 in Old Trafford, Manchester.
[W. H. Chaloner, ‘John Galloway (1804–94), Engineer of Manchester and his Reminiscences’,Transactions of the Lancashire and Cheshire Antiquarian Society , vol. lxiv, 1954;Engineer , 18 December 1896 and 1 January 1897;Journal of the Iron and Steel Institute , vol. li, p. 311; D. J. Jeremy (ed.),
Dictionary of Business Biography , vol. ii, 1985.]
W H Brock
,Josias Christopher (1778–1848), chemical manufacturer, was born at Graan Farm, Enniskillen, county Fermanagh, Ireland, August 1778, the fourth son of David Gamble, whose staunch Presbyterian ancestors had moved from Ayrshire to Ireland for religious reasons during the reign of James VI.
His mother's maiden name was Rutherford.
Gamble was trained for the Presbyterian ministry at the University of Glasgow, where he graduated MA in 1797 and was ordained minister for Enniskillen in December 1799.
In Glasgow Gamble had attended the lectures of the chemist William Cleghorn, as part of the medical training then considered proper as preparation for a minister.
He continued to practise chemistry as a hobby in Enniskillen and after moving to Belfast in 1804, and he prepared the recently discovered chlorine gas to help local farmers bleach their linen flax.
A by-product was transformed into sodium sulphate (Glauber's salt) for use as a purgative.
In Belfast, Gamble extended these chemical activities into the manufacture of bleaching powder.
He resigned his living in 1810 to become a full-time chemical manufacturer in county Monaghan, and then, in 1815, at Gerard's Bridge outside Dublin.
Here he also made alum and sulphuric acid by the lead chamber process.
In 1828 he became the partner of his friend and younger rival, James Muspratt [q.v.], who had emigrated to Lancashire in 1822, in building a Leblanc-process soda works on the St Helens canal.
Although the partnership lasted only two years, Gamble stayed in St Helens where, despite opposition from landowners angered by chemical pollution, with soap-makers Joseph and James Crosfield he established a successful alkali and sulphuric-acid business.
On the dissolution of the Crosfield partnership in 1848, the firm became Jos.
C. Gamble & Son.
Dressed like a clergyman all his life, his own chemist, architect, engineer, and manager, Gamble held patents for the improved manufacture of bleaching powder, a process for the concentration of sulphuric acid, and a saltcake furnace.
On 16 September 1820 he married Hannah Gower (died 16 December 1852), the daughter of a Dublin solicitor.
They had one son, Sir David Gamble, first baronet, and three daughters who died young.
Gamble died in St Helens 27 January 1848.
[J. F. Allen,Some Founders of the Chemical Industry , 1906 (portrait); T. C. Barker and J. R. Harris,A Merseyside Town in the Industrial Revolution, St Helens 1750–1900 , 1954.]
Bernard Capp
or ,John (c. 1610–1665), naval officer, of Plymouth, held his first naval command in 1649, in the newly remodelled navy of the Commonwealth.
His rise to prominence came during the first Dutch war (1652–4).
He took part in the actions off the Kentish Knock and Dungeness late in 1652 and the three great sea battles of 1653, and General George Monck (later first Duke of Albemarle, q.v.) recommended his promotion to one of the navy's best ships in recognition of his services.
During the final winter of the war he was rear-admiral of the blue in the Channel fleet.
He appears to have had some doubts about the establishment of the Protectorate, but accepted the reassurances of the Admiralty secretary, Robert Blackborne.
Stokes was flag-captain to Robert Blake [q.v.]in the expedition to Spain and the Straits of Gibraltar in 1654–5.
He took part in the attack on Porto Farina, and was advanced to rear-admiral during the latter stages of the expedition.
He also served with Blake and Edward Mountagu (see Montagu, later first Earl of Sandwich, q.v.) on the expedition to the south in 1656.
He commanded the ships that remained off the Spanish coast in April 1657 when Blake launched the attack on Santa Cruz, and, when Blake sailed for home in July, Stokes became commander of the force left to maintain the blockade.
At the close of the year Stokes led his squadron into the Straits, with the aim of protecting English shipping against the depredations of the Spaniards and the North African corsairs.
His squadron was too small to emulate Blake's attack on Porto Farina, but he was able to negotiate a satisfactory peace with the Dey of Tunis in February 1658, winning the right for English warships and merchantmen to use the facilities of Porto Farina, and ransoming English captives at a favourable rate.
He negotiated a similar treaty with Tripoli in 1659.
The expedition was plagued, however, by a long-running feud between Stokes and his deputy, Thomas Whetstone, the protector's nephew.
Whetstone, a rash and much younger man, proved contemptuous of the admiral's authority and used his political connections to undermine it.
It was only after the protector's death in September 1658 that Stokes ventured to arrest his deputy and ship him back to England for trial.
Stokes himself, arriving home with his squadron in September 1659, found his conduct fully vindicated by the government.
In November 1659 he was one of the naval officers ashore who wrote urging Monck to accept the army's coup against the restored Rump Parliament.
He was brought back into naval service in March 1660, probably at Mountagu's behest.
He made no overt protest as Mountagu manoeuvred the navy behind the restoration of monarchy, and sailed with the fleet that brought the king back to England in May.
At the end of the year he was made second in command of a naval expedition to West Africa, a joint operation mounted by the Guinea Company and the Crown.
Its commander was the fiery cavalier (Sir) Robert Holmes [q.v.]and the relations between the two leaders were tense.
On the outbreak of the second Dutch war in 1664 Stokes was recalled to the navy as captain of the Triumph , but he fell ill soon afterwards and died in Portsmouth 11 February 1665.
Stokes's political and religious views are less clear than those of many leading parliamentary commanders, but he was an able, tough, and reliable officer who earned tributes from four of the generals-at-sea (Blake, Richard Deane, q.v., Monck, and Mountagu).
Samuel Pepys [q.v.]found him good company.
In his will, drawn up in 1662, Stokes divided his estate equally between his wife Katharine and his married daughter Katherine Haydon.
[B. S. Capp,Cromwell's Navy , 1989; M. L. Baumber, ‘The Protector's Nephew: an Account of Thomas Whetstone in 1657–1659’,Mariner's Mirror , vol. lii, 1966.]
Charles Sebag-Montefiore
,Edward (1803–1884), collector and water-colourist, was born at Badger Hall, Shropshire, in 1803, the second son in a family of three sons and two daughters of General Robert Cheyney and his wife Harriet, daughter of Ralph Carr of Dunston Hill, county Durham.
His father was aide-de-camp to Prince Frederick, Duke of York.
Cheyney passed from Sandhurst into the army, buying a commission in a regiment which was ordered to India, where he spent a few years in inactive service.
After his father's sudden death in 1820, his mother and elder brother Henry moved to Italy, where Edward was to join them in about 1825 after leaving the army.
At first he lived in Naples and became acquainted with Sir William Gell, the excavator of Pompeii, Edward Dodwell [qq.v.], and other archaeologists and collectors.
The Cheyney brothers were notable in Anglo-Italian society of the 1820s and 1830s, and were especially connected with Rome, where their mother had established herself at the Palazzo Sciarra.
Edward Cheyney soon became friendly with British residents and regular visitors to Rome, and was welcomed in the great Roman houses.
Among these were Lady Coventry and her daughter Lady Augusta, Spencer Compton, second Marquis of Northampton, and his daughter Lady Marion Alford [q.v.],
Lord Beverley, later fifth Duke of Northumberland, and Michelangelo Caetani, an artist who was to succeed his father as Duca di Sermoneta.
He formed a lifelong friendship with Henry Edward Fox, fourth Baron Holland, whom he met in Genoa in 1827: Fox's journal for 1827 and 1828 records their crowded social sojourn in Rome.
The diarist Charles Greville [q.v.]arrived in Rome in March 1830 and met Edward Cheyney: their friendship was quickly established and lasted until Greville's death in 1865.
Cheyney moved to Venice in the 1840s, where he lived at the Palazzo Soranzo-Piovene on the Grand Canal.
Here he became a close friend of Rawdon Brown [q.v.], the historian of the Venetian archives.
During his time in Italy, Cheyney formed a collection of pictures and works of art, later housed at Badger Hall and at 4 Audley Square, London.
He had a fine library (sold by Sotheby's in June 1886) and owned superb drawings, Rembrandt etchings, bronzes, majolica, and furniture.
His picture collection, chiefly of the Venetian school, was remarkable for its concentration, unknown at that time, on Tiepolo, including a vast number of this artist's oil sketches.
His pioneering interest in Tiepolo led him also to gather a large collection of his drawings, which filled twelve albums.
He also patronized contemporary artists, including Thomas Cromek and Dessoulavy.
In 1851 Cheyney began to act as unofficial consultant to the trustees of the National Gallery about the quality and availability of pictures in Italy, sometimes contradicting the purchases proposed by John Ruskin [q.v.].
His London collection was described by Gustav Friedrich Waagen in 1857, and he was a member of the Burlington Fine Arts Club.
He was an enthusiastic amateur water-colourist.
He was an original member of the Philobiblon Society, founded in 1853 by his friend Richard Monckton Milnes (later first Baron Houghton, q.v.), and for whose publications, the Miscellanies , he contributed a number of articles about original documents connected with Venetian painters of the sixteenth century.
In 1838 he had written his only novel,Malvagna, or the Evil Eye , a romantic work set in Sicily, but it did not attract public attention.
Edward Cheyney inherited the Badger Hall estate in December 1866 on the death of his bachelor brother Henry.
Edward Cheyney died at Badger Hall 16 April 1884, also a bachelor: he bequeathed his property and collections to his nephew Colonel Alfred Capel Cure.
The collections were sold at Christie's in May 1905.
[Obituary by Monckton Milnes,Miscellanies of the Philobiblon Society , vol. v, 1884.]
M R D Foot
, Sir Claude Edward Marjoribanks (1876–1947), intelligence officer, was born at Cromwell Place, South Kensington, 10 September 1876, the second child and eldest son in the family of four sons and five daughters of Edward Mashiter Dansey, captain and later lieutenant-colonel in the 1st Life Guards, and his wife Eleanore, daughter of Robert Francis Gifford, second Baron Gifford.
His parents removed him from Wellington College in 1891, following a diphtheria epidemic, to a school in Bruges, whence too he was removed after a homosexual scandal.
In childhood he acquired fluent French, a language he often pretended hardly to speak.
In 1895 he went to the new colony of Rhodesia and became a trooper in the Matabeleland regiment of the British South Africa Police.
He helped suppress the Matabele rising in 1896, and learned the elements of scouting and intelligence gathering.
In 1898 he returned to England and secured a militia commission in the Lancashire Fusiliers.
He spent ten weeks in the winter of 1899–1900 with the British North Borneo Company police force as a sub-commandant, in operations against Mohammed Salleh, before rejoining his regiment in South Africa in 1900.
He took part in the relief of Mafeking, was briefly a fellow-subaltern with (Sir) Winston Churchill in the South African Light Horse, and spent the rest of the war in the field intelligence department.
In 1900 he received a regular commission as lieutenant in the 6th battalion of the Lancashire Fusiliers.
He stayed in South Africa, on intelligence duties, till 1904, and then spent five years in British Somaliland as a political officer, trying to counter the ‘Mad Mullah’.
While in England on sick leave he was recruited into the security branch of the secret service.
He spent three years in New York State as resident secretary of the Sleepy Hollow Country Club, a rich men's recreation park on the Hudson River, whence he could keep an eye on wealthy Irish-Americans.
In August 1914 he was recalled to England, and placed in charge of port security.
He revisited the USA in 1917 to play a decisive part in helping to set up the first official American military intelligence service.
He was promoted lieutenant-colonel and transferred to the Secret Intelligence Service to unravel a disastrous muddle in the Netherlands.
He next took over SIS's organization in Switzerland.
In 1919 the service's staff was cut back; he spent most of the 1920s in private business ventures on both sides of the Atlantic.
From 1929 to 1936 he was re-employed, under the cover of passport control officer, in Rome.
His chief, C (Sir Hugh Sinclair, q.v.), then realized that German secret police had penetrated several SIS stations.
Dansey left Rome in 1936; word seeped out that he had been caught with his hand in the till and sacked.
He settled into an export-import office in Bush House in the Strand, and set up parallel networks of secret intelligence agents to cover the penetrated areas, using the codename Z and avoiding the use of wireless.
In September 1939 Z's networks amalgamated with C's, and Dansey went back to Berne.
In November C died; Dansey returned to London, and became assistant chief to his friend (Sir) Stewart Menzies [q.v.], the new C. He was in charge of all active espionage till 1945.
All the arrangements for stay-behind agents in north-west Europe collapsed, but Dansey was able to charm most of the governments in exile in London into recruiting spies.
Dansey was closely involved with the Special Operations Executive in its early stages —(Sir) Frank Nelson [q.v.], its first executive head, had been a Z agent.
Dansey did not seek to influence its policy, so long as it kept out of his agents' way.
He often used to display there his sharp tongue, as notorious as his charm.
He also kept a keen eye on MI9, the secret escape service.
At the end of the war he was persuaded to retire, to Bathampton Manor, near Bath.
He was appointed CMG in 1918 and KCMG in 1943.
In 1915 he married Mrs Pauline Monroe Cory Ulman, daughter of David Cory, doctor of medicine, of New York.
She separated from him in 1929 and later divorced him.
His second wife, whom he married in 1945, was Mrs Frances Gurney Rylander, daughter of Dr D. F. K. Wilson.
There were no children of either marriage but he had a stepdaughter from each.
He died in a Bath nursing home 11 June 1947.
[Anthony Read and David Fisher,Colonel Z , 1984; private information.]
Paul Brand
(c. 1228–1277), administrator, was probably born some time before 1228 in the village of Boreham in Essex and was the son of Ralph, son of William of Boreham, minor landowner.
He had at least one brother, named John.
His first appearance in surviving records appears to be late in 1249, when he was appointed the abbot of Westminster's attorney for litigation in the Common Bench.
He may already by then have become the abbot's steward, a position he is known to have held in 1254 and apparently retained until 1259.
In that year he passed into the service of Richard de Clare, seventh Earl of Gloucester [q.v.], as his steward and went round the earl's estates hearing complaints against the earl's officials.
Although an ordained cleric, Hervey is said by a contemporary chronicler (William of Rishanger) to have been one of two standard-bearers of the men of London at the battle of Lewes in 1264.
After the victory of Simon of Montfort, Earl of Leicester [q.v.], he became a king's clerk.
For a few months Hervey was one of those in day-to-day control of the royal administration.
In Michaelmas term 1264 he was appointed a junior justice of the Common Bench and remained a justice of the court till the end of Trinity term 1265.
He may not, however, have sat in the final term as he was under sentence of excommunication, possibly for his part in the battle of Lewes.
His retention of the custody of a number of escheated royal honours in Essex and of Hadleigh Castle (originally granted to him in July 1264) until the end of 1265 or beginning of 1266, and his subsequent association with John de Burgh in June 1266 in the keeping of the peace in the counties of Essex and Hertfordshire, indicate that he successfully negotiated the transition from Montfortian rule to royalist restoration after the battle of Evesham.
He may already have been linked by this date with Earl Richard's son, Gilbert, eighth Earl of Gloucester [q.v.].
He was certainly in the earl's service by 1267, when he was one of those who advised him to occupy London in support of the claims of the ‘disinherited’ and was given a safe conduct to bring a message from the earl to the king.
Hervey re-entered the king's service in the last month of Henry III's life and in early November 1272 was appointed a baron of the Exchequer.
In the final years of his life Hervey achieved high office in the church.
By 1272 he had become precentor of Hereford Cathedral and a canon of St Paul's; in 1274 he became dean of St Paul's.
In 1275 he is said to have been a serious rival to the saintly Thomas de Cantelupe [q.v.]for the see of Hereford.
Hervey probably died a few days before 7 February 1277.
[Public Record Office, Curia Regis Rolls (KB 26) and E 159/47, m. 2d, C 62/49, mm.
2, 3; British Library, Harleian Charters 46.
I. 40; British Library, MS Cotton Tiberius C ix, ff. 241r, 253r;Historical Manuscripts Commission 9th Report , pp. 35, 41;Close Rolls of the reign of Henry III; Calendars of Patent and Calendars of Liberate Rolls of the reign of Henry III;Calendar of Inquisitions Post Mortem , vol. ii, 1906, nos. 214–15; Diana E. Greenway (ed.),
Fasti Ecclesiae Anglicanae, 1066–1300 , vol. i, 1968, pp. 8, 93.]
Giles Barber
,Theodore Deodatus Nathaniel (1904–1976), psychical researcher, bibliographer, and eighteenth-century scholar, was born 18 November 1904 in Lódź, Poland, and named Nataniel.
He was the younger son (there were no daughters) of Benjamin Besterman, diamond merchant, and his wife Golda Augusta Krengiel.
The single-minded energy which was Besterman's main characteristic brought him, early on and despite his lack of education, the chairmanship of the British Federation of Youth Movements (1925).
Besterman claimed that he was largely self-educated at the British Museum library and it is typical that his first separate publication should have been a bibliography of the well-known theosophist Annie Besant [q.v.](1924).
He was investigating officer to the Society for Psychical Research, 1927–35, and published widely on associated matters.
In the early 1930s he turned his attention towards bibliography, becoming both special lecturer at the London School of Librarianship and joint editor of the important, if short-lived, series Oxford Books in Bibliography, as well as writing his classic,The Beginnings of Systematic Bibliography (1935).
An indefatigable, largely single-handed, compiler and one who aimed essentially at making bibliographical and other information available, he published privately the first edition of his A World Bibliography of Bibliographies in 1939; this work, constantly enlarged, was to make his name a household word with librarians worldwide.
He was also closely associated with the British union catalogues of both periodicals and music, as well as being the first editor of the Journal of Documentation .
In these years he published on American history and established his own private press, the Guyon House Press, which, however, came to an end in the air raids of December 1940.
During World War II he served in the Royal Artillery and the Army Bureau of Current Affairs, the latter foreshadowing his immediately postwar position as head of the department for the exchange of information in Unesco, where he worked towards universal bibliographical control.
Besterman's advocacy of his causes was ardent rather than diplomatic, and around 1950 he turned to publishing the correspondence and works of Voltaire, a liberal spirit with whom he identified.
Living, by agreement with the city of Geneva, in Voltaire's former house, Les Délices, he founded the Institut et Musée Voltaire there (1952), while editing that writer's correspondence (107 volumes, 1953–65) as well as the equally multi-volume series,Studies on Voltaire and the Eighteenth Century .
He created the conferences which gave birth to the International Society for Eighteenth Century Studies and was the leading figure in the postwar rise of those studies outside the Anglo-Saxon world.
Despite his intensive activity on both bibliographical and scholarly fronts, he wrote numerous other works and started a series of facsimiles of the printed sources of western art, for which he collected both books and water-colours.
Following disagreements with the Genevan authorities, he moved in the later 1960s, first to London and then to Banbury, where he died 10 November 1976, having arranged with the University of Oxford for the bequest of his scholarly research interests (the Voltaire Foundation) to the Taylor Institution there.
In 1925 he married Henrietta Birley of Hampstead, but the marriage only lasted some ten years.
Besterman subsequently married Evelyn, younger daughter of Arthur Mack, of New York.
She had one son of her previous marriage.
The marriage was dissolved in 1958 and Besterman married Marie-Louise van Muyden of Geneva.
[The Times , 12 November 1976; personal knowledge.]
Michael R Lane
,George Croydon , first Baron Marks (1858–1938), engineer, patent agent, and politician, was born in Eltham, Kent, 9 June 1858, the eldest of eight children (four of whom died in infancy) of William Marks, an artisan at the Royal Arsenal, Woolwich, and his wife Amelia Adelaide, daughter of Thomas Croydon of Crediton in Devon.
George, who had two sisters and a brother, attended a private day-school in Eltham and at the age of thirteen entered the Royal Arsenal, where he continued his basic education whilst gaining valuable practical experience.
He became one of the first Whitworth scholars in 1875 and completed his education at King's College, University of London.
Between 1877 and 1882 he gained further experience with several well-known engineering firms.
In 1882 he joined Tangye Ltd. in Birmingham and soon became head of the lifting machinery department and an expert in hydraulically operated machinery.
In July 1887 Marks put up his plate in Temple Street, Birmingham, as a consulting engineer and patent agent.
Following a serious illness in 1889, he formed a partnership with (Sir) Dugald Clerk [q.v.], a former colleague at Tangye Ltd. and inventor of the two-stroke internal combustion engine.
The partners practised as Marks & Clerk and were joined by Marks's younger brother Edward in 1894.
Initially Marks concentrated upon the design and construction of ‘water balance’ cliff railways and steep-incline tramways.
Whilst with Tangye Ltd. he had been responsible for machinery used by the Saltburn, North Yorkshire cliff railway.
In 1888, in association with(Sir) George Newnes [q.v.], a local benefactor, founder of Tit-Bits and Liberal MP for Newmarket, he designed and built the Lynton and Lynmouth cliff railway.
This was followed by similar railways at Clifton Spa in Bristol, Bridgnorth in Shropshire, and Constitutional Hill in Aberystwyth.
A steep-incline cable-hauled tramway was completed in Matlock, Derbyshire, in 1893.
In 1894 Marks was appointed consulting engineer to the Duke of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha and he built another cliff railway in Budapest, for which he was rewarded with a knighthood of the Ducal Order of Ernest.
In 1893 Marks & Clerk moved to London, leaving Edward to run the Birmingham and Manchester offices.
The partnership moved to Lincoln's Inn Fields in 1909.
Marks opened an office in New York in 1910 and became closely associated with Thomas Edison as patent agent, advocate, and personal confidant.
In 1906 Marks successfully stood as Liberal MP for the Launceston and North Cornwall constituency which he held until 1924.
In 1911 he was knighted.
He joined the Ministry of Munitions in 1914 and three years later was appointed CBE for his outstanding work as a commissioner for the dilution of labour.
In 1929 Marks left the Liberal Party and offered his support to Ramsay MacDonald.
In July that year he was raised to the peerage.
In the House of Lords, as in the House of Commons, he was regarded as a leading authority on patent and trade-mark law.
He was a member of the Institutions of Civil and Mechanical Engineers and the Chartered Institute of Patent Agents, council member for the London Chamber of Commerce, president of the Institute of Fuel, and a member of the royal commission on decimal coinage.
Following World War I, he played a major role in the gramophone industry as chairman of the Edison Phonograph Company and the Columbia Graphaphone Company.
In 1931 he was closely involved in the merger of these companies with the Gramophone Company (HMV) which resulted in the formation of Electrical and Musical Industries Ltd.
(EMI).
He was also chairman of the British Equitable Assurance Company.
He was a lifelong Congregationalist and believed in the gospel of work and strict self-discipline, although his hospitality was renowned and his greatest pleasure was shipboard life on the great Atlantic liners.
He was chairman of the Sunday School Union and treasurer of the Girls' Brigade.
In later life his philanthropic deeds were legion.
In 1881 he married Margaret, daughter of Thomas Maynard, a Bath boat builder.
They had no children.
Marks died at his home, Cerne Abbas, Bournemouth, 24 September 1938 and was buried in the North Bournemouth cemetery.
The peerage became extinct.
[Company records; private information; personal knowledge.]
Bernard Capp
,John (1620–1667), naval commander, of Bermondsey, was the younger son of Robert Bourne (d .
1625), shipwright, who owned a dockyard at Wapping, and his wife Mary.
He was baptized 14 November 1620.
His elder brother Nehemiah [q.v.]emigrated to New England in 1638 and John may have followed him there.
During the 1640s he commanded ships on trading voyages to Massachusetts, in association with his brother, who had returned home in 1643.
Parliament drew Nehemiah into naval service in 1650 and John soon followed.
He commanded a hired merchantman in the summer of 1650, serving under his brother, and was appointed to a fourth-rate warship for the following winter guard.
He held senior commands throughout the first Dutch war.
He was rear-admiral in the squadron of (Sir) William Penn [q.v.]at the battle off Portland in February 1653; his ship was boarded by the Dutch and he suffered severe head wounds in the fighting.
He had recovered sufficiently by the spring to return to sea as flag-captain in the Resolution under Generals Richard Deane and George Monck [qq.v.], and took part in the major actions off the Gabbard in June and the Texel in July.
In 1654 he led a squadron to Newfoundland, though a storm disabled his ship and forced him to turn back.
He then served in the Channel.
Early in 1656 he was appointed rear-admiral of the fleet being sent against Spain under Generals Robert Blake [q.v.]and Edward Mountagu (later first Earl of Sandwich, q.v.), and took part in the long blockade of Cadiz.
When news arrived early in 1657 that a Spanish plate fleet on its way to the Canaries, Bourne (now vice-admiral) and (Sir) Richard Stayner [q.v.], the new rear-admiral, pressed Blake to intercept it.
He took part in the ensuing operation at Santa Cruz in April, in which the entire plate fleet was destroyed.
Bourne was a firm parliamentarian.
He was willing to serve under the Protectorate but his loyalties were essentially republican and he welcomed the restoration of the Rump early in 1659.
As General Mountagu, commanding a fleet in the Baltic, was a known Cromwellian, the support of Bourne, commanding in the Downs, was of considerable political significance.
When the army ousted the Rump in October 1659 he and a group of other naval officers then ashore wrote to Monck in Scotland, urging him to accept the coup, arguing that divisions would only play into the hands of the cavaliers.
The Rump, probably resentful, did not employ him again when it was reinstalled in December, and Mountagu had no wish to recall him.
Bourne therefore played no part in the Restoration, returning instead to his earlier career in maritime trade.
He became an elder brother of Trinity House in March 1660.
He was away at sea for much of the following year, and frequently thereafter, on voyages to the Mediterranean and North America.
As a Puritan, Bourne had devoted himself to God's cause, as he saw it.
When a storm disabled his ship in 1654 he was dismayed by the thought that God might have judged him unworthy to be an instrument.
In 1655 he responded to news of the persecution of the Waldenses by arranging a day of fasting in the Channel fleet and a collection for the victims.
Bourne died in 1667, probably in July or August.
In a will drawn up two years earlier he bequeathed his estate in Bermondsey to his wife Mary, and their two sons Robert and John.
[W. C. Chaplin, ‘Nehemiah Bourne’,Publications of the Colonial Society of Massachusetts , vol. xlii, 1952–6; B. S. Capp,Cromwell's Navy , 1989; J. R. Powell, ‘John Bourne, Sometime Vice-Admiral’,Mariner's Mirror , vol. lxii, 1976.]
Norris McWhirter
,Walter Goodall (1858–1943), runner, was the second of three children and younger son of Frederick Benjamin George, chemist and druggist of Calne, Wiltshire, and his wife Elizabeth.
George's birth was not registered but his baptism was on 8 October 1858 and he celebrated his birthday on 9 September.
In 1874, aged fifteen, George became ‘apprenticed to chemistry’ in Worcester and was often obliged to work a fourteen-hour day.
He grew up to a lithe 5 feet 11¼ inches and 10½ stone.
His earliest sporting interests were as a co-founder of the Worcester Rugby Football Club and as a penny-farthing cyclist in 1876.
In 1878 he became the joint winner in Birmingham of a handicap walking race over a mile with a 45-yard handicap.
At this time the fastest anyone had yet covered the English mile distance had been set by the professional runner, William Richards, at 4 minutes 17¼ seconds in Manchester on 19 August 1865.
On 1 June 1878 the nineteen-year-old George wrote down his thoughts on how some ten yards a lap (5.7 seconds of the total time) could be knocked off the then world standard.
He proclaimed his plan to much mirth.
The deed, he said, could be done with laps of 59, 63, 66, and 64 seconds.
Remarkably, more than seven years later he ran laps of 58½, 63½, 65¾, and 66 seconds at Lillie Bridge, London, on 23 August 1886 to establish a world's best time of 4 minutes 12¾ seconds that was unbeaten anywhere for the next twenty-eight seasons and was unbeaten by a Briton for forty-nine years, until Sydney Wooderson returned 4 minutes 12.7 seconds, running in Glasgow on 3 August 1935.
George won the English championship for the mile and the four miles in 1879 and the same distances at the inaugural Amateur Athletic Association championships, which were open to the world in the following year.
In 1882 and in 1883 he performed the feat of taking the half-mile, one-mile, four-mile, and ten-mile championships.
His dominance was such that few dared challenge him and some of his titles were ‘walkovers’.
George was a moderate smoker and his favourite meal before a race was a glass of beer and a hunk of bread and cheese.
He was, however, often racked by asthma and suffered much from hay fever.
He became unbeatable over the middle distances in an era before training became scientific.
One of his training runs over a mile was timed at 4 minutes 9.8 seconds but the absence of opposition and official timekeepers rendered the mark unofficial.
He won more than 1,000 cups and prizes as an amateur, setting records ranging from 1,000 yards to 12 miles.
Additionally he won the English national cross-country title in 1882, 1883, and 1884.
George turned professional in 1886 and was thus able to confront over a mile the leading pedestrian of the Victorian age — William Jeffrey Cummings (1858–1919) of Paisley.
The police, who were overwhelmed, estimated that 30,000 people converged on the red-brick dust track at Lillie Bridge, West Brompton, London, to bet on the outcome of the gladiatorial duel between George and Cummings.
Only after he finished in his world's best time of 4 minutes 12¾ seconds did George learn that the tenacious Scot had collapsed sixty yards from the tape and had fallen on the grass.
George made five journeys to the United States, both as an amateur and as a professional, and proved himself to be the world's greatest middle-distance runner, so starting a British tradition which was continued by Wooderson,(Sir) Roger Bannister, Derek Ibbotson, Steve Ovett, Sebastian Coe, and Steve Cram.
At St Nicholas Church, Worcester, on 11 October 1887, he married Ada Annie, younger daughter of George Grainger, JP, the proprietor of the Royal Worcester porcelain works.
After more than fifty-four years of marriage she was by his side when he died at the age of eighty-four, at 21 Frimley Gardens, Mitcham, south London, 4 June 1943.
They had one daughter and a son, Walter Gordon, who was shot dead in an industrial fracas in San Francisco in March 1932.
[Peter H. Lovesey,The Kings of Distance , 1968; Arthur F. H. Newton et al.,
Running , 1935; W. G. George,Athletics and Kindred Sports , 1902.]
Christopher Hogwood
,Michael (c. 1565–1628), composer and courtier, was the youngest of three children of William Cavendish and his wife Ann Cox.
He was a grandson of George Cavendish [q.v.], the biographer of Cardinal Thomas Wolsey [q.v.].
The family, which can be traced back to the thirteenth century, lived at the manor of Cavendish Overhall, Suffolk, until the house and lands were sold in 1596 by William Cavendish, Michael's eldest brother.
However, the dedication of Michael Cavendish's sole publication, a book of songs and madrigals published in 1598, states ‘From Cavendish this 24 of July’, so the family may have retained connections with the area.
Only one copy of Cavendish's book is extant, now in the British Library.
It is dedicated to ‘the Ladie Arbella’(Arabella Stuart, q.v.),
Cavendish's second cousin, and comprises twenty-eight compositions: fourteen songs for voice and lute or two voices and bass viol, six more lute songs with alternative versions for four voices alone, and eight madrigals for five voices — a range of performing options which justifies the claim in the dedication that the book ‘hath in it humours variable for delights sake’.
The songs are tuneful and well crafted, sometimes delicate in expression.
The madrigals, more clumsy and old-fashioned, look back to the models of Alfonso Ferrabosco the elder [q.v.]rather than forward to the looser, more expressive style of Thomas Morley [q.v.]; two of them (xxi and xxii) borrow musically as well as textually from Ferrabosco's settings, published by Nicholas Yonge [q.v.]in the influential second volume of Musica Transalpina (1597).
With ‘Come gentle swains’(xxiv) Cavendish has the distinction of being the first composer to introduce into a printed collection the English refrain which three years later concluded every composition in Morley's collection dedicated to Elizabeth I,The Triumphs of Oriana (1601): then sang the shepherds and nimphes of Diana  Long live faire Oriana.
A heavily revised version of this madrigal was included in Morley's collection.
Little is known of Cavendish's life.
The dedication contains the somewhat bitter generalization that ‘the policie of times may hold it unfit to raise men humbled with adversities to titles of dearnesse’, which could apply to Cavendish's own situation at the end of Elizabeth's reign.
But his fortunes may have revived after the accession of James I, since a manuscript tracing the pedigree of the family (British Library Add.
MS 19122) states that Cavendish was ‘Servant in the Bedchamber to Prince Charles’(who was born in 1601).
Whatever his personal fortunes, it is likely that his connections with the more favoured branch of the family headed by William Cavendish, first Earl of Devonshire [q.v.]and heir to Chatsworth and Hardwick, brought him into association with several other composers and musicians.
His book of songs and madrigals has similarities in style with the Songs of Sundrie Kindes (1604) by Thomas Greaves [q.v.], and both end with a group of five-part madrigals.
Greaves was employed by Sir Henry Pierrepoint whose wife, Frances Cavendish, was sister of the first earl and cousin to Michael's father.
The madrigalist John Wilbye [q.v.]dedicated one set of published madrigals to Arabella Stuart [q.v.]and the other to Sir Charles Cavendish, the earl's younger brother, who was himself connected by marriage to the Kytsons, Wilbye's patrons at Hengrave Hall.
Arabella Stuart was also the patron of Tobias Hume and the lutenist Francis Cuttinge [q.v.].
Two of the lyrics set by Cavendish (xix and xx) were later set by Michael East [q.v.]in his Madrigales to 3. 4. and 5. parts (1604) and Cavendish's only other extant work, besides his published book, is a contribution to The Whole Booke of Psalmes , published in 1592 by Thomas East [q.v.], thought to be the father of Michael East.
As a gentleman amateur with a place at court, Cavendish was not himself fully a member of ‘a profession worthie some grace’(as he described music in his dedication).
But the quality of his few compositions makes him not the least important of an influential group of musicians active around the turn of the century.
Other than his service to Prince Charles, nothing is known of his later years.
Cavendish's will was dated 5 July 1628 and proved six days later.
He died, unmarried, in the parish of St Mary Aldermanbury, London.
[Edward Doughtie,Lyrics from English Airs, 1596–1622 , 1970; G. A. Philipps, ‘John Wilbye's Other Patrons: the Cavendishes and their Place in English Musical Life during the Renaissance’,Music Review , vol. xxxviii, 1977, pp. 81–93.]
R J Goulden
,Matthias (fl. 1789–1805), straw-paper manufacturer, was born in Pomerania, the son of Matthias and Katharine Dorothea Koops, both also of Pomerania.
Very little is known of his early life: Matthias Koops stated that he had ‘for several years served in different distinguished military characters, under the late Emperor of Germany, and King of Prussia’.
By 1789 Koops was in England.
On 12 September his marriage to Elizabeth Jane Austin took place in London.
His application for naturalization was accepted on 1 April 1790 and in June, as a merchant of Edmonton, Koops was made bankrupt.
He eventually capitalized on his knowledge of Europe by publishing in 1796 both a set of five maps of the Rhine, Meuse, and Scheldt and a survey entitled A Developement of the Views and Designs of the French Nation , which sought to warn the English of certain French activities.
In the following year Koops set up the Minerva Universal Insurance Office in Pall Mall, Westminster.
This enterprise lasted less than a year.
Koops then became interested in the long-standing problem of making paper from materials other than linen and cotton.
His work on it led Koops to prove that paper made from straw, wood, and recycled waste paper could be produced commercially; this achievement earns him a place in the history of paper-making.
By 1800 Koops had experience of making paper from waste paper at Neckinger mill in Bermondsey, and between 1800 and 1801 three patents were granted to him: one for extracting inks from printed and written paper before pulping, and the other two for manufacturing paper (fit for printing) from straw, hay, thistles, waste, and refuse of hemp and flax.
Moreover, in 1800 Koops's Historical Account of the Substances which have been Used to Describe Events was printed on straw.
Having proved the possibility of making good paper from such materials, Koops set up a company, the Straw Paper Manufactory, raised over £70,000 by issue of shares, and in 1801 erected a paper-making mill at Millbank in Westminster.
Contractors for the machinery included John Rennie [q.v.]the engineer and the firm of Boulton & Watt.
This paper-mill was easily the largest in the country.
The enterprise, however, was over-ambitious and under-capitalized.
Koops himself was the principal shareholder in the venture and on the strength of this offered to satisfy his creditors.
The failure to discharge his bankruptcy by 1802 compelled Koops's creditors to issue a writ,inter alia , for seizure of the Straw Paper Manufactory's assets.
In the end the proprietors of the Straw Paper Manufactory could not keep the enterprise solvent.
The Millbank paper-mill and its equipment were eventually offered for sale by auction in October 1804, thereby ending the possibility of England challenging the European paper industry by using more easily available materials for making paper.
Koops himself, optimistic to the last, is last heard of in 1805 soliciting subscriptions for his river maps; his widow died in 1815.
[Dard Hunter,Papermaking , 2nd edn. enlarged, 1957; Arthur Chick, ‘Paper from Straw’,Antiquarian Book Monthly Review , April 1985; R. J. Goulden, ‘The Shadow Limn'd’,Factotum , no. 27, November 1988.]
David Watkin
,Geoffrey (1884–1929), author, was born in Hampstead 11 June 1884, the fourth son and the youngest of the seven children of Russell Scott and his wife Jessie Thurburn.
Russell Scott, a Unitarian like his brother C. P. Scott [q.v.], editor of the Manchester Guardian , was a prosperous manufacturer of flooring cloth.
Geoffrey Scott was at Rugby School from 1898 to 1902, and in 1903 went up to New College, Oxford, as an exhibitioner.
He gained second classes in both classical honour moderations (1905) and literae humaniores (1907).
He won the Newdigate prize in 1906 for a poem on ‘The Death of Shelley’, and the Chancellor's prize in 1908 for an essay on ‘The National Character of English Architecture’.
In 1906 Scott was invited by the connoisseur Bernhard Berenson to stay at I Tatti, his villa near Florence.
It was Berenson's custom to entertain brilliant undergraduates from Oxford and Cambridge at I Tatti, and Scott's companion from Cambridge was John Maynard (later Baron) Keynes [q.v.].
Scott had acquired a reputation for homosexuality at Oxford, as is made clear from correspondence in the Keynes papers at King's College, Cambridge, and he and Keynes became close friends.
In 1907 Scott returned to I Tatti where he remained for two years, acting as secretary-librarian to Berenson, by whose intensely aesthetic approach to the study of art he was powerfully influenced.
Scott went into informal architectural partnership with Cecil Pinsent, with whom he shared a flat in Florence from about 1909.
Berenson's wife Mary, who had fallen in love with Scott, obtained from him the commission to remodel I Tatti.
He and Pinsent designed the Renaissance-style library and laid out formal gardens at I Tatti in 1909–15, and were invited in 1912 to make alterations to the historic Villa Medici at Fiesole by its owner, the recently widowed Lady Sybil Cutting.
In 1914 Scott published The Architecture of Humanism in which, drawing on Theodor Lipps's theories of empathy, he presented a beautifully argued intellectual defence of classicism.
This influenced a generation of authors, including Kenneth (later Baron) Clark, Robert Byron, and Christopher Hussey [qq.v.].
In 1915 Scott became honorary first secretary at the British embassy in Rome, and in 1918 married Lady Sybil Marjorie Cutting (1879–1943), daughter of Hamilton John Agmondesham Cuffe, fifth Earl of Dorset, bencher of the Inner Temple, and widow of William Bayard Cutting, secretary to the United States embassy.
However, as Iris Origo, Lady Sybil's daughter by her first marriage, observed, Scott ‘was not, by temperament, a husband’.
The marriage quickly failed, largely as the result of Scott's improbable but passionate love affair with the lesbian author Victoria (‘Vita’) Sackville-West [q.v.].
Beginning in 1923, when Vita and her husband (Sir) Harold Nicolson [q.v.]came to stay at the Villa Medici, the affair lasted into 1925 and was followed by the Scotts' divorce in 1927.
There were no children of the marriage.
Scott was described by (Sir) Desmond MacCarthy [q.v.]in 1929 as ‘a very tall, black-haired sallow man, rather saturnine in appearance’, with ‘a strong streak of melancholy’.
Scott's The Portrait of Zélide (1925) was a delicately ironical biography of Madame de Charrière, the eighteenth-century bluestocking with whom James Boswell [q.v.]fell in love.
In 1927 he was invited to edit an important collection of Boswell's papers which had been bought by the American Colonel R. H. Isham.
In October Scott sailed to New York to begin the task which resulted in the Private Papers of James Boswell from Malahide Castle , privately published in eighteen volumes in 1928–34.
He disliked America, where he described himself as living ‘among the barbarians’.
He returned to England for a short holiday in May 1929.
On his return journey, accompanied by Cecil Pinsent, he caught a chill which turned to pneumonia from which he died in New York 14 August 1929.
His ashes were placed in the cloisters at New College, Oxford, where they are commemorated by a plaque recording him as ‘Humanist & Boswellian Scholar’.
[Nicky Mariano,Forty Years with Berenson , 1966; Nigel Nicolson,Portrait of a Marriage , 1973; Iris Origo,Images and Shadows: Part of a Life , 1970; Geoffrey Scott,The Architecture of Humanism , 1914, revised edn. 1924, reprinted 1980 with foreword by D. Watkin; M. Secrest,Being Bernard Berenson: a Biography , 1980; information from Scott's friends.]
T C Graham
,John (fl. 1400), manuscript artist, was active in the late fourteenth and early fifteenth centuries.
Siferwas depicted himself several times in the habit of a Dominican friar.
He is probably identifiable as the ‘John Cyfrewas’ of the Dominican community in Guildford who was ordained acolyte at Farnham on 19 May 1380 by William of Wykeham, bishop of Winchester [q.v.]; and as the ‘Johannes Sifirwas, brother of the Order of Preachers’to whom the widow Joan Elveden, from Muchelney (Somerset), bequeathed ‘one pair of jet praying-beads’in her will dated 4 September 1421.
After his ordination Siferwas perhaps moved from Guildford to the Dominican community in Salisbury or Ilchester.
All his surviving work was done for religious houses in the south-west.
Siferwas's work survives in three manuscripts: a Pentateuch Commentary from Glastonbury Abbey, at Trinity College, Cambridge; the Sherborne Missal, at Alnwick Castle; and the fragmentary Lovell Lectionary, in the British Library.
His work on the Missal is datable within the period 1396–1407: one of the patrons of the manuscript was Bishop Richard Mitford of Salisbury, whose episcopate spanned those years.
Siferwas depicted John Whas, the scribe of the Missal, as a Benedictine.
Whas probably belonged to the Benedictine abbey of Sherborne, for which the Missal was made, and Siferwas may have resided at Sherborne while decorating the manuscript.
Siferwas must have completed the decoration of the Lectionary before 1408, the year of the death of John, fifth Baron Lovell of Titchmarsh, who commissioned the manuscript for Salisbury Cathedral.
On folio 4 verso, Siferwas depicted himself presenting the manuscript to Lovell.
The picture is among the finest examples of early English portraiture.
The sumptuous Sherborne Missal represents the high point of Siferwas's art.
He decorated most of the first half of the 700-page manuscript himself, leaving much of the rest to assistants of lesser ability.
His own contribution comprises a full-page crucifixion, historiated and ornamental initials, and elaborate borders densely populated with biblical scenes, angels, ‘portrait’ heads, scenes of courtly life, drolleries, and representations of flora and fauna both conventionalized and naturalistic.
His sensitive depictions of birds are justly famous for their realism.
Several borders include a pinnacled tabernacle containing figural scenes.
These tabernacles are a hallmark of his art, and recur in the Lovell Lectionary.
Siferwas painted in the International Gothic style established in England, probably under north German influence, in the late fourteenth century.
Characteristic of the style are the use of rich, warm colours, skilful treatment of architecture, and painterly modelling of the human figure.
The Sherborne Missal is the masterpiece of the style.
Yet because Siferwas worked outside the main centres of manuscript production, his influence was less than his achievement merited.
[J. A. Herbert,The Sherborne Missal , 1920; E. G. Millar,English Illuminated Manuscripts of the XIVth and XVth Centuries , 1928; M. Rickert,Painting in Britain: The Middle Ages , 2nd edn., 1965; R. Marks and N. Morgan,The Golden Age of English Manuscript Painting 1200–1500 , 1981.]
Richard Greene
,Thomas (1695–1730), poet and clergyman, was born 1 August 1695.
His parents have not been identified, though he may have been related to a family of Purneys in Buckinghamshire.
On the evidence of his poems, however, it is believed that he spent his childhood in Kent.
Nothing is known about Purney's early education except that he spent a year at Merchant Taylors' School.
He matriculated in 1711 at Cambridge, where he was admitted as a pensioner to Clare Hall on 2 July.
He took his BA in 1715–16.
At Cambridge he acquired a reputation as a poet and became a friend of John Bulkeley, whose epic The Last Day (1717, revised 1719) he edited.
Purney published his first volume of poems,Pastorals After the Simple Manner of Theocritus , on 16 November 1716.
This was followed on 14 February 1717 by Pastorals, viz. The Bashful Swain: and Beauty and Simplicity .
The most interesting feature of these poems is their use of English dialect words.
In October 1718 he published a long mock-heroic poem,The Chevalier de St. George .
In his critical essay,A Full Enquiry into the True Nature of Pastoral (1717), he examined many of the issues treated by Thomas Tickell and Alexander Pope [qq.v.]in the Guardian dispute of 1713, and argued strongly on the side of Tickell that writers of pastorals should use imagery drawn from contemporary rural life.
Purney was ordained priest 24 May 1719.
In November of the same year he was appointed chaplain to Newgate prison, where he wrote a large number of Ordinary's Account s of funeral sermons, confessions, and last dying words of criminals executed at Tyburn.
There are reports that Purney was excessively zealous in his ministry, encouraging condemned men to confess to more crimes than they had actually committed.
It should be noted, however, that he also protested against conditions at Newgate, particularly the presence of strangers in the chapel ‘pointing & whispering, to ye Confusion of ye wretched Men to Dye’.
Purney's health declined from 1724.
He gradually withdrew from his duties at Newgate and he signed his last Ordinary's Account on 30 April 1725.
On 28 September 1725 he complained of ‘Hectick ffeaver’.
He eventually resigned as ordinary in November 1727.
He died in Kent in 1730.
[H. O. White, ‘Thomas Purney: Forgotten Poet and Critic of the Eighteenth Century’,Essays and Studies , vol. xv, 1929; H. O. White (ed.),
The Works of Thomas Purney , 1933; Thomas Purney,A Full Enquiry into the True Nature of Pastoral (1717), ed.
E. Wasserman, Augustan Reprint Society, series 2, no. 4, 1948.]
Raymond Lister
,Philip Henry George (1879–1959), naturalist, writer, and doctor, was born in London 13 August 1879, the only son and second of three children of (Sir) Edmund William Gosse [q.v.], poet, and his wife Ellen, daughter of George Napoleon Epps.
Educated at Haileybury, he subsequently studied agriculture at Wellingore Hall, Lincolnshire.
His chief early interest, inherited from his grandfather, Philip Henry Gosse FRS [q.v.], was natural history; this led to a trip to Newfoundland in 1895.
In 1896 he was appointed naturalist to the Fitzgerald expedition to the Andes, and on his return contributed ‘Notes on the Natural History of the Aconcagua Valley’ to E. A. Fitzgerald's The Highest Andes (1899).
Despite Philip's passionate interest in natural history, his father insisted that he should have a recognized profession, and the choice eventually fell upon medicine.
From 1899 he studied at St Bartholomew's Hospital, and qualified as MRCS and LRCP (1907); later he attained the degree of MD (Durham).
After six months as a house surgeon at Essex County Hospital, Colchester, he set up as a country doctor in the New Forest, his amusing recollections of which appeared in St. Bartholomew's Hospital Journal (1933–5).
Gosse's career was interrupted by the outbreak of war in 1914, in which he served as a captain in the Royal Army Medical Corps.
In France until autumn 1917, he was transferred to India until the armistice.
His wartime recollections,Memoirs of a Camp-Follower , were published in 1934, and were later reissued as A Naturalist Goes to War (1942).
After 1918 Gosse worked as a medical referee for the Ministry of Pensions, and later at the Radium Institute, eventually becoming its medical superintendent.
He retired from medicine in 1930, although for a brief period during World War II he acted as locum for a Cambridge doctor who had joined up.
Otherwise he became a full-time writer, producing three biographies, a history of St Helena (1938), and a History of Piracy (1932), which earned him an international reputation, being translated into French, Spanish, and Dutch.
Yet Gosse's most enjoyable works are his elegantly written and witty books of recollections, which include Go to the Country (1935),Traveller's Rest (1947), and An Apple a Day (1948).
Gosse was an entertaining companion; his somewhat mordant manner hid an essentially kind personality, and he was especially fond of young company.
His humour was sometimes expressed in schoolboyish practical jokes, but he possessed also a quicksilver wit, as illustrated by his remark to Lady (Margaret) Keynes (née Darwin), who told him she had been bitten by an ape at Gibraltar: ‘He was having revenge on the Darwins.’
Gosse's friends invariably forgave him for his wayward humour.
He possessed a genius for friendship which is reflected in the many literary people who knew, liked, and respected him, from Arthur Waugh and Vyvyan Holland to Siegfried Sassoon [q.v.](a distant relative) and the Sitwells [qq.v.].
He was for many years Brother Buccaneer to the literary dining club, The Sette of Odd Volumes, where his quick repartee was much appreciated.
From 1941 until his death he was a fellow commoner of Trinity College, Cambridge.
He was married three times.
In 1908 he married Gertrude Gosse Hay, an Australian cousin.
She was the daughter of Alexander Hay, colonist and politician.
They were divorced and in 1931 he married Irene Ruth Marden, daughter of Oliver Hawkshaw, gentleman of independent means.
After another divorce, in 1942, he married Anna Gordon Keown, the poet and novelist, who died in 1957.
She was the daughter of Robert Keown, a London wool merchant.
There was a daughter by each of the first two marriages.
Gosse died in Cambridge 3 October 1959.
[Personal knowledge.]
Willem D Hackmann
,John (1743–1821), instrument-maker, was born in Dearham, Cumberland, late June 1743 (he was baptized 1 July), the second of four children (the eldest of whom predeceased him) and elder son of Jonathan Cuthbertson, an innkeeper and yeoman, and his second wife Mary Fisher.
He has been confused with his younger brother, Jonathan, also born in Dearham and baptized 11 September 1744, who followed the same profession, and their separate publications have been listed in several prominent works under John's name.
Jonathan died in 1806.
Nothing is known about the brothers' formal education or early apprenticeships.
In 1761 John was apprenticed to the instrument-maker James Champneys and moved with him to Amsterdam in 1768.
Champneys was one of a number of prominent London instrument-makers who brought a petition against Peter Dollond [q.v.]in 1764 to annul (unsuccessfully as it turned out) the achromatic lens patent which had been granted to Dollond's father in 1758.
One of the reasons for Champneys's move to Holland with his apprentice may have been his bankruptcy in 1766.
He had to pay a heavy fine for infringing Dollond's patent in that year.
John followed the fairly common practice of marrying his master's daughter.
He married Jane Champneys on 1 September 1768, and shortly afterwards the move to Holland must have taken place, as John appears in the Amsterdam poorterboek on 29 December 1768.
Only John took the ‘poorter's oath’ necessary for those who wanted to establish a business, and from this we may surmise that James Champneys lived with John and Jane and that the business was solely in John's name.
They had four children in Amsterdam, but only their sole daughter, Jane, survived.
Cuthbertson became noted for his glass-plate frictional electrical machines; a technology which he took with him from London but which he developed to a high state of perfection in Holland.
Some of the improvements may have originated from his brother Jonathan, who had set up a flourishing instrument-making business in Rotterdam.
Cuthbertson also advanced the subject of electricity in the Netherlands, writing books, giving public lectures, and assisting some of the foremost Dutch scientists with their experiments.
In 1783 he constructed a very large twin-plate electrical machine for one of these scientists, Martinus van Marum, the director of the experimental cabinet of the Teyler's Foundation in Haarlem.
This frictional generator, the largest of its type, produced 24-inch discharges, equivalent to about 300,000 volts.
Cuthbertson returned to London sometime between 1793 and 1796, perhaps because of the worsening political situation in the Dutch Republic.
His brother decided to remain in Holland and died in Rotterdam.
John settled at Poland Street.
It cannot have been easy for a man in his fifties to start afresh as an instrument-maker in London.
In 1799 he invented an electrometer named after him and produced a simplified version of his plate electrical machine, which became the most popular type in England.
He also designed several air pumps.
In 1810 he wrote his last scientific papers.
He was buried 18 July 1821 in his parish church, St James's, Piccadilly, and probably died intestate.
[W. D. Hackmann,John and Jonathan Cuthbertson: the Invention and Development of the Eighteenth Century Plate Electrical Machine (Communication no. 142, National Museum of the History of Science), Leiden 1973, and Electricity from Glass: the History of the Frictional Electrical Machine 1600–1850 , 1978, pp. 154–64.]
Blake
,Randolph Frederick Edward Spencer- (1911–1968), journalist and MP, was born at Bolton Street, London, 28 May 1911, the only son and second of four children of (Sir) Winston Leonard Spencer-Churchill, later prime minister, and his wife Clementine Ogilvy Hozier (later Baroness Spencer-Churchill)[qq.v.].
He was educated at Eton and Christ Church, Oxford.
He was a loquacious and precocious boy, drinking double brandies at the age of eighteen — a habit which did not change over the years.
His father disapproved, but told a visitor: ‘Modern young people will do what they like.
The only time parents really control their children is before they are born.
After that their nature unfolds remorselessly petal by petal.’
Relations between Winston and Randolph were always uneasy, the father alternately spoiling and being infuriated by the son.
They accompanied each other in reasonable harmony on Winston's visit to Canada and the USA in 1929, but Randolph displeased his father soon afterwards by leaving Oxford without a degree in order to become a journalist.
He was at an early age a fluent writer and speaker, and a vigorous, if at times embarrassing, supporter of his father's cause.
In February 1935, without consulting his father, he stood at a by-election in Wavertree as an independent Conservative against the India Bill, thus splitting the party vote and letting in Labour.
In the general election that autumn he stood, this time as official Conservative candidate, for West Toxteth.
He lost, and lost again at a by-election in February 1936 in Ross and Cromarty against Malcolm MacDonald [q.v.], the National Government candidate and dominions secretary — another embarrassment for his father who was then angling for a cabinet post.
In 1940, thanks to the party truce, he was elected for Preston, but lost in the election of 1945.
During World War II he was a major in the 4th Queen's Own Hussars, serving on the general staff (intelligence) at GHQ Middle East.
In January 1944 he was parachuted into Yugoslavia as a member of the (Sir) Fitzroy Maclean mission to support General Tito.
He was joined by Evelyn Waugh and F. W. F. Smith, second Earl of Birkenhead [qq.v.].
His loquacity maddened his colleagues.
There is a story that they bet him a substantial sum that he could not read a certain number of books of the Bible without talking.
Well before the end of Genesis he exclaimed ‘Christ!
This is exciting’ and lost his bet, but never paid.
After two more unsuccessful attempts to get into Parliament in 1950 and 1951 he took to authorship, though continuing as a lecturer, journalist, and broadcaster.
His ambition was to write the life of his father.
The trustees who owned the papers were not too sure.
He decided to show that he was a serious biographer by writing the life of E. G. V. Stanley, seventeenth Earl of Derby.
It is a reputable if rather dull book, but Lord Derby was a dull man.
It was published in 1959 and the trustees gave their consent.
Churchill assembled a team of ever-changing research assistants — their position was neither easy nor well paid — at his house, Stour in East Bergholt, Suffolk.
In 1964 he wrote The Fight for the Tory Leadership , a very pro-Macmillan account of the accession of A. Douglas-Home (later Lord Home of the Hirsel) to the premiership.
He was blown out of the water on 17 January 1964 by Iain Macleod [q.v.], who had just become editor of the Spectator , in one of the most famous and devastating articles that has ever appeared in that journal.
For once Randolph had no comeback.
The first volume of his father's biography appeared in 1966,Youth 1874–1900 ; the second,The Young Statesman 1901–1914 , a year later, along with five companion volumes of documentation (1967–9).
He had set the pattern for a major biographical achievement but he died prematurely.
The work was carried to completion by one of his leading research assistants, Martin Gilbert.
The eighth and final volume appeared in 1988.
Slim, blond, and good-looking in his youth, he became somewhat bloated in middle age, and his potations did not improve his appearance.
Conversation with him could be exciting and enjoyable, but one was uneasily aware of potential explosions.
He was not liked in his father's wartime entourage: ‘I thought Randolph was one of the most objectionable people I had ever met,’ wrote Sir John Colville, one of Winston's private secretaries.
The shadow of a famous father can often damage a competitive son.
He was twice married: in 1932 to Pamela Beryl, daughter of Edward Kenelm Digby, eleventh Baron Digby; they had one son.
The marriage was dissolved in 1946 and in 1948 he married June, daughter of Colonel Rex Hamilton Osborne, of Little Ingleburn, Malmesbury, Wiltshire; they had one daughter.
The marriage was dissolved in 1961.
Churchill died at Stour 6 June 1968.
[Randolph Churchill,Twenty-one Years , 1965; Martin Gilbert,Churchill , 1971–88, seriatim; Mark Amory (ed.),
The Letters of Evelyn Waugh , 1980; Sir John Colville,The Fringes of Power , 1985; private information; personal knowledge.]
A G E Jones
,Benjamin Leigh (1828–1913), Arctic explorer, was born in Whatlington, Sussex, 12 March 1828, the eldest son of Benjamin Smith [q.v.],
MP for Norwich, and his wife Anne Longden, sister of Barbara Leigh Smith Bodichon [q.v.], artist and co-founder of Girton College, Cambridge.
Educated at the Nonconformist Bruce Castle School, in 1848 he was elected a pensioner of Jesus College, Cambridge; he was a senior wrangler in 1852.
As a Nonconformist he was not admitted to the BA degree until 1857, the first dissenter to be admitted.
He was called to the bar at the Inner Temple in 1856.
Smith was a rich man — his estate was proved at £110,891 on his death — and he travelled widely.
He took the Board of Trade ‘ticket’ to command his own ships and he invented an instrument for computing time at sea.
From 1871 to 1882 he sailed in Arctic waters.
In 1871 he took the yacht,Sampson , to Svalbard, to the Seven Islands, reaching latitude 81° 30' N. In 1872 he could not get beyond the north-west capes of Spitsbergen.
He did not get full credit for his oceanographic work on the Gulf Stream during his two voyages.
In 1878 he tried vainly to reach Spitsbergen but it was a close season.
In 1880 he built the screw brigantine,Eira , of 240/335 tons.
He sailed from Peterhead, but failed to make Jan Mayen and east Greenland.
Ice on the north coast of Spitsbergen made it impossible to pass Amsterdam Island, and so he made for Franz Josef Land, discovered only in 1873–4, and partly mapped.
Smith reached May Island in August, adding the south-west coast of the new land to the chart.
He also made some additions to the chart of the east coast of Spitsbergen.
In 1881 the Eira sailed from Peterhead and sighted Novaya Zemlya and Franz Josef Land.
On 21 August 1881 Smith's yacht was nipped between pack ice and land floe off Cape Flora, sinking in two hours.
The men of the ship's company lived in a makeshift hut for ten months, and then took to their boats for the homeward passage, reaching Novaya Zemlya, where they met the Hope , commanded by Sir Allen W. Young [q.v.], who had been sent to find them.
The whole crew landed safely at Aberdeen at the end of August 1882, having survived the winter because lack of provisions led them to live on fresh meat, thus avoiding scurvy, and because of Smith's quiet leadership.
In 1881 Smith was awarded the Patron's medal of the Royal Geographical Society for his discoveries.
He was so modest, reticent, and reserved that his paper on his voyage of 1880, given at the Royal Geographical Society, had to be read for him by the secretary.
In 1882 he was made an honorary fellow of Jesus College, Cambridge.
Smith made no further Arctic expeditions, but continued his interest in the Arctic and the whaling trade.
He continued his travels, but for the most part lived quietly in Sussex.
In 1882 Smith married Charlotte Annette, daughter of Frederick William Sellers, wine merchant of Paddington.
They had two sons and two daughters.
He died 4 January 1913 in Hampstead and was buried in Brightling, Sussex.
[The Times , 6 January 1913; A. G. E. Jones in the Musk-Ox , no. 16, 1975, pp. 24–31.]
P Collinson
,Josias (1553–1639), Nonconforming minister and publicist, was born in Canterbury in 1553, the son of George Nicholls, a member of the ruling oligarchy.
At the local cathedral grammar school he was exposed to the distinctly Protestant influence of the masters Anthony Rush [q.v.]and John Gresshop, and he proceeded to Oxford.
His first cure was at Yalding in the Medway valley, where he succeeded the radical printing preacher John Strowd.
In 1580 he was presented to the living of Eastwell near Ashford by Nicholas St Leger, a staunchly Protestant gentleman who had denounced Mary Queen of Scots in Parliament as that ‘monstrous huge dragon and mass of the earth’, and who had married the widow of Sir Thomas Finch [q.v.], whose manor-house dominated this tiny parish of fifteen households and seventy-two communicants.
The small scale of Nicholls's parochial obligations in Eastwell was out of proportion with his leading role among ‘the ministers of Kent’ who confronted Archbishop John Whitgift [q.v.]and his drive for conformity.
He was denounced in 1584 as the ‘ring-leader’ of those clergymen in Kent who opposed subscription to the Three Articles, Whitgift's standard of conformity, and who favoured further reformation of the Church of England.
By his own admission, he was ‘not one of the hindmost’ in taking the Puritan campaign into the lobbies of Parliament itself and he represented Kent at a synod of Puritan ministers held at Cambridge in September 1587.
In the 1590s he favoured a tactic of moderation in the expectation of a favourable political change.
He placed his hopes first in Robert Devereux, second Earl of Essex [q.v.], to whom he dedicated An Order of Household Instruction (1596), and then on James VI, to whom he appealed more or less directly in The Plea of the Innocent (1602), an account of the variable fortunes of the godly cause under Elizabethan rule.
This book included memorable and often quoted accounts of Nicholls's pastoral experiences in Kentish parishes, where congregations without experience of a preaching ministry retained a vague semi-Pelagian religion of conventional works righteousness.
The consequence of what Nicholls may have intended as a politic and eirenical statement was suspension, degradation, and imprisonment.
In 1604 Nicholls attended the Hampton Court conference as an observer.
Two years later he was suspected of complicity in Thomas Whetenhall's A Discourse of the Abuses Now in Question in the Churches of Christ and was fined in the Star Chamber.
Further troubles followed in 1614, when Nicholls was again prosecuted in the Star Chamber and imprisoned in the Marshalsea for opposition to the forced loan of that year.
By now he made his living as a schoolmaster, in Loose and Maidstone.
It is significant that all three of this sons, Suretonhie, Josias, and Repentance, laboured in the same profession, doubtless as frustrated preaching ministers.
Nonconformity persisted in the Nicholls dynasty into at least the third generation.
Josias Nicholls ended his days in London, where he lived in the parish of St Mary at Bow.
He died in 1639.
[Josias Nicholls,An Order of Household Instruction , 1596,The Plea of the Innocent , 1602, and Abrahams Faith 1602; Peter Clark, ‘Josias Nicholls and Religious Radicalism, 1553–1639’,Journal of Ecclesiastical History , vol. xxviii, 1977; Patrick Collinson,The Elizabethan Puritan Movement , 1967.]
E N K Clarkson
,Edward (1861–1951), geological surveyor, was born in Bristol 3 December 1861, the only child of Charles Hickes Greenly, medical practitioner, and his wife Harriett Dowling.
He was educated at Clifton College, Bristol, and in 1883 became for three years articled clerk to a London solicitor.
His real interests, however, increasingly came to lie in science and eventually his father paid for him to attend University College London, where he studied chemistry.
He was mainly self-taught as a geologist, and in his spare time he began an amateur interest in geological mapping.
He met quite by chance Professor A. H. Green [q.v.]of Leeds, to whom he showed his maps.
Green was very impressed and recommended Greenly to the director of the Geological Survey.
He was appointed to the Survey in July 1889 at the age of twenty-seven, and went to the Northern Highlands of Scotland, where he learned geological field techniques from the experienced surveyors B. N. Peach and C. T. Clough [qq.v.], and where he also developed a lifelong fascination with Pre-Cambrian metamorphic rocks.
Greenly resigned from the official Survey in the spring of 1885 because his wife was blind in one eye and there was a fear for the sight of the other — which in fact remained intact.
By this time, as a man of modest but independent means, he spent the next fifteen years mapping the Isle of Anglesey.
His meticulously accurate map and report of these mainly Pre-Cambrian rocks were ‘adopted’ by the Geological Survey and were published in 1919.
This magnificent, and still valuable, work earned him in 1920 the Lyell medal of the Geological Society of London (of which he was a senior fellow and later vice-president) and an honorary doctorate (1919) from the University of Wales.
The Greenlys moved to Clevedon for some time, in which district he made valuable contributions to Pre-Cambrian, Palaeozoic, and Quaternary geology.
From 1920 onwards they lived in Bangor, and he mapped in the Arvon district, which was a natural extension of his studies of Anglesey and which became his final geological work.
He continued his researches with vigour, having learned to drive a car at the age of seventy-five and despite the amputation of a leg three years later.
He led his last field excursion to Anglesey at the age of eighty-six.
Greenly, in addition to his Anglesey memoir, was the author of over fifty geological papers, several being conceptually far ahead of their time.
He also co-authored (with Howel Williams) the invaluable Methods in Geological Surveying (1930), and other books for the general reader.
Greenly has been aptly described as ‘a gentleman of the old school, kindly, courteous and cultured’.
He was a connoisseur of music, especially Beethoven's piano works, and of poetry and literature (in several languages).
All the field sketches and water-colours illustrating his geological work were his own.
He was also a lover of animals, cats especially, and a vegetarian.
His exquisite prose is perhaps most evident in his unusual book A Hand Through Time (1938), which he had originally intended not to be published until after his death.
This meditative and philosophical work, written after the death of his beloved wife in March 1927, is largely composed of memories of her; their relationship was unusually close and mutually inspiring.
It also includes descriptions of his early days on the Survey and pen portraits of the great geologists of those times.
Greenly was a man of religious bent, but in a pantheistic, non-doctrinal sense, and had a serene assurance of an immortal reunion with his wife.
In 1891 he married Annie, fourth of five daughters of John Barnard, dispensing chemist, of Bath, who often accompanied him on his geological work.
They had no children.
Greenly died in Bangor after a brief illness 4 March 1951.
[Obituary in Journal of the Geological Society , vol cvi, 1951, pp. lxiii–lxv; E. Greenly,A Hand Through Time , 1938.]
Peter Turvey
,William (1745–1814), civil engineer, was born at Plymouth Dock, Devon, 23 January 1745, the eldest child in the family of three sons and one daughter of Josias Jessop, quartermaster, HM Dockyard, Devonport, and his wife Elizabeth Foot.
He was educated at Plymouth Dock, showing a talent for mechanics, learning French and mathematics, and making some progress in classical studies.
In 1759 he was apprenticed to the civil engineer John Smeaton [q.v.], for whom his father had worked on the new Eddystone lighthouse.
Jessop became Smeaton's assistant in 1767.
He set up business on his own in 1772.
He worked with Smeaton on the improvement of the Aire and Calder river navigation, and assisted him with a canal survey in Ireland in 1773.
Subsequent work included canal and river navigation, land drainage, and harbour projects, as well as a brief venture into canal contracting.
As Smeaton gradually retired, Jessop came to be regarded as ‘the first engineer of the kingdom’, becoming overloaded with work during the canal mania of the 1790s.
He was appointed chief engineer for the Grand Junction (later the Grand Union) canal in 1793.
This was opened in 1800.
He worked on the Cromford canal linking the mill of Richard Arkwright [q.v.]in Bradford and the Derbyshire coalfield.
His first tunnel was the Butterley tunnel, 1.74 miles long, on the Cromford canal.
Jessop also pioneered iron railways, recommending them where canals would be uneconomic, and building the Surrey Iron Railway, the first public railway sanctioned by Parliament, opened in 1803.
He played an important part in the development of iron structures, in 1795 recommending the use of iron for the Pontcysyllte aqueduct on the Ellesmere canal, completed in 1805.
After 1800 Jessop became increasingly involved in dock and harbour projects, his most important works being the West India docks in London and Bristol docks.
In addition to engineering Jessop also had several business interests.
He invested in a cotton mill, and in 1791 became a founding partner of the Butterley Ironworks Company, which was to become one of the country's leading ironworks, building many iron bridges.
Jessop had an economical and pragmatic approach to engineering, preferring simple, affordable solutions; costly spectacular structures or long tunnels were not usually found on his works.
He was a man of simple tastes, always ready to encourage young engineers, yet not becoming jealous of colleagues' successes.
He also showed concern for the safety of workmen on his projects and sensitivity towards their impact on the environment.
In 1773 Jessop was elected a member of the Society of Civil Engineers, and from 1786 to 1805 was an alderman of Newark, Nottinghamshire.
On 3 February 1777 he married Sarah, daughter of John Sawyer of Haddlesey.
They had seven sons and one daughter.
Jessop died at Butterley Hall, Derbyshire, 18 November 1814 after several years' illness.
[‘Jessop, William’,Edinburgh Encyclopedia , vol. xi, 1817; Samuel Hughes, ‘Memoir of William Jessop’,Weale's Quarterly Papers on Engineering , vol. i, 1844; Charles Hadfield and A. W. Skempton,William Jessop, Engineer , 1979; D. Abbott (ed.),
The Biographical Dictionary of Scientists, Engineers and Inventors , 1985.]
J R Smith
,Benjamin (1736–1816), farmer and vaccinator, was born in Yetminster, Dorset, and baptized there 19 August 1736.
His father, Robert Jesty, butcher, had at least four sons of whom Benjamin appears to have been the youngest.
Little else is known of his early life.
In March 1770 Jesty married Elizabeth Notley (born 1740) in Longburton, four miles north-east of Yetminster, and the marital home was established at Upbury Farm adjoining Yetminster churchyard.
They had four sons and three daughters.
It was known in the dairy-farming areas of south-west England that milkmaids, and others who contracted the relatively mild and non-infectious disease of cowpox through handling udders of infected cows, obtained immunity from smallpox, and in 1765 the Medical Society of London received from a Dr Fewster a paper on ‘Cow Pox and its Ability to prevent Smallpox’.
In 1774 smallpox was widespread throughout England with epidemics in countless towns and villages, including Yetminster.
Jesty's servants Ann Notley and Mary Reade, who, like him, had been infected with cowpox, had nursed smallpox patients without themselves catching the disease.
Worried for his family's safety in the epidemic, Jesty resolved to provide immunity by giving his wife and two elder sons cowpox.
Finding a suitable cow in neighbouring Chetnole, he used a needle to transfer the pox matter and, copying the technique used by inoculators, infected his wife and sons by scratching their arms.
The boys had local reactions and quickly recovered but his wife's arm became very inflamed and for a time her condition gave cause for concern.
Thus took place the earliest known vaccinations, although the treatment was thought of as inoculation with cowpox until the term vaccination (from the Latin vacca for cow) was coined in 1802.
Jesty's experiment was met by hostility in the neighbourhood and, labelled inhuman, he was ‘hooted at, reviled and pelted whenever he attended markets in the neighbourhood’.
The introduction of an animal disease into a human body was thought disgusting and some even ‘feared their metamorphosis into horned beasts’.
But the treatment's efficacy was several times demonstrated in the years which followed when his two elder sons, exposed to smallpox, failed to catch the disease.
Interest in the prophylactic powers of cowpox virus was now growing and in May 1796 Edward Jenner [q.v.]began his series of vaccination experiments.
About 1797 Jesty became tenant at Downshay Manor Farm in Worth Matravers where, encouraged by Andrew Bell [q.v.], rector of neighbouring Swanage from 1801, he conducted more vaccinations.
Following Jenner's reward of £10,000 from the House of Commons in June 1802 for discovering and promoting vaccination, Bell took up Jesty's cause and in August 1803 wrote to George Pearson [q.v.], founder of the Vaccine Pock Institute, describing in detail the 1774 vaccinations.
In 1805 Jesty gave his evidence in London at the institute's invitation, when he was presented with a long testimonial and pair of gold-mounted lancets.
The institute also commissioned his portrait from Michael William Sharp [q.v.].
Jesty died in Worth Matravers 16 April 1816 and was buried in the parish churchyard.
His widow Elizabeth died 8 January 1824 and was buried alongside him.
[E. M. Crookshank,History and Pathology of Vaccination , vol. i, 1889; C. W. Dixon,Smallpox , 1962; Charles Creighton,A History of Epidemics in Britain , vol. ii, 1894; James F. Hammarsten et al .,
‘Who Discovered Smallpox Vaccination?
Edward Jenner or Benjamin Jesty?’,
Transactions of the American Clinical and Climatological Association , vol. xl, 1978; J. R. Smith,The Speckled Monster , 1987; E. Marjorie Wallace,The First Vaccinator , 1981; parish registers of Longburton, Yetminster, and Worth Matravers in Dorset County Record Office.]
Robert K G Temple
, Sir Gregory (c. 1603–1652), MP and regicide, was the son of Henry Norton of Charlton, Wantage, Berkshire, and his wife Elizabeth, fourth daughter of William Nelson of Chaldeworth, Berkshire.
He was created a baronet of Ireland 27 April 1624, aged about twenty-one, probably through the influence of his uncle, Sir Dudley Norton, secretary for Ireland, and admitted to Gray's Inn in 1629, being a contemporary there of John Bradshaw [q.v.], who was to preside over the king's trial, John Cook [q.v.], who was to prosecute the king, and John Alured the regicide [q.v.].
From then until the end of 1640 at least he resided at Hampdens Manor, Penn, Buckinghamshire, moving in 1640 to West Thorney near Chichester in Sussex.
He was JP for West Sussex from 1640 until his death, and was elected MP for Midhurst in a by-election to the Long Parliament in 1645, his fellow-MP being William Cawley the regicide [q.v.].
There is evidence of their closely co-ordinating their activities.
As a prominent parishioner of St Martin-in-the-Fields, Norton was also a member of the committee for the City of Westminster, along with his close friend and relation, Humphrey Edwardes, the regicide [q.v.].
Though not a commanding presence in the House, Norton was a devoted committee man.
He served in the committee concerning accounts within weeks of election as an MP, later joining the committee for martial law and the committee for Irish affairs, at which he attended assiduously, becoming a major figure.
After Pride's Purge, Norton's importance in the Commons increased dramatically.
He was immediately added to the committee for the revenue and the committee for compounding.
On 23 December 1648 he joined the committee for proceedings against the king, the first of the Commons committees which laid the groundwork for the king's trial and execution.
On 6 January he attended the first of the sessions of the high court of justice preparatory to the trial, and then attended most sittings of the court.
He was present when sentence was pronounced against the king, and signed the death-warrant.
He then served on committees to set up a republican government and abolish kingship and the House of Lords.
He continued to serve on increasing numbers of parliamentary committees until his death 26 March 1652.
Norton married Martha, daughter of Bradshaw Drew of Densworth near Chichester, Sussex.
Their eldest son, Gregory, died in 1652, shortly before his father; the younger, Henry, was disinherited because of his opposition to the king's trial and execution.
There was also a daughter, Elizabeth.
Restoration gossip that Norton lived at Richmond Palace, acquired at a cheap rate after the king's execution, is puzzling; his home at the time was actually Oatlands Park, near Weybridge, Surrey, and at his death his widow claimed to be penniless.
She was hounded under the Protectorate by the commissioners for compounding, who persecuted many republican MPs.
She married, secondly, Robert Gordon, fourth Viscount Kenmure, in 1655, and died in 1671.
[R. L. Greaves and R. Zaller (eds.),
A Biographical Dictionary of English Radicals of the Seventeenth Century , 3 vols., 1982–4; private research.]
J H Andrews
,William (c. 1789–1857), surveyor and civil engineer, was born in Burntisland, Fifeshire, and educated at Burntisland and in Edinburgh before becoming apprenticed to the eminent Scottish land surveyor, John Ainslie [q.v.].
From 1803 onwards he was employed on estate surveys in various parts of Scotland.
While still in his teens, and with an audacity that marked his whole career, he made himself known to the officers conducting the Ordnance Survey of Great Britain, who recommended him to an MP for county Mayo, Ireland, as capable of providing the Mayo grand jury with an accurate county map.
Bald started work in 1809 and soon secured other appointments in Mayo, first as one of the engineers employed by the government to survey the bogs of Ireland and later as a road engineer.
His survey of the county, completed in 1817 and published in 1830, was the most ambitious of all the Irish grand jury maps, paying special attention to trigonometrical accuracy and to the correct representation of relief and altitude.
Bald planned to follow it with other county surveys of similar quality, but this ambition was frustrated when the Ordnance Survey was directed to produced its own map of Ireland in 1824, and henceforth he devoted his energies to civil engineering, a profession for which he further equipped himself by a period of renewed study and foreign travel.
After 1832 Bald's career becomes a catalogue of the roads, harbours, river navigations, canals, and railways designed by himself or with his advice.
His first and most spectacular project in this period was the new Antrim coast road of 1832–7, which involved much blasting and tunnelling in the cliffs between Larne and Ballycastle.
Another road design of the same period, which included Ireland's first suspension bridge, was from Kenmare to Bantry, in the south-west.
In less difficult country, such as the Irish midlands, he was an advocate of railways, and later reproached the government's commission on this subject with the inadequacy of the network it proposed for Ireland.
His interest in tidal rivers began with work on the River Boyne and culminated in 1839 with re-employment in his native country as engineer to the Clyde River Trust, a post from which he was dismissed six years later after criticizing the trustees in a Glasgow newspaper.
This experience does not seem to have damaged his career, and his last recorded assignment was in the same area, reporting in 1854 on the navigational implications of the Glasgow Waterworks Bill.
For an engineer, Bald was a prolific and articulate writer and speaker, alive to the socio-economic context of his profession.
Though never honoured by the government he was elected to several learned societies, including the Royal Irish Academy, the Royal Society of Edinburgh, and the Société de Géographie de Paris.
He was thrice married (his third wife's name was Margaret) and had nine children, one of whom, Charles (born 1812/13), is known to have worked as a surveyor.
He died 26 March 1857 in St Pancras, London.
[M. C. Storrie, ‘William Bald, F.R.S.E.,c .1789–1857; Surveyor, Cartographer and Civil Engineer’,Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers , vol. xlvii, 1969, pp. 205–31.]