

G E Aylmer
,Richard (fl. 1647–1696), republican administrator and Particular Baptist preacher, came of a Gloucestershire family and was a cousin of Richard Deane [q.v.], general-at-sea, who was killed in action in 1653.
Whereas the future admiral was comptroller of the ordnance (in charge of field artillery) in the parliamentary army of Robert Devereux (Earl of Essex) and Philip Skippon [qq.v.]and then in the New Model Army, subsequently a colonel of foot, and eventually major-general and temporary commander-in-chief in Scotland (in 1652), his cousin was a captain of foot who became secretary or chief clerk to the army committee of the Rump Parliament from 1649 to 1653.
This was a post of some importance; family connections apart, Deane's colonel from the winter of 1647–8 to 1650 was Sir Arthur Hesilrige [q.v.], one of the most influential politicians in the new Commonwealth.
In 1653 Deane followed the military rather than the civilian republicans, becoming co-treasurer-at-wars and co-receiver-general of the assessments with John Blackwell the younger [q.v.], when the army tightened its grip on the fiscal machinery of government.
He held this position until the fall of the Protectorate in 1659, when he took the republican side.
Perhaps again due to Hesilrige's patronage, he became clerk of the council under the restored Commonwealth of May to October 1659; less predictably, however, he seems to have continued to act in this capacity under the ill-fated committee of safety (October-December 1659), this time committing himself to the service of the generals, notably Charles Fleetwood and John Lambert [qq.v.], rather than the civilian leaders in the restored Rump, among whom Hesilrige was the leading figure.
Possibly his religious stance, as a strict (or Calvinist) Baptist helps to explain this.
He was sent to Scotland on a confidential mission, ostensibly to negotiate with General George Monck (later first Duke of Albemarle, q.v.), on behalf of the generals in England, perhaps in reality — so it was alleged — to try to undermine the loyalty of Monck's army to their commander.
If so, he clearly failed in this, as he did in the abortive negotiations to stop the Scottish army from moving south in support of a civilian government — and ultimately of a free Parliament.
After the return of the ‘secluded members’ in February 1660, Deane lost his military commission as well as his other offices.
Following the Restoration he was considered sufficiently dangerous and obnoxious to be listed as one of the twenty non-regicides whose property was to be forfeit and who were excluded from office in perpetuity.
His namesake the admiral had been a regicide and there may have been an element of deliberate misidentification among the more ‘blimpish’ Royalist MPs.
He was certainly under house arrest as a suspected conspirator in 1660–1.
His identification with the Baptist preacher active in and around Bristol from the 1670s to the 1690s is probable, but there were several contemporaneous Richard Deanes with west-country connections.
His only modern biographer suggests that he spent his last days in extreme poverty at an advanced age, an ironical end for someone who had accounted meticulously for the handling of millions of pounds and had been listed by name in an Act of Parliament.
[C. H. Firth and G. Davies,Regimental History of Cromwell's Army , 2 vols., 1940, pp. 456, 460; G. E. Aylmer,The State's Servants , 1973; R. L. Greaves and R. Zaller (eds.),
Biographical Dictionary of British Radicals in the Seventeenth Century , 3 vols., 1982–4; Public Record Office E101/676/51, E351/306.]
John Michael Stephens
,John (1720–1789), publisher and printer, was born in Aintree 9 January 1720, the eldest son of Adam Sadler, printer, and his wife Elizabeth Beeby.
John entered the family printing business and learned the art of printing from his father, who owned a prosperous printing firm in the New Market in Liverpool.
At the age of twenty-eight he established his own printing business.
Like his father he was a great music lover and amongst the many works he published was a collection of over 300 songs set to music, entitled The Muses' Delight (1754).
He also printed and part published the Liverpool Chronicle and Marine Gazette .
More importantly John Sadler is credited with inventing a method of transfer-printing on to earthenware tiles.
The idea occurred to him from observing children sticking waste prints on to pieces of broken earthenware.
It is not clear when his experiments began, but an affidavit made out by Sadler and his assistant Guy Green states that on 27 July 1756 they printed 1,200 earthenware tiles of different patterns in six hours, and that the process had taken upwards of seven years to perfect.
Sadler, an astute businessman, did not proceed with the costly patent application, realizing that his process was safer if kept a closely guarded trade secret.
In addition to his tile business, he also transfer-printed on to enamelled copper and porcelain, which he sold to other retailers and from his own shop in Harrington Street.
In September 1761 he entered into an agreement with Josiah Wedgwood [q.v.]to transfer-print the Wedgwood creamware.
The resulting expansion in business necessitated the formation of a partnership with his young associate Guy Green, who became a full partner in 1763.
In September 1770 John Sadler retired, possibly because he was not in the best of health.
However, his abiding passion for collecting recipes and formulas kept him experimenting for a further twenty years, perfecting the transfer-printing process.
In 1777 he married Elizabeth Parker (died 1842), the daughter of a business associate, a watchmaker who owned a toy shop in Seel Street, and the niece of Mr Fazackerley, silversmith of Pool Lane.
They had three children, a daughter Elizabeth Mary (1782) and two sons: John Adam (1778) and James (1786).
John Sadler died in Liverpool 10 December 1789 and was buried in Sefton.
[E. Stanley Price,John Sadler: a Liverpool Pottery Printer , 1949.]
Ronald M Birse
,William (1774–1834), currier and inventor of the safety fuse, was baptized in Ashburton, Devon, 23 January 1774, the son of William and Mary Beckford.
He was in business as a currier, dressing and colouring tanned leather, first rather unsuccessfully in Truro and later in Tuckingmill near Camborne in Cornwall.
He was not involved in any way with the mining that was carried on in the surrounding area, but he was greatly affected by the frequent serious and often fatal accidents suffered by the miners through premature blasting explosions.
Gunpowder had been in widespread use in Europe in mining and quarrying since the early seventeenth century, but two hundred years later the techniques available for detonating the charges were still very primitive.
One method was simply to set fire to a ‘train' of gunpowder leading to the charge itself, the length of the train corresponding roughly to the time delay before the charge exploded; a later method involved a kind of fuse of goose quills filled with gunpowder.
Both methods were dangerously unreliable, even when(and it was not always the case) the greatest care was exercised by the shot-firers.
Bickford was determined to make a safer type of fuse, and although he was no scientist he carried out a series of experiments with many different combinations of materials until, having nearly despaired of ever achieving his goal, he visited a friend in his rope walk and suddenly hit on the idea of spinning a light rope or cord round a tightly packed central core of gunpowder.
The idea was simple, but devising a machine for the manufacture of his ‘safety fuse’ was beyond Bickford himself, so he took into partnership Thomas Davey, a working miner with a talent for solving mechanical problems.
The Bickford safety fuse, as patented in September 1831, consisted of two layers of flax yarn enclosing a central core of gunpowder, the whole being made watertight with varnish or tar.
The resulting fuse was much more accurate and consistent in its timing, and had a much better resistance to water and the various kinds of treatment to which it was inevitably subjected in the mines.
It raised the level of both safety and productivity and was therefore popular with both miners and management.
Bickford himself fell seriously ill before his fuse could be manufactured in any quantity, and it was only after his death in 1834 that a factory was established in Tuckingmill which continued to make various types of fuse, seldom departing very far from the original specifications, for almost 130 years.
His family, along with those of his partner Davey and his son-in-law George Smith, were involved in the management of Bickford, Smith & Company up to the time of its final closure in 1961.
William Bickford probably married Susanna Burall in April 1802 at Illogan, Cornwall.
They had two sons, baptized in Truro in 1808 and 1809, both called William (presumably the first died).
Bickford died in Tuckingmill and was buried there 7 October 1834.
[T. G. Tullock (ed.),
The Rise and Progress of the British Explosives Industry , 1909; ICI Magazine , vol. xxxiv, September 1956, p. 239.]
Grayson Carter
,William (1778–1849), missionary and biblical translator, was born in Lochwinnoch, Renfrewshire, 30 January 1778, the son of William Glen, tailor.
He matriculated at Glasgow University in 1797, but left without a degree and studied at the theological college of the associated synod in Selkirk, under George Lawson [q.v.].
He was ordained minister of a newly-formed congregation of burgher seceders in Annan, Dumfries, 15 April 1807.
Glen and his wife provided lodgings in their house for Thomas Carlyle [q.v.], then mathematics master at his old school, Annan Academy.
Carlyle praised Glen in his Reminiscences (1881) as ‘a most pure and excellent man, of correct superior intellect, and of much modest piety and amiability’, and described his wife as ‘a handsome, brave, and cheery-hearted woman’.
Glen resigned from Annan in November 1816; his discouragement was partly caused by the friction created in trying to raise sufficient funds to carry on the work of the congregation.
He offered his services to the Edinburgh Missionary Society as an overseas candidate, thus fulfilling a youthful ambition.
After training, Glen, accompanied by his wife, went as a missionary to Astrakhan, in southern Russia, where he remained for five years.
He achieved little proselytizing success, but was more successful in his efforts to master the Persian, Arabic, and Turkish languages.
In about 1823 he began what was to be his principal life's work, the translation of the Old Testament from Hebrew into Persian.
He began with the Psalter and the Proverbs, and his translations were published separately by the British and Foreign Bible Society.
By the time that Glen returned to Scotland, in 1834, his reputation as a Persian scholar was already established.
He continued working on his translation in Scotland until 1837, when he was sent to Persia by the synod of the United Secession Church to complete his labours.
He lived in Tabriz and Tehran; in 1843 he returned to Scotland, bringing his completed manuscript with him.
It was printed by Thomas Constable of Edinburgh [q.v.], and published in 1845, the cost met by the mission board of the United Secession Church, aided by a grant of £500 from the British and Foreign Bible Society.
In 1845 Glen was awarded the degree of DD by St Andrews University.
Glen volunteered to supervise the distribution of his work in Persia, and to circulate with it a new edition of the Persian translation of the New Testament by Henry Martyn [q.v.].
Glen and his son Andrew sailed for Persia by way of Constantinople in 1847.
In January 1848 they were received by the shah, who was presented with copies of the Old and New Testaments and a translation of Sketch of the Evidence from Prophecy (1823) by Alexander Keith [q.v.].
On 28 September 1810 Glen married Margaret Scott of Annan.
They had five sons, the elder two of them twins.
Glen died of dysentery, after a short illness, in Tehran 12 January 1849, and was buried there in the Armenian cemetery.
[William Glen,Journal of a Tour from Astrachan to Karass , 1823; Frank Miller, ‘Carlyle's Missionary Friend’,Record of the Home and Foreign Mission Work of the United Free Church of Scotland, new series, vol. xxiii, 1923, pp. 97–8; obituary in Missionary Record of the United Presbyterian Church , May 1849, pp. 73–7.]
John A Bagley
,Samuel Franklin (1861–1913), cowboy, showman, and aeronautical pioneer, was born 6 March 1861 in Birdville, Texas, the youngest in the family of three sons and one daughter of Samuel Franklin Cody, farmer, and his wife Phoebe June.
He left home in 1873 and spent fourteen years as a cowboy and trail rider, with a spell of gold-mining in the Yukon in 1883–4.
In 1888 he joined a Wild West circus and toured the United States for about two years, then sailed to England and established a music-hall act as a sharpshooter.
This act, in which his wife and sons took part, developed into a substantial touring company performing throughout Britain and Europe; Cody's most famous melodrama was The Klondyke Nugget , first staged in 1898.
From 1900 Cody became actively interested in kite flying, and patented a man-carrying kite system in 1901.
In 1903 he sold four sets of kites to the Admiralty; in 1905 the army ordered kites, and engaged Cody to instruct the Royal Engineers in their operation.
He thus became involved with the Balloon Factory at Farnborough, under Colonel J. E. Capper, and gave up his theatrical activities.
Capper wished to develop both airships and aeroplanes for military use, and took advantage of Cody's mechanical and practical skills to promote this work.
Cody was largely responsible for the engine installation of the airship which flew in 1907, and he designed and constructed the machine on which he made the first powered aeroplane flight in Great Britain on 16 October 1908.
The War Office decided in 1909 to stop work on aeroplanes, but Cody was allowed to keep the machine.
By July 1909 he was making successful flights of several miles, and in August was awarded the Aeronautical Society's silver medal.
In October he flew at the first British flying meeting at Doncaster, and there he became a naturalized British subject.
In the next four years Cody built some half-dozen aeroplanes, which he flew competitively with considerable success, winning four British empire Michelin trophies and other prizes.
He won the military trials in 1912; the consequent War Office order for two machines was his only commercial sale.
Cody was a tall, flamboyant character, and an exceptional pilot.
He was widely admired by fellow pilots and show-business colleagues, as well as the general public.
On 7 August 1913, flying his latest machine, Cody crashed at Farnborough; he and his passenger, W. H. B. Evans, were thrown out of the aircraft and killed.
Cody was subsequently given a funeral with full military honours by the Aldershot garrison.
With his death it emerged that Cody had a legal wife, Maud Maria, daughter of Joseph Lee, in an American asylum.
Since about 1890 he had lived with Lela Marie (christened Elizabeth Mary) King, daughter of horse-dealer John Blackburn Davis, and her two sons, who adopted his name.
A third son was born in 1895.
[G. A. Broomfield,Pioneer of the Air , 1953; Arthur S. Gould Lee,The Flying Cathedral , 1965; Percy B. Walker,Early Aviation at Farnborough , 1971 and 1974; private information.]
John Bold
,William (1628–1676), architect, was born in 1628, the eldest son of Anthony Samwell of Dean's Yard, Westminster, and grandson of Sir William Samwell of Upton Hall, Northamptonshire.
He was admitted to the Middle Temple in 1648, living in chambers until 1656, but he never practised law.
After the Restoration he bought the manor of Watton in Norfolk, remaining its owner until his death.
Samwell was a gentleman architect of considerable accomplishment, whose achievement has been undervalued, although John Aubrey [q.v.]considered him ‘an excellent architect, that has built severall delicate howses’.
These were distinguished by the sophistication of their planning, in which a balance was struck between the grand, public and convenient, private rooms.
In their exploitation of spatial possibilities, shown to particularly good effect at Grange Park, his designs are at least as accomplished as those of the better known gentleman architects, Sir Roger Pratt and Hugh May [qq.v.].
Samwell's first authenticated building, the King's House in Newmarket (1668–71), designed for Charles II, was partly demolished in 1814: the south-east block survives as Palace House Mansion.
It was criticized by John Evelyn [q.v.], visiting in 1670, as ‘mean enough’, apart from the cellars, ‘& hardly capable for a hunting house’.
At Grange Park, Hampshire, built c .1670 for the lawyer, Sir Robert Henley, Samwell's house was swallowed up by the neo-classical remodelling by William Wilkins [q.v.], but despite alterations and the threat of demolition, the shell of his house substantially survives, concealed within the later work.
It is on this building, and on his long-demolished Eaton Hall, Cheshire (1675–82), built for Sir Thomas Grosvenor [q.v.], that any assessment of his work must rest.
In both designs he brought to the Restoration house an unexpected elegance of arrangement, combining corner suites in the French manner, comprising bedchamber and closets, the suites linked with each other by corridors, with grand, formal staircases, to achieve a synthesis premonitory of the great houses of the eighteenth century.
Although at Grange Park Samwell did not introduce the Imperial staircase of three open flights to England, there is little doubt that his was grander than its precursor at Gunnersbury by John Webb [q.v.].
Samwell's other work included the doubling of the central range of Ham House, Surrey, for John Maitland, first Duke of Lauderdale, and his wife Elizabeth Murray [qq.v.](1672–4), to create a plan more in keeping with contemporary expectations of convenience and grandeur, and the addition of a wing for William Windham at Felbrigg Hall, Norfolk (1674–86).
Both these works survive.
He was also responsible for the design of a coach-house (1673–4), now demolished, in the Royal Mews, Charing Cross, commissioned by George Villiers, second Duke of Buckingham [q.v.], master of the Horse.
Samwell married Anne, daughter of Sir Denner Strutt of Little Warley, Essex; they had two daughters.
By his will (PCC 71 BENCE), dated 25 April 1676 and proved 26 June, he directed that his body should be buried in Upton, Northamptonshire.
[H. M. Colvin,A Biographical Dictionary of British Architects 1600–1840 , 1978;idem (ed.),
The History of the King's Works , vol. v, 1660–1782, 1976; J. Geddes, ‘The Grange, Northington’,Architectural History , vol. xxvi, 1983; R. W. Ketton-Cremer,Felbrigg, the Story of a House , 1962; E. Mercer, ‘William Samwell and the Grange’, in H. M. Colvin and J. Harris (eds.),
The Country Se at , 1970; P. Thornton and M. Tomlin,The Furnishing and Decoration of Ham House , 1980.]
Donald Munro Lewis
,Henry (1835–1912), evangelist, was born 25 October 1835 in Tattershall, Lincolnshire, the youngest of four sons and seven children of John Varley, brewer and maltster, of Tattershall, and his wife Mary.
He was educated at Lincoln until his mother's death in 1845 and then he attended a boarding-school in Kibworth, Leicestershire (1845–6).
At the age of eleven he went to London to work, eventually becoming a butcher employed by Thomas Pickworth, a staunch Calvinist.
In 1851 Varley, whose mother had been a devout Anglican evangelical, experienced an evangelical conversion through the preaching of Baptist W. Noel [q.v.], a well-known Baptist minister.
He was rebaptized and joined Noel's church.
In 1854 he emigrated to Australia where he prospered as a butcher, returning to England in 1857.
Varley's business success was soon eclipsed by his evangelistic preaching; his remarkable rapport with the working poor led him to establish a church for his converts.
In 1860 Varley and Thomas Pickworth each gave £1,100 to build a ‘tabernacle’ in Notting Hill, which accommodated 1,000 persons.
Varley was its unpaid pastor until 1882 and experimented with various means of evangelizing and meeting the social needs of the poor.
Varley often preached for C. H. Spurgeon [q.v.], and, like Spurgeon, declined ordination but, unlike Spurgeon, refused to be identified as a Baptist.
In 1869 he sold his business and began preaching throughout Britain.
In 1874 he toured Canada and the United States.
This was the first of a series of overseas crusades: Australia and New Zealand (1876–8), America (1884), the Cape Colony (1886), and Australia (1886–8).
In 1888 he settled in Melbourne for health reasons but continued to travel widely, preaching repeatedly in Britain as well as in Singapore (1891), India (1892–3), the United States (1893–4, 1895, 1897–9, 1901–2), Canada (1897, 1898), Norway (1903), and Germany (1903).
Varley was one of a number of itinerant lay evangelists who emerged after the 1858–9 religious revival.
Over time his sermons moved away from emotional appeals to more reasoned ones; in this he had much in common with the British ‘gentleman evangelist’ of his day, like Brownlow North [q.v.].
His preaching reflected emphases then popular with British evangelicals: the controversial ‘holiness teaching’ promoted by the ‘Keswick convention’, anti-Catholicism, temperance, opposition to Anglo-Catholic ‘ritualism’, and vehement campaigns against international prostitution rings.
Varley embraced premillennialism, which reinforced his pessimistic view of the direction of Victorian society.
He was fearless in his attacks on public figures whose actions he considered unconscionable.
Varley was also known for his ‘purity lectures’, which sought to make men serious, sober, and sexually abstemious.
He wrote many religious tracts and books.
In 1857 he married Sarah, daughter of Thomas Pickworth, butcher.
They had six sons and two daughters.
Varley died in Brighton 30 March 1912.
[Henry Varley jun.,Henry Varley's Life Story , 1913.]
R L Thomson
,Archibald (1774–1841), author of the first published Manx dictionary, was born in the village of Colby, Isle of Man, the third of four sons of William Cregeen, a cooper and small farmer, and his wife Mary Fairclough (‘Faircliff’ in the marriage register of the adjoining parish of Malew, 13 November 1764), who is reported to have come from Ireland.
He was baptized in his own parish church of Arbory, 20 November 1774.
Of his education nothing is known.
He was apprenticed as a monumental mason and so must have added literacy in English to his native Manx.
After his marriage to Jane Crellin in the parish church of German, 8 March 1798, he built in Colby a house for himself and his family (six daughters and two sons), later called Ravenstone.
In alternate years from 1813 he held the office of coroner for the sheading of Rushen in addition to his ordinary occupation.
Cregeen began work on the dictionary about 1814, collecting words from the Manx Bible (1770–5), for which he often gave references, and from other printed sources, but also gathering material, words, phrases, scraps of traditional verse, and proverbs, from current usage.
He marked stress, the gender and plural of nouns, the stems of verbs, and included old case-forms and all the pronominal prepositions.
To this catalogue of inflectional variations he added a generous number of illustrations of the initial mutations.
The dictionary is preceded by a sketch of grammar, again concentrating on morphology.
In this work of at least twenty years' duration Cregeen was encouraged and assisted by the Revd John Edward Harrison (1784–1858), vicar of Jurby, whose hand has been detected in the preface and the opening paragraphs of the grammar.
The dictionary, published in 1835, though not the most copious, is the most serviceable, the most reliable and soundly based, ever produced.
It has been reprinted several times, beginning in 1910.
Cregeen died on Good Friday, 9 April 1841, and was buried 13 April in Arbory churchyard, where his elegant box-tomb is still to be seen south-east of the church.
[Memoir by J. M. Jeffcott, high-bailiff of Castletown (1817–1892),Notes and Queries , 7th series, vol. x, 1890; parish registers;Proceedings of the British Academy , vol. lv, 1971, pp. 202–10.]
Ian D Rae
,Henry Bollmann (1826–1907), inventor and chemical manufacturer, was born at Sloane Street, London, and was baptized 20 August 1826 at St Luke's, Chelsea, the son of George Thomas Condy, barrister and newspaper proprietor, and his wife Charlotte, the daughter of Colonel Foot of the Scots Greys.
He was educated at Brompton Grammar School and later at the Royal College of Chemistry at Oxford Street.
In 1843 his mother inherited from Dr Bollman, a Hungarian chemist, the chemical manufactory of C. Foot & Co. which had been founded at Battersea in 1816.
Mrs Condy maintained the business until her son's education was complete, whereupon he took over.
The chief products were acetic acid, acetate salts, mineral acids, albumen, pharmaceuticals, and other chemicals.
Condy eliminated unprofitable product lines and made significant improvements to production methods, for which he took out fifteen patents over the period from 1852 to 1888.
His interest in hygiene and disinfection was evident in sales of ‘ozone water’, in his patents dealing with the preparation and use of chlorine and of highly oxidized compounds of manganese, and in his authorship of five short books on the topic between 1860 and 1867.
It was because of this interest that he was awarded a Red Cross medal for services rendered to the sick and wounded during the Franco-Prussian war.
Solutions of sodium manganate and permanganate, patented in 1856 and 1876, were marketed as ‘Condy's Fluid’, and the derived solid as ‘Condy's Crystals’.
These were widely used as disinfectants and the crystals in particular for treatment of snakebite after Dr Lacerda recommended potassium permanganate for this purpose in 1881.
Imitators who marketed potassium permanganate as ‘Condy's Crystals’(and solutions of it as his fluid) were the subject of litigation which reached its height in Australia at the turn of the century.
Although successful, it failed to change the popular belief that ‘Condy's Crystals’ are potassium permanganate.
Other litigation between Condy and A. D. Mitchell, who had joined the firm in 1870, led at first to estrangement and then to reconstitution of the company as Condy & Mitchell Ltd., with Mitchell and Henry Bollmann's eldest son, H. J. Bollmann Condy, as managing directors.
From this point H. B. Condy gradually withdrew from the business while continuing his interests in industrial chemistry, foreign travel, and horse-riding.
On 19 October 1850 Condy married Eleanor Chriss at St Dunstan-in-the-East, London.
They had three sons and one daughter.
He died in Folkestone 24 September 1907.
[Chemist and Druggist , 5 and 12 October 1907, 13 June 1908, and 31 July 1909;The Times , 28 November 1877;Australian Journal of Pharmacy , November 1901; Patent Office.]
Derek Howse
,Jeremiah (1720–1783/4), mathematical instrument-maker, was baptized at the Presbyterian chapel in Carter Lane, Blackfriars, London, 14 December 1720, the son of Jonathan Sisson [q.v.], mathematical instrument-maker.
By 1740 he was one of his father's workmen and, according to the French astronomer Joseph de Lalande, writing in 1763, his father was so infirm in his last years that it was he, Jeremiah, who actually made the large mural quadrants for Bologna, Paris, Pisa, and George Parker, second Earl of Macclesfield [q.v.].
When his father died in June 1747, Jeremiah took over a thriving business and the premises at the corner of Beaufort Buildings, Strand.
Though his reputation as a craftsman equalled, if not exceeded, his father's, as a businessman he was a failure, being declared bankrupt in 1751.
Lalande wrote of him in 1763: ‘Sisson has been several times in prison for failing to pay his workmen [of whom Jesse Ramsden, q.v., was one]; he starts many things and finishes nothing: he takes his instruments to the pawnbroker, where they have been seen selling for a tenth of their value.
He is obliged to work in great haste, and so achieves nothing worthwhile, but nevertheless there is no one who has as much ability as he.’
Though his main stock-in-trade was probably small surveying and drawing instruments, it was his large astronomical instruments that made his reputation.
He made the zenith sector that Nevil Maskelyne [q.v.]took to St Helena in 1761; all the larger instruments for the king's private observatory at Kew, and instruments for St John's College in Cambridge, Naples, Geneva, Milan, and Mitau in Latvia.
In 1772 he was appointed mathematical instrument-maker to the Board of Ordnance.
His duties included the servicing of the instruments at Greenwich Observatory and making two new equatorial sectors.
In 1775 he was once again declared bankrupt and lost the Ordnance appointment.
However, Maskelyne had a high opinion of his abilities, lending him considerable sums and securing for him commissions for instruments, not only for his own observatory at Greenwich, but also for new instruments for Eger in Hungary, Mannheim, and Florence.
Then, in 1780, Sisson was forced to vacate his premises in Beaufort Buildings and to make over the lease and mortgage of his house in Southwark to Maskelyne.
Of his first marriage nothing is known, but he was described as a widower when he married Ann Sidebotham at St Clement Danes 1 January 1761, and again when he married Grace Plampin at St Anne's, Soho, 14 February 1774.
Of his death, the only reference found is the entry in Maskelyne's account book for 13 March 1784: ‘Recd of Mrs Grace Sisson, thro’ the hands of Mr Henry Robin Auctioneer my dividend for £88.14.11 due to me from the Estate of the late Jerh Sisson — £15.0.0 — and gave it to the Widow.’
[Joseph de Lalande,Journal d'un Voyage en Angleterre 1763 , ed.
H. Monod-Cassidy, 1980; Jean Bernoulli,Lettres Astronomiques , 1771; Maskelyne's account book, 1773–85 (microfilm at National Museum, Greenwich); D. Howse, ‘The Greenwich List of Observatories’,Journal for the History of Astronomy , vol. xvii, part 4, 1986; J. R. Millburn, private communications.]
David Gavine
,James Stuart (1719–1800), politician and amateur astronomer, was born 23 February 1719, the younger son in the family of two sons and four daughters of James Stuart, second Earl of Bute, and his wife Anne, daughter of Archibald Campbell (later first Duke of Argyll, q.v.).
He was educated at Eton 1728–32 and Leyden.
On his father's death in 1723 he assumed the surname and estate of his great-grandfather Sir George Mackenzie, baronet [q.v.]of Rosehaugh, also acquiring property in Angus, Perthshire, and London.
The impetuous young man became infatuated with the dancer Barberoni, was summoned home from Europe, and a ‘safe’ marriage negotiated for him in 1749 to his first cousin Lady Elizabeth Campbell, daughter of John, second Duke of Argyll [q.v.].
Their two children died in infancy.
Mackenzie represented Argyllshire in Parliament 1742–7, Buteshire 1747–54, Ayr Burghs 1754–61, and Ross-shire 1761–80.
He attended regularly but never spoke.
In 1758 he was made envoy extraordinary to the king of Sardinia, living ‘in a most splendid stile’ in Turin, and very popular.
Argyll's death in 1761 left the management of Scotland at the disposal of his nephew John Stuart, third Earl of Bute, Mackenzie's elder brother, who became chief minister.
Although desiring a diplomatic posting to Venice, Mackenzie was recalled to take over Scottish affairs from Sir Gilbert Elliot, third baronet [q.v.].
In 1763 he was sworn of the Privy Council and made lord privy seal for Scotland, with considerable powers of patronage.
Although an amiable and scrupulously honest man he was tactless, politically naïve, and, like Bute, doctrinaire.
He was unfortunate to have been in office when George III's association with the Earl of Bute brought unpopularity to his whole family.
The intimacy of the Stuart brothers with George III was much disliked by the House of Commons.
In 1762 he was involved in the clash between moderate and evangelical factions over appointments of clergy to Edinburgh charges, and his well-meaning attempts to secure the best qualified candidates and to appease all sides provoked further animosity over civil and judicial promotions.
With the final removal of Bute from the king's advisers in 1765 George Grenville forced Mackenzie's removal, but in the 1776 administration of William Pitt, first Earl of Chatham, he was reinstated as lord privy seal for Scotland for life, at the same £3,000 salary but without power.
In 1780 he left politics to devote himself to agricultural improvements and amateur science on his Belmont estate in Perthshire.
Triangulations on distant hills were attempted, weather records kept, and there was an astronomical observatory.
An obsessive bureaucrat, he listed the numerous instruments of his scientific friends, but published nothing.
He knew Giuseppe Piazzi, Nevil Maskelyne [q.v.], and probably James Bradley [q.v.].
He was an early member of the Royal Society of Edinburgh.
Mackenzie died in London 6 April 1800, his estate passing to his brother's son, James Archibald Stuart-Wortley, later first Baron Wharncliffe [q.v.].
A bas-relief by Joseph Nollekens [q.v.], extolling his virtues and adorned with scientific instruments, is in the Duke of Argyll monument in Westminster Abbey.
[Sir Robert Douglas,The Peerage of Scotland , vol. i, 1813; L. Namier and J. Brooke,The House of Commons 1754–1790 , vol. iii, 1964; D. Gavine, ‘James Stewart Mackenzie and the Bute MSS’,Journal of the History of Astronomy , vol. v, 1974; A. Murdoch,The People Above: Politics and Administration in Mid-Eighteenth Century Scotland , 1980; J. Stuart Shaw,The Management of Scottish Society 1707–1764 , 1983.]
Valerie Lloyd
,Roger (1819–1869), artist, photographer, and barrister, was born 28 March 1819 at Crimble Hall, near Bury, Lancashire, the third of four brothers and the fourth of seven children of John Fenton, banker and MP for Rochdale, and his first wife, Elizabeth Aipedaile.
His mother died when he was ten.
He graduated BA from University College London in 1840, then studied law intermittently throughout the 1840s and was called to the bar in 1851.
During this period he also studied painting under Charles Lucy [q.v.]in London and Paris, and exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1849, 1850, and 1851.
He was a member of the founding committee of the North London School of Drawing and Modelling, which opened in 1850.
Probably as a result of seeing photographs in the Great Exhibition in London and at the Société Héliographique in Paris, Fenton began his own photographic experiments.
In the autumn of 1852 he photographed in Russia, and the results were shown at the first exhibition of photography at the Society of Arts, when he gave the address.
The Photographic Society, of which he was a promoter, was formed in 1853, and Fenton served as honorary secretary until 1856.
In 1854 he became the first official photographer to the British Museum, and received several commissions to photograph for Queen Victoria and Prince Albert.
He was also commissioned to photograph in the Crimea during the war; he was the first photographer successfully to photograph a war.
He brought back 360 glass negatives of views of the battlefield and portraits of soldiers.
Fenton photographed a wide range of subjects, especially landscape and architectural studies in Britain, including cathedrals; the new bridges and museums; and the countryside of Lancashire and Yorkshire, the Highlands, and north Wales.
These pictures, often on unusually large negatives for the period, constitute Fenton's greatest contribution to photography.
He used the latest camera technology, and experimented with all the techniques that were available.
He remained prominent in the Photographic Society, and contributed to its annual exhibitions until 1862, when he gave up photography completely, and sold all his negatives and equipment.
During his later years he practised law in London and on the Northern circuit.
In 1843 he married Grace Elizabeth, daughter of John Charles Maynard of East Harlsey, Yorkshire: they had five daughters and one son.
Two of the daughters, Annie and Rose, were painters who exhibited at the Royal Academy between 1887 and 1885.
Fenton died of heart failure in Potters Bar 9 August 1869.
[Valerie Lloyd,Roger Fenton, Photographer of the 1850s , 1988.]
Norman Gash
,William Marcus Joseph (1798–1883), member of Parliament, was born in Ireland 17 April 1797 or possibly in 1798, after the death of his father, the youngest in the family of two sons and two daughters of Marcus Beresford, MP (grandson of Sir Marcus Beresford, first Earl of Tyrone and counsel to the Irish revenue commissioners), and his wife Frances Arabella, daughter of Joseph Leeson, first Earl of Milltown.
His father died 16 November 1797.
He was educated at Eton and St Mary Hall, Oxford, where he took his BA in 1819.
In 1822 he was commissioned as lieutenant in the 9th Royal Dragoons, transferring to the 12th Lancers in 1826.
He served in the Lisbon expedition of 1826 and retired on half pay in January 1831 with the rank of major.
For some years he lived on his estate at Ballinastow in county Wicklow, where he was high sheriff in 1835.
After contesting Waterford City in 1837 he was elected MP for Harwich in 1841.
He kept this post until 1847, when he became MP for North Essex.
In public life his guiding principles were Protestantism and protectionism.
He opposed the Maynooth bill of Sir Robert Peel in 1845 and was made chief whip of the Protectionist party early in 1846.
As such he was responsible both for the retirement of Lord George Bentinck [q.v.]from its leadership in 1847, after his vote for Jewish emancipation, and for the resumption of the title Conservative for his party in 1848.
While initially suspicious of Benjamin Disraeli, he recognized his talents and served loyally under him from 1849.
In the ministry of Edward Stanley, fourteenth Earl of Derby, he became secretary at war (February–December 1852) and was party manager in the following general election.
Subsequent parliamentary enquiries into improper electoral practices involved him in some censure and this enabled Disraeli, who never liked him, to make fresh arrangements for the management of the party in opposition.
In 1859 Beresford headed a protest against the Derby ministry's reform bill but did not press his opposition to a vote.
Defeat in the general election of 1865 ended his parliamentary career.
Under William IV and Victoria he held court appointments as groom of the privy chamber and from 1823 master of the tennis court.
His several business interests included the chairmanship of the Northern Counties Union Railway and various directorships.
A tall, rough, hot-tempered Irishman, given to habitual profanity, Beresford was more popular with back-benchers than with his leaders.
His encouragement to the Tory press to take a strong Protestant and anti-Peelite line contributed to the perpetuation of the 1846 disruption.
He assisted nevertheless in keeping the Protectionist party together in a difficult period, with few resources and little help from his leaders.
In 1833 he married Catherine, youngest daughter of George Robert Heneage, of Hainton Hall, Lincolnshire; they had two sons and a daughter.
Beresford died at 40 Eccleston Square, London, 6 October 1883.
[Gentleman's Magazine , 1797, part 2;Illustrated London News , 3 April 1852;The Times , 9 October 1883;Benjamin Disraeli Letters , vol. iv, University of Toronto Press, 1989; W. F. Monypenny and G. E. Buckle,The Life of Benjamin Disraeli , 6 vols., 1910–20; Robert Stewart,The Politics of Protection , 1971, and The Foundation of the Conservative Party , 1978.]
Jeremy Black
(1630–1714), princess of the Palatinate and mother of George I, was born 14 October 1630 in The Hague, the youngest of five daughters and the youngest but one of the thirteen children of Frederick V (1596–1632), elector Palatine (1610–32) and the ‘winter king’ of Bohemia (1619–21), and his wife Elizabeth (1596–1622), the daughter of James I. Born in exile, because of Frederick's expulsion from Bohemia and the Palatinate, Sophia's importance in history was derived from her parentage and from the unpredictable fate of the Stuarts.
Brought up at Leiden until 1641, Sophia was taught French, German, English, Dutch, Latin, Greek, theology, history, mathematics, and law, before moving in 1641 to her mother's court at The Hague, an environment where learning was encouraged.
Her mother suggested that Sophia marry the exiled Charles II, but he was not interested, and, her pride hurt, in 1650 she moved to the court of her eldest brother Karl Ludwig, now restored to Heidelberg.
Sophia married Ernst August of Brunswick-Lüneburg (1629–1698) in 1658, after his elder brother had withdrawn an offer.
Ernst August and Sophia had six sons and one daughter; their eldest son George was born in 1660.
Ernst August benefited from the failure of his three older brothers to father any legitimate sons, and, from prince-bishop of Osnabrück in 1661, he progressed to Duke of Calenberg (1679) and elector of Hanover (1692).
As the territories of the different branches of the house of Brunswick-Lüneburg were consolidated.
Ernst August became a more powerful individual.
Sophia was proud of her husband and delighted by his rise.
She had made a lengthy visit with him to Italy in 1664–5 and enjoyed the company of learned men, including G. W. Leibniz.
Sophia was not intolerant in religious matters.
The death of William, Duke of Gloucester (1689–1700), the last surviving child of Queen Anne, led to fresh concern over the succession in Britain.
In 1701 by the Act of Settlement Catholics were debarred from the English succession, and Sophia and her heirs were named heirs to William III and Anne.
The Act of Union of 1707 ensured that this succession would extend to Scotland.
The granddaughter of James I, Sophia was the nearest Protestant claimant by blood; fifty-seven Roman Catholics nearer in blood were passed over.
After William III's death in 1702 and Anne's succession Sophia became the immediate heir to the throne.
The relationship between Sophia and the monarch was never free from tension, and the succession also created difficulties between Sophia and her eldest son George, a particularly serious crisis occurring in 1706, over Sophia's attempt to intervene in English politics.
Expectation about becoming queen helped give Sophia a powerful interest in her last years, but she was denied her chance, dying 8 June 1714 after hurrying to shelter from sudden rain during a walk in the palace gardens at Herrenhausen.
Anne died two months later, 1 August 1714.
Thus the British were denied the chance of a monarch who would have been more cultivated than any of the other Hanoverians, while Sophia, born in exile, died without ever visiting the country to whose throne she was heir.
Her eldest son, Georg Ludwig (George Lewis), became king of Great Britain and Ireland in 1714.
[Sophia's correspondence and memoranda, written in French or German, and published between 1885 and 1927; A. W. Ward,The Electress Sophia and the Hanoverian Succession , 2nd edn., 1909; Ragnhild Hatton,George I, Elector and King , 1978.]
Richard Greene
,Sarah Fyge (1670–1723), poet, was born in London in 1670, one of the six daughters of Thomas Fyge (died 1706), physician and city councilman who was descended from a landowning family of Winslow, Buckinghamshire, and his wife Mary Beacham (d. 1704) of Seaton, Rutland.
Little is known of her education; however, she was certainly precocious.
She claimed to have been ‘scarce fourteen years’ when she wrote The Female Advocate , her most important work, which was published in 1686.
Her father objected to her poetry and sent her to live with relatives in Shenley, Buckinghamshire, in about 1687.
Following this banishment she was married, apparently against her will, to an attorney named Edward Field.
During this marriage they lived in or near London.
Edward Field was dead by the mid-1690s.
In 1700 she contributed an ode on the death of John Dryden [q.v.]to Luctus Britanici: or the Tears of the British Muses , and she also contributed to The Nine Muses (1700), a volume of poems by women in memory of Dryden edited by Mary Delarivière Manley [q.v.], with whom she had an intense but short-lived friendship.
Sometime between 1700 and 1703 she married the Revd Thomas Egerton, rector of Adstock, Buckinghamshire, a second cousin about twenty years her senior, and a widower.
At the time of her second marriage she was in love with Henry Pierce, an attorney's clerk and associate of her first husband.
By 1703 Sarah and Thomas Egerton were embroiled in an apparently unsuccessful suit for divorce.
Their marriage was notoriously unhappy.
Delarivière Manley records somewhat maliciously a ‘comical Combat’ between the Egertons, in which Sarah throws a pie at her husband's face, and dumps butter and drink over his head while he grapples with her topknot.
In 1703 Sarah Egerton published, against her husband's wishes,Poems on Several Occasions .
Apart from angry descriptions of the narrowness of a woman's lot, the poems also describe the poet's feelings for Pierce whom she calls ‘Alexis’.
This volume was reissued in 1706, the same year that The Female Advocate was reprinted bearing the date 1707.
After this time information about Sarah Egerton is sparse.
Her husband died in 1720, leaving her a childless widow in comfortable circumstances.
She died in Winslow 13 February 1723.
[Mary Delarivière Manley,Secret Memoirs…from the New Atalantis , 1709, pp. 158–63, and Memoirs of Europe , 1710, pp. 289–90; J. Medoff, ‘New Light on Sarah Fyge (Field, Egerton)’,Tulsa Studies in Women's Literature , vol. i, 1982, pp. 155–75; Janet Todd (ed.),
A Dictionary of British and American Women Writers , 1984; Roger Lonsdale (ed.),
Eighteenth Century Women Poets: an Oxford Anthology , 1989.]
Edwin Welch
,James (1843–1913), educational pioneer and politician, was born in Balgonie, Fifeshire, 2 January 1843, the eldest child in the family of eight sons, three of whom died in childhood, and one daughter of James Gordon Stuart, mill owner, and his wife Catherine, daughter of David Booth [q.v.], lexicographer, of Newburgh, Fifeshire.
He was educated at Madras College in St Andrews, and St Andrews University, graduating BA in 1861.
In 1862 he won a minor scholarship to Trinity College, Cambridge, and graduated third wrangler in 1866.
Elected a fellow of Trinity in 1866, he became an assistant tutor in 1867, and began the system of intercollegiate lectures and courses of university extension lectures.
From 1867 Stuart organized private courses while he arranged for the university to be presented by provincial towns with reasoned requests for the provision of university lectures.
In 1873 a local lectures syndicate was appointed with Stuart as secretary, and the first university lectures and classes were given in Derby, Leicester, and Nottingham.
Although this had been suggested many times before, Stuart was the first to succeed, and his work shaped the future of the extension system.
He ceased to be secretary in 1876, but remained a syndic and helped both the London Society for the Extension of University Education and the Oxford committee to begin extension work.
In 1875 Stuart was elected first professor of mechanism and applied mechanics at Cambridge, and pioneered the new courses.
Despite his success, the senate objected both to practical training and to Stuart's radical politics.
He resigned his chair in December 1889 after tripos proposals were rejected and the department's existence threatened.
He had already entered the House of Commons in 1884 as MP for Hackney, and represented Hoxton from 1885 to 1900.
From 1906 to 1910 he was MP for Sutherland.
He supported Josephine Butler [q.v.]in her campaign for the repeal of the Contagious Diseases Act, and also supported female suffrage and reform of the House of Lords.
He gave further offence to some when he edited the Star and Morning Leader from 1890 to 1898.
Never given office by the Liberals, he served as a back-bencher on several royal commissions and committees.
He was sworn of the Privy Council in 1909.
St Andrews University awarded him an honorary LLD in 1875.
In 1890 he married Laura Elizabeth, eldest daughter of Jeremiah James Colman, MP, the mustard manufacturer.
She was a former undergraduate of Newnham College, Cambridge.
They had no children.
When his father-in-law died unexpectedly in 1898, Stuart became a director of J. & J. Colman, moved to Norwich, and took over management of the firm.
Stuart died at Carrow Abbey 13 October 1913.
His widow founded an extramural lectureship at Cambridge in his memory, and contributed towards the cost of Stuart House, the home of the Cambridge board of extramural studies for almost half a century.
[James Stuart,Reminiscences , 1911; T. J. N. Hilken,Engineering at Cambridge University 1783–1965 , 1967; Edwin Welch,The Peripatetic University , 1973; private information.]
Jacob M Price
, Sir Joshua , first baronet (1702–1777), merchant and financier, was born in The Hague 5 January 1702, one of the six sons of Cornelis Van Neck, paymaster-general of the land forces of the United Provinces, and his wife Anna de Greeff.
Four of his five brothers followed their father into public service: most conspicuously Lambert, pensionary of Rotterdam, and Abraham, attorney-general of the province of Holland.
In 1718 another older brother, Gerard, settled as a merchant in London, where Joshua joined him in 1722, first as assistant and later as partner.
The firm of Gerard & Joshua Van Neck were ‘general merchants’, but unusually active in placing the capital of fellow Dutchmen (and other continentals) in the British public funds and company shares.
The sums so entrusted made them a power among London houses subscribing to public loans, particularly during the wars of 1744–63.
Already one of the four leading underwriters in 1744, they were to be one of the two houses that arranged the ‘closed subscription’ loans to the government in the difficult winters of 1745–6 and 1757 — loans subsequently attacked by Sir John Barnard [q.v.]as too favourable to the promoters.
In all known surviving lists of such subscriptions in the 1750s and 1760s (1757, 1759, 1767), the Van Neck firm took the largest share.
They were also important military remittance contractors during the Seven Years' War.
The Van Necks had developed valuable trading and political connections in France, particularly with the Parisian Protestant firm of Thellusson, Necker & Co., who were able to get them important wheat-buying commissions from the French government.
Their greatest coup was the highly remunerative commission to buy tobacco in London in 1730–65 for the French tobacco monopoly (which then imported most of its leaf from Britain).
So important was this and so adept the participants that the farmers-general and the Van Necks were able to persuade both the French and British governments to permit the continued shipment of British tobacco to France during the wars of 1744–8 and 1756–63.
This traffic also permitted the firm to act as a channel of communications between the two governments in wartime.
For his financial and other services, Joshua Van Neck was created a baronet 14 December 1751.
The childless Gerard Van Neck died 17 August 1750 leaving an estate estimated at £240,000, almost three-fifths of which went to his brother Joshua.
In 1732 Sir Joshua married Marianne, daughter of Stephen Daubuz, a Huguenot merchant of London.
They had four daughters and two sons.
Their daughter Elizabeth married Thomas Walpole, MP and merchant of London, son of Horatio, first Baron Walpole of Wolterton [q.v.]; her sister Margaret married his brother Richard Walpole, London banker and MP.
In 1750 the firm was reorganized as a partnership between Joshua, his son-in-law Thomas Walpole, and D. J. Olivier.
In 1765 Walpole broke with his father-in-law and set up his own firm, carrying off the French tobacco contract in the process.
Even so, Sir Joshua could be described at his death as ‘one of the richest merchants in Europe’(Gentleman's Magazine , 1777).
Arthur Devis painted a ‘conversation piece’ of Sir Joshua and his family in the gardens of his villa at Putney.
If, in the lifetime of Gerard, their family world appeared to be very much that of the Dutch reformed and Huguenot expatriate communities in London, their social horizons expanded considerably after the Walpole marriages.
Sir Joshua Van Neck died 6 March 1777 and was succeeded in the baronetcy by his elder son Gerard.
[J. M. Price,France and the Chesapeake , 2 vols., 1973; Charles Wilson,Anglo-Dutch Commerce and Finance in the Eighteenth Century , 1941.]
Robert Hutchinson
,(John) Frederick (Thomas)(1865–1916), author and illustrator, was born in Richmond, Surrey, 6 August 1865, the eldest of four sons and three daughters of the Revd John Jane, later vicar of Upottery, Devon, and his wife Caroline, daughter of the Revd James Frederick Todd, vicar of Liskeard.
The family had a nautical ancestry: in the sixteenth century John Jane sailed with the navigator John Davis [q.v.]to the Arctic; Captain Henry Jane commanded HMS Seahorse during the war of 1739–48.
At school in Exeter, Jane demonstrated a liking for practical jokes that was to endure for his lifetime, and also a socially unpopular talent for manufacturing explosives.
His father intended him for an army career, but that and a project for farming in the colonies came to nothing; and by 1885 he was living hand to mouth in Chelsea as an illustrator and journalist.
In August 1889 he was commissioned by Pictorial World to cover a month of naval manoeuvres, preceded by an inspection of the combined fleets at Spithead by the German emperor Wilhelm II.
Jane was able to sketch nearly one hundred ships, as well as paying off his mess bill by painting decorative panels in his host ship's wardroom.
From then onwards, ‘Fred T. Jane’ became a recognized signature on bold black and white illustrations in a number of books and magazines; so realistic was the picture in the Illustrated London News of the torpedoing of the ironclad Blanco Encalada in the Chilean revolutionary war of 1891 that a legend grew that Jane had been present at the action.
Aircraft, television, and laser holograms were recognizably foreshadowed in a series of drawings, ‘Guesses at Futurity’, in the Pall Mall Magazine , 1894–5.
Jane became a successful novelist with Blake of the ‘Rattlesnake' (1895), followed by science-fiction titles,The Incubated Girl (1896),To Venus in Five Seconds (1897), and The Violent Flame (1899), which featured an armament with the characteristics of a nuclear weapon.
As early as 1882, inspired by the Mediterranean fleet's bombardment of Alexandria, he had conceived the idea of a warship sketch-book, provisionally entitled ‘Ironclads of the World’.
This bore fruit in 1898 with the publication of Jane's All the World's Fighting Ships (shortened to Jane's Fighting Ships in 1905), with details of all major surface warships; this was to be used as a ship recognition and intelligence aid by all sides in many future naval conflicts.
The edition of 1903 contained an article, ‘An Ideal Warship for the British Navy’ by Vittorio Cuniberti, which foreshadowed the main features of the ‘Dreadnought’class of battleships.
In 1909 the first edition was published of Jane's All the World's Aircraft .
In 1906 Jane stood unsuccessfully as an independent ‘navy before party’ parliamentary candidate for Portsmouth.
The years 1908–9 were dramatic: on the lookout for spies, Jane abducted a German who seemed to be acting suspiciously in Portsmouth, and ‘deposited him in the Duke of Bedford's animal park’ at Woburn.
The publicity generated by this exploit produced letters denouncing other suspect spies which Jane handed to the War Office, thus assisting what was to become MI5.
As a practical joke, he kidnapped by car the socialist MP, Victor Grayson, who was due to address a Portsmouth meeting; a similar plan to kidnap (Sir) Winston Churchill failed when travel arrangements were altered.
To his chagrin, Jane was not appointed to any official position during World War I, and had to be content with privately supporting naval recruiting and propaganda.
He was married twice: first, in 1892, to Alice Beattie (one daughter, who died in 1908); and second, in 1909, to Edith Frances Muriel Carre (one daughter).
He died, of a heart attack following severe influenza, in Portsmouth, 8 March 1916.
[Jane's Fighting Ships , 1948; Christopher Andrew,Secret Service , 1987; company archives of Jane's Information Group, Coulsdon, Surrey.]
John Grigg
,Stuart , Baron Rendel (1834–1913), industrialist, politician, and philanthropist, was born in Plymouth 2 July 1834, the third son in the family of four sons and three daughters of James Meadows Rendel, FRS [q.v.], civil engineer, and his wife Catherine Jane, daughter of James Harris of Plymouth.
Two of his brothers were George W. Rendel and (Sir) Alexander Rendel [qq.v.].
He was educated at Eton and Oriel College, Oxford, where he graduated in 1856 with a fourth-class degree in classical studies.
In 1861 he was called to the bar (Inner Temple), but before long, through his father's association with the inventor and arms manufacturer W. G. Armstrong (later Baron Armstrong of Craigside, q.v.), became the London manager of Armstrong's engineering firm, a post which involved business relations with foreign governments.
At the time of his death he was vice-chairman of the company.
In 1880 he was elected Liberal MP for Montgomeryshire and he held the seat for the next fourteen years.
His victory there was remarkable, because he had no Welsh connections and the seat had long been monopolized by the powerful local family of Wynn, a member of which he defeated.
He spent £12,000 on the election (to his opponent's £20,000), and thereafter devoted, on his own admission, 20 per cent of his annual expenditure to politics.
He soon became known as ‘the member for Wales’, and was accepted as leader of the Welsh Liberal group in Parliament.
Under his guidance it began to act coherently, with the result that the Liberal leadership was compelled to pay more attention to Welsh causes.
This process was assisted by his close friendship with W. E. Gladstone, which became closer still when one of his daughters married one of Gladstone's sons.
Sharing Gladstone's high churchmanship, he was well qualified for the difficult task of reconciling him to the policy of Welsh disestablishment.
A leading opponent of disestablishment, Bishop A. G. Edwards of St Asaph [q.v.], later wrote of Rendel that he ‘read the Welsh character in its strength and weakness’, and so achieved unity and discipline within the Welsh party.
He gave much encouragement to the rising generation of authentically Welsh politicians, among whom T. E. Ellis [q.v.]and, above all, David Lloyd George (later Earl Lloyd-George of Dwyfor) were outstanding.
Lloyd George thought very highly of him and used to quote with approval his dictum that in politics ‘there are no friendships at the top’(too often attributed to Lloyd George himself).
Rendel took a special interest in Welsh education and culture.
He deserves most of the credit for the Welsh Intermediate Education Act of 1889; and from 1895 to the end of his life he was president of the University College at Aberystwyth, to which he regularly contributed £1,000 a year.
In 1898 he presented the fine site overlooking Aberystwyth on which the National Library of Wales was built.
Meanwhile, on Gladstone's resignation in 1894, he had been raised to the peerage as Baron Rendel, of Hatchlands in Byfleet, county Surrey.
Hatchlands was his English estate, but he also had villas in Italy and the south of France, and in London a succession of grand houses, in the last of which, 10 Palace Green, Kensington Palace Gardens, he died 4 June 1913.
Rendel was a shy man, but confident in his views and, to those who knew him well, a shrewd, witty, and charming companion.
Had he been more self-assertive he might have risen higher in politics, but in his chosen field he made good use of his wealth and talents.
A portrait of him by Charles Thompson hangs in the council chamber of the National Library of Wales.
He married in 1857 Ellen Sophy, daughter of William Egerton Hubbard of Horsham, Sussex, brother of J. G. Hubbard (later first Baron Addington, q.v.).
She predeceased him by a year.
They had four daughters but no son; thus on his death the peerage became extinct.
[F. E. Hamer (ed.),
The Personal Papers of Lord Rendel , 1931; Kenneth O. Morgan,Wales in British Politics, 1868–1922 , 1963; A. G. Edwards,Memories , 1927.]
George W Carpenter
,Patrick (1820–1895), mechanical engineer, was born in Kilmarnock, Ayrshire, 29 June 1820, the eldest in the family of five sons and two daughters of the Revd Robert Stirling [q.v.], a Scottish minister and inventor, and his wife Jane, daughter of William Rankine, wine merchant, of Galston.
He was educated privately.
Engineering was a considerable family influence, his great-grandfather Robert Stirling having built a threshing engine in 1758 and his father having invented the hot-air engine and inspired C. W. Siemens's regenerative furnace for the melting and reheating of steel.
In 1837 he was apprenticed to his uncle James S. Stirling at Dundee foundry, where he worked for the next six years and where some locomotives were built for the Arbroath and Forfar Railway which influenced his own later designs.
From 1843 he worked on marine engines with Robert Napier [q.v.]on Clydeside, doing installation work on four early Cunard liners.
He joined Neilson & Co. in 1846 at their Hyde Park (Glasgow) works, becoming a foreman in the locomotive construction department.
In 1851 he became locomotive superintendent of the small Bowling and Balloch Railway on Loch Lomond, before returning to marine work with Laurence Hill of Port Glasgow.
He then joined R. & W. Hawthorn & Co. of Newcastle, a firm which supplied locomotives to the Glasgow and South Western Railway, of which he became locomotive superintendent in 1853.
His first task was to select a site for and to design new locomotive workshops in Kilmarnock to replace existing inadequate facilities in Glasgow.
He then introduced several new locomotive types from 1855 onwards for passenger and freight service, the former being of 2–2–2 type with outside cylinders and inside bearings to all axles.
Later examples had boilers without a steam-collecting dome, which strengthened the boiler shell and which characterized all his later locomotives, as well as those of his brother James on the South Eastern Railway and of his son Matthew on the Hull and Barnsley.
In 1866 Stirling succeeded Archibald Sturrock as locomotive superintendent of the Great Northern Railway at Doncaster and in the next year his 0–4–2 type mixed-traffic locomotive was first introduced, with construction continuing over the next twenty-eight years, as well as the 2–4–0 type for passenger service.
However, he considered that only locomotives with a single pair of driving wheels were really suitable for express-train service and the first of these were built in 1868, followed two years later by the larger 4–2–2 type with outside cylinders and driving wheels eight feet in diameter, whose simple and elegant outline created great interest.
These, and a series of 2–2–2 type machines with inside cylinders, continued to be built until 1895 and hauled the principal express trains.
They also pulled those in the railway ‘races’ from London to Edinburgh in 1888 and to Aberdeen in 1895, when there was keen competition between the east and west coast routes and Stirling's locomotives averaged over 60 m.p.h. between London and York.
However, the steadily increasing weight of express trains in the 1890s made it obvious that more powerful locomotives would be required.
Stirling was charming if somewhat reserved in manner.
He was dedicated to his work and to his men, by whom he was much respected for his design and organizing ability and for his fairness and kindness in cases of individual hardship.
During times of recession he did everything possible to avoid making men redundant, preferring that all should work short time.
On his seventieth birthday his workmen presented a drinking fountain to the town of Doncaster as a token of their esteem.
He was a member of the Institutions of Civil and Mechanical Engineers and one of the earliest members of the Institute of Engineers and Shipbuilders of Scotland.
He and his wife had three sons, all of whom became railway engineers, and one daughter.
Stirling died at Highfield House, Doncaster, 11 November 1895.
[Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers , vol. cxxiv, 1895–6; C. Hamilton Ellis, ‘Famous Locomotive Engineers’,Locomotive, Railway Carriage and Wagon Review , 15 October 1938; E. L. Ahrons,The British Steam Railway Locomotive 1825–1925 , 1927; F. A. S. Brown,Great Northern Locomotive Engineers 1846–1881 , 1966, and From Stirling to Gresley 1882–1922 , 1974.]
Jim Burton
,John (1839–1919), meteorologist and experimental scientist, was born 18 September 1839 in Falkirk, the fourth son of Henry Aitken of Darroch, Falkirk, head of a Falkirk legal firm, and his wife Margaret Russel.
He was educated at Falkirk Grammar School and the University of Glasgow, where he studied natural philosophy and engineering.
Intending to have a career as a marine engineer, Aitken served a two-year apprenticeship in Dundee and a further three years with R. Napier & Sons, shipbuilders, of Glasgow.
After completing his apprenticeship he suffered a breakdown in health and was compelled to abandon his intended profession.
He inherited wealth and could have lived a leisured life but preferred to pursue his earlier interest in natural philosophy.
Part of his home in Falkirk was converted into a scientific laboratory and workshop and he devoted his life to the pursuit of experimental science.
His early training as an engineer stood him in good stead, and he not only devised but also constructed most of the apparatus that he used.
Aitken's work covered a wide spectrum of physical science, and he had some ninety-eight contributions published in scientific literature.
Significant papers on colour sensation appeared in 1871–2, being followed by work on oceanic circulation, glacier motion, and changes of state.
This led to a study of condensation in the Earth's atmosphere, and it was here that his greatest contributions were made.
Aitken related condensation to the presence of dust particles in the atmosphere and invented an ingenious instrument — the Aitken dust counter — that allowed a count of dust particles in a sample of air.
He showed that condensation would not take place under normal atmospheric conditions, even at high supersaturations, without the presence of dust particles to act as nuclei.
In fact, sufficient nuclei are always present in the atmosphere.
C. T. R. Wilson [q.v.]later showed that condensation can take place on ions in dust-free air, but this can only be achieved in the laboratory using greater expansion and cooling than occurs naturally.
Subsequent work by Aitken was largely within the field of meteorology, although he maintained other interests.
He made contributions to the theory of cyclonic and anticyclonic development, the formation of dew and hoar frost, and the measurement of air temperature.
At his death he left a paper pointing to inadequacies in the standard Stevenson thermometer screen.
Aitken's honours included FRSE, 1875; the Keith (1883) and Gunning (1895) prizes of the Royal Society of Edinburgh; FRS, 1889; the Royal medal of the Royal Society of London, 1917; and LLD, University of Glasgow, 1899.
Bearded and dignified, Aitken was an original thinker who remained outside the mainstream of scientific activity.
This helped him take an individual approach to problems, but he stayed in touch with other workers, and his findings were always made available.
He lived a quiet life, with country pursuits his main recreation, and he never lived away from Falkirk.
But he was not a recluse and travelled widely within Europe.
He never married.
He died at Ardenlea, Falkirk, 13 November 1919.
[Cargill G. Knott (ed.),
Collected Scientific Papers of John Aitken, LL.D., F.R.S.,
1923; B. J. Mason,The Physics of Clouds , 1957, pp. 20–83;Proceedings of the Royal Society of Edinburgh , vol. xli, 1920–1, pp. 177–81;Nature , vol. civ, 1919, pp. 318, 337–8, 376;Symons's Meteorological Magazine , vol. liv, 1919, pp. 125–6;Scotsman , 15 November 1919;British Weekly , 20 November 1919.]
Patrick O'Brian
, Sir William (1745–1816), vice-admiral, had obscure origins: neither his place of birth nor his parents are mentioned in the Naval Chronicle 's report of his death, but it is probable that he went early to sea, since on joining the Dolphin on 8 July 1766 he was rated able.
The Dolphin was commanded by Captain Samuel Wallis, who also had the Prince Frederick and the Swallow (Captain Carteret) under his orders, and she sailed round the world by way of the Straits of Magellan, Tahiti, Java, the Cape of Good Hope, and St Helena, leaving Plymouth on 19 August 1766 and anchoring in the Downs on 20 May 1768, paying off in June.
The other ships of the Royal Navy which Mitchell listed in his record of service were the Hector (74 guns), which he joined, again as an able seaman, on 31 July 1777.
On 1 November 1777 he was rated midshipman and master's mate, and on 26 August 1778 he left the ship to join the Victory (100 guns) the next day, again as master's mate.
He served in her, with breaks of a few days, until 12 March 1781, when he moved to the Foudroyant (80 guns) as acting lieutenant, staying until the end of October.
On 1 November 1781 he appeared before a board at the Navy Office, produced the necessary certificates and papers, answered the examining captains' questions satisfactorily, and passed for lieutenant, the board observing that ‘he was more than 31 years old’, which suggests the lack of a birth certificate.
He was commissioned almost at once, and early in 1792 he returned to the Foudroyant as first lieutenant; in April of the same year he was promoted master and commander, being given the Pigmy of 14 guns; and in 1790 he was made post.
In 1794 he was acting captain of the Adamant (50 guns) and then captain of the Isis , also of 50 guns.
The Isis was not a line-of-battle ship, but like the Adamant she acted as one in the battle of Camperdown in October 1797, when she set about the much heavier Gelijkheid (64 guns), one of the eleven Dutch ships that were taken.
In 1800 he was given the Resolution (74 guns) and in 1803 he was captain of the Zealand , the flagship of Sir James (later first Baron) de Saumarez [q.v.].
It was in this connection that Sir John Ross [q.v.]speaks of him in his Memoirs and Correspondence of Admiral Lord de Saumarez (vol ii, 1838, p. 72): ‘Captain, afterwards Admiral, William Mitchell, an officer who had risen to the rank of rear-admiral by his good conduct, after having been flogged round the fleet for desertion.’
This is a startling remark, but it is delivered as a matter of course, and Ross (1777–1856), a naval officer and eventually an admiral himself, is unlikely to have been mistaken about something generally known in the service at the time.
It is true that the record of service presented in 1781 shows no ship from which it is probable that Mitchell deserted when he was a seaman; but the years between 1768 and 1777 are passed over in silence.
However that may be, in 1807 Captain Mitchell was certainly commanding the sea fencibles at Shoreham, and the next year he was promoted rear-admiral of the blue, moving steadily up the grades by seniority until he became vice-admiral of the white (Nelson's highest rank) in 1813: he was also appointed KCB before his death, which took place at his house in Camberwell Grove, Surrey, in 1816.
[Sir John Ross,Memoirs and Correspondence of Admiral Lord de Saumarez , 1838;Naval Chronicle , 1797 and 1816; details of service from National Maritime Museum, Greenwich.]
Austin Woolrych
,Arthur (d. 1680), Fifth Monarchist and radical republican, came of minor Dorset gentry stock with strong Exchequer connections.
He was the fourth son of John Squibb; his mother Anne was a sister of Sir Robert Seymour of Hanford.
Arthur Squibb the elder, his father's first cousin, was a teller, and his elder brother Lawrence also became one in 1640, in which year he himself acquired a reversion to a tellership.
Unlike Lawrence, but like his elder namesake, Arthur junior was a parliamentarian, and he adventured £300 in the prospective purchase of Irish lands.
He was described as clerk to Sir Edward Powell, a master of requests, in the earlier 1640s, and later in the decade he served on various commissions for Surrey or Westminster or both, including those for the assessment, the militia, and sequestrations.
He rose further under the Commonwealth, becoming a commissioner for compounding and a JP in 1650 and a commissioner for indemnity in 1652.
A lay preacher, his house was the meeting-place of a gathered church by 1649.
At some stage Squibb became an ardent Fifth Monarchist — certainly before he was nominated to Barebone's Parliament in 1653 as a member for Middlesex.
He was one of those who led that assembly in prayer on its first full day's sitting, which it devoted entirely to religious exercises.
He took an extreme position on law reform as well as in matters religious, and his fellow millenarians took to meeting regularly at his house to concert their parliamentary tactics.
That, however, owed more to the convenience of his nearby residence than to any personal pre-eminence.
He was a zealous MP and served on numerous committees, but the House never elected him to the council of state.
When the moderate majority finally resigned their power back into Oliver Cromwell's hands, Squibb was one of the radical remnant who sat on until they were evicted.
Like all Fifth Monarchists, Squibb regarded Cromwell's Protectorate as a usurpation of the promised kingdom of Christ.
He remained a JP but his other public employments terminated, and he sold his reversion to a tellership to his half-brother Edmund.
In 1655–6 he engaged in discussions with some disaffected Commonwealthsmen about a possible basis for an alternative government, but he steered clear of active conspiracy or rebellion.
He was re-employed by the restored Rump in 1659, but after the army's second seizure of power he was briefly imprisoned in the Isle of Man.
After the Restoration, pursuing his erstwhile reversion on Edmund's behalf, he was pronounced unfit for a tellership, but he kept out of trouble until 1671, when he was sent to the Tower on suspicion of involvement in the conspiracy of Colonel Thomas Blood [q.v.].
He was free a year later, however, when he was licensed under the Declaration of Indulgence, as a Baptist, to preach at his house in Chertsey.
His will, made on 30 November 1679 and proved on 1 April 1680, shows him in possession of lands in Essex and Ireland; it made modest but adequate provision for his wife Martha, daughter of John Ireland of Hale in Lancashire, and for a son and three daughters.
[G. E. Aylmer,The State's Servants , 1973; B. S. Capp,The Fifth Monarchy Men , 1972; A. Woolrych,Commonwealth to Protectorate , 1982; pedigree by G. D. Squibb in Proceedings of the Dorset Natural History and Archaeological Society , vol. lxviii.]
Robert Brown
,William Knox (1849–1917), financier and principal founder of the Anglo-Persian Oil Company, was born 11 October 1849 in Newton Abbot, Devon, the only son among the seven children of William Francis D'Arcy, solicitor, of Newton Abbot, and his wife Elizabeth Baker, daughter of the Revd Robert Bradford of Wolborough, Devon.
He was educated at Westminster School and in 1866 emigrated with his parents to Australia, where they settled in Rockhampton on the Queensland coast.
D'Arcy practised as a solicitor in Australia, but in 1882 formed a syndicate to exploit a vein of gold that had been discovered close to Rockhampton.
This became the Mount Morgan Gold Mining Company, and D'Arcy's shareholding made him a very rich man.
In 1889 he returned to England and enjoyed high society and sporting pursuits: there were shooting parties on his Norfolk estate, and he held his own private stand at Epsom.
However, towards the end of 1900 D'Arcy was approached about funding exploration in Persia, where oil seepages had long been known about.
D'Arcy himself never went to Persia, but on 28 May 1901 his representative obtained a concession valid for sixty years.
This entitled him to search for and sell ‘natural gas, petroleum, asphalt and ozokerite’ throughout all of Persia except in the five northern provinces adjoining Russia.
Drilling operations began towards the end of 1902 in Chiah Surkh, a likely oil-bearing area near the border with Iraq.
D'Arcy's engineer was a man of great experience and tenacity, but the difficulties proved formidable.
After three years without success D'Arcy feared that the venture would fail.
‘Every purse has its limits,’ he wrote, ‘and I am beginning to see the bottom of my own.’
D'Arcy had invested some £250,000 of his own money in the enterprise, and felt that it was ‘money that I shall never see again'.
Other financial help was needed, and in 1905 it came in the form of a deal with the Burmah Oil Company — to whom D'Arcy ultimately surrendered his interest in the whole venture (in return for 170,000 Burmah shares and the reimbursement of all his expenses).
Drilling operations had meanwhile been shifted to the south, and oil was finally struck in Masjid-i-Suleiman on 26 May 1908, just as D'Arcy and Burmah were on the point of giving up.
The discovery of oil in significant quantities ensured the successful formation of the Anglo-Persian Oil Company on 14 April 1909, and marked the birth of the oil industry of the Middle East.
Although D'Arcy sat on the board of the new company he was not disposed to play any further significant role.
In 1872 D'Arcy married Elena, daughter of Samuel Bradford Birkbeck, a mining engineer, of Glenmore, Queensland; they had two sons and three daughters.
Elena died in 1897, and in 1899 D'Arcy married Ernestine (‘Nina’), daughter of the Australian journalist Arthur Leslie Boucicault.
‘Nina’ Boucicault was the first actress to play the role of ‘Peter Pan’in the play of that name by (Sir) James Barrie [q.v.].
D'Arcy died 1 May 1917 at his home in Stanmore, Middlesex.
[BP Shield magazine, March 1972; R. W. Ferrier,The History of the British Petroleum Company: the Developing Years 1901–1932 , 1982; private information.]
G E Aylmer
, Sir Martin (1614–1665), financier and revenue farmer, was baptized in Stafford 11 March 1614, the son of Edward Noell and his wife Grace, also born Noell, his cousin.
He had at least two brothers and a sister.
He was probably apprenticed as a London scrivener and continued to be an active member of the Scriveners' Company throughout his life.
In 1648 he was serving as a commissioner for the militia and for the collection of tax arrears in London, by which time he had also already branched out into commerce, being recorded as a shipowner.
His true métier appeared in 1651 with his appointment as co-farmer of the excise on salt; he combined this with actually managing the salt-works in North and South Shields, buttressing his position by obtaining quasi-monopoly rights in that commodity.
During the course of the decade, with or without partners, Noell took on the farming of more revenues, and in 1657–9 he was co-postmaster-general with John Thurloe [q.v.], who may have been a relative by marriage.
Associated with Thomas Povey [q.v.]in trying to promote a West India Company, Noell was also active in the Levant and East India Companies.
He sat for his home town of Stafford in the second Protectorate Parliament of 1656–8, but is recorded as a more active speaker in the 1659 Parliament of Richard Cromwell [q.v.].
He spoke vigorously in support of the protector's Baltic policy, arguing that England's commercial interests required a strong anti-Dutch and so pro-Swedish stance, even at the risk of war.
Later in the session Noell had to defend himself against accusations of having made an illicit profit out of transporting captured Irish, Scottish, and English Royalist soldiers, political prisoners, and convicted criminals to Barbados; he denied not the facts of such transportation but the allegations of cruelty and profiteering arising therefrom.
He also came under attack in his capacity as a revenue farmer and would-be monopolist.
A small pointer to Noell's wealth is his having paid £520 at the end of 1657 to avoid becoming an alderman of the City.
It was through his West Indian interests that his career most obviously spanned the great divide of 1660.
None the less, his fall from favour and loss of revenue farms and offices under the restored Commonwealth of 1659 may have been what stood him in best stead in the following year, rather than secret payments to the Royalist cause before May 1660, for which there is no evidence beyond inference.
Samuel Pepys [q.v.]was a little surprised at Noell's knighthood in 1662; whether it is sufficiently explained by the resumption of his dual role as West India lobbyist and revenue farmer cum government creditor remains an open question.
Noell also had Irish interests, for the better protection of which he became a member of the Irish Parliament (from 1661 to his death).
The fact of his eldest son's having been knighted within a month of Noell's death from the plague (on 29 September 1665 at his home in the parish of St Olave Jewry, London) suggests continuing royal favour, although his executors did not escape unwelcome attention from royal revenue officials, notably in connection with allegations of his having profited improperly from the gains of privateering — England and Spain remaining technically at war until some little time after the Restoration.
Noell was survived by five sons, two daughters, and his wife Elizabeth who died two weeks after his own death.
Historians have differed in their judgements of Noell's importance.
In the story of relations between government and city, the worlds of high politics and high finance, his career helps to fill the gap after the revenue farmers and disbursing officials of early Stuart times and before the goldsmiths, proto-bankers, and other financial fixers of the later seventeenth century.
Noell died a rich but not fabulously wealthy man, having already settled much of his property and set up a substantial charity in his native town.
[G. E. Aylmer,The State's Servants , 1973; R. Latham and W. Matthews (eds.),
The Diary of Samuel Pepys , 11 vols., 1970–83;Acts of the Privy Council, Colonial Series ;Calendars of State Papers Colonial ;Calendars of Treasury Books ; J. B. Beaven,Aldermen of London , 2 vols., 1908; British Library, Additional MS 11411 and MS Egerton 2345.]
Rachael Low
,(Frank) Humphrey (Sinkler)(1907–1950), documentary film maker, was born at The Gazebo, Walberswick, Suffolk, 19 August 1907, the only child of Frank Jennings, architect, and his wife Mildred Jessie Hall, amateur painter.
He was educated at the Perse School, Cambridge, and won a scholarship to Pembroke College, Cambridge, where he received a first class in part i of the English tripos in 1928 and a first class with distinction in part ii in 1929.
At both school and university he showed talent for acting and theatrical design.
After graduation he was awarded a scholarship to do research for a doctoral thesis on Thomas Gray [q.v.], apparently never completed, under the supervision of I. A. Richards [q.v.].
In Cambridge in the 1930s he ran a gallery of modern art with Julian Trevelyan, edited Shakespeare's 1593 Quarto of Venus and Adonis , with Jacob Bronowski [q.v.]founded and wrote for the magazine Experiment , and designed sets and costumes for theatrical productions.
In 1934 he joined the GPO Film Unit.
His attention was diverted, however, by two other interests.
In 1936 he served on the committee organizing the spectacular international surrealist exhibition in London, and in 1937 he was involved with Tom Harrisson [q.v.]and Charles Madge in founding Mass Observation.
The London Gallery had an exhibition of his paintings, strongly influenced by surrealism, in 1937.
In 1939 he turned to films in earnest.
His distinctive style emerged in Spare Time (1939), an impression of leisure activities among British working-class people, in an edited structure of countless visual details, an overlapping sound track providing continuity.
He continued to paint and write poetry from time to time but he was now a professional and energetic film director, turning out twenty documentaries during the next eleven years.
Many were scripted by himself, and many edited by his valuable collaborator, Stewart MacAllister.
Most were for the GPO, later Crown Film Unit, and distributed by the Central Office of Information to cinemas and overseas.
The best were made during the war, including Listen to Britain (1942),Fires Were Started (1943), and Diary for Timothy (1944/5).
He was appointed OBE in June 1946 for his work in sustaining morale at home and publicizing Britain's fighting spirit abroad.
After the war he left the Crown Film Unit to work with the producer Ian Dalrymple, making three unsuccessful films between 1947 and 1950.
Lively and original, Jennings has been described as the only real poet produced by the British cinema.
The painter's eye, the poet's search for meaning, and the social anthropologist's interest in the everyday came together in a unique film style which built overall impressions from the juxtaposition of detail.
The cool and neutral intellectual who had observed the working class in Spare Time matured during the war.
His love of Britain and wholehearted support for the fight against Fascism gave his films an urgency and richness which were lacking in the few he made after the war.
In 1929 Jennings married Cicely Mary Wilhelmina Raimonde, daughter of Richard Edward Synge Cooper, civil engineer.
They had two daughters.
Jennings died as the result of a fall on the Greek island of Poros, 24 September 1950, choosing locations for a film for the European Economic Commission.
[Basil Wright, ‘Humphrey Jennings’,Sight and Sound , December 1950; Mary-Lou Jennings (ed.),
Humphrey Jennings: Film Maker, Painter, Poet , 1982; Anthony W. Hodgkinson and Rodney E. Sheratsky,Humphrey Jennings — More than a Maker of Films , 1982; Mary-Lou Jennings and Charles Madge (eds.),
Pandaemonium 1660–1886: the Coming of the Machine as seen by Contemporary Observers , 1985.]
J M Richards
,Charles (1743? –1812), architect, was probably born in 1743, at Bolton Street, London, the only son of Walter Cameron, originally from Edinburgh, a carpenter and speculative builder.
In 1760 he was apprenticed to his father with whom he lived.
He also studied under the successful architect Isaac Ware [q.v.]whom he helped prepare a new edition of Lord Burlington's Fabbriche Antiche , a book of engravings from the collection of Palladio drawings belonging to Lord Burlington (Richard Boyle, third Earl of Burlington, q.v.).
On Ware's death in 1766 Cameron, inspired by Burlington's researches, determined — rather than complete his apprenticeship with his father — to travel to Italy and publish his own book on Palladio's drawings of the Roman imperial baths.
Financed by his father, he left for Rome in 1768.
There Cameron made the acquaintance of Charles Louis Clérisseau [q.v.], the scholar and draughtsman, and teacher of Robert Adam [q.v.]during the latter's residence in Italy.
Clérisseau's knowledge of the Roman baths, which he had studied with Adam, would have been an asset to Cameron, though it is not known what share Clérisseau had in the preparation of Cameron's book,The Baths of the Romans , which, after various delays, was published in London in 1772.
Little is known of Cameron's subsequent activities, except for a series of financial differences with his father, until he is recorded in 1779 as being established in St Petersburg at the court of Catherine the Great.
Catherine had for some while been recruiting architects from the West, especially from Italy.
It is uncertain how Cameron obtained an introduction to her but it was possibly through Clérisseau, who was known to her, or through Cameron's book on the Roman baths.
Cameron first worked for Catherine at the palace of Tsarskoe Selo, to which he made several additions over a period of fifteen years, notably the Agate Pavilion and the Cameron Gallery, an elegant building based on the neo-classical style developed in England by Robert Adam, about which Cameron had probably learned from Clérisseau.
These showed, as also did his later buildings, remarkable delicacy and inventiveness, especially in their richly decorated interiors.
Cameron also designed (1782–5) the palace of Pavlovsk for the Grand Duke Paul, where he built in the grounds the first Greek Revival building in Russia, the Temple of Friendship.
In the Crimea he designed additions for the empress to her palace of Bakhtchi-Serai.
On the empress's death in 1796, her successor Paul I dismissed Cameron from his post at Tsarskoe Selo, and deprived him of his house there.
For a while he was in financial difficulties, but by 1801, after Paul's assassination, he was working again at Tsarskoe Selo for the dowager empress and in 1802 Alexander I, the new emperor, appointed him architect-in-chief to the Admiralty, where he carried out minor works.
He also worked at the naval base at Kronstadt.
Between 1781 and 1784 he married Catherine (died 1817), daughter of John Busch, head gardener at Tsarskoe Selo.
Cameron died in St Petersburg in 1812.
The main collection of his drawings is at the Hermitage Museum, Leningrad.
A portrait, by A. O. Orlovsky, painted in 1809, is at the State Russian Museum, St Petersburg.
[Isobel Rae,Charles Cameron, Architect to the Court of Russia , 1971.]
Richard Cust
, Sir Richard (1584–1645), Puritan magistrate and MP, was born 9 January 1584, the eldest surviving son and third of seventeen children of Richard Grosvenor esquire of Eaton, Cheshire, and his wife Christian, daughter of Sir Richard Brooke of Norton, Cheshire.
He was educated in the Puritan household of John Bruen esquire, of Stapleford in Cheshire, and at Queen's College, Oxford, where he matriculated 26 October 1599 and graduated BA 30 June 1602.
Grosvenor was knighted 24 August 1617 and made a baronet 23 February 1622.
He represented Cheshire in the Parliaments of 1621, 1626, and 1628–9.
Grosvenor made his principal mark in local affairs.
He succeeded his father as a JP for Cheshire in 1619 and served on the bench until his removal, as part of a purge by George Villiers, first Duke of Buckingham [q.v.], on 26 October 1626.
He was also sheriff of Cheshire in 1624–5 and Flintshire in 1625–6.
Although not one of the foremost Cheshire gentry in terms of wealth or landholdings, Grosvenor became the most influential local governor in the area of his main estate, immediately to the south of Chester.
This was because of his industry and abilities as a man of affairs and also his reputation as a supporter of godly ministers.
In 1628 he was described by the Puritan preacher, Nathaniel Lancaster, as ‘a father of the country’.
As an MP, Grosvenor was not in the front rank of Commons spokesmen, but he was an effective, if rather long-winded, public speaker and a diligent attender of committees.
Most of his interventions in Parliament were concerned either with the welfare of his Cheshire constituents or the defence of the Calvinist religion.
In 1621 he spoke out against the patentee, Sir Giles Mompesson [q.v.], and the popish threat to the Palatinate; and in 1629 delivered a notable attack on the influence of the king's Arminian advisers.
He was also a meticulous parliamentary diarist, providing the fullest known account of debates in 1626, 1628, and 1629.
Between 1629 and 1638 Grosvenor was imprisoned in the Fleet, having become liable for the debts of his brother-in-law, Peter Daniel esquire.
Although he was not restored to the bench after his return to the county, he remained an influential figure in local politics.
In May 1640 he arbitrated a dispute over the parliamentary election for Chester; and in July 1642 he played a leading role in organizing, and probably also drafting, the Cheshire ‘Remonstrance’, a petition containing over 8,000 signatures, which called on the king and Parliament to settle their differences and avoid civil war.
During the war Grosvenor remained neutral; he is not to be confused with his eldest son, Richard Grosvenor esquire, who played a prominent part in the royalist defence of Chester.
Grosvenor's speeches and writings make it possible to reconstruct his political views in considerable detail.
He was a firm believer in the divine right of kingship and patriarchal authority, but at the same time he staunchly defended the liberties of the subject and Parliament's role as ‘the representative of the people’.
Above all, he was concerned to root out the evil of popery and overcome the influence of ‘evil counsellors’ close to the king.
In many respects he was the archetype of the ‘patriots’ and ‘public men’who played a crucial political role as spokesmen for their localities and ‘the country’in the years preceding the civil war.
He was married three times, to Lettice, daughter of Sir Hugh Cholmondeley [q.v.]of Cholmondeley, Cheshire; Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Thomas Wilbraham of Woodhey, Cheshire; and Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Peter Warburton [q.v.]of Grafton, Cheshire.
He died 14 September 1645.
[R. P. Cust and P. G. Lake, ‘Sir Richard Grosvenor and the Rhetoric of Magistracy’,Bulletin of the Institute of Historical Research , vol. liv, 1981, pp. 40–53; G. Ormerod,The History of the County Palatine and City of Chester , 3 vols., 1882, vol. ii, pp. 836, 842–3;Commons Debates ; G. P. Higgins, ‘County Government and Society in Cheshire,c .1590–1640’, MA thesis (1974) for the University of Liverpool; private research.]
W D A Smith
,Henry (1800–1830), pioneer of anaesthesia, was born in Lady Halton, Bromfield parish, Shropshire, 27 January 1800, the fifth son and seventh child in the family of eight sons and five daughters of John Hickman, farmer (also clerk of the course at the Ludlow races), and his wife Sarah, daughter of Benjamin Hill, yeoman of Stanton Lacy.
From 1819 he sometimes inserted ‘Hill’ after ‘Henry’, although this was not a baptismal name.
Hickman's early education, apprenticeship, and hospital attendance are unknown save for a surviving fair-copy notebook dated 1816–18, containing extracts from textbooks and a record of attendance for two weeks at Brookes's School of Anatomy, London.
In November 1819 Hickman matriculated in Edinburgh, registered with the university, and joined the Royal Medical Society, but he did not graduate.
In 1820, although under age, he became MRCS.
Hickman set up practice as a surgeon in Ludlow.
Advertising for an apprentice, he promised instruction in the different branches of the profession and access to his museum.
In May 1824, however, before moving to Shifnal, he auctioned some of the natural history specimens.
Commercial directories listed him as physician in Shifnal.
In February 1824 he wrote to T. A. Knight, FRS [q.v.], suggesting the use of suspended animation to tranquillize fear and relieve suffering during surgical operations.
He reported standard surgical procedures on animals rendered insensible under a bell glass by denying them fresh air or by administering carbon dioxide, without evidence of pain and with full recovery.
Usually haemorrhage was trifling and healing clean.
He attributed the latter to antiputrescent properties of carbon dioxide.
The origins of his inspiration, twenty years before Horace Wells discovered nitrous oxide anaesthesia, are unknown.
Suggestions that Hickman experimented with nitrous oxide remain unsubstantiated.
In August 1824 Hickman produced a pamphlet entitled A Letter on Suspended Animation, containing experiments showing that it may be safely employed during operations on animals, with a view of ascertaining its probable utility in surgical operations on the Human Subject, addressed to T. A. Knight Esq.
of Downton Castle, Herefordshire, one of the Presidents of the Royal Society…
The next line (overscored on the only surviving copy) reads: ‘…and read before it by Sir Humphrey Davy ’— an event which did not take place.
The text was also reproduced in the Shrewsbury Chronicle .
The Lancet responded in 1826 with a scathing letter under the heading ‘Surgical Humbug’ signed ‘Antiquack’.
In 1828 Hickman appealed to Charles X, king of France, for the collaboration of the king's medical schools with his experiments on insensibility produced by ‘introduction of certain gases into the lungs’, which were ridiculed by the A.Académie de Médecine.
On his return to England, he practised in Tenbury Wells, Worcestershire.
In 1821 Hickman married Eliza Hannah, daughter of Benjamin Gardner, a farmer, of Leigh Court, near Worcester.
They had one son and three daughters.
Hickman died 2 April 1830 in Tenbury Wells and was buried at Bromfield.
[Lancet , vol. ix, 1826, p. 646; Wellcome Historical Medical Museum,Souvenir, Henry Hill Hickman Centenary Exhibition 1830–1930 , 1930; F. F. Cartwright,The English Pioneers of Anaesthesia: Beddoes, Davy and Hickman , 1952; W. D. A. Smith, articles in British Journal of Anaesthesia , vol. xxxviii, 1966, vol. xlii, 1970, and vol. l, 1978.]
Roger Dobson
,Arthur Llewelyn Jones- (1863–1947), author and essayist, was born 3 March 1863 in Caerleon-on-Usk, Monmouthshire, the only child of the Revd John Edward Jones, rector of Llanddewi Fach, and his wife Janet Robina Machen, whose maiden name was adopted by the family in order to please her Scottish relations.
He was educated at Hereford Cathedral School.
The splendours of the landscape surrounding Llanddewi rectory, his boyhood home near Caerleon, and his passion for romantic literature inspired him to begin writing.
Eleusinia (1881), a mystical poem, was his début in print.
The mystery and wonder it expressed characterized all his later creations.
His father's penury prevented Machen attending university, and his attempt to pursue a medical career proved short-lived when he failed the preliminary examination of the Royal College of Surgeons in 1880.
In 1881 he moved to London in an unsuccessful endeavour to enter journalism.
Living in poverty, he wrote while variously employed as a tutor, publishers’ clerk, and cataloguer of occult books.
His early works included The Anatomy of Tobacco (1884), translations of The Heptameron (1886) and Casanova's Memoirs (1894), and The Chronicle of Clemendy (1888).
In the next decade he composed his most notable work.
The Great God Pan (1894) and The Three Impostors (1895), his early ventures into the macabre, appeared in the Bodley Head's ‘Keynotes’ series.
The Hill of Dreams , one of the period's most remarkable and decadent novels, was completed in 1897 but remained unpublished for ten years.
After his wife's death in 1899 Machen briefly sought solace in the occult fraternity, the Order of the Golden Dawn, but ultimately found its teachings sterile.
He joined the Shakespeare repertory company of (Sir) Frank Benson [q.v.]as an actor in 1901, and subsequently toured with several theatrical companies.
He resumed writing between stage engagements.
His literary theories were trenchantly expressed in Hieroglyphics (1902), and his supernatural tales collected in The House of Souls (1906).
From 1910 to 1921 Machen worked as a reporter for the Evening News .
Although he detested journalism his Johnsonian manner and compelling character established him as one of Fleet Street's most charismatic figures.
The Evening News carried several of his wonder stories, and the appearance in September 1914 of his wartime fantasy ‘The Bowmen’ brought him to public attention.
The tale of phantom archers from Agincourt aiding British troops was widely accepted as factual, and by the summer of 1915 the legend of the ‘Angels of Mons’ had swept the country.
In the 1920s, after the British literary establishment had neglected him for forty years, Machen attracted a coterie of admirers in the United States.
Writers such as Vincent Starrett and Carl Van Vechten, extolling the lyrical power of his prose, proclaimed him a mystagogue of the secrets of life and art in the tradition of Edgar Allan Poe and Nathaniel Hawthorne.
Machen's reminiscences,Far Off Things (1922) and Things Near and Far (1923), movingly recaptured his youth in Monmouthshire and his struggles as a writer during the fin de siècle , and revealed the depth of his dedication to literature.
By the end of the 1920s, as the vogue for his books diminished, Machen encountered renewed financial hardship.
He and his family moved to Amersham, Buckinghamshire, where he produced essays, reviews, innumerable letters, and a final crop of stories.
In old age he maintained a relish for life in defiance of tribulations and failing health, and his geniality and goodness made him the centre of a circle of faithful friends and admirers.
In 1887 he married Amelia, daughter of Frederick Metcalfe Hogg, gentleman, of Worthing, Sussex.
She died of cancer in 1899, after several years of illness.
In 1903 he married Dorothie Purefoy Hudleston, one of the actresses in Benson's company, the daughter of Colonel Josiah Hudleston, formerly of the Indian Army.
They had one son and one daughter.
Machen died in St Joseph's Nursing Home, Beaconsfield, Buckinghamshire, 15 December 1947.
[Aidan Reynolds and William Charlton,Arthur Machen , 1963; Wesley D. Sweetser,Arthur Machen , 1964.]
Michael F G Selby
,Alexander (1787–1860), geographer and penal reformer, was born 11 February 1787 in Edinburgh, the only child of the second marriage of Alexander M'Konochie (the later spelling was adopted in 1832), a lawyer and commissioner for the Board of Customs for Scotland, who died in 1796, and his wife Ann Margaret.
The young Maconochie was placed under the guardianship of Allan Maconochie (Lord Meadowbank, q.v.), a close kinsman, later judge of the supreme court of Scotland.
Until he was fifteen he had private tuition which concentrated on classics and law, but in August 1803 he was able, with much difficulty, to break away to sea, entering the Royal Navy in 1803.
During the Napoleonic wars Maconochie served in the West Indies under Admiral Sir Alexander Cochrane [q.v.].
Promoted lieutenant in the brig Grasshopper , he was driven ashore on the Helder in December 1811.
He was imprisoned at Verdun from 1811 until his release in 1814.
Rejoining the fleet, he was promoted to commander but was soon paid off.
In 1815 he was placed on the reserve list and returned to Edinburgh.
He was retired with the rank of captain in 1855.
In Edinburgh he published his first pamphlet,Considerations on the Propriety of Establishing a Colony on one of the Sandwich Islands , in 1816.
In 1818 he published his longest work, a study of the Pacific, which he had never visited:A Summary View of the Statistics and Existing Commerce of the Principal Shores of the Pacific Ocean .
As farming in North Queensferry, Fife, proved unprofitable, he moved to London in 1828.
At the inaugural meeting of the Geographical Society on 16 July 1830, he was appointed its secretary, and on 16 November 1833 the first professor of geography in the University of London.
He resigned in 1836 to accompany Sir John Franklin [q.v.]to Van Dieman's Land as his private secretary.
Before embarking he was honoured as knight of the Royal Hanoverian Guelphic Order.
This change of career was prompted by his enthusiasm to study the Pacific.
Before he left, the Society for the Improvement of Prison Discipline asked him to report on the treatment of convicts in Van Dieman's Land.
His report, an Essay on Convict Discipline (1838), was so condemnatory of official policy that Franklin dismissed him in 1838.
He was appointed superintendent of the penal colony on Norfolk Island in 1840.
He remained there until he was dismissed in 1844.
Maconochie was the originator of the ‘mark’ system of prison discipline, which was based on the conviction that the state has a duty to reform criminals, and that positive encouragement was more effective than punitive measures.
There should be the opportunity to earn release by acquiring marks by diligence.
His methods disturbed traditionalists as insufficiently punitive.
He was dismissed by the colonial secretary, Lord Stanley (later fourteenth Earl of Derby, q.v.), despite acknowledgement that ‘his efforts appear to be rewarded by the decline of crimes of violence and outrage and by the growth of humane and kindly feeling in the minds of persons under his care.’
He returned to England in 1844 but was unemployed except for a brief tenure of the post of governor of the new prison in Birmingham in 1849–51, before dismissal.
Maconochie was a pioneer in unrelated disciplines but it was as a penal reformer that he was most influential.
His philosophy was embodied in the declaration of principles at Cincinnati in 1877, founding modern penology.
Above all, his lasting legacy was his determination to reform criminals.
In 1822 he married Mary Hutton Browne, from Bamburgh, Northumberland.
They had seven children.
Maconochie died 25 October 1860 in Morden, Surrey.
[Captain Maconochie,Norfolk Island , 1847; J. V. Barry,Alexander Maconochie of Norfolk Island , 1958; R. Gerard Ward, ‘Captain Alexander Maconochie’,Geographical Journal , vol. cxxvi, December 1960; family archives.]
G B Taylor
,Niels Edvard (1889–1957), chemical engineer, was born 25 March 1889 in Selde, Denmark, the eldest in the family of four sons and one daughter of Sigurd Harold Alfred Rambusch, medical practitioner and chief medical officer for the northern part of Jutland, and his wife Johanne Faartoft, sometime Liberal members in the Danish parliament.
He was sent away to school in Nykoøbing Mors, living with grandparents for seven years.
On leaving school he decided against entering university, preferring to study the practical side of engineering through an apprenticeship to a master blacksmith in Nykoøbing.
At the age of fifteen he moved to Copenhagen to complete his practical engineering experience, and two years later graduated as a mechanical engineer at the Copenhagen Technical College.
In 1911, following six months' military service with the Danish infantry, Rambush was invited to England by Arthur H. Lymn, who had formed a business in London to further develop and exploit commercially existing processes of gas production for industrial purposes.
After a short period Lymn took Rambush into partnership, forming the gas and chemical engineering firm of Lymn & Rambush.
During his years in London Rambush expanded his knowledge into the field of chemical processing, continuing his studies at Battersea Polytechnic under Professor J. W. Hinchley, who invited him to become a founding member of the Institution of Chemical Engineers in 1922.
In 1930 Rambush acquired British citizenship, having changed his name by deed poll from Rambusch to Rambush.
In 1918 Lymn & Rambush was taken over by the Power-Gas Corporation of Stockton-on-Tees.
Rambush was appointed chief engineer and his boundless energy and leadership earned him rapid promotion with ever greater responsibilities.
He was soon appointed chief engineer of the subsidiary company, Ashmore, Benson, Pease & Co.
Ltd., manufacturers of gas holders and iron and steelworks plant, became general manager of both companies in 1931, managing director in 1938, and in 1951 executive chairman of the Power Gas Corporation Ltd., which by then had acquired all the assets of the subsidiary company.
He continued as chairman until his death.
He travelled widely in connection with the company's business and contributed many technical papers which earned him an international reputation.
His 500-page Modern Gas Producers , which for many years was the standard work on the gasification of solid fuels in a fixed bed with a mixed blast of air and steam, was published in 1923.
In 1931 he was awarded the Moulton medal of the Institution of Chemical Engineers and in 1954 became a vice-president of the Institution.
In 1948 he received an honorary D.Sc.
from the University of Durham.
In 1911 Rambush married Mavis, daughter of John Henry Blackmore, grocer.
They had two sons, the elder of whom died at the age of nineteen, and two daughters.
Rambush died 15 May 1957 in Stockton-on-Tees.
[R. W. Rutherford in Chemical Engineer , October 1986, pp. 50–1; family archives; personal knowledge.]
David Jenkins
,Thomas Gwynn (1871–1949), poet, scholar, and writer, was born at Gwyndy Uchaf farm, Betws-yn-Rhos, Denbighshire, 10 October 1871, the eldest in the family of three sons and a daughter of Isaac Jones, farmer, and his wife Jane Roberts.
He was baptized Thomas.
By his early teens he was embarrassed by the publicity gained through the frequency with which his poems appeared in the local newspapers and resorted to using a variety of noms de plume : his Bibliography lists over ninety.
As Thomas Jones was a common name he adopted ‘Gwynn’(Gwyndy means white house) as a second Christian name.
After leaving the village school at fourteen he was employed as a junior clerk in a local estate office, but was encouraged to receive private tuition in classics and French, with a view to entering Oxford University.
A severe attack of pneumonia a few weeks before the entrance examination destroyed his university hopes, and he resigned himself to working on his father's farm.
His poems so impressed Thomas Gee, the owner and editor of the influential weekly Baner ac Amserau Cymru (Banner and Times of Wales) that he invited him to join his staff as a trainee journalist.
Towards the end of 1893 he moved to Liverpool as a freelance.
A further bout of pneumonia during 1897, followed by depression, forced him to return home to rejoin Y Faner as a sub-editor, while also contributing to the recently founded North Wales Times .
Once more, as in his youth, he was befriended by the Revd Robert Ambrose Jones (‘Emrys ap Iwan’), a well-known literary critic and political commentator, who stimulated his interest in European languages and literature.
In 1898 he moved to Caernarfon and joined the Herald group of newspapers, where a sympathetic editor, Daniel Rees, introduced him to Italian.
At the National Eisteddfod of Wales in 1902, he won the premier literary award (the chair) for an ode composed in the traditional strict metres on ‘Ymadawiad Arthur’(The Passing of Arthur) which established him as the precursor of a new era in Welsh literature.
Two years later, as joint secretary of the Celtic congress held in Caernarfon, he acquired a deep and fruitful interest in both Irish and Breton literatures which inspired some of his more notable odes, for example‘Tir-na-nÓg’, ‘Broséliàwnd’, ‘Anatiomaros’, and ‘Argoed’.
Endowed, as he was, with a compelling creative genius, he drove himself with little regard for his own health and welfare, contributing (over and above his journalistic duties) serial novels, literary and political commentaries, and poems to newspapers, and an increasing flow of scholarly articles and essays to monthly and quarterly journals.
He suffered another attack of pneumonia and, on medical advice, he spent the winter of 1905–6 in Egypt, where he made a good recovery.
At the National Eisteddfod held in the Albert Hall in 1909 he was again awarded the chair for an outstanding awdl (ode) on ‘Gwlad y Bryniau’(The Land of the Hills), and soon after his return home he was appointed a cataloguer at the newly founded National Library of Wales.
During the next four years he wrote two substantial biographies which were highly acclaimed, those of his mentor Emrys ap Iwan , and Thomas Gee , the most influential publisher in Wales during the nineteenth century and a great friend and supporter of the young David Lloyd George (later Earl Lloyd-George of Dwyfor).
He contributed a great deal to the development of Welsh drama with both original plays and translations, while his book on Welsh Folklore and Folk-Custom (1930, revised edn. 1979) was the fruit of a lifelong study of the subject.
In 1913 he became reader in Welsh literature at the University College of Wales at Aberystwyth, and was awarded an MA.
Six years later he was promoted to the Gregynog chair of Welsh literature, from which he retired in 1937.
In that year he was appointed CBE, and received the degree of honorary D.Litt. from both the universities of Wales and Ireland.
Gwynn Jones received many other honours but none gave him greater pleasure than the publication of a selection of his poems,Detholiad o Ganiadau , by the Gregynog Press in 1926, and the de luxe edition, issued in 1932–7 by Hughes & Son, Wrexham, of six volumes of selected poems and essays.
Even so, in his mid-sixties and preparing to retire, he created more than a literary stir with the publication of a series of poems in vers libre on contemporary themes (Fascism, war, pacifism) which, in 1944, were published in a volume entitled Y Dwymyn (The Fever)(2nd edn. 1972).
In 1899 he married Margaret Jane (‘Megan’)(died 1963), daughter of Thomas Davies, butcher of Denbigh.
They had one daughter and two sons.
Thomas Gwynn Jones died in Aberystwyth 7 March 1949 and was buried in the town's public cemetery.
[David Jenkins,Cofiant T. Gwynn Jones , 1973; W. Beynon Davies,Thomas Gwynn Jones , 1970; D. Hywel E. Roberts (ed.),
Llyfryddiaeth Thomas Gwynn Jones: Bibliography , 1981.]
David I Harvie
,John Stewart (1856–1920), metallurgical chemist, was born 9 December 1856 at 12 Norfolk Street, Hutchesontown, Glasgow, one of six sons and a daughter (two other sons died in infancy) of Robert McArthur (spelled thus on the birth certificate), tailor, of Glasgow, and his wife Elizabeth Stewart.
He left school at fourteen and became an apprentice with the Tharsis Sulphur and Copper Company — part of the great Glasgow international chemical empire generated by the Tennant family.
In the evenings he studied metallurgy and mathematics until the age of twenty-two.
With two physicians, William Forrest and Robert Wardrop Forrest, he formed a private research syndicate, seeking improved methods of recovering gold from complex ores.
In 1886 another Tennant subsidiary in Glasgow, the Cassel Gold Extracting Company, collapsed following a scandal involving H. R. Cassel, its American founder, and MacArthur was called upon to restructure the company.
This he did successfully, first moving its works from Gray's Inn Road, London, to Glasgow.
He based the restructuring on his own researches rather than Cassel's discredited process.
Between 1886 and 1888 MacArthur and the Forrests registered patents in Britain covering a new process of gold and silver recovery, based on dissolving crushed ore in potassium cyanide solution and subsequent filtration through metallic zinc.
The process was assigned to the Cassel Company, international patents obtained, and MacArthur began to train young chemists and dispatch them with plant to virtually every gold-producing country.
The world's gold-mining industry was stagnating, refining only about 45 per cent of metal from complex ores: the new process enabled 98 per cent extraction, and was hailed as the saviour of the industry.
However, in 1896 the South African mining bureaucracy took MacArthur through their courts to prove an esoteric weakness in the patent, which allowed them to avoid royalty payments to the man who had rejuvenated their industry.
A century later, however, MacArthur was still given credit in South Africa for his contribution to that country's economy.
He continued to introduce his process throughout the world, travelling abroad extensively.
He also took an interest in cyanide production and in refining processes for copper and antimony.
In 1911 he concentrated on radium refining on an industrial scale, initially in Runcorn in Cheshire, and from 1915 until his death, in Balloch on Loch Lomond.
This pioneering, dangerous, and chemically intensive work was as significant as that on gold, most work on radium being at that time confined to the laboratory.
MacArthur was concerned to apply science for the benefit of industry and humanity, but was unwilling to endure the politics of international business.
He was the first gold medal winner (1902) of the Institution of Mining and Metallurgy, his obituary in Nature noting: ‘It is given to few men to discover a process which has had such a far-reaching effect in almost every branch of civilised life.’
MacArthur married in October 1888 Agnes Ann, daughter of William Marshall, woollen merchant, of Glasgow.
They had one son, John Stewart MacArthur, cleric.
MacArthur died 16 March 1920 in Pollokshields, Glasgow.
[Private papers; business records.]
Michael C W Hunter
,Daniel (1640–1730), physician, natural philosopher, and colonial adventurer, was born in 1640, the son of Daniel Coxe, gentleman, of Stoke Newington, Middlesex.
He matriculated at Jesus College, Cambridge, in 1659, becoming a scholar in 1661.
Even before this, however, he had become involved with Robert Boyle [q.v.]and the group of natural philosophers active in Oxford in the late 1650s, and Coxe's close links with Boyle continued after the Restoration.
On 22 March 1665 Coxe was elected a fellow of the Royal Society, in which he played an active role for the rest of the 1660s and a slightly less active one in the 1670s.
His interest was particularly in chemical investigations; he devoted special attention to the chemical analysis of vegetable substances, his findings on which were published in three articles in Philosophical Transactions in 1674.
These studies were evidently intended to form part of a grandiose ‘history of vegetables’, of which he presented a prospectus to the society in 1668, but which never materialized.
In the 1660s and 1670s Coxe established a successful medical practice in London.
He was awarded the degree of MD per literas regias at Cambridge in 1669, and became an honorary fellow of the London College of Physicians in 1680.
In 1669 he participated in the pamphlet war between physicians and apothecaries by publishing A Discourse, wherein The Interest of the Patient in Reference to Physick and Physicians is soberly debated ; this combined an attack on the apothecaries with a vindication of the role of an experimentally active physician which he exemplified.
Coxe's chief claim to retrospective fame was his activity as a colonial adventurer: indeed, Daniel Defoe [q.v.]in his Essay on Projects (1697) was to single out Coxe, along with William Penn [q.v.]and Anthony Ashley Cooper, first Earl of Shaftesbury [q.v.], in this connection.
In the mid-1680s Coxe began to acquire property in West New Jersey, and in 1687 he purchased the proprietary rights of the province from the heirs to Edward Byllynge.
Thereafter he bought more land, his holding in the area ultimately totalling a million acres; he also invested large sums in developing local fisheries and industries, and he encouraged the exploration and exploitation of the hinterland towards the Great Lakes.
In 1692, however, he sold the bulk of his holdings and the right of proprietorship to a syndicate of forty-eight London merchants, the West New Jersey Society, for £9,800.
By this time Coxe had shifted his interests further south to the province of ‘Carolana’— covering the present North and South Carolina, Georgia, Florida, and Louisiana — which had been granted by Charles I to Sir Robert Heath [q.v.], attorney-general, in 1629.
Coxe acquired the title in the 1690s, and at the end of that decade he attempted to orchestrate settlement in the area in opposition to the parallel activities of the French.
In 1698 he equipped two ships to explore the Mississippi; he also tried to encourage a Huguenot settlement on the Gulf of Mexico, and to float a joint-stock company to exploit Florida.
These various schemes proved problematic, however, and little came of Coxe's ambitions, though they were briefly the subject of government interest in 1719, when the question arose of the English title to this part of America.
Coxe's role in exploiting this area was recounted — together with a topographical account of somewhat questionable reliability — in A Description of the English Province of Carolana , published in 1722 by his son, also Daniel Coxe.
In 1671 Coxe had married Rebecca, daughter of John Coldman, a London alderman.
Baptized on 31 August 1673, the younger Daniel Coxe emigrated to America at the age of twenty-eight and thereafter took a prominent role in the affairs of West New Jersey.
The elder Coxe died 19 January 1730; at that point he retained the title to Carolana, which his descendants surrendered to the British government in return for land in the colony of New York in 1769.
[G. D. Scull, ‘A Biographical Notice of Dr Daniel Coxe, of London’,Pennsylvania Magazine of History and Biography , vol. vii, 1883; A. G. Zimmerman, ‘Daniel Coxe and the New Mediterranean Sea Company’, ibid., vol. lxxvi, 1952; V. W. Crane,The Southern Frontie r, 1670–1732 , 1928; Michael Hunter,The Royal Society and its Fellows 1660–1700 , 1982; Royal Society Boyle Letters, vol. ii, 52–79, Classified Papers X(1)8.]
Eric Midwinter
,Maurice William (1895–1956), cricketer, was born at 28 Warleigh Road, Preston, Brighton, 30 May 1895, the eldest in the family of three sons and seven daughters of Frederick William Tate, professional cricketer, and his wife Gertrude Beach of Preston, Brighton.
He was educated at Belvedere School, Hayward's Heath, and, encouraged by his father, he had a trial for Sussex when he was fifteen.
He played for Sussex from 1912 to 1937, during which period he took 2,211 wickets for Sussex at an individual cost of 17.41 runs.
No mean bat, he also scored just over 17,000 runs for the county, and did the double of a hundred wickets and a thousand runs seven times (nine times counting all cricket).
In all first-class cricket he had 2,784 victims (average 18.16), taking a hundred wickets in no less than fourteen seasons, including three times when he captured more than 200 wickets.
With over 21,000 runs in all cricket, these figures made Maurice Tate one of only nine all-rounders (by 1990) to have accomplished the feat of 20,000 runs and 2,000 wickets.
It was as a bowler that he was chosen to play for England, making his début in 1924, and thereafter winning 39 caps.
He took 155 wickets for England at an average of 26.16, his best series being during the MCC tour of Australia in 1924–5 when he took 38 wickets, at that time a record for England versus Australia.
Under the influence of the Sussex and England captain, A. E. R. Gilligan, Tate had early developed into a fast medium bowler, able to control deceptive swerve and telling accuracy over exacting periods.
His briskness of pace off the pitch became legendary, and he is said to have been the first bowler deliberately to have deployed the seam in his technique.
He is generally regarded as one of the best two or three fast medium bowlers in English annals.
‘Chubby’ Tate, wholehearted and cheerful, was, with his huge grin and massive feet, the darling of the sports cartoonists.
On finishing his first-class career, Tate became an amiable landlord of several Sussex hostelries, coached at Tonbridge School, and was commissioned during World War II.
In 1921 he married Kathleen Miriam, the daughter of Alfred Charles Freeman, painter artist, of Brighton.
They had twin daughters and two sons.
Tate died in Wadhurst, Sussex, 18 May 1956.
[Wisden Cricketers' Almanack s; Lord's library.]
T S Dorsch
,James (1763–1833), barrister-at-law, was born 10 June 1763 in Woodside, Wreay, Carlisle, the fourth child and fourth of the eight sons (one of whom died shortly after birth) and one daughter of John Losh, gentleman, of Woodside, and his wife Catherine, daughter of John Liddell of Moorhouse, Burgh-by-Sands, Cumberland.
Educated privately, he went to Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1782, and graduated BA in 1786.
He then entered himself at Lincoln's Inn, and, after being called to the bar in 1789, began to practise on the northern circuit.
On a visit to Paris in 1792, Losh narrowly escaped from the city during the September massacres, possibly owing his escape to the influence of Jean Paul Marat, who had practised as a veterinary surgeon in Newcastle.
Ill health later led him to spend some time in the Bristol area, where he cemented his friendship with William Wordsworth [q.v.], whom he met in 1795 at a gathering of radical friends (who included George Dyer, William Frend, William Godwin, and John Horne Tooke, qq.v.).
He also became a friend of Samuel Taylor Coleridge and Robert Southey [qq.v.].
In 1799 he settled as a barrister in Newcastle upon Tyne, rapidly acquiring an enviable reputation as a man of strict integrity and sound judgement, whether in the courts or as an arbitrator in industrial disputes.
As a Unitarian he was debarred from holding civic appointments or public office, but, following the repeal of the Test and Corporation Acts in 1828, for the annulment of which he had campaigned, the corporation of Newcastle in 1832 invested him with the highest judicial function in their gift, the recordership, and shortly afterwards with the honorary freedom of the city.
Losh was an active reformer and philanthropist.
Among the causes which he espoused with fervour were the abolition of the slave trade, Catholic emancipation together with total religious freedom, and, above all, parliamentary reform.
A friend of both Charles (later second Earl) Grey and Henry Brougham [qq.v.], he used his influence in the northern counties to speed the passing of the Reform Bill.
In the smaller world of Newcastle Losh did valuable work towards the relief of indigence and the betterment of social conditions and educational standards; he was a leading figure in the improvement of services in the infirmary and the fever hospital, and the establishment of Sunday schools, infant and secondary schools, and mechanics' institutes.
Always forward-looking, and abreast of industrial developments, he was a prime mover, as chairman of the directors, in the construction of the Newcastle–Carlisle railway.
Very widely read and a lover of drama and music, he was for some thirty years one of the most influential members of the famous Literary and Philosophical Society of Newcastle upon Tyne.
He published an edition of Areopagitica (1791) by John Milton [q.v.], and a translation of Benjamin Constant's Observations on the Strength of the Government in France (1797), and some of his reforming speeches were printed.
He had a fine presence and was a forceful speaker.
He was a devoted family man, and a friend to men of all religious creeds and political persuasions.
In 1798 Losh married Cecilia, daughter of the Revd Roger Baldwin of Aldingham, Lancashire.
They had five sons and three daughters.
Losh died in Greta Bridge, Yorkshire, 23 September 1833.
[Edward Hughes (ed.),
The Diaries and Correspondence of James Losh , 2 vols., 1962, 1963; Henry Lonsdale,The Worthies of Cumberland , vol. iv, 1873; Richard Welford,Men of Mark ‘twixt Tyne and Tweed , vol. iii, 1895; Cumbria Record Office, Carlisle.]
K E L Simmons
,Edward Allworthy (1900–1978), naturalist and author, was born in Northern Ireland at Corlea, Lowwood, Belfast, 8 October 1900, the younger child and only son of Hamilton Armstrong, manufacturer's agent, and his wife Mary Elizabeth Susan, daughter of Dr Samuel W. Allworthy.
He was educated at the Royal Belfast Institution and then at Queen's University, Belfast, studying science in his first year then switching to philosophy.
He gained a BA (honours) in 1921.
Called to a religious vocation, he attended Ridley Hall Theological College, Cambridge, in 1921–3, being ordained deacon in 1923 and priest in 1924.
Spells as a curate in Doncaster and Ipswich were followed by three years as chaplain at St Andrew's in Kowloon, 1929–31, during which he studied Chinese at Hong Kong University.
He then spent eleven years in Leeds, first as curate at St Peter's (1932–8), during which he obtained an MA in the history and philosophy of religion and in Chinese studies at Leeds University, then as vicar of St Matthew's, Holbeck.
In 1943 he returned to Cambridge as vicar of St Mark's, Newnham, in which post he remained until his retirement in 1966.
Armstrong's career in the Anglican Church was unexceptional and it was in other fields that this remarkable man achieved international distinction, most notably as a writer and an original student (as observer and interpreter) of bird behaviour — in which field he produced a huge output of highly influential articles, books, and scientific papers.
He had an extraordinary, polymathic mind, the breadth of his interests embracing folklore, anthropology, theology, philosophy, psychology, foreign languages, and Shakespearian criticism, as well as ornithology.
His Christian delight in nature gave him ‘a sense of wonder in creation’, an important theme in his theology, his religious faith and a great love of the beauty of nature being basic to his character.
Proud of being a member of a long line of parson–naturalists stretching back to John Ray and Gilbert White [qq.v.], he saw his contributions to science as an extension of his work as a priest.
Armstrong's interest in and love of birds began during his childhood in Northern Ireland and found their first mature expression in his prize-winning book Birds of the Grey Wind (1940), as much a contribution to literature as to natural history.
What has been called his ‘exact and scientific attitude to bird-life’ then gave rise to a series of important books on birds —Bird Display (1942) and its sequel Bird Display and Behaviour (1947),The Wren (1955),The Folklore of Birds (1958),A Study of Bird Song (1963), and The Life and Lore of Birds (1975)— as well as a number of shorter or more popular works.
Two other books —Shakespeare's Imagination (1946) and St. Francis: Nature Mystic (1973)— also drew upon his ornithological knowledge, making each the definitive contribution in its field.
In recognition of his work, he received an honorary MA from Cambridge in 1952, a special Union gold medal of the British Ornithologists' Union in 1959, and the Stamford Raffles award of the Zoological Society of London in 1966.
In 1940 Armstrong married Eunice Joan, daughter of the Revd Frank Uttley, Methodist minister.
They had two sons.
His last years were marred by debilitating illness but, a compulsive worker, he went on writing until the end, dying at his home in Cambridge 19 December 1978.
[Information from Dr P. H. Armstrong (son); W. H. Thorpe in Ibis , vol. cxxi, 1979, pp. 369–73, and in British Birds , vol. lxxii, pp. 219–21; Ralph S. Palmer in Auk , vol. xcvii, pp. 922–3; personal knowledge.]
H G Roseveare
, Sir John (1622–1687), chancellor of the Exchequer, was born in July 1622 in Battlesden, Bedfordshire, the second but eldest surviving son of William Duncombe of Battlesden, gentleman, and his wife Elizabeth, daughter of Sir John Poyntz of South Ockenden, Essex.
Educated at Eton,c .1634–8, he was briefly enrolled at Christ's College, Cambridge, but between 1641 and 1646 was abroad, registering at Leyden University in 1643.
On his return he faced a conflict of loyalties.
His father actively supported the parliamentarian cause in the English civil war but John Duncombe's sympathies were Royalist and his marriage, on 12 July 1646, to Elizabeth, daughter of a former chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, Sir Humphrey May [q.v.], allied him to one of the Stuarts' most loyal families of servants.
In 1648 a knighthood was conferred upon Duncombe and in 1655, upon his father's death, he succeeded to his Bedfordshire estates.
Duncombe entered Parliament in 1660 as member for Bury St Edmunds, which he represented until 1678.
Active in committees and a frequent speaker, he was given office as a commissioner of the Ordnance Office in May 1664.
The appointment, held until 1670, associated him with an energetic department and Duncombe here acquired a modest reputation for administrative skills.
However, in May 1667 the political world was surprised by Duncombe's selection as member of a powerful Treasury commission and elevation to the Privy Council.
Eclipsed by more dynamic colleagues, such as Anthony Ashley Cooper (first Baron Ashley and later first Earl of Shaftesbury), Sir Thomas Clifford (later first Baron Clifford of Chudleigh), and Sir William Coventry [qq.v.],
Duncombe was nevertheless recognized by Samuel Pepys [q.v.]as a painstaking, if pompous, public servant of the kind he could respect.
His personal weaknesses and his deference to Sir William Coventry were satirized by George Villiers, second Duke of Buckingham [q.v.], in a play,The Country Gentleman (1669), but unlike Coventry he survived the humiliation and continued to serve Charles II as a ministerial spokesman on financial legislation.
In November 1672 he succeeded Lord Ashley as chancellor of the Exchequer.
This was still a minor office with little independent authority, and Duncombe continued to play second fiddle to the successive lords treasurer with whom he served.
It was a role to which he seemed well suited, for he displayed little originality of mind and almost no strong convictions — except in defence of the Church of England.
On the key religious policies of this first age of half-tolerated dissent Duncombe took a consistently conservative stance, sharing Anglican prejudices against Nonconformists and Roman Catholics alike.
He helped to frame much of the persecuting legislation of the reign, such as the Conventicle Acts of 1664 and 1670.
However, it was on financial policies that he chose to oppose his senior colleague, the lord treasurer Thomas Osborne, first Earl of Danby [q.v.], and in May 1676 he was dismissed, losing his pension in 1678 and his place in the council in 1679.
He died in Battlesden 4 March 1687 and was succeeded in his estates by his son William (c .1647–1704) whose undistinguished career in Parliament and administration was a paler shadow of his own.
There were also six other children.
[B. D. Henning,The House of Commons 1660–1690 , 1983; J. C. Sainty (ed.),
Treasury Officials, 1660–1870: Office Holders in Modern Britain , 1972; S. B. Baxter,The Development of the Treasury, 1660–1702 , 1957; H. C. Tomlinson,Guns and Government: the Ordnance Office under the Later Stuarts , 1979.]
Marius Goring
,Arthur (1875–1960), actor-manager, was born in London 21 January 1875, the eldest in the family of four sons and one daughter of Thomas Arthur Smith, partner in Wontner, Smith & Company, stocktakers in the City of London, and his wife Emily Mary, daughter of Thomas Taylor Wontner, stocktaker.
He was educated at the North London Collegiate School.
His early life was regulated by strict discipline, his only contact with art being the family orchestra, to which each member contributed by playing a different instrument.
His father intended him to follow his trade but, to his chagrin, his son chose to become an actor, supported by the odd pound from his mother.
His father gave him nothing.
Giving up the family name, he called himself Arthur Wontner and started his career in the theatre in Ryde, Isle of Wight, 18 April 1897, in The Sorrows of Satan .
No manager or salary were recorded but he managed on his mother's contributions and joined Miss Sarah Thorne at the Theatre Royal, Margate, where he played thirty leading parts in eight months.
He opened in London in 1898 in The Three Musketeers , and then toured for four years, adding fifty new parts to the first thirty.
He was engaged by (Sir) Herbert Beerbohm Tree [q.v.]to act in Australia, where he played in The Eternal City , 1903–5, and returned to London with 100 parts ready for performance.
The first was Raffles (1906).
He moved away from mere professionalism towards the art of a leading man in plays which required first-rate acting, performing in plays by Shakespeare, Oscar Wilde, H. G. Granville-Barker, Sir J. M. Barrie [qq.v.], and Ibsen.
In 1929 he went into management with Lady Mary Wyndham [q.v.]and then on his own.
By his retirement in 1955 he had performed in over 200 plays.
He also pursued a career in radio, television, and films, and he became famous in the role of Sherlock Holmes.
His theatrical power emerges from the portrait by Alfred Cope at the Garrick Club of Wontner as Joseph Fouché in the Italian play,Napoleon .
Wontner was twice married.
In 1903 he married Rosecleer Alice Amelia Blanche from Totnes, Devon, whom he met on the voyage to Australia.
Her stage name was Rose Pendennis and she was the daughter of Henry Alfred Kingwell, who had an export business in New Zealand.
They had two sons and one daughter.
Rose died in 1943, and in 1947 he married Florence Eileen, daughter of Thomas Lainsbury, businessman.
Wontner died 10 July 1960 at his home, 177 Holland Park Avenue, London.
[John Parker (ed.),
Who's Who in the Theatre , 11th edn., 1952;The Times , 12 July 1960; private information from Sir Hugh Wontner (son); personal knowledge.]
K Middlemas
,John (1879–1923), revolutionary, Marxist teacher, and Scottish nationalist, was born in Pollokshaws 14 August 1879.
He was the sixth child of working-class parents, Daniel Maclean, crofter and later potter, and his wife Annie McPhee, the grandson on one side of crofters evicted from Mull in the Highland clearances, on the other of migrants to industrial Strathclyde.
After his father's early death, he was brought up by his mother and educated locally and at Glasgow University.
Convinced that education was the prime path to political formation, he became a schoolmaster and, although his socialism made it hard to find a place, he was appointed to one by the Govan school board.
The political movements of the 1900s in the Glasgow region had their own peculiarities but also reflected national divisions.
Living in the most aggressively proletarian city in Britain, Maclean read Marx, espoused the class struggle, joined the Social Democratic Federation in 1903, and soon began to write articles for its broadsheet Justice .
He chose vanguard revolutionary activity rather than the programmatic socialism of the Independent Labour Party, and began both to preach a doctrine of strikes to break the capitalist system, and to teach the Marxism of Das Kapital at open classes in Glasgow halls.
James Maxton [q.v.], later ILP leader, became one of his converts; and by 1914 he was instructing the largest economic classes in Europe.
He later helped to found the Scottish Labour College in 1918.
Maclean was a teacher and prophet rather than a party leader.
Few disciples followed him, his purist rigour being unsuited to compromise or the political infighting which wracked the sectarian Left.
But World War I gave him the chance to stand on internationalist ground with an uncompromising fervour and personal courage that gave him a status denied to most of the others, whose work lay in the factories and in the shop stewards' movement.
He campaigned against the war itself and against military and industrial conscription, and helped to organize the early rent strikes in 1915–16.
His pacifism was couched in the violent language of subversion and revolution, and long before 1917 he began to look for a distinctive Scottish way out of the war.
This caused his dismissal by the school board and disfavour from the Clyde workers committee; indeed, his closest political contacts before the Russian revolution were with followers of Trotsky.
All the Glasgow Left groups suffered from the countermeasures introduced during 1916 by the government of H. H. Asquith (later Earl of Oxford and Asquith).
But Maclean made no attempt to hide his political subversion.
He was arrested and tried for the first time in April 1916.
A revolutionary outburst from the dock may have contributed to his three-year sentence.
In prison he acquired heroic status, but the conditions of Calton gaol began to undermine his health, and he was absent through the crucial period in 1916 when David Lloyd George (later Earl Lloyd-George of Dwyfor) re-established government authority over munitions production, and when the Labour Party was incorporated in the war effort.
After the February revolution in Russia, demonstrations by the Glasgow shop stewards indicated to the authorities that Maclean was more of a risk in prison than outside.
He was released in June 1916 but, instead of campaigning for negotiated peace, argued (now to classes of 1,500 students) that the revolutionary crux had arrived.
His advocacy of soldiers' and workers' councils put him wholly at variance with the Labour movement as it regrouped on a parliamentary socialist programme late in 1917; but it won him from Lenin and Litvinov the title of first Bolshevik consul for Britain, based in Scotland.
For a few months he stood on a European par with Adler and Liebknecht and tried to take responsibility for Russians interned after the Brest–Litovsk peace.
But any chance that the British (or Scottish) Communist Party would form around him was lost when he was again arrested in April 1918 and sentenced to five years with hard labour.
Imprisonment has to be seen in the context of the German breakthrough in France, and fears about what would happen in Glasgow on May day 1918; it removed him from influence, even though he stood as candidate for the Gorbals in Glasgow in the 1918 election and attracted 7,436 votes against G. N. Barnes [q.v.].
Released after the armistice, but with health broken by hunger strikes, prone to paranoiac suspicions, and deserted by most of his former colleagues, Maclean fought two last campaigns: in 1919 to prevent allied counter-revolution in the Soviet Union — in concert with Sinn Fein— and in 1920 to create a distinctive Scottish Communist Party.
He lost against the coalition of Marxist groups which, with Lenin's approval, formed the Communist Party of Great Britain.
He then put his last efforts into a Scottish Workers' Republican Party and, after further imprisonment, reverted to a sort of nationalistic anarchism.
He was reviled by the Bolshevized CPGB, the ILP, and the Labour Party.
Maclean was never a politician and fell foul of those on the left who were, who used and then discarded him.
His legacy lies in his teaching, and his belief that a Scottish revolutionary internationalism could be sustained within the world communist movement.
He married Agnes Wood, a nurse, in 1909.
She was the daughter of James Wood, plasterer, and his wife Elizabeth Stothard.
The Macleans had two daughters.
He died of pneumonia in Glasgow 29 November 1923.
[Maclean's private papers in the National Library of Scotland; B. J. Ripley and J. McHugh,John Maclean , 1989; W. Kendall,The Revolutionary Movement in Britain 1900–21 , 1969; interviews with contemporaries.]
Gillian Avery
,Mary Louisa (1839–1921), novelist and children's writer, was born 29 May 1839 in Rotterdam, Holland, the eldest daughter and second child in the family of three sons and three daughters of Charles Augustus Stewart and his wife Agnes Janet, daughter of John Wilson of Transy, Fife.
Her father (about whose parentage there is some mystery) had given up his army commission and gone into business.
This may account for his daughter's distancing herself in her books from the commercial classes and her somewhat self-conscious identification with the upper classes.
From 1841 her childhood was spent near the centre of Manchester, though her father, who became a senior partner in his Manchester shipping firm, prospered and was in 1855 able to move to the far more select area of Whalley Range.
She was educated mostly at home, though there was a brief unhappy experience at a Swiss boarding-school, and in adolescence she attended the private classes of the Revd William Gaskell [q.v.], the Gaskells being near neighbours of the Stewarts in Rusholme.
In 1861 she married Captain Richard Molesworth of the Royal Dragoons, the son of Anthony Oliver Molesworth, a captain in the Royal Artillery.
Richard Molesworth's social rank (he was nephew of the seventh Viscount Molesworth) did not compensate in her mother's eyes for the dangers of marrying a man with a violent temper (supposedly caused by a head wound incurred in the Crimean war).
There is evidence that the young wife soon realized the truth of this, for there are references in the early adult novels to incompatible marriages and domineering husbands.
There was the added disadvantage that he was irresponsible and financially inept.
Richard Molesworth retired from the regular army in 1864 with the rank of major, and with financial help from his father-in-law rented Tabley Grange in Cheshire.
Though the five years they spent here were to be ultimately clouded by the death of first their eldest daughter in 1869 and then a few months later their infant son, it was probably the happiest period in their marriage, and they enjoyed social life with the local landowning gentry.
They had three daughters and two sons who survived into adult life.
When the marriage ended in legal separation in 1879 they were living in Caen.
Mrs Molesworth spent the next four years in France and Germany, but returned to England permanently in 1883.
Lover and Husband was published in 1870, the first of four three-volume novels for adults written under the name of ‘Ennis Graham’.
Her first children's book,Tell Me a Story , which included an account of her daughter's death, was published (still under the name of ‘Ennis Graham’) in 1875, with drawings by Walter Crane [q.v.], who was to illustrate many of her books.
The use of barely disguised episodes from the lives of children that she knew, and from her own childhood, was to characterize her books.
She had limited capacity for invention, and her fairy stories are low on enchantment, but she had unusual talent for entering into a child's feelings.
Her second children's book,Carrots — Just a Little Boy (1876), for instance, which depicted her own family and included an irascible father, was written with great sympathy from the point of view of a six-year-old.
Her own children sometimes suffered from their faults being castigated in their mother's books, for, though tender towards young children and deeply understanding of their need for security, she could be severe towards social failings, such as discontent and ill temper in their elder siblings.
She seems to have been a stern mother (she was always a deeply reserved woman) who mellowed when she became a grandmother.
After the success of Carrots and of The Cuckoo Clock the following year, which at once established her as a leading writer for children, she was to write prolifically, sometimes, as in the 1880s and early 1890s, completing seven books in a year.
She wrote over one hundred books.
They were for all ages, from the very young to the schoolroom young lady; some might even be classed as adult fiction, though they were never again to be published as such.
The plots are slight and turn on small everyday incidents, but the reader is absorbed in the background, and lives the experiences of her child characters.
Algernon C. Swinburne [q.v.], to whom she sent many of her books as they appeared, was one of her greatest admirers.
However, her books, though absorbing to the adult reader, are difficult to revive for the young of another generation because of their preoccupation (even greater than that of her female contemporaries) with social status.
She died in her flat in Sloane Street, London, 20 July 1921 and was buried in Brompton cemetery.
[Roger Lancelyn Green,Mrs Molesworth , 1961; unpublished material in the possession of the Lancelyn Green family.]
Garry Alder
,Charles (1800–1853), Asian traveller, archaeologist, and numismatist, was born James Lewis in Aldermanbury, Middlesex, 16 February 1800, the eldest child of George Lewis, oil dealer, of 58 Aldermanbury, and his wife Mary, daughter of Thomas and Elizabeth Hopcraft of Croughton, Northamptonshire.
Nothing is known of his education and early years.
He served briefly in the King's 24th Regiment of Foot and then enlisted 12 October 1821 as a private soldier in the East India Company's infantry, later transferring to the Bengal European Artillery.
He was present at the siege of Bharatpur in 1826 but deserted in early July 1827 in Agra.
He travelled under his new name to Afghanistan and embarked on a decade of pioneering travel and antiquarian investigation.
During this period he collected well over 80,000 ancient coins and other objects which first provided a chronology of the dynasties of central Asia in the unknown centuries after the death of Alexander the Great.
From 1834 Masson published news of his discoveries in the Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal .
The following year he was recruited by the East India Company as news writer in Afghanistan, in return for a free pardon for his desertion and a small allowance.
Masson became bitterly critical of Britain's Afghan policy in the years before the Afghan war.
He left Afghanistan in 1838 and during the ensuing British invasion remained in Sind, writing up his researches and travels for publication in London (Ariana Antiqua , 1841, and Narrative of Various Journeys , 3 vols., 1842).
In attempting to return to Afghanistan in 1840, he became accidentally embroiled in the Baluchistan revolt and was imprisoned by the British authorities without either charge or good reason (described in Narrative of a Journey to Kalat , 1842).
Masson returned to England in 1842, embittered and short of money, although from 1845 he received a small pension from the East India Company.
He published a book of verse and some contributions to learned journals, but his efforts to obtain financial compensation, to publish an illustrated magnum opus about his Afghan years, to return to Afghanistan, and even to complete a half-finished novel all came to nothing.
Masson was the pioneer of Afghan archaeology and numismatics, although he lacked the knowledge fully to interpret his discoveries.
As an accurate observer of, and extensive traveller in, a virtually unknown land he was unrivalled.
In February 1844 he married eighteen-year-old Mary Anne, daughter of John Kilby, farmer.
Masson died in Lower Edmonton 5 November 1853 and his wife followed two years later, leaving two children.
[E. Johnston,Catalogue of Manuscripts in European Languages , vol. ii, part 2, 1937; critical bibliography in reprint of Charles Masson,Narrative of Various Journeys , vol. i, Graz, 1975; Gordon Whitteridge,Charles Masson of Afghanistan , 1986; private and official papers in the India Office Library and Records.]
George W Carpenter
,William Barber (1816–1887), mechanical and civil engineer, was born in Everton 1 July 1816, the second son of the Revd Robert Peddie Buddicom of St George's in Everton, later principal of St Bees College.
He was educated at home and in 1831 was apprenticed to Martin, Dixon & Co. of Liverpool.
In 1836 he was appointed resident engineer, under Edward Woods and Henry Booth [q.v.], of the Liverpool–Newton Bridge section of the Liverpool and Manchester Railway, with responsibility for the maintenance of the permanent way, bridges, stations, and the winding engines for the steeply graded tunnel sections at Edge Hill, as well as for the replacement of the original rails which were far too light to carry heavy traffic.
In 1840 he became locomotive superintendent of the Grand Junction Railway (Birmingham–Warrington) where he introduced to locomotive drivers a system of premiums for economies in fuel and oil, which enabled working expenses to be reduced considerably.
He was involved with Alexander Allan, the works manager at Liverpool, in rebuilding existing inside-cylinder locomotives, the crank axles of which frequently fractured, with outside-cylinder drive.
This was the origin of the ‘Crewe’ locomotive type, which was built on a large scale after the transfer of the GJR works to Crewe, in the planning of which Buddicom was deeply involved.
In 1842 Buddicom went to France to work on the Paris–Rouen railway, which opened in 1843, and was subsequently extended to Le Havre.
During the revolutionary period in France, following the fall of Louis Philippe in 1848, Buddicom struggled valiantly to keep the railway in operation despite considerable physical danger to himself and to his family.
He also had the confidence of the Banque de France, which deferred settlement of major outstanding bills.
In addition to building contract locomotives and rolling stock at the Sotteville workshops in Rouen, which employed some 2,000 men, Buddicom also carried out similar construction for the Orléans–Tours and Amiens–Boulogne railways, forerunners of the Paris–Orléans and Nord railway systems.
In 1849 a second works was built at Bordeaux-La Bastide to meet the locomotive and rolling-stock requirements of the Midi (Southern) railway.
In 1854 a contractors' consortium, in which the Belgian contractors Parent & Schaecken joined Thomas Brassey [q.v.]and Buddicom, undertook to build the Bellegarde tunnel, two-and-a-half-miles long, for the Lyon–Geneva railway, and in 1860 Buddicom and Brassey undertook the conversion of the Rouen to Dieppe railway from single to double track.
In 1863 Parent, Brassey, and Buddicom undertook to build part of the Southern railway of Italy and Buddicom joined Brassey and Charles Jones in the construction and supply of motive power and rolling stock for the Maremma railway in that country.
With the deaths of Parent and Brassey in 1870 Buddicom wound up the partnership.
After his return to England, Buddicom became a JP and high sheriff of Flintshire (1864).
In 1847 he was awarded the Legion of Honour by Louis Philippe for his services to France.
He was a member of the Institutions of Civil and Mechanical Engineers and of the Société des Ingénieurs Civils de France.
In 1845 Buddicom married Marie Jeanne, daughter of Joseph Robert Howman, of the Royal Navy.
They had three daughters and at least three sons.
Buddicom died at Penbedw Hall, near Mold, Flintshire, 4 August 1887.
[Minutes of the Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers , vol. xci, 1887–8;Engineering , vol. xliv, 12 August 1887;La Vie du Rail , Paris, 24 September 1967.]
Nigel Saul
, Sir John (c. 1341–1391), courtier and poet, was probably the son and heir of John Clanvow, a minor landowner in the Welsh borders.
In his early years John the younger saw active service abroad.
In 1364 he fought in Brittany.
In 1370 he was with Sir John Chandos [q.v.]when he fell at Lussac and subsequently with Sir Robert Knollys [q.v.]in Picardy.
In 1373–4 he accompanied John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster [q.v.], on his great chevauchée across France from Calais to Bordeaux.
In 1378, in another foray into Brittany, he was again with Gaunt when the latter launched his abortive attack on St Malo.
Between campaigns he formed attachments of a more lasting kind.
Possibly as a result of connections forged in his native county, he came into contact with Humphrey de Bohun, sixth Earl of Hereford, by whom he was retained with a life annuity of £40.
When the earl died without male issue in 1373, he was taken on as a king's knight by Edward III who, in addition to confirming the earl's grant, awarded him an annuity for life of £50.
Payment of the annuity was continued by the king's successor, Richard II, whose favour he was to enjoy for the rest of his life.
In 1381 or a little earlier he was appointed one of the group of ‘chamber knights’, who were the most trusted executants of the royal will.
His annuity was first raised to 100 marks (£66 13s. 4d.), assigned on the lordship of Haverford, and then on 20 August 1385 replaced by a grant for life to him of that lordship.
Clanvow's retention by the Crown brought him a variety of employments.
In Herefordshire he was a JP and several times a commissioner to investigate disturbances, while at court he was entrusted, among other responsibilities, with a number of diplomatic missions.
Important though these duties were, they were fairly routine in character; they did not bring Clanvow to the notice of a wider public.
What did was his espousal of unorthodox religious views.
According to the chronicler Thomas Walsingham [q.v.]he was one of a group of knights who were adherents of the ideas of John Wycliffe [q.v.].
Of the group Clanvow is the only one known to have committed his beliefs to writing.
In a tract, known from its principal theme as The Two Ways , he reflects, significantly in English, on the choice that Our Lord offers men between the pain of hell and the bliss of heaven.
There are no avowedly Wycliffite thoughts in the piece; it is not doctrinally polemical; and it eschews comment on the real presence.
But its silences may be considered suggestive of dissent: there is no mention of confession, pilgrimage, or the veneration of the saints.
Authority throughout rests on the scriptures.
Support for Wycliffite positions is therefore implicit if not entirely explicit.
Clanvow's literary activity also extended to the writing of poetry.
The Book of Cupid , his one surviving work, is a piece of sufficient merit to have been thought until the nineteenth century to have been written by his friend Geoffrey Chaucer [q.v.].
Like the latter's Parliament of Fowls , to which it is indebted, it takes the form of a dream vision incorporating a debate about the nature of love.
The two protagonists, the cuckoo and the nightingale, present a series of antithetical statements about the power of love, in which the cuckoo finally gains the edge.
The narrator himself — the subject of his poem — joins in, and offers sympathy to the defeated party.
It is an ingenious and accomplished poem.
Though it lacks the tension of Chaucer's Parliament of Fowls , it is possessed of a wry, self-mocking quality which makes it one of the most attractive works of the age.
In his final years Clanvow participated in the revival of crusading activity in Europe and north Africa.
In 1390 he took part with other English knights in a Genoese-led attack on the port of Tunis.
In the following year he was on his way to Constantinople when he died 17 October in a village in Greece.
From the subsequent descent of his estates it can be established that John's heir was one Thomas Clanvow, either a son or a brother; but the general uncertainty attending the family pedigree makes it impossible to establish with accuracy the relationship between him and other members of the family.
[Calendar of Close Rolls ;Calendar of Patent Rolls ; A. Clarke et al .
(eds.),
Foedera , 1816–69; L. C. Hector and B. F. Harvey (eds.),
The Westminster Chronicle, 1381–1394 , 1982; V. J. Scattergood (ed.),
The Works of Sir John Clanvow , 1975.]
John N Molony
,Richard (1753–1827), the first clergyman of the Church of England to arrive in Australia, was born in 1753, the son of John Johnson of Welton, Yorkshire.
He was educated at the Kingston-upon-Hull grammar school and graduated BA at Magdalene College, Cambridge, in 1784.
After ordination in 1786 he was appointed as ‘chaplain to the settlement’ at New South Wales on 24 October in the same year.
His appointment was influenced by the Eclectic Society of which John Newton and William Wilberforce [qq.v.]were members.
An evangelical of great piety and a man of gentle character and inflexible integrity, Johnson was charged with a mission beyond the powers of most because he was to be custodian of the morals of the infant settlement but he had also to conform to the pragmatism of Arthur Phillip [q.v.], the first governor of New South Wales.
Phillip's yardstick was survival.
To the degree that religion and morality assisted that end he tolerated the role of Johnson.
Accompanied by his wife, whom he had married shortly before sailing, Johnson arrived with the first fleet and celebrated the first Anglican service under ‘a great tree’ at Sydney cove on 3 February 1788.
He took as his text ‘What shall I render unto the Lord for all His benefits toward me’(Psalm 116:12) which probably aroused a chill response in his convict hearers.
Johnson threw himself unsparingly into his daily tasks, whether celebrating divine service, catechizing, marrying, baptizing, burying, or attending frequent executions.
To and fro from Sydney to Parramatta he devoted himself to the spiritual and physical welfare of the convicts.
He went down into the foetid holds of the ‘sick ships’ of the second fleet where hundreds lay dying or ill.
Francis Grose, the successor to Phillip, regarded Johnson as ‘one of the people called Methodists…a very troublesome, discontented character’ and obstructed his work in all possible ways (Historical Records of Australia — see below).
Grose was unable to prevent him erecting a pleasing but modest church in 1793, which Johnson paid for in rum.
The church was burnt down in 1798.
Johnson was the first to extend his apostolate to the Aborigines, taking one into his own home and giving his first-born, a daughter born in 1790, the Aboriginal name Milbah.
A son was born in 1792.
His ecumenical spirit was such that when two Spanish vessels visited Sydney in 1793 he ‘outdid himself in his sociable gestures, particularly toward our chaplain fathers approaching them with a kindness and humility and a simplicity that was truly evangelical’(The Spanish at Port Jackson , Australian Documentary Facsimile Society, 1967).
His main relief was farming, which he engaged in with considerable proficiency.
Johnson returned to England in 1800, leaving ‘as a mere skeleton’, said his successor Samuel Marsden [q.v.].
He served firstly as a curate in Essex and then as rector of the combined parishes of St Antholin and Saint John Baptist in London.
His An Address to the Inhabitants of the Colonies established at New South Wales and Norfolk Island , published in London in 1794, was an early item of Australian literature.
He died in London 13 March 1827, and was survived by his wife.
[Historical Records of New South Wales , i–iv;Historical Records of Australia (1) i–v; James Bonwick,Australia's First Preacher , 1898; W. H. Rainey,The Real Richard Johnson , 1947; G. Mackaness (ed.),
Some Letters of Rev. Richard Johnson , 1954; K. J. Cable, ‘Johnson, Richard (1753–1827)’ in Australian Dictionary of Biography , vol. ii, 1967.]
D J Richardson
, Sir Joseph Nathaniel (1847–1917), caterer, was born 29 December 1847 in Kennington, London, the son of Nathaniel Lyons, an itinerant vendor of watches and cheap jewellery, and his wife Hannah Cohen.
He was educated at the Borough Jewish School in the East End of London.
He began as an optician's apprentice, and also exhibited water-colour paintings at the Royal Institution and wrote simple novelettes.
He was an inventor, and designed quick-selling gadgets which he used his showman-like qualities to retail at the many regional and metropolitan exhibitions being organized in the last quarter of the nineteenth century.
In 1887 Lyons ran a stall at the Liverpool exhibition, selling for a shilling a combined microscope-binocular-compass which he had invented.
At this time the Salmon and Gluckstein families, successful tobacco merchants, were turning their attention to catering, seeing the need for good, cheap, clean places to get a cup of tea.
They decided to operate a pilot scheme at exhibitions, needed someone to run it and act as ‘front man’, and turned to Lyons, who was a distant relative of Isidore Gluckstein's fiancée.
Lyons agreed to run a tea pavilion at the Newcastle jubilee exhibition of 1887, and to use his name, because it was felt to be beneath the dignity of the Salmon and Gluckstein families to go into catering.
The Newcastle pavilion was so successful that in 1887 a private company was formed to develop the families' catering interests.
The firm organized catering at the Glasgow exhibition, the 1889 Paris exhibition, and then took over the catering at Olympia and the Crystal Palace.
In 1894 a public company, J. Lyons and Co.
Ltd., was formed.
The first teashop opened in 1894 in Piccadilly, and during the next few years a chain of teashops was opened in London.
Lyons was made chairman for life.
His extrovert personality made him the ideal host at the company's restaurants.
There is some evidence that he was involved in the negotiations for property, and he certainly became associated publicly with the great success of the firm.
But there is no doubt that the real organizational flair, the risk-taking, and the shrewd perception of the profit opportunities in catering belonged to members of the Salmon and Gluckstein families, and the real power in the company lay with them.
Lyons was knighted in 1911 for supervising the catering arrangements for the Territorial Army.
He married Psyche, daughter of Isaac Cohen, the manager of the Pavilion Theatre, Whitechapel Road.
They had no children.
Lyons died 22 June 1917 in London.
[S. Aris,The Jews in Business , 1970; D. J. Jeremy (ed.),
Dictionary of Business Biography , 1985; D. J. Richardson, ‘The History of the Catering Industry, with Special Reference to the Development of J. Lyons and Co.
Ltd. to 1939’, Ph.D.
thesis (1970) for the University of Kent.]
Richard Clogg
,Ronald Montagu (1867–1920), classical scholar and university principal, was born in Rugby 16 August 1867, the youngest of the three sons of the Revd Leonard Francis Burrows, schoolmaster, of Rugby, and his wife Mary Vicars.
He was educated at Charterhouse and at Christ Church, Oxford, where he took firsts in classical honour moderations (1888) and literae humaniores (1890).
From 1891 to 1897 he was assistant to the professor of Greek at Glasgow University.
In 1898 he was appointed professor of Greek at University College, Cardiff, moving to Manchester University as Hulme professor of Greek in 1908.
In 1907 he published The Discoveries in Crete and their Bearing on the History of Ancient Civilization , which was well received by contemporary scholars, including (Sir) Arthur Evans [q.v.].
A Christian Socialist (and lifelong speculator on the Stock Exchange), Burrows, during his travels and archaeological expeditions, acquired a fascination for the history and politics of modern Greece.
He gained an Oxford D.Litt. in 1910.
Like many of his contemporaries he was bowled over by the charismatic personality of Eleutherios Venizelos, the Greek politician.
His enthusiastic championing of the Greek, and more particularly the Venizelist, cause found its fullest expression during his energetic and popular principalship of King's College, London, between 1913 and 1920.
A founder in 1913 of the Anglo-Hellenic League, he wrote numerous articles supporting Greek territorial claims and upholding Venizelos in his feud with King Constantine I. With R. W. Seton-Watson [q.v.], a colleague at King's, Burrows formulated in the autumn of 1915 the unsuccessful scheme, which was taken up by the Foreign Office, to lure Greece into the war of 1914–18 on the side of the entente through the offer of Cyprus.
So closely did Burrows identify with Venizelos that the Greek statesman invited him in 1916 to act as the ‘semi-official’ representative in London of his breakaway provisional government in Salonika.
With Seton-Watson, Burrows was instrumental in the establishment in 1915 of the School of Slavonic Studies (subsequently the School of Slavonic and East European Studies of the University of London).
This became a powerhouse of academic propaganda in favour of self-determination for the peoples of eastern Europe.
Thomas Garrigue Masaryk (subsequently president of Czechoslovakia) was appointed a professor in the School and, in October 1915, delivered a highly influential lecture entitled ‘The Problem of Small Nations in the European Crisis’.
Besides his pioneering support for Russian and east European studies, Burrows was also responsible for the establishment of the Cervantes chair of Spanish and the Camoens chair of Portuguese.
His most cherished foundation, however, was the Koraes chair of Modern Greek and Byzantine history, language, and literature which was endowed by well-to-do Anglo-Greeks, by Venizelos himself, and by the Greek government.
Burrows lived long enough to secure the appointment of Arnold Toynbee [q.v.]to the chair in 1919.
But his death in the principal's residence at King's College 14 May 1920, at the early age of fifty-two, spared him the furious controversy that arose when the donors sought Toynbee's removal on political grounds.
A romantic philhellene to the end, in a letter written on his deathbed Burrows expressed his ‘boundless faith’ in Venizelos (‘my Pericles’) and his love for Hellas.
Burrows was one of the progenitors of ‘area studies’ in Britain.
His enthusiastic and entrepreneurial promotion of these studies, however, was combined with a political naïvety that blinded him to the problems that can arise from reliance on external sources of funding in politically charged fields of study.
In 1892 he married Una Geraldine, daughter of Charles John Ridgeway, later bishop of Chichester.
They had no children.
[George Glasgow,Ronald Burrows: a Memoir , 1924; Richard Clogg,Politics and the Academy: Arnold Toynbee and the Koraes Chair , 1986.]
F P Thomson
,Alan Dower (1903–1942), electronics engineer, inventor, and the first systems engineer, was born in Hampstead, London, 29 June 1903, the only son and younger child of Semmy Joseph Blumlein, company director and naturalized Briton from Germany, and his wife Jessie Edwards, daughter of the Revd William Dower, a Scottish missionary to the east Griquas in Africa and founder of the town of Kokstad.
Blumlein's childhood was neither tranquil nor settled.
The death of his father in 1914 and persecution of British people with German surnames made him withdrawn; he did not read fluently until he entered Highgate School with a living scholarship in 1917.
He exhibited high intelligence, had an exceptional memory, but was unpopular and solitary because he hated games.
In 1921, with a governor's scholarship, he started electrical and telephony engineering studies at the Imperial College of Science and Technology, entering on the second year of the course to help his mother's finances, and consequently was compelled to sit the far harsher external students' examination for the first-class honours B.Sc.
degree, which he gained in 1923.
He served for a year as a demonstrator.
In 1924 Edward Mallett and he presented a paper to the Institution of Electrical Engineers on their joint development, ‘A New Method of High-Frequency Resistance Measurement’, which attracted great attention.
Employed by the International Standard Electric Corporation in 1924–9, Blumlein started to exhibit his extraordinary inventive flair.
He was sent to Switzerland, France, and Spain to cure electrical interference plaguing telephone lines.
Successful, he returned to England and invented a telephone crosstalk reduction circuit, which was adopted internationally from 1927 under his joint patent with J. P. Johns.
He invented and patented the ‘closely coupled inductor ratio arm bridge’, a measuring instrument of great accuracy with numerous variations, including the low-level altimeter he developed in 1941 for the Royal Air Force.
Tiring of telephony after four more patents, which included improvements in submarine cables, he joined the Columbia Graphophone Company in 1929 to develop an entirely electrical disk recording system which would circumvent Western Electronic's semi-mechanical equipment and abolish Columbia's obligation to pay royalties.
Blumlein's revolutionary technique vastly improved quality and simplified production, and was adopted internationally.
Intensely fond of music, he invented high-quality components to incorporate in his invention of stereophony, which was granted British Patent 394325 in 1931.
It made seventy claims and described the two-channel stereo record adopted worldwide since 1958, and foresaw quadrophonics.
The first major application of Blumlein's principles was in 1939, when he developed the visual display sound locator to help anti-aircraft gun-laying before radar was available.
In 1931, under the direction of (Sir) Isaac Shoenberg [q.v]of the newly formed Electric and Musical Industries (EMI) research laboratories, Blumlein was appointed chief engineer to head a multi-disciplinary team charged with research and development of a purely electrical television system.
They produced the 405-line 50 fields per second interlaced, high-definition, versatile, and reliable equipment preferred by the BBC as the standard in 1937, when the Baird system was rejected.
Within a year, a miniaturized lightweight airborne version was built for British and French air-force experiments.
From 1938 television pulsed circuit and other sophisticated techniques were of increasing interest for the development of essential defence innovations.
Blumlein's team was contracted to expedite development of — among other devices — the ultra-secret H 2 S or ‘bomber's eye’ airborne, earth–surface, cockpit screen display equipment, immune to darkness and weather.
Altogether Blumlein was awarded 128 patents, or an average of one each six working weeks.
They are the essence of today's heterogeneous electronics industries and the foundation of telecommunications.
Throughout his life Blumlein was a trustworthy and loyal man with a passionate interest in the arts, music, and aviation — he held a private pilot's licence from 1929 and often flew a biplane or Moth.
A good mixer in adulthood, he was even-handed in recording joint participation inventions in patent specifications and resourceful and reliable in emergencies.
He was of medium height, slim and wiry in build with a healthy complexion and short-cut dark hair, a penetrating even-toned deep voice, and small strong hands.
He walked rapidly with long swinging strides, was seldom ill, and had a probing curiosity.
In 1933 Blumlein married Doreen, a schoolteacher, the daughter of Thurston T. Lane, auctioneer and estate agent, of Penzance.
On Sunday, 7 June 1942, in sunny weather, the Halifax bomber flying laboratory crashed in flames in the Wye Valley and all aboard, including Blumlein, were killed.
[F. P. Thomson, ‘The Making of a Genius’(unpublished); Philip B. Vanderlyn in Journal of the Audio Engineering Society , September 1978; correspondents and personal knowledge.]
Michael Prestwich
,Thomas (d. 1295), knight and traitor, was probably the first man in England to be executed for spying.
His precise origins are not clear.
It was probably he, not a namesake, who was a follower of John Giffard [q.v.]in the civil wars of the late 1260s, and who was rewarded for his loyalty to the Crown with a grant of land in Northamptonshire.
There was a strong tradition of royal service in the Turberville family: Hugh de Turberville had served Edward I with distinction since before his accession.
Thomas was certainly a royal household knight in 1282, when he took part in the Welsh war.
In 1286 he accompanied Edward to Paris and on to Gascony.
When war broke out between England and France in 1294 he served with a retinue of at least nine knights in John of Brittany's expedition to Gascony.
Initial successes were considerable.
Turberville was part of the force which occupied Rioms.
In April 1295, however, the French seized the town after a riot among the English troops.
John of Brittany and much of the garrison fled by ship, but Turberville was captured along with a dozen other knights.
In August Turberville returned to England, claiming that he had escaped from prison.
It was soon discovered that he was in fact spying for the French.
A messenger he had employed to take a letter to France revealed its contents to the king.
In it Turberville informed the provost of Paris that Wales was now at peace.
He reported that the Isle of Wight was not guarded, and that the king was to send a powerful embassy to the German king.
Twenty ships were to be sent with grain supplies to Gascony, and an expedition there was to be headed by the earls of Lancaster, Lincoln, and Warwick, along with Hugh Despenser (later Earl of Winchester, q.v.).
Turberville claimed to have reached agreement with the recently defeated Morgan of Wales [q.v.]that he should rebel again if the Scots would follow suit.
He advised the French to send a powerful embassy to Scotland.
The letter reveals that Turberville's sons had been kept in Paris as hostages, and that he had been promised £100 worth of land as his reward for treachery.
The letter seems genuine.
It is reasonably circumstantial, and the description of English plans is very plausible, even though Warwick and Despenser did not sail for Gascony, and no embassy as described went to Germany in 1295.
It is inconceivable that Edward would, for propaganda purposes, have falsely implicated one of his own household knights in treason.
Turberville was arrested on 24 September 1295, and was tried promptly, on 8 October.
The chief justice of the King's Bench pronounced the verdict.
The guilty man was to be drawn on an ox hide to the gallows, where he was hanged.
News of the event was widely circulated, as a form of war propaganda, and it was also commemorated in a popular song or poem.
[H. R. Luard (ed.)
Bartholomaei de Cotton, Historia Anglicana , Rolls Series, 1859; H. Rothwell,The Chronicle of Walter of Guisborough , Camden Society, vol. lxxxix, 1957; J. G. Edwards, ‘The Treason of Thomas Turberville, 1295’ in R. W. Hunt, W. A. Pantin, and R. W. Southern (eds.),
Studies in Medieval History presented to F. M. Powicke , 1948.]