

A G E Jones
,William (1790–1847), merchant service master and discoverer of the South Shetlands, was born 11 October 1790 in Seaton Sluice, the elder child of William Smith, joiner, of Seaton Sluice, and his wife Mary Sharpe of Earsdon, Northumberland.
Nothing is known about his early years and education.
He was probably apprenticed to the east coast coal trade.
In 1811 he became owner and master of the Three Friends of Blakeney, Norfolk.
In 1812 he became master of the brig Williams of Blyth, newly built for him.
In the years 1812–18 he traded to Europe and South America.
Smith sailed from Buenos Aires in mid-January 1819.
In rounding Cape Horn, he was driven into a high latitude, and on 19 February 1819 he wrote in his journal, ‘in latitude 62°40’ S and longitude per Chronometer 60°00' West, Land or Ice was discovered ahead bearing SEbS distant about two leagues, blowing hard gales with flying showers of snow.’
He named the place New South Britain, a name later changed to New South Shetland.
What he had seen was Williams Point on Livingston Island, a black promontory that stood out from the ice-cap.
On returning to Valparaiso on 11 March 1819, he obtained no credence —‘all ridiculed the poor man for his fanciful credulity and his deceptive vision.’
On his second voyage, in the winter (May–June 1819), he saw nothing of New South Shetland.
On his third voyage, from Montevideo, Smith saw the same point again on 15 October 1819, as well as Desolation Island.
He took soundings, made a landing on North Foreland in King George Island, where he took possession, and examined the northern coast of the islands from east to west.
He returned to Valparaiso where Captain William Shirreff, RN, ordered Edward Bransfield, a master in the Royal Navy, and three midshipmen to accompany Smith to survey the new land.
On his fourth voyage Smith examined the north and south coasts of New South Shetland and, from 30 January 1820, part of the Antarctic continent, the Trinity Peninsula.
They had thus sighted the continent a few days later than Bellingshausen's sighting in longitude 2°15' W. Bransfield's manuscript chart is in the hydrographic department of the Admiralty.
From this, in 1941 Lieutenant-Commander R. T. Gould, RN, was able to plot Smith's course in great detail, round New South Shetland and from Tower Island to the South Orkneys.
In 1821 Smith made a fifth voyage to New South Shetland, but found British and American ships there, killing fur seals, which were almost exterminated in the next five years.
He returned to London with the Williams , arriving with 30,000 sealskins worth £7,500.
His owners were in difficulties and he was bankrupted.
Smith wrote no account of his voyages but in 1820, in the Edinburgh Philosophical Journal , vol. iii, no. 6, pp. 367–80, J. Miers wrote ‘An account of the Discovery of New South Shetland’, with a map of sorts.
In 1824 Smith was a Thames pilot, and his licence was later extended to the Downs.
The Trinity House records of the time describe him as 5 feet 8 inches tall, with black hair and dark complexion.
In 1827–30 he was master of the William and Ann , owned by James Weddell [q.v.],
in the Davis Straits whale fishery; he had little success and did not go again.
In these years he often changed his address in the East End of London.
In 1838 Smith was rejected for a place in the Trinity House almshouse, being under age.
In 1839 his pilot's licence was withdrawn as ‘a pilot reduced by age and infirmity’, and he was superannuated.
Petitions to the Admiralty for remuneration for his discovery brought nothing.
He died in May 1847 at 2 Hungerford Street, St George's in the East, London, the exact date not being known.
His estate, valued at £100, was left to his wife, Mary, about whom nothing is known.
It is not known whether they had any children.
[Northumberland County Record Office; Public Record Office; A. G. E. Jones, ‘Captain William Smith and the Discovery of New South Shetland’,Geographical Journal , vol. cxli, no. 3, 1975, pp. 445–61.]
John Harvey
,Henry (fl. 1495–1528), master mason, was the son of Thomas Redman (died 1516), a working mason at Westminster Abbey and master there from 1505 until his death, when Henry succeeded him.
They descended from hereditary riding-bailiffs of the abbots of Ramsey by a serjeanty dating from the twelfth century.
Henry worked under his father at the abbey from 1495, but from 1501 to 1506 was building the Observant friary in Richmond, Surrey, by contract along with a brickmaker, Robert Nevill, and Thomas Binks, carpenter.
The partners received over £1,200 for the work.
In 1509 Redman visited King's College, Cambridge, with William Vertue [q.v.],
and in 1511 was surety for Vertue's performance of a contract at St George's chapel, Windsor.
Chief mason at Westminster Abbey from 1516, he was also master mason of the chancel of St Margaret's church, built for Abbot John Islip [q.v.]
in 1516–23; he also designed the tower and porch.
Redman regularly returned his weekly pay of 3s. 4d. to the fabric fund.
In 1516 he was associated with Vertue in designing new works at Eton College, the west range and Lupton's tower, but early in 1515 he had already become architect to Cardinal Thomas Wolsey [q.v.]
for his building projects at York Place, Westminster, and Hampton Court.
For the Crown he made the two tilt-yard towers at Greenwich from 1516 and on 12 September 1519 received the office of king's master mason jointly with Vertue, who had held the position since 1510.
In 1520 Redman also became chief mason at Windsor Castle.
After Wolsey's surrender of Hampton Court to the king in 1525, work began on the Cardinal's College (now Christ Church) in Oxford, where Redman was joint master with John Lebons or Lubbyns and the carpenter Humphrey Coke.
In March 1527 William Vertue died, and Redman was sole king's mason until his death 10 July 1528.
The next day it was reported that Henry VIII was ‘sorry for the death of Mr Redman his mason’.
Redman and his wife Joan (died 1531) were considerable benefactors to the town of Brentford, Middlesex, where they lived; damaged brasses in Brentford church commemorate them.
[J. Harvey,English Mediaeval Architects , 1984, and Supplement , 1987.]
Peter Thornton
,Arthur Thomas (1864–1945), architect and architectural historian, was born 14 April 1864 at 37 Westbourne Park, Bayswater, London, the second son in a family of five sons and three daughters of Thomas Bolton, solicitor, and his wife Emily Wildman of Chilham Castle, Kent.
He was educated at Dr Huntingford's Preparatory School, Wimbledon, and Haileybury, entering University College London in 1882.
In 1884 he was articled for three years to the architect Robert Edis.
He joined the Architectural Association in 1885 and was elected an associate of the RIBA in 1888 and a fellow in 1909.
In 1893 Bolton won the Soane medallion for his ‘Design for a Railway Terminus’, and in 1895, having become increasingly interested in the history of architecture, he won the RIBA's silver medal for an essay on ‘The Influence of Literature on Architecture’.
In 1901 Bolton was appointed first headmaster of the new day school at the Architectural Association.
His first major commission was a factory and offices in Limehouse for the Sanitas Company (1900).
He built for himself a house (Larkscliff) on the cliffs at Birchington, Kent (1906).
His most important commission was the completion of the offices for the Hamburg-Amerika Linie in Cockspur Street, London (1906–8).
Subsequently he built a house in the country for a wealthy barrister (Hurtwood in Sussex) and another in the Usk Valley (Colomendy), where he also displayed a talent for garden design (1912–14).
However, most of the work he was doing at this time was of a minor nature.
Having moved his family back to London in 1913, Bolton was in 1917 appointed curator of Sir John Soane's Museum in succession to Walter L. Spiers [q.v.].
He remained in this post until his death.
He opened up the Museum to scholars and architectural historians by writing many articles on Soane and his collections for the architectural press in the 1920s and also embarked on a series of publications about Soane:The Works of Sir John Soane (1924), an edition of Soane's Royal Academy Lectures on Architecture (1929) and The Portrait of Sir John Soane (1927), as well as a number of pamphlets.
He also wrote a two-volume work on The Architecture of Robert and James Adam (1922), which led to work at Adam's Royal Society of Arts and in 1925 to his being consultant to the eighth Earl of Jersey at Osterley Park.
Bolton was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1914 and served on the council of the London Topographical Society (1918–27).
From the early 1920s until his death he was joint editor with H. Duncan Hendry of the Wren Society volumes.
Bolton may not have enjoyed outstanding success as an architect but he was greatly respected; it was as a scholar that he excelled.
In 1897 he married in London Harriet Barnes Fall (died 1944), daughter of Samuel Fall of Carolina.
They had three sons and two daughters.
Bolton died in London 17 January 1945.
[Press-cuttings book at Sir John Soane's Museum; obituaries in Journal of the Royal Institute of British Architects , January 1945 and Architectural Association Journal , February 1945; Jill Lever, ‘A. J. Bolton, Architect’,Architectural History , vol. xxvii, 1984; A. Stuart Gray,Edwardian Architecture: a Biographical Dictionary , 1985.]
John Harvey
,William (fl. 1323–1349), mason and architect, belonged to a distinguished architectural family of East Anglia, descended from tenants of the abbot of Ramsey at Wyke Fen in Well since the twelfth century (A. B. Whittingham in Archaeological Journal , vol. cxxvii, pp. 285–9).
In 1323–5 Ramsey worked as a mason at St Stephen's chapel in Westminster Palace, but seems to have been identical with the Master William de Ramesseye in charge of works at Norwich Cathedral in 1326–31.
In London in 1331, he was engaged as master of the new work of the chapter house and cloister of St Paul's Cathedral by June 1332, and was to press on to completion, but the chapter house had not quite been finished in 1349.
Ramsey was one of four masons on a commission to survey the Tower of London in 1335, and on 1 June 1336 he received a patent as chief mason at the Tower and chief surveyor of the king's works south of Trent for life, at one shilling a day and a robe every year.
For two years Ramsey was in charge of repairs at the Tower, but was able to continue in private practice, agreeing on 23 May 1337 to advise on the works of Lichfield Cathedral.
The presbytery there was carried out with details from his hand.
From 1337 onwards Ramsey was also in charge at St Stephen's chapel, and by this time he was a wealthy man.
In 1340 he was assessed to pay £10 towards the loan of £5,000 made to the king by the city of London; and he contributed to another loan in 1346.
Early in 1344 he was charged with building the king's new ‘Round Table’ at Windsor Castle, from 16 February until 27 November; the work was then stopped, and later abandoned and destroyed.
He also had business in east Kent, for in April 1345 arrangements were made to hear his plea against the abbot of St Augustine's, Canterbury, and his retainers, said to have carried away Ramsey's goods in Reculver and assaulted Ramsey's servants.
Further works at Westminster Palace were entrusted to him in April 1346, and included the final stages of St Stephen's chapel, and he was to impress masons and carpenters for Edward III's expedition against France.
In 1347 Ramsey was common councillor for the ward of Aldersgate in London, where he lived.
The next year he was buying property in Enfield, Middlesex, but seems to have fallen victim to the Black Death on 3 June 1349.
His daughter Agnes, married to Robert Huberd, citizen and mason of London, carried on her father's business as a monumental mason and in 1358–9 was paid £106 18s. 11d. for the alabaster tomb of Queen Isabella, widow of Edward II, set up in the church of the London Greyfriars.
Ramsey, as shown by surviving remains and fragments, was the originator of the Perpendicular style, a marked advance from the curvilinear forms current before 1330.
To him initially was due the greater unity of design in English architecture of the later middle ages.
[J. Harvey,English Mediaeval Architects , 1984.]
J R Maddicott
or , Sir Roger (d. 1322), baron, was the younger son of Sir Robert Damory, of Bucknell and Woodperry (Oxfordshire), Thornborough (Buckinghamshire), and Ubley in Somerset, who died in or before 1285.
Although his family was one of well-established county gentry, Roger's position as a younger son probably justified the description of him in the Vita Edwardi Secundi as by origin ‘a poor and needy knight’.
It was initially his elder brother, Sir Richard Damory, who was more prominent.
As sheriff of Oxford and Buckingham from 1308 to 1310, forester of Whittlewood Forest in Buckinghamshire from 1308, constable of Oxford castle from 1311 to 1321, and steward of the royal household from 1311 to 1325, Richard moved from local administration to the centre of power and may have been responsible for introducing Roger to royal service.
Roger first appears in 1309 as the retainer of Gilbert de Clare, ninth Earl of Gloucester.
It was perhaps as a member of Gloucester's retinue that he fought at Bannockburn in June 1314, where Gloucester was killed; and his performance in the battle, for which he was later rewarded with land worth 100 marks a year, may have brought him to Edward II's notice.
From then on his rise was rapid and within three years he had become the supreme influence at Edward's court.
The royal grant of the castle and honour of Knaresborough, Yorkshire, in December 1314 was the first favour to come his way.
By January 1315 he was a knight of the royal household and in the next two years he received various grants of lands, wardships, and money.
His progress was crowned in April 1317 by his marriage to Elizabeth de Clare, one of the three sisters and co-heiresses of the former Earl of Gloucester, for which again he had Edward to thank.
His wife's share in the partition of the vast Gloucester estates made him one of the leading territorial magnates and led to his being summoned to Parliament from November 1317.
From the later months of 1316 Damory became the leading member of a group of royal favourites, two of whom, Hugh Despenser the younger [q.v.]
and Hugh Audley, were also married to Gloucester's sisters.
The royal patronage lavished on them, at a time of general distress caused by famine and Scottish attacks, brought them the enmity of Thomas, Earl of Lancaster [q.v.],
the greatest of the magnates, who was determined to purge the court and to overturn Edward's indulgent grants.
From 1316 to 1319 Lancaster's feud with the courtiers dominated English politics.
In October 1317 the earl seized the royal castles of Knaresborough and Alton, Staffordshire, then in Damory's custody, and he was later to accuse Damory of plotting against his life.
As the most avaricious of the courtiers Damory was put under restraint in November 1317 by Aymer de Valence, Earl of Pembroke, and Bartholomew Badlesmere [qq.v.], both of them moderates among Edward's associates, who imposed on Damory a written undertaking not to profit excessively from the king's generosity nor to permit others to do so.
After long negotiations a fragile settlement between Lancaster and the king's friends was reached in August 1318 by the treaty of Leake, where Lancaster and Damory were temporarily reconciled.
Damory's promise to pay Lancaster just over £600 may help to account for both this reconciliation and a subsequent review of royal grants which allowed Damory to keep virtually all that he had gained.
Within a few months his position came under threat from a new direction.
In 1318–19 the rise of Hugh Despenser the younger gradually displaced Damory from his standing at the centre of the court.
Although Edward apparently promised him the captaincy of Berwick in September 1319, during the English siege of the town, and grants continued to come his way during 1320, his allegiance was soon to be severed by the ambitions of Despenser, whose attempts in 1320–1 to enlarge his share of the Gloucester inheritance in south Wales raised the whole march against him.
Damory and Audley, the husbands of the other two co-heiresses, were vulnerable to Despenser's expansionism and in the early months of 1321 they and the other marchers turned to Lancaster for help.
Damory was present at Lancaster's assembly at Sherburn, Yorkshire, in June 1321, when the earl tried to put together a coalition against Despenser and his father.
In the brief civil war that followed he took Worcester for the rebels in January 1322, but was captured by the king's forces at Tutbury, Derbyshire, on 11 March.
He was tried and condemned to death, but spared because of Edward's former affection for him and because of his marriage to the king's niece.
Sick or mortally wounded, he died in Tutbury 13 or 14 March 1322 and was buried in Ware, Hertfordshire.
He left a daughter, Elizabeth, born in May 1318.
He had been at the head of the factional politics of Edward II's middle years, and his rapid rise and precipitate fall typified the fate of others who had had the misfortune to enjoy Edward's patronage.
[J. C. Davies,The Baronial Opposition to Edward II , 1918; J. R. Maddicott,Thomas of Lancaster, 1307–22 , 1970; J. R. S. Phillips,Aymer de Valence, Earl of Pembroke , 1972; G. E. Cokayne,Complete Peerage , new edn., vol. iv, 1916.]
Peter Parker
,Joe Randolph (1896–1967), writer and editor, was born 4 November 1896 in Herne Hill, south London, the younger son and second of three children of Alfred Roger Ackerley, fruit importer of London, and his mistress, Janetta Katherine Aylward, an actress.
His parents married in 1919.
He was educated at Rossall School and Magdalene College, Cambridge, where he obtained a third class in English in 1921, having abandoned law after a short time.
His education had been interrupted by the war of 1914–18, in which he served on the western front as an officer in the 8th battalion of the East Surrey Regiment.
Twice wounded, he was captured in May 1917, and subsequently exchanged into internment in Switzerland.
These experiences, and the death in action of his elder brother, Peter, resulted in a pronounced strain of melancholy in his character.
In 1922 he received an appreciative letter from E. M. Forster [q.v.]
about his long meditative poem, ‘Ghosts’.
This led to an enduring friendship, the closest of Ackerley's life.
It was at Forster's suggestion that Ackerley spent five months in India as companion-secretary to the eccentric Maharajah of Chhatarpur.
The anthology Poems by Four Authors (1923) contained ten poems Ackerley had written while an undergraduate, and in 1925 the play based upon his experiences as an internee,The Prisoners of War , was produced in London.
Its ‘difficult’ themes (the war and homosexuality) made it a succès d'estime , but although Ackerley was hailed as a coming dramatist, he never completed another play.
In 1928 he became an assistant producer in the talks department of the BBC.
Through Forster he had acquired a wide circle of literary acquaintances, many of whom he recruited to make broadcasts on the radio.
In 1932 he edited Escapers All , derived from a series of talks given by men who had escaped from prisoner-of-war camps.
That same year he also published Hindoo Holiday , based on his Indian diaries.
In spite of many excisions on the grounds of libel and obscenity, the book's sly humour and brilliant character-drawing ensured excellent sales and consolidated Ackerley's reputation.
In 1935 he became literary editor of the Listener , a post he held for twenty-four years.
He wanted the magazine to be ‘in the vanguard of contemporary thought, the forefront of the battle’, and commissioned reviews, articles, stories, and poems which reflected this.
‘I think that people ought to be upset,’ he wrote; ‘I think that life is so important and, in its workings, so upsetting that nobody should be spared.’
This was a policy which led to many disagreements with his timid employers, and he waged a vigorous guerrilla campaign against the prudery and philistinism of the BBC hierarchy.
His integrity, charm, tact, and an insistence upon the highest standards, led to his being widely considered the finest literary editor of his generation.
Ackerley flouted convention both in and out of the office.
Strikingly good-looking and energetically homosexual, he conducted a long but conspicuously unsuccessful search amongst working-class men for ‘the Ideal Friend’.
His father's life had been similarly unorthodox, for he had kept a second mistress and three daughters, whose existence was revealed only after his death.
Ackerley's crusade to tell the truth, however uncomfortable and inconvenient that might be, arose from his belief that his relationship with his father had been compromised by their inability to confide in each other.
In 1956 Ackerley published My Dog Tulip , a shockingly frank and funny portrait of his Alsatian bitch, Queenie.
The story of how he acquired her from a petty criminal and gradually transferred his love from man to dog is told in his novel We Think the World of You (1960), which won the W. H. Smith award.
Although unconsummated, this relationship was undoubtedly the most satisfactory of his life and resulted in his passionate advocacy of animal rights.
In retirement Ackerley revised what was to be his masterpiece, a ‘family memoir’ begun in the 1930s which was eventually published as My Father and Myself (1968).
He lived in considerable squalor and acrimony in a small Putney flat with his ‘three bitches’: Queenie, his ageing Aunt Bunny, and his emotionally unstable sister, Nancy.
After the death of Queenie in 1961 he became increasingly morose.
Although disenchanted with the human world, he turned his misanthropic gloom to good account in witty and self-deprecatory letters.
He died from a coronary thrombosis, 4 June 1967, at his home in Putney.
[Peter Parker,Ackerley: A Life of J. R. Ackerley , 1989;The Times , 6 June 1967; Neville Braybrooke (ed.),
The Letters of J. R. Ackerley , 1975; Francis King (ed.),
My Sister and Myself (a selection from Ackerley's diaries), 1982.]
Sheila O'Connell
,William (c. 1580–1619), portrait painter, is first recorded on 17 July 1606 when he was awarded the freedom of the City of London by redemption in the Company of Painter-Stainers.
Further documentary evidence of his life and work is scanty, but because his will is listed with those in the parish of St Sepulchre, just outside the walls of the City, it has been suggested that his father may have been William Larkin, the host of the Rose inn in that parish.
A brother, Richard, and his son, Benjamin, are mentioned in the will.
The fact that Larkin did not obtain his freedom to trade in London in the usual way — by patrimony or after serving an apprenticeship — is unexplained.
Freedom by redemption was usually awarded to craftsmen coming from elsewhere, but the evidence of Larkin's painting style points to training in one of the London studios — of Isaac Oliver or Marcus Gheeraerts [qq.v.].
In any event by 1606 he had certainly attracted patronage at the highest level: his sponsors for freedom of the City were Lady Arabella Stuart, third in line to the throne, and her future father-in-law Edward Seymour, Earl of Hertford [qq.v.].
In 1609 or 1610 Larkin painted the only picture which can as yet be linked to documentary evidence: a portrait of Edward Herbert, first Baron Herbert of Cherbury [q.v.],
which survives with its pair, of Sir Thomas Lucy (1585–1640, q.v.), at Charlecote Park.
According to an anecdote told in Herbert's autobiography, copies of the portrait were made for the queen, for Richard Sackville, the third Earl of Dorset, and, in miniature by Isaac Oliver, for Lady Aeres (a copy at University College, Oxford, may be one of these).
In 1613 Larkin painted the third Earl of Dorset and his brother, Sir Edward Sackville, later fourth Earl [q.v.],
and shortly afterwards he or his studio was responsible for seven portraits of ladies of the Suffolk family.
(This series is now at Ranger's House, Blackheath.)
The Rutland Papers record two payments to Larkin, both of the considerable sum of £30: in 1617 for an unspecified picture, and in 1619 for a portrait of Lady Katherine Manners, who was to marry George Villiers, first Duke of Buckingham [q.v.],
in the following year (a portrait of Buckingham in the National Portrait Gallery is attributed to Larkin on stylistic and technical grounds).
In the summer of 1618 Lady Anne Clifford [q.v.]
sat to Larkin (a bust-length portrait still at Knole may be a copy of the original).
Three portraits by Larkin are listed in a seventeenth-century inventory of pictures at Claydon: Lady Sussex; Frances Howard, Countess of Somerset; and Anne Turner [q.v.],
her accomplice in the murder of Sir Thomas Overbury [q.v.].
Larkin represents the end of the tradition in which a painter was regarded as an anonymous craftsman, like a possible relation, Thomas Larkin, the king's locksmith.
He painted with the meticulous craft of the Elizabethan limner in a style derived from the elaborate concoctions of mannerist court portraiture; a style soon to be swept away by the tide of the baroque brought to England from Flanders by Rubens and Sir Anthony Van Dyck [q.v.].
All that is known of Larkin's domestic life derives from the parish registers of St Anne's, Blackfriars, where between 1612 and 1615 the baptisms and burials of three of his children are recorded, and from his will, in which he mentioned his wife and young daughter, both named Mary.
There is no suggestion of worldly success, although the sums paid for his work compared well with those paid to his contemporaries, and his estate is referred to simply as ‘goods and chattels and debts’.
Larkin died in 1619, between 10 April when he signed his will and 14 May when it was proved.
[Guildhall Library, Commissary Court of London, MS 9172/30; Mary Edmond, ‘Limners and Picturemakers’ in The Walpole Society , vol. xlvii, 1980; Roy Strong,The English Icon , 1969; Sheila O'Connell,William Larkin and the 3rd Earl of Dorset: a Portrait in Focus , catalogue of an exhibition at Ranger's House, 1989.]
B M E O'Mahoney
,Henrietta (1833–1883), engineer, was born in 1833, probably in Bermondsey, the eldest in the family of four daughters and two sons of James Lowe [q.v.],
smoke-jack maker and mechanist, and his wife Mary, eldest daughter of George Barnes of Ewell, squire.
Her education is unknown, although both parents had connections with the Seymours of Syon House.
By 1852 James Lowe was reduced to poverty and Bermondsey had become a slum.
On 25 July 1855 in the British embassy, Paris, Henrietta married Frederick Vansittart (died 1902), a lieutenant of the 14th Dragoons, son of William Vansittart of the Shottesbrooke family of White Waltham.
He sold his commission in 1856 and bought 18 Clarges Street.
They had no children.
Henrietta did not lose interest in her impecunious father and within two years she was with him aboard HMS Bullfinch for the trials of his new screw propeller.
By 1859 she and Edward Bulwer-Lytton (later first Earl of Lytton, q.v.) were having a secret affair.
In 1860 Benjamin Disraeli thought she had such a hold on Lytton that it was affecting his attendance at the House.
The friendship lasted until 1871.
Following her father's death in 1866 she carried on his pioneering work on the development of the screw propeller for steamships.
In 1868 she obtained patent no. 2,877 for the Lowe–Vansittart propeller.
The Times of 24 September 1869 reported the Admiralty trials of the propeller when fitted to HMS Druid , and the part played by Henrietta even though she was a married woman.
In 1871 the Lowe–Vansittart propeller was awarded a first-class diploma at the Kensington exhibition, followed by similar awards worldwide.
Meanwhile it had been fitted to many warships and liners, including the Scandinavian and Lusitania .
The obituary in the Journal of the London Association of foremen, engineers, and draughtsmen recalled that ‘she was a remarkable personage with a great knowledge of engineering matters and considerable versatility of talent’, and ‘how cheery and thoughtful for the happiness of others she was…she was the only lady, it is believed, who ever wrote and read a scientific paper, illustrated by diagrams and drawings made by herself, before the members of a Scientific Institution.’
This referred to a paper presented in 1876.
In September 1882 she visited the Tynemouth exhibition.
She did not pay the £600 for renewal of her patent and the day after it was due was ordered by magistrates to be detained in the county lunatic asylum at Caxlodge, near Newcastle, having been found wandering by the police.
She died there 8 February 1883 of acute mania and anthrax.
[Hertfordshire Record Office; obituary in Journal of the London Association of Foreman Engineers and Draughtsmen , March 1883; B. M. E. O'Mahoney, ‘Britain's First Woman Engineer’,Woman Engineer , vol. xiii, no. 4, April 1983.]
Paul Brand
,Elijah (ante 1232–1284), businessman and rabbi (known in royal records as master Elias, son of master Mosse of London), was probably born in London not later than 1232.
He was one of the six sons of rabbi Moses of London, active as a businessman and in communal affairs from around 1240 onwards and writer of an authoritative work on biblical punctuation, and his wife Antera, the daughter of Jacob.
Elijah Menahem may have been educated in France, perhaps at Sens.
Prior to the 1275 statute of Jewry he was one of the major moneylenders in the Jewish community.
Thereafter he may have been engaged in wholesale dealing in corn and wool, though it is more probable that he continued to lend money under the guise of advancing money against future payment of commodities.
He could trace descent from rabbi Simeon ben Isaac ben Abun ‘the Great’ of Mainz (c .1000) and his family had produced rabbinic scholars for generations.
From 1266 onwards he is regularly described as magister in official records, indicating that he too was recognized as a rabbi within the Jewish community.
There are many references to his opinions and jurisprudential decisions in medieval rabbinic literature, and there survive  commentaries on the first mishnaic tractate of the Talmud (Berakhoth (benedictions)) and on the domestic service (Haggadah) for Passover eve written by him.
These are in Hebrew but the opinions include occasional lexical items in Anglo-Norman, e.g. ‘rissoles’ and ‘pastides’(pies).
He was also active as a physician and in 1280 went to Flanders to treat the nephew of the count.
He seems to have enjoyed friendly relations with successive kings and queens of England and even with the papal legate Ottobuono.
He also got on well with the justices of the Jews and may for a brief period have enjoyed some sort of official position in the Exchequer of the Jews.
There may have been a more sinister side to this friendly relationship with the justices of the Jews.
Shortly after his death it was alleged that they had co-operated with him in altering entries on their own plea rolls at his house.
These entries related to royal debts assigned to Elijah by way of compensation for debts pardoned by the Crown in favour of the abbey of Stratford, and the alterations allegedly had the effect of enriching Elijah at the Crown's expense.
These allegations led to the dismissal and disgrace of the two justices concerned (Hamon Hauteyn and Robert of Ludham).
Elijah Menahem was married by 1253 to a wife named Pucelle, of whom no more is known.
His second wife Fluria, the widow of Sampson of Northampton, was married to him by 1267.
He had at least six sons.
Elijah Menahem probably died in London not long before 13 June 1284.
[Cecil Roth, ‘Elijah of London: the most illustrious English Jew of the Middle Ages’,Transactions of the Jewish Historical Society of England , vol. xv, 1946;idem ,The Intellectual Activities of Medieval English Jewry , British Academy Supplemental Papers no. viii, 1949; M. Y. L. Sacks,The Writings of Rabbi Elijah of London , Jerusalem, 1956.]
Tom Jaine
, Sir George (c. 1858–1941), hotelier, was born c .1858 in Scarborough, Yorkshire, the son of George Reeves-Smith, sometime manager of the Brighton Aquarium.
His brother, Henry Reeves-Smith, was to be an actor.
Education at Brighton College and early apprenticeship to the Bordeaux wine merchants, Jean Calvert & Co., preceded training in the hotel industry and appointment, in about 1890, as manager of the Victoria Hotel, Northumberland Avenue, London.
By 1893 he was manager of the Berkeley Hotel, Piccadilly.
This he purchased by forming a small syndicate in 1897, taking for himself the office of managing director.
Richard D'Oyly Carte [q.v.],
founder of the Savoy Hotel, sought to rebuild his management team after the departure of César Ritz and Auguste Escoffier.
To secure the services of Reeves-Smith, he purchased the Berkeley Hotel in 1900 and appointed him managing director of the Savoy Company.
He held this office, together with that of vice-chairman of the Savoy Company, from 1916 until his death.
His style of management was precise, for he was aware of the slightest derogation from high standards of housekeeping or service; yet he was innovative and capable of masterly delegation.
Although apparently punctilious and conservative in manner and dress, he had a shrewd business appreciation of practical detail and people's tastes in leisure activities.
Some idea of his skill may be gained from Imperial Palace (1930), a novel by Arnold Bennett [q.v.]
based on the author's knowledge of the Savoy and its chief executive, which was dedicated to Reeves-Smith.
Reeves-Smith founded the Hotels and Restaurants Association (1910) and was chairman of its executive (1910–41) and of its council (1931–41).
He was connected with several industry-wide associations and committees, as well as being chairman of the London coronation accommodation committee (1937).
He was involved in the Preston Hall settlement for tuberculous ex-servicemen in Aylesford, Kent (1919–25) and the British sanatorium in Montana-Vermala, Switzerland.
He was knighted in 1938 for service to the hotel industry, and in the same year he was made a chevalier of the Legion of Honour.
In 1939 he became a knight commander of the Order of the Crown of Italy.
In 1888 he married Maud, daughter of Charles Hindle, Brighton hotelier.
They had a son, who was killed in World War I, and a daughter.
They lived in rooms, first in the Berkeley, then at Claridge's.
Reeves-Smith was an inveterate buyer of books, and it was said that he bought a hotel in Seaford, Sussex, to accommodate his library.
He died from pneumonia 29 May 1941 in his rooms at Claridge's.
[Stanley Jackson,The Savoy , 1964; information from Sir Hugh Wontner and the Savoy Group.]
A L Rice
,George Charles (1815–1899), Indian Army surgeon and pioneer oceanographer, was born 16 November 1815 in Calcutta, India, the eldest of seven children of Nathaniel Wallich [q.v.],
Danish-born surgeon and botanist, and his second wife Sophia Colling.
He was educated at King's College, Aberdeen, and at the University of Edinburgh, where he studied medicine and graduated MD in 1836, becoming LRCS (Edinburgh) the following year.
Wallich returned to India in 1838 as assistant surgeon in the Indian Army and saw considerable active service during the next nineteen years, taking part in the Sutlej and Punjab campaigns of 1842 and 1847 and acting as field surgeon during the Sonthal rebellion of 1855–6.
In 1851, during his single furlough spent in England, he married Caroline Elizabeth, daughter of Edmund Norton, a solicitor in Lowestoft.
They subsequently had four sons and four daughters.
Wallich finally returned to England on sick leave in 1857 and retired officially from the Indian Army in 1859 with the rank of surgeon major.
During the homeward voyage Wallich collected a variety of marine organisms, thus beginning the study of oceanography which was to dominate the remainder of his life.
His reports on the collections brought him to the notice of the British scientific establishment and led to his appointment as naturalist in HMS Bulldog during a voyage under the command of Sir Leopold M ‘Clintoch in 1860 to investigate a possible northern route for the proposed north Atlantic telegraph cable.
Wallich reported the results of the Bulldog cruise in his most important publication,The North-Atlantic Sea-bed (1862), including his general views on deep-sea biology.
The main conclusion of this work was a refutation of the ‘azoic theory’, originally put forward by Edward Forbes [q.v.]
in 1843, according to which the depths of the ocean beyond a few hundreds of metres were devoid of life.
Wallich based his refutation mainly on a Bulldog sounding, at a depth of some 2,300 metres, which brought up a number of brittle-stars entangled in the line.
But this evidence was generally regarded as inconclusive by the scientific world.
Instead, the credit for disproving the azoic theory was, and still is, generally accorded to Charles Wyville Thomson and W. B. Carpenter [qq.v.]for their dredging results during the cruises of the Lightning and Porcupine in 1868 and 1869.
Wallich published several significant scientific papers during the 1870s and 1880s, mainly on the classification of the foraminiferans and on the role of the lower organisms in the formation of geological deposits.
He also became an accomplished photographer, publishing privately a volume of excellent portraits of contemporary scientists.
But his main preoccupation during the latter part of his life was in attempting to obtain the public recognition which he felt he had been denied.
This led him into a series of acrimonious exchanges, both private and public, with several notable scientists of the day, but mainly with Carpenter and Thomson, whom he also accused of plagiarizing his results, particularly those dealing with the biology of the foraminiferans.
The controversy culminated in 1877 with Wallich's unsuccessful demand that the Royal Society should censure his two opponents, for he felt that the Society had tacitly condoned their misdemeanours by publishing their results in its prestigious journal, from which Wallich was debarred since he was not a fellow.
He was never elected to the fellowship of the Royal Society, but in 1898 his work was recognized by the award of the gold medal of the Linnean Society.
Wallich undoubtedly felt that this recognition was too little and too late, remaining bitter and resentful to his death, 31 March 1899, which took place in London.
[A. L. Rice, H. L. Burstyn, and A. G. E. Jones, ‘G. C. Wallich MD — Megalomaniac or Mis-Used Oceanographic Genius?’,
Journal of the Society for the Bibliography of Natural History , vol. vii, no. 4, 1976; Wallich papers, British Museum (Natural History).]
D H Mellor
,Frank Plumpton (1903–1930), mathematician and philosopher, was born in Cambridge 22 February 1903, the eldest of the two sons and two daughters of Arthur Stanley Ramsey, president (i.e. vice-master) and mathematics tutor of Magdalene College, Cambridge, and his wife Agnes Mary Wilson.
He was educated at Winchester College (1915–20) and Trinity College, Cambridge (1920–3), where he read mathematics, winning an entrance scholarship, becoming a senior scholar in 1921 and a wrangler in the mathematical tripos in 1923.
In 1924 he became a fellow of King's College, Cambridge (only the second non-Kingsman to do so), and in 1926 a university lecturer in mathematics, a post he held until his death.
His main interest in mathematics was in its foundations, his ‘The Foundations of Mathematics’(1925) being the culmination of the reduction of mathematics to logic undertaken in the Principia Mathematica (1910–13) of Bertrand (third Earl) Russell and A. N. Whitehead [qq.v.].
On mathematics itself he published only eight pages, in ‘On a Problem of Formal Logic’(1928), but this subsequently became the basis of a whole branch of mathematics known as Ramsey theory.
He also worked on economics, encouraged by his friend John Maynard (later Baron) Keynes [q.v.],
and his papers, ‘A Contribution to the Theory of Taxation’(1927) and ‘A Mathematical Theory of Saving’(1928), started two flourishing branches of the subject: optimal taxation and optimal accumulation.
Keynes was influential in persuading King's to make him a fellow, despite his criticisms of Keynes's A Treatise on Probability (1921) culminating in his ‘Truth and Probability’(1926), the classic paper that laid the foundations for modern subjective interpretations of probability and related theories of games and decision making.
His real vocation, however, was philosophy, influenced especially by Russell and Ludwig Wittgenstein [q.v.],
whose Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (1922) he translated but whose Tractatus doctrines he later persuaded Wittgenstein to abandon.
His own work also included seminal articles on ‘Universals’(1925), ‘Facts and Propositions’(1927), ‘Knowledge’(1929), ‘Theories’(1929), ‘Universals of Law and of Fact’(1928), and ‘General Propositions and Causality’(1929).
Most of these papers were published only after his death, first in The Foundations of Mathematics (1931), edited by his friend R. B. Braithwaite, and later in his Philosophical Papers (1990), edited by D. H. Mellor.
His philosophy took a long time to be appreciated, partly because he never pushed his own work, which was subsequently overshadowed by that of Wittgenstein.
He was a quiet, modest man, easy going and uninhibited, with a loud infectious laugh, his tolerance and good humour enabling him to disagree strongly without giving or taking offence: as with his brother Michael (later Baron Ramsey of Canterbury), whose ordination (he went on to become archbishop of Canterbury) Frank, as a militant atheist, regretted.
He was tall (six feet three inches) and bulky, short-sighted, wore steel-rimmed spectacles and appeared clumsy but was in fact a good tennis player.
He produced his remarkable output in four hours a day — he found it too exacting to do more — in the mornings, with afternoons and evenings often spent walking or listening to records.
He listened a lot to classical music, both live and recorded, and was a keen hill-walker.
In 1925 he married Lettice, daughter of Cecil Cantley Baker, a land agent.
They had two daughters.
He died in Guy's Hospital, London, 19 January 1930, following an operation to cure an attack of jaundice.
[F. P. Ramsey,The Foundations of Mathematics , ed.
R. B. Braithwaite, 1931; introduction to F. P. Ramsey,Foundations , ed.
D. H. Mellor, 1978; contributions to ‘Better than the Stars’, a radio portrait of Frank Ramsey by D. H. Mellor, BBC Radio 3, 27 February 1978; personal communications from Margaret Paul (sister) and Jane Burch (daughter).]
A L Harris
,Charles Thomas (1852–1916), geologist, was born in Huddersfield 23 December 1852, the third of four sons and fifth of six children of Thomas William Clough, solicitor and later an alderman, of South Parade, Huddersfield, and his wife Amelia Jane, daughter of James Ibeson, surgeon.
Clough was educated at Rugby School and St John's College, Cambridge, where he obtained a first class in the natural sciences tripos in 1874 and an MA in 1878.
On graduating he joined the Geological Survey in 1875, working in the Teesdale and Cheviot districts until 1884, when he was posted to the Survey's Edinburgh office.
On his appointment in Scotland he formed part of a group of geologists who, in the period before World War I, were internationally without parallel for their original insights into metamorphic and igneous rocks and the intricate problems of structural geology.
On his promotion to district geologist in 1902, he became formally the leader of that group.
He made major contributions to the geology of Dalradian rocks along the Highland border between Callander and Loch Lomond and in the Cowal district of Argyllshire.
In Wester Ross, western Inverness-shire, and on Skye he unravelled the intricate metamorphic and structural history of the Moine schists and Lewisian gneisses, while on Mull he demonstrated complicated, intrusive, igneous relationships in the Tertiary Igneous Complex.
Clough's particular strength lay in the meticulous detail in which he recorded field data.
His contemporaries reported him as a master of geological field-mapping techniques and his original maps of many parts of Scotland confirm his observational skills and his ability to locate himself in the wilderness with an accuracy that cannot be improved upon with aerial photographs.
His passion and concern for minutiae may have served to diminish the impact that this work had on his contemporaries and successors.
The detail recorded on his maps was extended into his writings, where his conclusions about many geological relationships, later taken for granted but then original and often fundamental, were hidden in a mass of detailed evidence and justification.
The obscuring by detail of some of his more fundamental and original conclusions may have resulted in formal recognition of his contributions coming rather late in his life, although he was awarded the Murchison medal of the Geological Society in 1906 and was president of the Geological Society of Edinburgh from 1908 to 1910.
It was not until the year of his death that he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh and awarded an honorary LLD by St Andrews University.
Clough was small in stature with disproportionate physical strength and powers of endurance.
He had golden-brown hair and beard and a voice high in pitch but rich in timbre.
He had dogged determination and was of undeviating rectitude, although this did not relate to any well-defined religious beliefs.
He had a profound influence at a personal level on his contemporaries.
In 1881 he married Anne Mary, daughter of Thomas Durham Usher, gentleman.
They had a son and two daughters.
Clough died at Edinburgh Royal Infirmary 27 August 1916 of injuries sustained three days earlier in a railway accident while examining rocks in a narrow cutting.
He is commemorated by the Edinburgh Geological Society Clough memorial medal, awarded annually to geologists who have done significant original work in Scotland or northern England.
[Archives of the Geological Society of Edinburgh and the Geological Survey, Edinburgh; Kirklees metropolitan council archives; Edward Greenly,A Hand Through Time , 1938.]
Paul Slack
, Sir George (c. 1500–1558), merchant and alderman of London, was the son of George Barne, grocer of London, though the family seems also to have had connections in Wells, Somerset.
He was a member of the Haberdashers' Company, and prospered from various sectors of English commerce, both traditional and novel.
He exported cloth and imported wine from Spain, and he was a leading figure in new enterprises.
With William Garrard [q.v.],
he was a ‘principal doer’ in promoting the first voyage to Muscovy of 1553, a founder and active member of the Russia Company, and a promoter of voyages to West Africa in 1553 and 1554.
At the time of his death he had property in London, Southwark, and Hertfordshire.
Barne also took a full part in City politics.
He was alderman from 1542 and lord mayor in 1552–3, when the Crown passed precariously from Edward VI to Mary.
He was knighted on 11 April 1553 and was one of the City fathers signing the letters patent of Edward which made Lady Jane Grey queen.
Though consequently treated with some suspicion by the Marian regime, there is no evidence that he had strong Protestant convictions: his loyalties were to the City and other members of its élite.
He married Alice Brooke of Shropshire and had at least three sons and two daughters, all of them involved directly or by marriage in London commerce.
His heir, George, married William Garrard's daughter, Anne, and was subsequently governor of the Russia Company, mayor in 1586–7, and MP.
Of his daughters, Anne married Alexander Carleill, another Muscovy merchant,(and then Sir Francis Walsingham, q.v.); and Elizabeth married John Rivers, lord mayor in 1573–4.
Barne died 18 February 1558 and was buried at St Bartholomew the Little, London.
[T. S. Willan,The Muscovy Merchants of 1555 , 1953; J. G. Nichols (ed.),
Chronicle of Queen Jane and Queen Mary , Camden Society, vol. xlviii, 1850.]
Michael Coren
,Cecil Edward (1879–1918), journalist, was born 12 November 1879 in Kensington, the youngest in the family of two sons and one daughter of Edward Chesterton, estate agent, of London, and his wife Marie Louise Grosjean, daughter of a Wesleyan lay preacher and pioneer of the temperance movement.
He was educated at Colet House and St Paul's School.
His childhood was shaped by a fertile and loving relationship with his elder brother, Gilbert Keith Chesterton [q.v.],
and flavoured by his father's inveterate storytelling and relish for magic tricks.
G. K. Chesterton welcomed his brother's arrival with ‘now I shall always have an audience.’
Ironically, the younger boy dominated, frequently leading G. K. along novel social and academic paths.
He was a notoriously untidy child, with a penchant for pet cockroaches, and pockets full of half-eaten food and scribbled pages.
His precocity was partly formed by his propinquity to his brother, and subsequent membership of debating circles such as the IDK (I Don't Know), composed mostly of much older boys.
The pull of journalism was incessant, but filial loyalty led him to qualify as a property surveyor.
The profession's demands became intolerable however, and in 1901 he began contributing to the magazines of the day.
Prominent amongst these was the Eye-Witness , an erratic, often brilliant weekly, which prided itself on exposing corruption in high places and advocating a wider distribution of property based on broadly Christian principles, or distributism.
J. Hilaire Belloc [q.v.]
was the editor, Chesterton his assistant.
The two men were close friends, and compounded their views in the book The Party System (1911), an inflamed attack on the incestuous nature of British politics.
Chesterton became editor of the Eye-Witness and its successor, the New Witness , in 1912, the same year in which he joined the Roman Catholic Church, largely due to the influence of Belloc and his wife.
The year 1912 also saw the beginning of the Marconi campaign, in which he attacked a group of Liberal cabinet ministers, including the attorney-general, Sir Rufus Isaacs (later first Marquess of Reading, q.v.), who had profited on the Stock Exchange through illegal inside knowledge.
His case was a strong one and when he was prosecuted for criminal libel in 1913 he won a moral, if not a legal victory, avoiding the expected prison sentence.
His editorial polemics, however, were jaundiced by anti-Semitism.
Hilaire Belloc, often ambivalent towards the Jewish people, went so far as to condemn Chesterton's ethnic slurs.
His reputation dwindled in the shadow of his brother's achievements during the years between Marconi and World War I, and although his journalism remained incisive, it was increasingly tainted with bitterness at the perceived economic and political decay of Edwardian England.
In 1917 he was finally accepted, after several rejections, for front-line service in the East Surrey Regiment, and was wounded on three occasions.
In 1917, after a sixteen-year courtship, he married the journalist Ada Elizabeth Jones (who wrote under the name of John Keith Prothero), daughter of the writer Frederick Charles Jones; they had no children.
A virulent attack of nephritis prevented Chesterton from further action at the front, and he died 6 December 1918 in Wimereux, near Boulogne, France.
[G. K. Chesterton,Autobiography , 1936; Michael Coren,Gilbert: the Man Who was G. K. Chesterton , 1989.]
Robin Bidwell
,Stafford Bettesworth (c. 1801–1860), political agent in Aden, was from a Sussex family, but his place and date of birth are unknown.
He was appointed a midshipman in the Bombay Marine in 1817 and arrived in India in May 1818.
Haines made his name as a surveyor in the Persian Gulf, and was appointed assistant surveyor in 1826.
After a short period as quarantine master in Bombay in 1832, Haines was appointed to the survey ship Palinurus to chart the south coast of Arabia.
In 1833 Haines was instructed to survey the island of Socotra as a possible coaling station for steamships travelling between Britain and India.
Following his failure to buy or seize Socotra, Haines convinced the government of Bombay that Aden could be made into both a strategic and a great commercial centre.
In 1837 Haines persuaded the sultan of Lahej to sell Aden.
He returned to India, following a kidnap attempt, but because there was a fear that Muhammad Ali Pasha, governor of Egypt, might seize Aden, he stormed the town on 19 January 1839.
Haines was presented with a sword worth 200 guineas, appointed political agent, and later promoted captain (1841).
He administered Aden from 1839 to 1854.
His first tasks were to erect fortifications, to intrigue to prevent the Arabs from uniting to expel the intruder, and to use the Jews to set up a highly efficient intelligence network.
After he had beaten off three attacks to retake Aden, Haines was able to concentrate on his plans for turning a ramshackle town where 600 people, nearly half Jews, lived in squalor into the main entrepôt for Arabia and East Africa.
An attempt to bring the imam of Yemen into alliance was vetoed by India, but he played tribal politics better than the craftiest of sheikhs, cheaply keeping the peace with well-placed bribes.
At the same time, offering low rents to those who would agree to build in stone, he laid out a town which after seven years had a population of 25,000, served by a free port.
Haines had no friends in high places and his requests for administrative help were unheeded.
He was a virtual dictator but had to write every letter himself and took no leave for fifteen years.
When auditors did arrive they found a deficit of £28,000, for, in the absence of a bank, Haines had used the Treasury for political and administrative expenses without keeping proper records.
He was recalled to Bombay by the East India Company in February 1854 and put on trial for fraud and embezzlement; although twice acquitted he was nevertheless cashiered.
No one believed him guilty of financial dishonesty but the governor, John Elphinstone (thirteenth Baron Elphinstone, q.v.), demanded restitution of the money.
Haines, with an annual salary of £2,400, was unable to pay and was consigned to a debtors' prison.
He remained there for six years until the new governor of Bombay, Sir George Clerk [q.v.],
took pity on him.
He was released on 9 June 1860.
Haines was a strange mixture, a man with a romantic vision for the future of the first conquest of Queen Victoria's reign, a skilful politician amongst Arabs but not amongst his fellow-countrymen, with a sailor's practicality in such matters as building a town but not in administration.
He was a formidable man, often devious, but liked by his colleagues and subordinates, energetic, and determined.
He was thickset with a broad forehead and full beard and very light-coloured, widely set eyes that could be most intimidating.
In 1831 he married Mary Saulez in Alton, Hampshire.
They had one son and one daughter.
Haines died 16 June 1860, at Bombay harbour on a ship that was to take him to England, one week after his release from prison.
[India Office records; Gordon Waterfield,Sultans of Aden , 1968.]
E B Stuart
,John , sixteenth Earl of Shrewsbury and Earl of Waterford (1791–1852), leading Roman Catholic, was born 18 March 1791, the eldest surviving child of John Joseph Talbot, brother of Charles, the fifteenth Earl of Shrewsbury, and his wife Catherine, daughter of Thomas Clifton of Lytham, Lancashire.
His father was later to have another son by a second marriage.
John Talbot was born in the same year as the Catholic Relief Act was passed and as a result was one of the first sons of Catholic gentlemen able to benefit from a solid Catholic education in Britain.
He was sent first to the Benedictines at Vernon Hall, Lancashire, then in 1802 to Stonyhurst, and finally in 1806 to St Edmund's College, Ware.
In June 1827 he succeeded to the title and estates of his uncle Charles.
The Talbot family was one of the oldest Catholic families in Britain, having remained true to the faith throughout the Reformation and penal years (the only exception being Charles Talbot, twelfth Earl, q.v., who conformed to the Protestant religion in 1679).
Unlike many recusant families the Talbots had managed to retain most of their landed estates and for centuries they were the most important landowners in the midlands.
In 1829 the Catholic Emancipation Act was passed, but the new earl was reluctant to assume the active political life that was now open to him.
He devoted his time to the completion of the mansion and pleasure gardens at Alton Towers begun by his uncle, who had made the place his home.
Searching for an architect who could produce buildings in the Gothic style, which was then becoming fashionable, he made the acquaintance of the eccentric Augustus Pugin [q.v.]
and employed him.
Pugin (who soon after their meeting converted to Catholicism) together with a fellow convert Ambrose Phillipps de Lisle [q.v.]
drew Shrewsbury into their vision of a Roman Catholic revival in Britain.
Alton Towers became the gathering-place of clergy, leading laity, and converts.
Shrewsbury was asked to sponsor the building of many of the churches designed by Pugin and to provide financial support for de Lisle's schemes for the reconversion of England.
The earl obliged the two converts, often against his better judgement.
He took a far more realistic approach to the revival and certainly did not share their conviction that the Oxford Movement would lead to the reunion of the Church of England with the Church of Rome.
Although hailed by the leaders of the Catholic revival as their patron, ‘the good Earl John’(as he was known by them) retained something of the recusant Catholic families' suspicion of ‘enthusiasm’, religious fervour, and triumphalism.
When the Catholic hierarchy was restored in 1850 Shrewsbury, whilst defending the restoration in public and denouncing the Catholic peers who distanced themselves from it, felt that the triumphalist attitude of Cardinal Nicholas Wiseman [q.v.]
was imprudent and ill-advised.
A staunch Tory, Shrewsbury was distressed to find himself at odds with some of his fellow Catholics over Ireland and deplored the support given to Daniel O'Connell [q.v.]
by the Catholic organ the Tablet .
By 1850 the earl was spending most of his time in Italy, having had to close Alton Towers for most of the year because of the expense of upkeep.
In 1814 he married Maria Theresa, eldest daughter of William Talbot of Castle Talbot, county Wexford.
They had a son who died in infancy and two daughters, both of whom married Italian princes.
Shrewsbury died in Naples 9 November 1852 and was succeeded by his cousin, Bertram Arthur Talbot (1832–1856).
[Tablet , 16 and 30 November 1852; Denis Gwynn,Lord Shrewsbury, Pugin and the Catholic Revival , 1946.]
Stanley Wells
,William (c. 1568–1623), publisher, printer of the Shakespeare First Folio, was born c .1568, the son of a London barber-surgeon.
On 20 August 1584 he was apprenticed for eight years from 29 September to the distinguished printer Henry Denham [q.v.];
his brother John was apprenticed to another printer, Richard Tottel [q.v.],
on 29 October.
William became a freeman of the Stationers' Company on 6 December 1591.
He set up shop as a publisher and on 26 August 1594 married Jayne Vrique; a son, Isaac, was baptized on 19 April 1595; three other children, Thomas, Joan, and Alice, figure in his will.
Jaggard's first book was registered with the Stationers' Company on 4 March 1595; he rapidly became a successful businessman.
Ill feeling followed his publication in 1599 of The Passionate Pilgrim .
Ascribed to Shakespeare, this poetical anthology includes versions of sonnets 138 and 144, three extracts from Love's Labour's Lost , and other short poems, some by writers other than Shakespeare, others of unknown authorship.
In a third edition of 1612 Jaggard added without authority nine poems from Troia Britannica (1609) by Thomas Heywood [q.v.].
Heywood, in his Apology for Actors (1612), protested and declared Shakespeare ‘much offended with M. Iaggard (that altogether vnknowne to him) presumed to make so bold with his name’(signature G4r+v).
The original title-page was replaced with one that did not mention Shakespeare's name.
Jaggard's career prospered.
He seems to have taken at least nine apprentices, the last in November 1622; one, bound in 1610, was John Shakespeare, son of a Warwick butcher.
In 1601 Jaggard collaborated with Thomas Pavier to publish the only book of his own composition, a summary history of the lord mayors of London from Elizabeth's accession until 1601, and in 1602 he acquired what seems to have been a monopoly on the printing of playbills (none survives).
In 1604 he received a lucrative royal commission to print the Ten Commandments for use in churches throughout the country.
Around this time he entered into partnership with James Roberts [q.v.],
whose printing business he soon took over.
On 17 December 1610 Jaggard became official printer to the City of London (Guildhall records: Letter Book DD fo. 225b).
Around 1612 he became blind as a result of syphilis; an account of his treatment is preserved in the British Library (Sloane MS 640).
On 23 June 1613 Isaac Jaggard was admitted freeman of the company by patrimony, doubtless to help his father.
In 1619 William joined Pavier in an attempt to publish plays by and attributed to Shakespeare, apparently intending to sell them in sets of nine volumes.
He had printed four volumes before the lord chamberlain forbade the Stationers' Company to print any of the King's Men's plays without permission.
Jaggard then issued the remaining plays with false dates.
This fraud caused much confusion until it was exposed as the result of bibliographical detective work by A. W. Pollard, Sir W. W. Greg [qq.v.], and others.
Jaggard is best remembered as joint publisher and printer of the First Folio of Shakespeare; printing was completed in late October or early November of 1623, around the time of his death; he is named in the colophon, but the title-page (probably printed last) names Isaac, who on 4 November became printer to the City of London ‘in the place of William Jaggard his late Father deceased’(Guildhall records: Letter Book JJ, fo. 51).
Jaggard's will, made on 28 March 1623, was proved on 17 November; he left a substantial estate.
[E. E. Willoughby,A Printer of Shakespeare: the Books and Times of William Jaggard , 1934; F. P. Wilson, ‘The Jaggards and the First Folio of Shakespeare’,Times Literary Supplement , 5 and 12 November 1925.]
John Harvey
,William (c. 1465–1527), master mason, was the younger son of Adam Vertue, a working mason at Westminster Abbey, and first appears in 1501 as joint master with his elder brother Robert for the rebuilding of Bath Abbey church.
Within the next year the brothers were also designing Henry VII's chapel at Westminster, and vaults for St George's chapel in Windsor Castle.
With John Aylmer, a London mason, William contracted to vault the choir on 5 June 1506, the work to be finished by the end of 1508.
Robert Vertue died late in 1506 and William continued various jobs started by his brother.
He may have been the ‘Maister Vartu’ who worked on the church of St Mary-at-Hill in London in 1502, and the ‘Vertu the mason’paid for a new window at St Anthony's Hospital, Threadneedle Street, London.
Soon after Robert's death William was called to Cambridge to discuss the resumption of work on the unfinished King's College chapel with Henry Smyth, clerk and surveyor of the king's works, and John Lee, who was to become joint master mason with John Wastell [q.v.].
Vertue's first visit was on 1 May 1507; in December 1509 he was again at Cambridge with Henry Redman [q.v.];
and on 30 July 1512 he dined in hall with Wastell.
Vertue was doubtless involved because of his expert knowledge of vaulting gained at Windsor, Westminster, and, above all, at Bath Abbey where he and his brother had engaged in respect of their fan vault that ‘there shall be noone so goodely neither in England nor in France.’
On 28 July 1510 Vertue was granted the office of king's master mason at the Tower of London and elsewhere.
He continued Henry VII's chapel until its completion in 1519, and at Windsor undertook a further contract to vault the lady chapel between 1511 and 1514.
At Oxford he designed Corpus Christi College, built in 1512–18.
There, as elsewhere, Vertue worked with Humphrey Coke, the master carpenter, and they were jointly responsible for ground and first-floor plans of the college.
Between 1511 and 1522 he probably worked for the Duke of Buckingham on Thornbury Castle, Gloucestershire.
In 1512 the old chapel of St Peter ad Vincula in the Tower of London was destroyed by fire, and Vertue designed its successor, finished in 1520.
He also supervised alterations at Woking Palace from 1515, and in 1516 he and Henry Redman designed the west side of the court of Eton College, including Lupton's tower.
On stylistic grounds Vertue may also be credited with the design of Lupton's chantry in Eton College chapel.
In 1519 Vertue gave up his patent as king's mason and became joint master with Redman.
He none the less played a prominent part in 1520 in the preparations at Calais for the ‘Field of the Cloth of Gold’, continued to supervise the works at Eton, and seems to have been the architect of St Stephen's cloister in Westminster Palace.
[J. Harvey,English Mediaeval Architects , 1984.]
James Lees-Milne
,(Emily) Margaret (1876–1951), authority on English furniture and decoration, was born 15 August 1876 in Derwent, Derbyshire, the eighth in the family of five sons and five daughters of the Revd Francis Jourdain, vicar of Derwent Woodlands, Derbyshire, and his wife Emily, daughter of Charles Clay [q.v.],
a Manchester surgeon.
Stories about her childhood suggest that she was shrewd, self-reliant, and unorthodox.
She rejected Christianity: ‘I don't want to hear any more about that poor man,’ she is said to have told her governess.
Margaret had little affinity with her siblings, including her brother Francis [q.v.],
an ornithologist, and her sister Eleanor, author, with C. A. E. Moberly, of The Adventure .
She was privately educated, and then went to Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford, where she took a third class in classical honour moderations in 1897.
On her father's death in 1898, Margaret moved with her mother to lodgings in Cambridge, and then to Broadwinter Farm, Dorset.
But family life and obligations were not to her liking, and she left home whenever she could afford to do so.
By earning a pittance as a contributor to learned periodicals, she managed from time to time to share rooms in London with friends.
She translated from the classics and the French symbolist poets.
Lord Alfred Douglas [q.v.],
editor of the Academy between 1907 and 1910, published her occasional verse, including An Outdoor Breviary (1909), a collection of pastoral prose poems.
Haunted by penury for the rest of her life, she habitually made notes over other people's letters and wrote her own on the back of old laundry bills.
During World War I she met the novelist Ivy Compton-Burnett [q.v.].
In October 1919, at the age of forty-three, she moved into Ivy's flat, thereby establishing a friendship which brought the two ladies considerable renown.
From poetry Margaret Jourdain's interests gradually shifted to furniture and decorative artefacts.
Between 1903 and 1910 she wrote nearly sixty articles on such subjects as lace, samplers, stumpwork, wallpapers, tea caddies, silks, and velvets.
Edward Hudson of Country Life enlisted her services in making that periodical the exponent of culture and the arts to a wide public.
In 1910 her The History of English Secular Embroidery appeared and it was followed in 1914 by Furniture in England from 1660 to 1770 and Decoration in England from 1660 to 1770 , albeit both under the name of the fashionable decorator Francis Lenygon, by whom Margaret was casually employed.
A succession of books on kindred subjects was published by Batsford.
Decorative Plasterwork of the Renaissance (1927) was the first to treat of that particular craft.
Margaret Jourdain was one of ten contributors to Percy Macquoid and H. C. Ralph Edwards's massive three-volume The Dictionary of English Furniture (1924–7).
The outbreak of war in 1939 brought these pursuits to a temporary halt.
They were resumed by the publication, jointly with H. C. Ralph Edwards, of Georgian Cabinet-Makers (1944), the first serious recognition of furniture designers other than Thomas Chippendale, George Hepplewhite, and Thomas Sheraton [qq.v.].
The Work of William Kent (1948), though strictly factual and dry, was also original and scholarly.
Lastly,English Interior Decoration 1500 to 1830 (1950) was a worthy symposium of a life's study of the ancillary arts.
Margaret Jourdain was squat, broad, and plain.
Dressed in clothes subfusc and neat she favoured large hats with rampageous feathers.
At the end of a long gold chain she carried a Georgian spyglass which she applied in a rather menacing manner to a small, beady eye.
Her speech was clipped and deprecatory, yet she was sought after by a host of admirers who held her in awe and sometimes felt affection for her.
She was extremely generous to aspiring young art historians.
Records of the gatherings around her and Ivy Compton-Burnett's ample though moderate table at Braemar Mansions, Kensington, have contributed to the mythology of English literary anecdote.
The bluestocking pair dispensed eccentricity and cheer.
To Ivy's irreparable loss Margaret died from heart failure 6 April 1951 in the Charing Cross Hospital.
Her last words were, ‘Don't let Day [their maid]eat all the Elvas plums.’
She was unmarried.
[Hilary Spurling,Ivy When Young , 1974, and Secrets of a Woman's Heart , 1984;A Conversation between I. Compton-Burnett and M. Jourdain , Orion: a Miscellany, vol. i, 1945; personal knowledge.]
Cecily Langdale
,Gwendolen Mary (1876–1939), artist, was born 22 June 1876 in Haverfordwest, Pembrokeshire, Wales, the elder daughter and the second of four children of Edwin William John, solicitor, and his wife Augusta Smith, who came from a Brighton family.
The artist Augustus John [q.v.]
was her younger brother.
Her childhood was spent at Haverfordwest and, from the age of eight, at Tenby.
She was educated first at home by governesses and subsequently at Miss Wilson's Academy in Tenby and Miss Philpott's Educational Establishment in London.
All four children escaped the repressive John household at their earliest opportunity, Gwen John in 1895 by going to London to enter the Slade School of Fine Art, then the most progressive art school in Britain.
She studied there for three years with Frederick Brown and Henry Tonks [qq.v.], winning a certificate for figure drawing (1896–7) and the Melvill Nettleship prize for figure composition (1897–8).
Among her fellow students were A. Ambrose McEvoy [q.v.],
Ursula Tyrwhitt, Ida Nettleship (later Mrs Augustus John), Gwen Salmond (later Mrs Matthew Smith), and, most gifted of all, her brother Augustus.
Her lifelong tendency to form intense and smothering attachments to both men and women, by their very nature doomed to failure, became apparent at this time.
Seemingly meek and self-effacing, she was in fact strong-willed and fiercely passionate.
Upon leaving the Slade she went to Paris in September 1898.
There she studied for several months at the Académie Carmen with James McNeill Whistler [q.v.],
who admired her ‘fine sense of tone’.
In January 1899 Gwen John returned to London, where, for the next four years, she lived what she later called a ‘subterranean’ existence in various dismal Bloomsbury and Bayswater rooms.
During this period she had an unhappy love affair with the painter Ambrose McEvoy.
She exhibited for the first time in spring 1900 at the New English Art Club, an organization with strong Slade connections, and continued to show there twice yearly until 1903.
In March 1903 she and Augustus had a joint exhibition at Carfax & Co., London; she had already acquired the reputation of working extremely slowly, and contributed only three pictures to her brother's forty-five.
Her early art reflects her Slade training.
The paintings are usually faintly Victorian genre scenes of women in interiors; executed in sombre earth colours, they are small and highly finished.
The drawings are mostly assured, slightly restrained studies of women.
In autumn 1903 she made a walking tour through France with Dorelia McNeill, later Augustus John's companion.
After stopping for several months in Toulouse, they arrived in Paris in February 1904; she was never to leave.
For the next decade, she lived in a series of modest Montparnasse residences, several of them subjects of paintings.
She had a small group of friends, usually women, though one was the poet Rainer Maria Rilke.
Her requirements were few, and she earned a meagre living as an artist's model, most notably for Auguste Rodin, whom she met in 1904, and for whose unfinished monument to Whistler she posed.
Although an unhappy liaison with Rodin consumed much of her attention during the next several years, she did produce many drawings, among them most of her famous cat studies, and at least a dozen paintings.
She continued to exhibit at the New English Art Club (1908–11).
As her love affair with Rodin drew to a close, she focused increasingly on her art, and the next decade was a productive one.
From 1911 John Quinn, the American lawyer and collector, provided her with a stipend and purchased any picture she offered.
Equally valuable was his encouragement and emotional support, although they did not meet until 1921.
In January 1911 she took rooms at 29 rue Terre Neuve in the Paris suburb of Meudon where Rodin lived.
There she began instruction in Catholicism and was received into the church probably early in 1913.
She was commissioned by the nuns of the local chapter of the Soeurs de Charité Dominicaines de la Présentation de la Sainte Vierge de Tours to paint a series of portraits of their founder, Mère Marie Poussepin.
Gwen John did many water-colours of church interiors, populated by those nuns and their charges, the little girls of the Orphelinat St Joseph.
She remained in Paris during World War I, though she made frequent trips to the Brittany coast, where she did profoundly moving drawings of children.
Because of war restrictions, she ceased exhibiting in London; she showed several times in New York (Armory show, 1913; Penguin Club, 1918).
Apart from a few still lifes, interiors, and landscapes, the pictures of Gwen John's artistic maturity are all female portraits, usually of a model known only as ‘the convalescent’, the monumental figure isolated or before a simple background.
The pictures are relatively small, their compositions simplified.
The surfaces are fresco-like, the pigment dry and chalky, and the palette severely restricted.
She now painted multiple versions of each subject.
The early 1920s were years of achievement and satisfaction.
She exhibited in Paris (salons of 1919–25) and New York (Sculptors' Gallery, 1922).
In 1920 she met the poet Arthur Symons [q.v.],
of whom she made drawings.
John Quinn's death in 1924 closed this happy period, and brought genuine financial insecurity.
She painted less and, without Quinn's encouragement, she was less eager to exhibit.
However, in 1926 she had the largest show of her lifetime, at the New Chenil Galleries, London, and received considerable attention.
By 1930 she was represented in various public collections (Tate Gallery, London; City of Manchester Art Galleries; Whitworth Art Gallery, University of Manchester; Hugh Lane Municipal Gallery of Modern Art, Dublin; Albright-Knox Art Gallery, Buffalo; Art Institute of Chicago).
This was the period of her last obsessive attachment, to Véra Oumançoff, sister-in-law of the philosopher Jacques Maritain.
By about 1930 she had ceased painting, though for several more years she made small, colourful, increasingly abstract water-colours.
She occasionally exhibited earlier work (Carnegie Institute, Pittsburgh, 1930; Deffett Francis Art Gallery, Swansea, 1935; National Eisteddfod in Fishguard, 1936).
She purchased a shack at 8 rue Babie, Meudon, to which she moved in 1932.
Her last years are somewhat mysterious.
She withdrew more and more completely, and displayed total disregard for her own well-being.
She still made occasional trips to Brittany; on the last of those, she fell ill and died 18 September 1939 in the Hôpital de Dieppe.
She was unmarried.
[Susan Chitty,Gwen John , 1981; Mary Taubman,Gwen John , 1985; Cecily Langdale and David Fraser Jenkins,Gwen John: an Interior Life , 1985; Cecily Langdale,Gwen John: with a Catalogue Raisonné of the Paintings and a Selection of the Drawings , 1987.]
M K C MacMahon
,James (1824–1882), clergyman and lexicographer, was born in 1824, the son of James Stormonth, fish curer, and his wife Jane Robertson.
He had at least one younger brother.
He was educated at the Canongate Burgh School, Edinburgh, and the University of Edinburgh (1845–7, 1851–7) where he read arts and divinity but did not proceed to graduate.
He entered the ministry of the Church of Scotland as a licentiate at New Street church, Edinburgh.
Appointed to a teaching post at the Canongate Burgh School, he remained there until 1864, when disagreements with the school's directors led to his dismissal.
In 1867 his post as session clerk of the Canongate kirk was terminated.
He returned thereafter to ministerial appointments in the Church of Scotland: in Cupar and Orkney (Rendall and Stenness).
It was during the five years he spent in Orkney that he began to make a name for himself in the field of English-language studies; he was also the writer of the ‘Orcadian Boatman's Song’.
Arguments within his congregation in Stenness, however, led to his demitting his post and returning to Edinburgh.
His philological work focused on the lexis, pronunciation, and orthography of English.
His Etymological and Pronouncing Dictionary of the English Language (1871) was immensely popular with the general public — by 1918 it had passed through eighteen editions.
Its success lay in the clarity and succinctness of exposition of the subject-matter.
In the academic world, however, the work was received less approvingly.
A devastating review by Henry Bradley [q.v.]
in the Academy (April 1884), after Stormonth's death, exposed the numerous weaknesses in his etymological analyses.
From the Dictionary Stormonth derived other publications, including a series for schoolchildren and students on the vocabulary and spelling of English.
In 1880 he became a deacon of the Episcopal Church in Scotland; in 1881 he was ordained priest and served at the church of St John the Evangelist, Edinburgh.
His tenure of the post was short: his health had been declining progressively for several months as a result of overwork, and he died 5 February 1882 at his home at 7 Cornwall Street, Edinburgh.
He was survived by his wife, Mary Trotter, whom he married in 1847, daughter of the Revd Robert Hunter, a schoolmaster of Colinton, and by two sons and four daughters.
[Minute book of the Canongate Burgh School directors; Canongate kirk session records; minutes of the presbytery of Cairston;Athenaeum , February 1882;Scottish Guardian , February 1882.]
John Bold
,Hugh (1621–1684), architect, was born in 1621, the seventh son of John May of Mid Lavant, near Chichester, Sussex, and the cousin of Baptist May [q.v.],
keeper of the Privy Purse to Charles II.
Little is known of his career before the Restoration, but it is likely that his appointment on 29 June 1660 as paymaster of the Works indicates services rendered to the court in exile, rather than architectural activity.
May is known to have been in the service of George Villiers, second Duke of Buckingham [q.v.],
during the 1650s, when he assisted in the transfer of works of art from York House to Holland, where they were to be sold, and in 1656 he accompanied his friend, the painter (Sir) Peter Lely [q.v.],
on a further visit to Holland to join the exiled court, travelling with him as his ‘servant’.
Dutch influence is apparent in his architecture.
Although May's connection with the Royal Works, like that of the surveyor, Sir John Denham (d .
1669, q.v.), appears to have stemmed from his political activities, he proved himself, unlike Denham, to be an inspired choice.
May became one of the outstanding architects of the seventeenth century.
As paymaster he was responsible for the organization of the finance required in the restoration of the neglected royal palaces.
In 1665–6 he joined with Sir Roger Pratt [q.v.]
and (Sir) Christopher Wren [q.v.]
in advising on the repair of old St Paul's Cathedral, and after the great fire was appointed as one of the supervisors of the rebuilding of the City.
After acting as surveyor of the Works in 1666, during Denham's illness, he was promoted to the comptrollership in June 1668.
He entertained hopes of succeeding Denham upon the latter's death in 1669. but was passed over in favour of Wren, being compensated by the grant of a pension of £300 per year in recognition of ‘loyal and faithfull service’.
May's major architectural work for the court was the remodelling in 1674–84 of the upper ward of Windsor Castle, following his appointment as comptroller of the Works there in 1673.
This work, now destroyed or altered, was remarkably innovative, the architect creating the first great baroque ensemble in England, combining architecture, carving (by Grinling Gibbons, q.v.), and painting (by Antonio Verrio, q.v.) in a grand and sumptuous suite of staterooms.
The spatial complexity and dramatic lighting of the staircase at Windsor had been achieved by May on a smaller scale at the earlier Eltham Lodge, Kent, one of the quintessential Restoration houses, built in 1664 for Sir John Shaw, and one of the few buildings by the architect to survive.
His other firmly authenticated works, all for men in court circles, included Cornbury House in Oxfordshire, Berkeley House in Piccadilly, and Cassiobury Park in Hertfordshire.
May died 21 February 1684 and was buried in Mid Lavant church.
By his will (PCC 32 HARE), dated 19 January 1684, he left the major part of his estate to his nephew Thomas, son of his late elder brother John.
There are portraits of May by Samuel Cooper [q.v.],
dated 1653, at Windsor, and by Lely, a double portrait with the artist,c .1675, at Audley End.
[H. M. Colvin,A Biographical Dictionary of British Architects 1600–1840 , 1978;idem (ed.),
The History of the King's Works , vol. v, 1660–1782, 1976; K. Downes,English Baroque Architecture , 1966; O. Hill and J. Cornforth,English Country Houses Caroline , 1966; O. Millar,Sir Peter Lely , 1978.]
Richard J Grace
, Sir (Nicholas) James (Sutherland), baronet (1796–1878), merchant, was born in 1796 in Lairg, Sutherlandshire, the second son in the family of three sons and five daughters of Captain Donald Matheson of Skinness and his wife Katherine, daughter of the Revd Thomas MacKay, minister of Lairg.
He was educated at the Royal High School and the University of Edinburgh, after which he spent two years learning commerce with a London agency house.
Calcutta attracted him in 1815, but his first enterprises there were inauspicious and unsuccessful.
However, his voyages as supercargo on ships in the ‘country trade’ between India and China opened his eyes to the opportunities in Singapore and Canton.
By the early 1820s he held appointment as Danish consul at Canton, and was a partner in the firm of Yrissari & Company, renamed Matheson & Company in 1827, and wound up in 1828.
While serving as agent in Canton for merchants in India and Singapore, and dealing in export and import commerce, he speculated in the opium trade which, although illegal, offered the greatest profits.
In 1828 a fellow Scot, William Jardine [q.v.],
brought Matheson into the firm of Magniac & Company, reconstituted in 1832 as Jardine, Matheson & Company.
Of the two, Jardine was the dour, disciplined business planner, while Matheson was the more mercurial and intellectually curious entrepreneur.
Their combined experience built the most influential agency house in Canton, its fleet flying Scotland's cross of St Andrew with colours reversed.
Jardine, Matheson engaged in banking, shipping, insurance, and marketing, principally on commission for businesses remote from China.
Their legitimate trade may have exceeded their opium trade, but it was their hard-currency resources from opium sales which gave them primacy among the foreign merchants in Canton.
Matheson's advocacy of free trade was embodied in his booklet The Present Position and Prospects of British Trade with China (1836).
Shortly after Jardine retired from Canton in 1839, leaving Matheson as the managing partner, imperial commissioner Lin Tse-hsu confiscated foreign inventories of opium, and forcibly detained sixteen merchants, including Matheson.
Upon their release in May, Lin expelled Matheson from China forever, but the Scot retreated first to Macao and then to Hong Kong, to resume opium sales in secret, with 200 per cent profits on fresh supplies from India.
During the first opium war (1840–2), after Hong Kong was occupied by the British expedition, Matheson purchased for his firm the first plots of land offered for sale on the island.
For medical reasons he retired to London in 1842, and there found his partner terminally ill.
When Jardine died in 1843, Matheson succeeded him as MP for Ashburton, 1843–7.
He then sat for Ross and Cromarty, 1847–68.
He also pursued finance, and in 1848 helped reorganize the banking firm of Magniac, Jardine, which as Matheson & Company became a financial giant in the City, and within which he became ‘Uncle James’.
In his China days Matheson had joined with Jardine and others to organize the Medical Missionary Society in Canton and a hospital in Macao.
Also, with a small hand press in 1827, he started the Canton Register , China's first English-language newspaper.
Upon retiring to Britain, he purchased the Isle of Lewis, in the outer Hebrides, and acquired other vast estates in Scotland.
For his generous relief to the people of Lewis during the great famine of the late 1840s, he was made a baronet in 1850.
Matheson was appointed lord lieutenant and sheriff principal of the county of Ross in 1866.
Elected FRS in 1846, he led an active public life into his eighth decade, and for many years served as chairman of the Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Company.
In 1843 he married Mary Jane, daughter of Michael Henry Percival, of Spencer Wood, Canada, a member of the Quebec legislative council.
They had no children.
Matheson died 31 December 1878 in Mentone, in the south of France.
[Maggie Keswick (ed.),
The Thistle and The Jade , 1982; Michael Greenberg,British Trade and the Opening of China 1800–42 , 1951; Peter Ward Fay,The Opium War, 1840–1842 , 1975; information from Alan Reid, archivist, Jardine Matheson Company.]
Michael J Turner
,John (1770–1812), assassin of the prime minister Spencer Perceval, was born in St Neot's in Huntingdonshire, the younger child and only son of a London land surveyor and miniature painter and his wife Elizabeth Searbrow, of St Neot's gentry stock.
His father became mentally ill in 1779, dying a year later.
At fourteen Bellingham was apprenticed to a Whitechapel jeweller but proved ‘perverse and troublesome’ and eventually ran away.
In 1787 he sailed as a subaltern on a merchantman that was wrecked.
In 1793 Bellingham established himself as a tradesman in Oxford Street but was gazetted bankrupt in 1794.
Later he became a commercial agent, and in 1804 was arrested for debt in Archangel.
He accused the local authorities of improper detention and made repeated appeals for help to the British consul and ambassador.
They did not act since the case was one for the Russian authorities alone.
Finally released in October 1809, he returned to England, determined to gain redress.
Since the consul and ambassador had failed to help him, he felt entitled to reparation from the British government.
Persistent calls for justice were unavailing and, exasperated by his lack of success, Bellingham decided upon the extreme course of assassinating the prime minister — a crime carried out, with pistols, coolly and deliberately, in the House of Commons lobby on 11 May 1812.
Tried on 15 May, he was found guilty of murder and executed three days later in London.
Before, during, and after the trial Bellingham remained calm and collected, showing no signs of fear or remorse.
He felt fully justified in acting as he did, asserting that true blame attached to those who had refused to listen to his grievances.
After his return from Russia he had married Mary-Anne, daughter of John Neville, a Dublin merchant.
The pair settled in Liverpool; Bellingham practised as an insurance broker and his wife as a milliner.
They had two children.
Preoccupied with efforts to gain redress from the ministry, however, Bellingham had abandoned his family and moved to London.
[Daniel Wilson,The Substance of a Conversation with John Bellingham , 1812;The Trial of John Bellingham.
Taken in shorthand by Mr. Fraser.
With an Account of Bellingham's execution , 1812;The Times , 12, 13, 16, 18, and 19 May 1812; D. Gray,Spencer Perceval, the Evangelical Prime Minister , 1963.]
Peter J T Morris
,Alexander Macomb (1844–1917), industrialist, was born 28 June 1844 in Edgbaston, Birmingham, the ninth and youngest child of George Chance, a hardware merchant, and his wife Cornelia Maria, daughter of Arent Schuyler de Peyster of New York.
George was a brother of Robert Lucas Chance, who founded Chance Brothers & Co., glass-makers of Smethwick, in 1824.
Alexander Macomb Chance was educated at King Edward's School, Birmingham, and then in Lausanne.
He subsequently joined the family firm.
Chance Brothers had established an alkali works at Oldbury in 1835, to supply the glassworks.
Chance was made managing director of the works in June 1868 and was made a partner of Chance Brothers in 1879.
When the alkali works were converted into the Oldbury Alkali Co.
Ltd. in 1890, Alexander M. Chance was made deputy chairman as well as managing director.
He decided not to take part in the creation of the United Alkali Co. in 1890, but amalgamated his company with another midland Leblanc soda manufacturer, Hunt & Sons of Wednesbury, in 1898 to form Chance & Hunt Ltd.
He was chairman of Chance & Hunt from 1901 until his retirement in June 1912; Brunner, Mond & Co. (later part of ICI) acquired a majority shareholding in Chance & Hunt in 1917.
Chance is chiefly remembered for the Chance process, for the recovery of sulphur in the Leblanc process, which enabled it to weather for another thirty years the challenge from the ammonia-soda process used by the Solvay Company in Belgium and its British partner, Brunner, Mond & Co.
The Leblanc process prepared soda (sodium carbonate) by heating salt with sulphuric acid, which formed saltcake (sodium sulphate) and hydrochloric acid gas.
The saltcake was then converted into the desired soda by heating it with coal and limestone in large revolving furnaces.
Unfortunately, impure calcium sulphide was a major by-product of this second step, and the Leblanc works were surrounded by mounds of evil-smelling waste called ‘galligu’.
In the 1880s Chance developed a method of pumping carbon dioxide gas through tanks of a slurry of galligu and water.
The hydrogen sulphide gas thereby freed from calcium sulphide was burnt to produce elemental sulphur, which was used to make sulphuric acid.
Chance built a convalescent home for his workers and set up a fund which quickly paid out compensation for industrial accidents on a ‘no-fault’ basis.
His concern about the evil effects of drunkenness led to the formation of the Langley Temperance Club, and he was also active in the social work of the Church of England.
He presented the open space of Warley Woods to the city of Birmingham.
In 1870 Chance married Florence (died 1903), daughter of Major Arthur H. M. Mercer, of the 60th Rifles.
They had eight children.
In 1907 he married Agnes Elizabeth, daughter of William Fleming of Inverness.
There were no children of the second marriage.
Chance died in Torquay 22 November 1917.
[Obituary in Journal of the Chemical Society , 1917, pp. 307–9; Kenneth M. Chance, ‘The Chance Memorial Lecture’,Chemistry and Industry , 1944, pp. 298–301 (portrait); P. J. T. Morris and C. A. Russell,Archives of the British Chemical Industry 1750–1914 , 1988; C. A. M. Press,Worcestershire Lives , 1894?]
G P Baker
,Friedrich (1896–1959), philosopher, was born 21 March 1896 in Vienna, the son of Leopold Waismann, a Russian who subsequently became a naturalized Austrian, and his wife Clara Schwarz, an Austrian.
Schooled there, he took a degree in physics at Vienna University in 1922 as an external student.
He later received a doctorate for his philosophical publications.
In 1922 he came into contact with Moritz Schlick, professor of philosophy and founder of the Vienna Circle.
Thenceforth Waismann acted as Schlick's unofficial assistant, eventually running his graduate seminar.
From 1929 to 1936 he was librarian of the philosophy faculty, supplementing his income by giving private tuition in mathematics and philosophy.
In 1927 Schlick decided that the work of Ludwig Wittgenstein [q.v.]
was of fundamental importance to the programme of logical empiricism.
Schlick made contact with Wittgenstein and then soon introduced Waismann to Wittgenstein, assigning him the task of gathering and expounding Wittgenstein's ideas.
Thenceforth Waismann acted as the spokesman for Wittgenstein's point of view within the Vienna Circle, representing with Schlick the conservative wing in the evolution of logical positivism.
From shorthand notes of conversations with Wittgenstein, supplemented by dictations and typescripts, Waismann wrote lectures and articles on Wittgenstein's conception of mathematics, his view of logic, and his treatment of identity and probability.
The culmination was to be a systematic presentation of these ideas on logic, language, and philosophy.
Advertised in 1930 as a joint publication under the title Logik, Sprache, Philosophie , this book was to be the first volume in the series Die Wissenschaftliche Weltauffassung .
Wittgenstein withdrew from co-authorship in 1934, but he continued to assist Waismann in this Schlick-directed project.
Schlick's murder in 1936 terminated Waismann's employment and his opportunities for supporting himself by private teaching.
It also spurred him to complete his lengthier expositions of Wittgenstein's thinking.
Einführung in das mathematische Denken (Vienna, 1936) developed some of Wittgenstein's leading ideas into an overview of the nature of mathematics.
By early 1937 Waismann completed Logik, Sprache, Philosophie , but the Anschluss and later the invasion of Holland frustrated his plans for publishing the German text.
The hostile political climate and the lack of academic employment in Austria forced Waismann to move to England.
He played a leading role in the transition of logical empiricism into ‘ordinary language philosophy’(typified by J. L. Austin and Gilbert Ryle, qq.v.).
He was therefore a protagonist in both main developments within analytic philosophy in the mid-twentieth century.
He went to Cambridge in October 1937.
This created an awkward situation, since Waismann was expounding some of Wittgenstein's earlier ideas while Wittgenstein himself was developing later ideas in his own classes.
Wittgenstein did nothing to soften the difficulties, even discouraging his own students from attending Waismann's lectures.
This slight deeply embittered Waismann.
He moved to New College, Oxford, in February 1940, only to be interned briefly in Paignton, Devon.
At Oxford he became lecturer in the philosophy of mathematics in 1945 (reader, 1950), then reader in the philosophy of science in 1955.
His lectures were a considerable source of intellectual excitement.
He took British nationality in 1950.
His reputation rested primarily on three papers.
The first, ‘Verifiability’(1945), suggested modifications of the principle of verification to accommodate the essential indeterminacy of symbolism (‘open texture’).
The second, ‘Language-Strata’(1953), explored the ‘loose’ logical relations between different domains of discourse (e.g. between psychological concepts and descriptions of overt human behaviour).
The third, ‘How I See Philosophy’(1956), distinguished philosophical arguments from deductive demonstrations of theses and instead illustrated how to treat philosophical problems on the model of psychoanalysis; the patient must acknowledge his own difficulties and dissolve his problems by coming to view things in new ways.
The three papers were reprinted in H. R. Harré (ed.),
How I See Philosophy , 1968.
Much work has been published since Waismann's death.
Logik, Sprache, Philosophie was reconstructed and published in 1970; the English translation, completed in 1938 and extensively corrected by Waismann, appeared in 1965 as The Principles of Linguistic Philosophy .
Both are misunderstood as derivative or secondary writings on Wittgenstein.
Lectures on the Philosophy of Mathematics (1982) have been reconstructed from notes and manuscripts.
Wille und Motiv appeared in 1988.
Much of his writing remains unpublished.
This includes a book on the concept of causality, transcripts of dictations by Wittgenstein dating from the early 1930s, and a quantity of poems and aphorisms in which Waismann despaired about other philosophers and life in England.
He was elected a fellow of the British Academy in July 1955.
In 1929 he married Hermine Antscherl, an Austrian who had been born in Vienna in 1894.
She committed suicide in Oxford on 10 April 1943.
There was one child of the marriage, a son Thomas, born in Vienna in 1935, who committed suicide in 1952.
Waismann died in Oxford 4 November 1959.
[The Times , 6 November 1959; Stuart Hampshire in Proceedings of the British Academy , vol. xlvi, 1960; Oxford University archives; Ray Monk,Ludwig Wittgenstein: the Duty of Genius , 1990, pp. 282–327; G. P. Baker, ‘Verehrung und Verkehrung: Waismann and Wittgenstein' in C. G. Luckhardt (ed.),
Wittgenstein: Sources and Perspectives , 1979, pp. 243–85; private information.]
H B Whittington
,Charles (1842–1920), geologist, was born 30 September 1842 in Faringdon, Berkshire, the only child of James Lapworth, shopkeeper, and his wife Martha.
He was educated at the village school in Buckland, and from 1862 at Culham Teacher Training College, near Oxford, gaining a first-class certificate there in 1864.
His first post, teaching English in Galashiels, enabled him to begin geological work in the Southern Uplands and to discover fossils in rocks thought barren.
In seventeen years as a schoolmaster, first at St Peter's School, Galashiels, and from 1875 at Madras College, St Andrews, Lapworth became an expert on these fossils, the graptolites, and trained himself in detailed geological mapping and in visualizing the attitude and arrangement of strata in three dimensions.
He showed that the Southern Uplands was not a single thick sequence of rocks, but a thin sequence repeated in concertina-like folds.
A succession of distinctive graptolite faunas characterized layers of black shale, a succession recognizable elsewhere in Britain and on the Continent.
Thus Lapworth showed that the older Palaeozoic strata could be subdivided and correlated in as great detail as could younger rocks.
Lapworth was passionate in his search for truth and exactness in the solution of geological problems, and diplomatic in his presentation, gifts which enabled him to propose the accepted solution to a famous controversy.
This was his proposal of the Ordovician system as a separate thickness of rocks having its distinctive faunas, intervening between the Cambrian system of Adam Sedgwick [q.v.]
and the Silurian system of Sir Roderick I. Murchison [q.v.].
Lapworth's extraordinary achievements led to his appointment in 1881 to the new chair of geology at Mason College, later the University of Birmingham, which he held until his retirement in 1913.
Here he applied his supreme skills in detailed mapping, and his knowledge of Alpine structures and metamorphic rocks, to provide the basic solution to the controversy on the structure and rock succession in the north-west Highlands of Scotland.
This work led to a breakdown in his health, but the solution he outlined was amply verified and extended by officers of the Geological Survey.
As his health recovered, he resumed his fieldwork, making important new discoveries in the geology of the midlands, Shropshire, and north Wales, and providing advice to the second royal coal commission (1902–5) and on foundations and water supply.
Between 1901 and 1918 the classic monograph on graptolites (British Graptolites ) was completed under his editorship.
Lapworth received many honours, including the Bigsby (1887) and Wollaston (1899) medals of the Geological Society of London.
He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1888, and was awarded its Royal medal in 1891.
He received an LLD from both Aberdeen (1883) and Glasgow (1912) universities.
In 1869 he married Janet, daughter of Walter Sanderson, inspector of the poor, of Galashiels.
They had three sons (one of whom died in infancy) and a daughter.
One son became a distinguished chemist and fellow of the Royal Society, another a well-known geologist.
Lapworth died at his home in Birmingham 13 March 1920.
[W. W. Watts, ‘The Geological Work of Charles Lapworth’, special supplement to Proceedings of the Birmingham Natural History and Philosophical Society , vol. xiv, 1921;Proceedings of the Royal Society , series B, vol. xcii, 1921; Allan T. P. Cooper, ‘From Village School to University’,Culham Club Magazine , February 1961; private information.]
Simon Jervis
,George (d. 1786), cabinet-maker and, probably, furniture designer, is first recorded at Christmas 1785 when he and his son, George, insured premises at 48 Redcross Street, Cripplegate, with the Sun Insurance Company.
‘Utensils and stock’ were valued at £500.
Hepplewhite had died intestate at Redcross Street by 27 June 1786, when administration was granted to his widow, Alice.
His estate was valued under £600.
In 1786 ‘Kepplewhite & Son’(sic ) were listed in Lowndes London directory at 48 Redcross Street.
The auction of ‘The valuable stock in trade and household furniture of Mr. Hepplewhite, cabinet manufacturer deceased’ was announced in the Public Ledger (10 October 1786).
That another son, John, subscribed to the Treatise on the Five Orders of Architecture (1787) by George Richardson, a draughtsman for the Adam firm, suggests connections with the book trade and architectural circles.
In 1788 Isaac [q.v.]
and Josiah Taylor published The Cabinet-Maker and Upholsterer's Guide; or, repository of designs for every article of household furniture, in the newest and most approved taste…
The whole exhibiting near three hundred different designs, engraved on one hundred and twenty-six plates: from drawings by A. Hepplewhite (sic)and Co. cabinet-makers from their architectural library at no. 56 Holborn.
No compendium of furniture designs had appeared since 1762, when Thomas Chippendale [q.v.]
issued the third edition of his Gentleman and Cabinet-Maker's Director .
In publishing the Hepplewhite Guide the Taylors were filling a yawning gap.
The plates were issued in batches at the beginning of July, September, and October 1787.
In January and February 1788 a subscription was promoted in such papers as the Lincoln, Rutland and Stamford Mercury and Williamson's Liverpool Advertiser .
The price was two guineas.
The preface adopts a modest tone: ‘To unite elegance and utility, and blend the useful with the agreeable, has ever been considered a difficult, but an honourable task.’
It stressed the Guide 's utility to ‘the mechanic’, ‘to young workmen in general, and occasionally to more experienced ones’.
A successful subscription ‘enabled us to exceed the number of plates originally proposed’.
The designs, covering many furniture types, are plain and functional or in a competent but unimaginative neo-classical manner, which seems indebted to the example of James Wyatt [q.v.].
Given their backward character and the fact that they appeared scarcely a year after George Hepplewhite's death, the traditional suggestion that Alice, his widow, was capitalizing on his designs seems plausible.
However, the appearance in 1789 of a second edition with an extra plate, and of six plates signed ‘Hepplewhite’ or ‘Heppelwhite’dated October, November, and December 1792, and May 1793, in The Cabinet-Makers' London Book of Prices of 1793 suggests that the firm designed after his death.
This was proven when, in reaction to criticism from Thomas Sheraton [q.v.],
who stated in his Cabinet-maker and Upholsterer's Drawing Book (1793) that the Hepplewhite Guide had ‘already caught the decline’ in design standards, a third edition was issued in 1794 containing new or altered plates, in which many curvilinear or shield-back chairs and sofas of 1788 are replaced by neat rectilinear forms in the French style, which Sheraton had derived from Henry Holland [q.v.]
at Carlton House.
Usually the Guide 's text, containing information on nomenclature, fashion, materials, finishes, and upholstery, was altered in 1794 to take account of the altered plates, only two of which bear that date, but, curiously, comments of 1788 on a chair ‘executed with a good effect for his Royal Highness the Prince of Wales’ apply, in 1794, to a completely different design.
The Hepplewhite Guide was influential beyond England, in America, in Denmark, where J. C. Lillie used it in designing chairs for Liselund in 1793, and in Germany, where F. G. Hoffmann pirated Hepplewhite designs in his Meubles-Magazin (Leipzig, 1795).
A late nineteenth-century Hepplewhite revival led to an 1897 reprint of the Guide by Batsford, and a modest myth grew up around George Hepplewhite, who was stated to have been apprenticed to Gillows of Lancaster and London; in 1801, however, they wrote ‘We have not Hebbelthwaite's Publication.’
[G. Beard and C. Gilbert (eds.),
Dictionary of English Furniture Makers 1660–1840 , 1986.]
E A Reid
, Sir John (1601–1685), MP, was born 11 August 1601 in Kingston upon Thames, Surrey, the first son of George Evelyn of West Dean, Wiltshire, clerk in Chancery, and his wife Elizabeth, daughter of Sir John Rivers of Chafford, Kent.
The nephew of Sir John Evelyn of Surrey (1591–1664, q.v.) and cousin of the diarist, John Evelyn (1620–1706, q.v.), he was educated at Merchant Taylors' School, Emmanuel College, Cambridge (BA 1619), and the Middle Temple.
On his marriage on 2 April 1622 to Elizabeth, daughter of Robert Coxe, grocer, of London, he had land in Hampshire, Surrey, and Wiltshire settled on him.
Knighted in 1623, Evelyn first entered Parliament for Wilton in 1626, and ten years later succeeded to an estate allegedly worth £2,000 per annum but heavily encumbered with debt.
He was among the Wiltshire justices reproved for obstructing royal purveyors of timber for the navy in 1637 and he refused a contribution to the expenses of the bishops' war two years later.
Elected in 1640 to both the Short and Long Parliaments for Ludgershall, Evelyn supported ‘root and branch’ reform of the church, and in the summer of 1642 urged preparation for war.
Although he was proclaimed a traitor for his activities against the Wiltshire Royalists and refused access to the royal presence in November 1642, Evelyn, with his uncle, contemplated making terms with the king in August 1643.
Suspended from the Commons for a year following the interception of an incriminating letter, he secured his readmittance, according to the diarist, Sir Simonds D'Ewes [q.v.],
only by promising to work with the Independents.
Thereafter D'Ewes accused him of doing his utmost to ‘kindle a fire’ between England and Scotland and to hinder a church settlement on Presbyterian lines.
For the next four years Evelyn was politically prominent: he became a leading member of the group around Oliver St John [q.v.],
termed the ‘Royal Independents’ by Valerie Pearl, and in Commons divisions frequently acted as teller with Sir Arthur Hesilrige against Denzil Holles (first Baron Holles of Ifield) and Sir Philip Stapleton [qq.v.].
He signed the Engagement with the army in August 1647.
In January 1648 he became a member of the committee of both kingdoms.
A teller for the motion to make no further addresses to the king, Evelyn was later involved in plans to make a new peace approach to disengage the king from the Scots, and during the Newport negotiations he urged that extremist measures should be tempered while negotiations continued.
Evelyn abstained from the Commons after Pride's Purge in 1648, and went into retirement until the return of the secluded MPs to the Long Parliament in February 1660, when he became a councillor of state.
He was elected to the Convention Parliament (April 1660) for Ludgershall (on a double return) and Stockbridge.
‘A long lived, happy man’, Evelyn died 26 June 1685.
He was survived by two daughters, one of whom he cut out of his will with five shillings because of her marriage to a Tory.
[A. Davidson, ‘Sir John Evelyn’(typescript draft for History of Parliament); B. D. Henning,The House of Commons 1660–1690 , 1983;Transactions of the Royal Historical Society (5th series), vol. xviii, 1968, p. 73;Commons Journals , vols. ii–vi; British Library Harleian MSS 165, ff. 156–7.]
Janet E Grenier
,Louisa (1820–1912), poor-law reformer, was born 16 November 1820 in London, the youngest of nine children of Richard Twining [q.v.],
tea merchant of the Strand, and his wife Elizabeth Mary, daughter of the Revd John Smythies, rector of All Saints, Colchester.
Elizabeth and William Twining [qq.v.]were her siblings.
She was educated at home, mainly by her mother and sisters.
She showed considerable talent for drawing and had two books on Christian art published in the early 1850s,Symbols and Emblems of Early and Medieval Christian Art (1852) and The Types and Figures of the Bible (1854).
In 1853, after visiting the Strand union workhouse to see an old nurse, she conceived the idea of systematic visits to the workhouse by neighbourhood ladies to say prayers and converse with the inmates.
She was informed that unpaid and voluntary effort was not sanctioned by the Poor Law Board.
In 1855 she published A Few Words about the Inmates of our Union Workhouses .
She began visiting other workhouses in London, the rest of England, and abroad.
Through lectures, articles, and letters, she earned a reputation as an expert on workhouses.
She contributed a paper to the first congress of the National Association for the Promotion of Social Science in Birmingham (1857).
In 1858 the Poor Law Board relented and the Workhouse Visiting Society, with Twining as honorary secretary, was set up, affiliated to the NAPSS.
In 1861 she was instrumental in setting up a home for workhouse girls sent out to service, so that they would not have to mix with women of bad character.
Reform of workhouse infirmaries was one of her prime concerns.
The hardship and neglect suffered by the sick was confirmed by a report published by the Lancet in 1866.
Louisa Twining campaigned ceaselessly for trained nurses and matrons.
In 1879 the Workhouse Infirmary Nursing Association was founded to train and supply nurses, and she became secretary.
In 1875 women became eligible for election as guardians.
Louisa Twining was chief financial supporter of the Society for Promoting the Return of Women as Poor Law Guardians and subsequently chairwoman.
She was a guardian herself in Kensington (1884–90) and Tunbridge Wells (1893–6).
By 1895 she had attained the opening up of Lincoln's Inn Fields to the poor.
She taught, pressed for prison reform, and helped set up charitable houses for elderly, epileptic, and incurable women.
She also helped set up a convalescent home for patients from the East End after the cholera epidemic of 1867.
She established the need for, and secured, female matrons for London police courts and stations.
She was involved in many church activities in London and abroad.
A firm advocate of temperance, she believed that drink was the cause of much of the crime, vice, and misery of the poor.
She was a strong believer in women's participation in public affairs.
In 1904 she was president of the Women's Local Government Society.
She was also a member of the National Society for Women's Suffrage.
The presentation of an illuminated address to her in 1904 acknowledged her lifelong work in raising the whole standard of poor-law administration.
Louisa Twining died in London 25 September 1912.
She was unmarried.
[The Times , 27 September 1912; Fawcett Library archives; Louisa Twining,Recollections of Life and Work , 1893, and Workhouses and Pauperism , 1898.]
G E Aylmer
,Thomas (c. 1600–1658), lieutenant-general of artillery, was the third son among the five children of Dr John Hammond, MD [q.v.],
physician to the royal household under James I, and his wife Marie.
His eldest brother Robert was the father of Lieutenant-Colonel Robert (‘Robin') Hammond [q.v.],
Charles I's jailer in the Isle of Wight during 1647–8, and Oliver Cromwell's cousin through the Hampden family.
His youngest brother Henry Hammond [q.v.]
was the eminent Anglican divine.
His only sister, Mary or Marie, married Sir John, father of the more famous Sir William Temple [qq.v.].
The family had a country seat at Chertsey in Surrey, and by the time of his death in 1617 Hammond's father was clearly a wealthy man, giving generously to charity as well as providing for his widow and children, Thomas's share being a lease worth £40 per annum and a legacy of £200.
Nothing certain is known of Hammond's career from then until the eve of the civil war, but he must have seen military service in the continental wars, either in the Netherlands or Germany, since he was a trained gunnery officer before 1642.
Why he took the side of Parliament against the king must remain surmise, unless explained by family connections and/or religious commitment.
Evidence of his radicalism is found in 1644 when, as lieutenant-general of the ordnance in the army of the Eastern Association, he testified against his own commander-in-chief, Edward Montagu, second Earl of Manchester [q.v.],
in the latter's celebrated clash with his lieutenant-general of horse, Oliver Cromwell.
Not surprisingly, Hammond was appointed to the corresponding post in the New Model Army from the spring of 1645.
He was among the politically active officers of 1647–9, serving on the small standing committee to which Sir Thomas Fairfax (later third Baron Fairfax of Cameron, q.v.) handed over control of issuing all commissions, and acting as a spokesman for the high command in their successive dealings with the Parliament, the king, and the radicals in the army itself (the Agitators and their Leveller allies).
He was named to the high court of justice in January 1649, attending no less than fourteen of its sittings, including the occasion on which judgment was given against the king; he did not, however, sign the death warrant, although there is no corroborative evidence for the statement that he positively refused to do so, and in 1660–1 he was clearly regarded — albeit posthumously — as having been a regicide.
Hammond did not go on the Irish expedition of 1649, but remained on active service; unlike Fairfax, he took part in the pre-emptive invasion of Scotland the following year.
Like Cromwell himself, he fell seriously ill in that country and his health appears to have been permanently shattered.
Hammond retired from his military position in the course of 1651–2, but continued to be much preoccupied with the pay arrears due to himself and the other personnel of the artillery train from his years of service.
He received a grant of Irish lands, having been an ‘adventurer’ for £200 back in 1642.
The artillery men received grants of ex-crown lands in Middlesex and Surrey in settlement of their arrears; his own share was the royal manor of Byfleet, only four miles from his family's seat in Chertsey.
He had already acquired some ex-episcopal lands back in 1647–8, in settlement of earlier debts owing to him on the public faith.
Hammond had a brush with the Commonwealth's accounts committee in 1651, but protested that he had accounted fully and properly for all the sums which he had received in all the three armies in which he had served; he pointed out that his account from July 1649 on was with the army in Scotland, where by this time George Monck (later first Duke of Albemarle, q.v.) had succeeded him as lieutenant-general of the ordnance.
He was still acting as a trustee for the officers and men of the artillery train when additional compensation was voted out of crown lands in the act of 1652; a misleading reference from May of that year has led some authorities to assume that he was dead by then.
Hammond was clearly in very poor health when he made his will in 1657, dying the next year, not long before the protector, his old colleague and then commander.
The liberal if optimistic provisions for his family made in his will (proved 27 April 1658) were all destroyed by the events of 1660.
The ex-church and crown lands which he had acquired were automatically forfeit; the residue of his property was confiscated by his retrospective attainder as a regicide.
His widow Martha and seven surviving children must have had to make their own ways in the world, unless they received help from their in-laws, the Temple family, after whom one of his sons was named.
His famous Anglican brother had died on the eve of the Restoration.
[C. H. Firth (ed.),
The Clarke Papers , I and II, Camden Society, new series, vols. xlix and liv, 1891 and 1894; G. E. Aylmer,The State's Servants , 1973; A. W. McIntosh, ‘The Numbers of the English Regicides’,History , vol. lxvii, 1982;Victoria History of the Counties of England, Surrey , vol. iv, 1912, p. 231, and iii, 1911, p. 401; L. R. Stevens, ‘Note on Byfleet manor and the Manor House’,Surrey Archaeological Collections , vol. xlv, 1937; Public Record Office PROB/11/PCC 64 Weldon, 438 Alchin, 217 Wootton.]
John Grigg
,Alexander William Charles Oliphant , Baron Murray of Elibank (1870–1920), politician and company director, was born in Folkestone 12 April 1870, the eldest son in the family of four sons and five daughters of Montolieu Fox Oliphant Murray, later tenth Baron Elibank (peerage of Scotland), who in 1911 became the first Viscount Elibank (UK peerage), and his wife Blanche Alice, daughter of Edward John Scott of Southsea, Hampshire.
As heir apparent to the peerage Murray was known as the Master of Elibank, and his nickname in politics was ‘the Master’.
He was educated at Cheltenham College and the Royal Military College, Sandhurst.
As a young man he found ungainful but instructive employment as assistant private secretary at the Colonial Office (1892–5).
In October 1900 he was elected Liberal MP for W. E. Gladstone's old seat of Midlothian, which he held until 1906.
From 1906 to 1910 he represented Peebles and Selkirk, and from 1910 to 1912 again Midlothian.
When the Liberals returned to power he held office, first as comptroller to the household (1905–9), then as under-secretary of state for India (1909–10), and finally as parliamentary (patronage) secretary to the Treasury and Liberal chief whip (1910–12).
The post of chief whip was exceptionally demanding at this time because of the constitutional crisis following the Lords' rejection of the 1909 budget, and the Liberals' dependence on the Irish party.
In these difficult circumstances Murray was a highly effective operator, with a gift for backstage negotiation and intrigue much assisted by his natural bonhomie.
He was liked by politicians of all parties and factions; in particular, he was just as close to the Asquith family as to David Lloyd George (later first Earl Lloyd-George of Dwyfor).
He also had the confidence of the new king, George V, and of his two private secretaries, Francis, first Viscount Knollys, and Sir Arthur Bigge (later Baron Stamfordham)[qq.v.], who disagreed with each other on the constitutional issue.
He was sworn of the Privy Council in 1911.
In August 1912 he resigned, ostensibly in order to rehabilitate the Elibank estates which his father had made over to him.
At the invitation of the Liberal industrialist Weetman Pearson (later first Viscount Cowdray, q.v.), he became a director of S. Pearson & Son.
In 1912 he was raised to the peerage as Baron Murray of Elibank.
There was, perhaps, another reason for his withdrawal from politics.
In 1911 he had acquired, with Lloyd George and the attorney-general, Sir Rufus Isaacs (later first Marquess of Reading, q.v.), a personal shareholding in the American Marconi Company, soon after the British Marconi Company had entered into a large contract with the British government.
He had also bought 3,000 American Marconi shares for Liberal party funds.
News of these transactions gradually leaked out and the matter was investigated by a parliamentary select committee, which reported on party lines.
Murray was summoned to appear before it in the spring of 1913, but by then he was in South America acting for Lord Cowdray.
His replies pleading inability to attend were sent from Bogota, and ‘Bogota’ became at the time a favourite Tory catcall at political meetings.
In November 1915 he returned briefly to public service as director-general of recruiting in Lloyd George's Ministry of Munitions, but by then his health was already beginning to fail.
His appearance and character are well described by J. A. Spender [q.v.]:
‘His ample figure and full-moon face, with its fringe of curls, were always a pleasant vision, and he had a persuasive manner that was hard to resist…his chronic good humour soothed many savage breasts.’
In 1894 Murray married Hilda Louisa Janey Wolfe, daughter of James Wolfe Murray of Cringletie, Peeblesshire.
They had no children, and at his death 13 September 1920 at his home (Elibank, Walkerburn) on the Tweed the barony conferred on him became extinct.
[Arthur C. Murray,Master and Brother: Murrays of Elibank , 1945; J. A. Spender,Life, Journalism and Politics , 1927.]
M R D Foot
,John Charles Francis (1897–1956), soldier and secret organizer, was born in India (probably Calcutta) 21 November 1897, the only son and elder child of (Sir) Thomas Henry Holland [q.v.],
geologist, and his wife Frances Maud, daughter of Charles Chapman, deputy commissioner in Oudh.
Close friends called him ‘Jo’.
He went from Rugby to the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, whence he was commissioned into the Royal Engineers on 28 July 1915.
He was posted to the eastern Mediterranean, arriving too late for the Gallipoli campaign, but serving on the Salonika front for most of the rest of the world war.
He was mentioned in dispatches in 1917, and in the summer of 1918 was awarded the DFC for gallantry in action with the Royal Air Force.
He was badly wounded in Dublin during the troubles of 1919–21, in which he admired the technical skills of his Irish guerrilla opponents.
In 1922 he reverted from temporary major to lieutenant; he was promoted captain in 1924 and major seven years later.
He passed the staff college, and held a staff captain's appointment in northern command in 1934–6.
In 1938, again due for promotion but medically unfit, he took an appointment as a second-grade staff officer in the War Office to research on any subject he chose.
He chose irregular warfare.
His branch, in which he was at first the only officer, was called GS (R).
His Irish experiences led his lively imagination well outside the normal range of military thinking at the time.
Early in 1939 his branch was renamed MI R, and placed in the military intelligence directorate, though Holland concentrated rather on operations.
Encouraged by A. P. (later first Earl) Wavell [q.v.],
he laid the foundations of several wartime secret services, and was one of the originators of the Commandos.
For a few months in the summer of 1939 he worked at 2 Caxton Street, Westminster, alongside L. D. Grand, a Woolwich contemporary who ran the then inadmissible section D of the secret service.
On the outbreak of war in September Holland went back to the War Office.
He gathered like-minded officers round him, and dispatched each in turn to run the service for which he seemed fit: N. R. Crockatt, whose prowess he had admired at Rugby, to secure intelligence from prisoners of war; E. R. Coombe to form the inter-services security board, which handled code-names and deception as well as security;(Sir) Gerald Templer [q.v.]
to run the security of the expeditionary force; and M. R. Jefferis to invent and exploit secret gadgets.
He sent (Sir) Colin Gubbins [q.v.]
to the independent companies in Norway, then to command projected stay-behind parties to damage the communications of any invading German forces, and eventually to run the Special Operations Executive.
In July 1940 his staff, and Grand's, and a semi-secret propaganda branch of the Foreign Office, were all amalgamated to form the SOE.
Holland thereupon went back to regimental duty, on being offered a regular lieutenant-colonel's command.
By July 1943 he was back in the War Office, as deputy chief engineer and a major-general.
He was appointed CB in 1945, and received also the American legion of merit and medal of freedom with silver palm.
In 1947–8 he was chief of staff, Western Command; in 1949–50 he was again employed, briefly, on secret planning; and he retired in 1951.
He was a shortish, burly man who went bald early; a heavy cigarette smoker; quick-tempered, but recovering fast from anger.
He married in 1924 Anne Christabel, daughter of Sir James Bennett Brunyate, KCSI, CIE, of the Indian Civil Service; they had two sons and a daughter.
He died at his elder son's house in Wimbledon 17 March 1956.
[Army List s; private information.]
N G Coley
,Christian Augustus Henry (1806–1890), chemical manufacturer, was born 2 December 1806 in Kiel, Germany, the fourth son in the family of five sons and two daughters of Carl Christian Allhusen, merchant of Kiel, and his wife Anna Margaretha Schroder.
The French occupation of Schleswig-Holstein caused the family to break up.
Allhusen's education is obscure; he worked in the grain trade first at Rostock, then from 1825 at Newcastle upon Tyne with two older brothers.
In 1827, his brothers leaving Newcastle, he invited Henry Bölckow [q.v.],
a Rostock friend, to join him in the grain trade; he was also involved in ship and insurance broking.
Allhusen entered the Tyneside chemical industry at Gateshead in 1840 when he purchased the soap works of Charles Attwood & Co.
He was not a chemist but adopted innovatory methods and used commercial skill to promote his products.
In 1862 he began drilling for salt on Teeside for Leblanc alkali manufacture on Tyneside, but this enterprise hastened the decline of Tyneside industry as the rival Solvay process expanded on the Tees.
Allhusen was a member of Gateshead town council from 1849 to 1853, an early president of the Newcastle chamber of commerce, and a Tyne commissioner from 1852 to 1855.
An Anglican and Liberal (later Liberal Unionist), he amassed a large fortune and his influence in the north-east was considerable.
As an advocate of free trade, he supported Richard Cobden [q.v.]
in his scheme for a commercial treaty with France in 1860, and represented local chemical manufacturers at the Paris conferences.
To celebrate the treaty he invited W. E. Gladstone, chancellor of the exchequer, to visit Newcastle in 1862.
Allhusen's business interests were varied; he was a director of the Marine Insurance Co., the Northfleet Coal & Ballast Co., the Brazil Great Southern Railway, the British Land & Mortgage Co. of America, the International Bank of London, the New Oriental Bank Corporation, the Metropole Hotel Co., and the Newcastle and Gateshead Water Co.
A major shareholder in the Northumberland and Durham District Bank, which failed in 1857, he managed to avert the closure of the Derwent Ironworks Co. which owed the Bank £1,000,000.
In 1864 it was registered as the Consett Iron Co.
Allhusen married Anne, daughter of John Shield of Broomhaugh, in 1835; they had four sons and two daughters.
His daughter Annie married twice, her second husband being Lord D'Arcy Godolphin Osborne, brother of the Duke of Leeds.
From 1842 Allhusen lived at Elswick Hall, Newcastle, but moved to Stoke Court, Stoke Poges, Buckinghamshire, in 1873 and died there 13 January 1890, not long after his wife.
Soon after Allhusen's death the Tyneside factory was amalgamated in the United Alkali Co.
[D. J. Jeremy (ed.),
Dictionary of Business Biography , 1984; J. Fenwick Allen, ‘Industrial Celebrities: Christian Allhusen’,Chemical Trade Journal , 5 April 1890;Newcastle Daily Journal , 13 January 1890;Newcastle Daily Chronicle , 14 January 1890; W. A. Campbell,The Old Tyneside Chemical Trade , 1964.]
David M Fahey
,Joseph (1844–1926), temperance advocate, was born in Worcester 21 October 1844, the third in the family of three sons and one daughter who survived infancy (out of eight children) of John Malins, master builder and later carpenter of Whittington, near Worcester, and his wife Jane, daughter of James Allen, cheese factor, of Wellington, Shropshire.
The family soon moved to Birmingham, where Joseph entered King Edward VI's School, Bath Row, at the age of eight.
Two years later his father's chronic drunkenness forced Joseph to file brass-work ten hours a day for 1s. 6d. a week.
Later he was apprenticed to a decorative painter.
At sixteen Malins took the total abstinence pledge.
In 1866 he emigrated to Philadelphia, where he painted railway carriages in the workshops of the Pennsylvania Railroad Co.
As a result of his wife's ill health he returned to Birmingham in 1868.
The crucial moment in his life occurred during his brief residence in the United States.
In 1867 he joined the Independent Order of Good Templars, a fraternal society for teetotal men and women which, unlike most fraternal societies, offered no mutual aid financial scheme.
Later he was commissioned to plant the order in England.
In 1868 he founded the first lodge in England, ‘Columbia’ lodge no. 1.
When the grand lodge of England was organized in 1870, the youthful Malins was elected grand worthy chief templar.
A tireless organizer, he travelled over 100,000 miles within England and when in Birmingham reached his office before 6 a.m. and worked till midnight.
By the time he retired in 1914 nearly a million men, women, and children had held membership, often briefly.
In 1874 the membership exceeded 210,000.
Malins also helped build the order overseas, particularly in Sweden and Norway.
The Good Templars offered their predominantly working- and lower-middle-class membership a sense of community and purpose as temperance militants committed to prohibition by direct local veto.
For a time Malins regarded himself as a Liberal Unionist, but he made policy toward drink the only basis for supporting parliamentary candidates.
Self-assertive and uncompromising, Malins led a protest against the racial policies of the Good Templars in the American South, which culminated in a secessionist IOGT of the world, dominated by the grand lodges of England and Scotland, during 1876–87.
From 1897 to 1905 he led the reunited order as international chief templar and in 1899 undertook a round-the-world mission which symbolized Good Templar internationalism.
In 1905 he was made the first patriarch templar.
Malins also served as honorary secretary (and later chairman) of the National Temperance Federation and as a Worcestershire county councillor.
He was a prolific writer on temperance topics (his works included verse such as Professor Alcoholico , 1876).
In 1866 he married Lucy Ellen, daughter of Edward Jones, commercial traveller.
They had one daughter and four sons.
Malins was an active Wesleyan most of his life.
He died 5 January 1926 at his home in Sparkhill, Birmingham.
[Joseph Malins (second son),The Life of Joseph Malins: Patriarch Templar, Citizen and Temperance Reformer , 1932.]
Michael Holroyd
,Hugh Kingsmill (1889–1949), writer under the name ‘Hugh Kingsmill’, was born in London 21 November 1889, the second of three sons and four children of (Sir) Henry Simpson Lunn [q.v.],
founder of a travel agency and pioneer of skiing holidays, and his wife Ethel, daughter of Canon Thomas Moore, rector of Midleton, county Cork, and headmaster of Midleton College.
He was educated at Harrow, won an exhibition to New College, Oxford, where he failed to take a degree, and finally went to Trinity College, Dublin (BA and MA, 1919).
From 1912 to 1913 he worked for his early literary hero, James Thomas (‘Frank’) Harris [q.v.],
on the journal Hearth and Home .
At the outbreak of World War I Kingsmill enlisted in a regiment of cyclists and in 1916, having received a commission in the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve, was sent to France where he was soon captured.
His twenty-one months as a prisoner of war at Karlsruhe would have been satisfactory, he later calculated, ‘had I been able to bank them and draw them two or three weeks at a time whenever I wanted a respite from ordinary experience’.
From 1921 to 1927 Kingsmill's ordinary experience was comfortably divided between employment in his father's travel business in Lucerne and the writing of fiction.
His first novel The Will to Love (1919) appeared under the name Hugh Lunn.
For the rest of his career he was to use his two Christian names, Hugh Kingsmill, as a nom de plume .
This was partly to distinguish himself from his elder brother,(Sir) Arnold Lunn [q.v.],
and partly to disengage himself from his father, with whom his relationship was fractured by the breakup of his marriage in 1927.
His biography of Matthew Arnold [q.v.]
(1928), written somewhat under the influence of G. Lytton Strachey [q.v.],
was disordered by the working out of personal grievances.
Over the next twenty years Kingsmill was to earn most of his income from writing.
The Dawn's Delay (1924) and The Fall (1940) were his best volumes of fiction, but he was to become chiefly known for his essays and biographies.
One maverick publication,The Return of William Shakespeare (1929), featured an inspired chapter of Shakespearian criticism framed by an unconvincing science-fictional device which removed it to shelves not visited by scholars.
Of the four biographies he published in the 1930s,Frank Harris (1932) was a witty and ironic exercise in demythology, identifying his one-time literary hero as an inverted puritan ‘with a heart of borrowed gold’; and his Samuel Johnson (1933) a succinct and humane study of ‘an intensely loving and compassionate soul handicapped in its expression by lifelong disabilities of mind and body’.
His other biographies, being cases for the prosecution, provoked hostile reviews.
But George Orwell [q.v.]
was to judge his life of Charles Dickens [q.v.],
The Sentimental Journey (1934), ‘a brilliant book’ and still the best study of Dickens fifteen years later; and (Sir) William Empson [q.v.]
was to describe his D. H. Lawrence (1938) as ‘the best book about him’, being ‘funny with the human breadth that the subject requires’.
Kingsmill's biographies tended to start brilliantly and end hurriedly, owing to his pressing financial difficulties.
For this reason his volumes of essays,After Puritanism (1929),The Poisoned Crown (1944), and The Progress of a Biographer (1949), were more satisfactory as finished books.
He supplemented his income with a number of anthologies, of which the most celebrated is Invective and Abuse (1929), and by working as literary editor of Punch (1942–4) and the New English Review (1945–9).
The main impulse in Kingsmill's writings was the theme of will versus imagination.
In his biographical criticism this took the form of showing how popular sentiment acting on suggestible minds simplified people into myths.
His ideal was ‘the complete sympathy of complete detachment’, but in practice he distanced himself from his subjects and stressed his severity over the underlying sympathy.
His fate was to be valued as a conversationalist, to his detriment as a writer, and to have a profound effect on those who were to become better known than himself.
Kingsmill largely segregated his domestic from his literary life.
In 1915 he married Eileen FitzGerald, daughter of Horace Turpin, a solicitor from Maryborough in Ireland.
They had one daughter.
In 1934, after this marriage was dissolved, he married Dorothy Vernon, with whom he had settled in 1930, and who had one son of her own.
She was the daughter of Thomas Vernon, servant.
Of the second marriage there were two daughters and a son.
Kingsmill died in Brighton 15 May 1949.
[Hesketh Pearson and Malcolm Muggeridge,About Kingsmill , 1951; Michael Holroyd,Hugh Kingsmill: a Critical Biography , 1964; Richard Ingrams,God's Apology: a Chronicle of Three Friends , 1977.]
Ronald M Birse
,Henry Robinson (1795–1844), founder member of the Institution of Civil Engineers, was born in Hackney in 1795, the son of the Revd Samuel Palmer [q.v.],
Nonconformist minister, at whose academy he was educated.
He had several brothers and sisters.
From 1811 to 1816 he was apprenticed to Bryan Donkin [q.v.],
and he early displayed the keen interest in education and the formation of scientific societies that he pursued throughout his life.
In about 1813–14 he organized in Bermondsey a society of workmen which virtually constituted a Mechanics' Institute, almost ten years before those established by Leonard Horner [q.v.]
in Edinburgh and George Birkbeck [q.v.]
in Glasgow and London.
On completing his apprenticeship he was engaged by Thomas Telford [q.v.],
and worked for him for ten years on surveys and designs for many of his works.
In about 1817 he suggested to Joshua Field [q.v.]
the idea of founding a society of engineers which would be more accessible to the younger members of the profession than the rather élitist Society of Civil Engineers founded by John Smeaton [q.v.]
in 1771.
The first meeting of the Institution of Civil Engineers was held on 2 January 1818 with eight founder members present, but it made slow progress until in 1820 Telford, who never joined the Smeatonians, agreed to become the first president.
Palmer subsequently became a member of the council of the Institution and in 1835 was elected one of the vice-presidents; he was always very attached to the Institution, contributing several interesting papers and seldom failing to take part in the discussions which he considered to be the most valuable part of the meetings.
In 1826 he was appointed resident engineer to the London docks where, over the next nine years, he designed and executed the Eastern dock, with the associated warehousing, entrance locks, bridges, and other works.
He then moved to Westminster as a consulting engineer and became engaged in the survey, design, and construction of many large schemes for canals, railways, docks, and harbours, including those at Port Talbot, Ipswich, Penzance, and Neath.
Between 1821 and 1842 he took out five patents, one of them for a ‘suspension railway’ which was tried out unsuccessfully in Cheshunt, and two relating to a system of constructing roofs and bridge decks in corrugated wrought or cast iron, which was for a time quite extensively used.
He was elected FRS in 1831, and published two papers on tides and the movement of shingle in the Philosophical Transactions , 1831 and 1834.
On 30 March 1827 he married Mary Ann Emma Osmond at St Margaret's, Westminster.
He died 12 September 1844 in Westminster.
A memorial window to Palmer was installed in the main hall of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1954.
[Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers , vol. iv, 1844, pp. 6–8; John Garth Watson,The Civils: the Story of the Institution of Civil Engineers , 1988; A. W. Skempton,British Civil Engineering 1640–1840: a Bibliography of Contemporary Printed Reports, Plans, and Books , 1987.]
Roger Bowers
,Walter (fl. 1476–1499), church musician and composer, Nothing is known for certain of his family, birth, and education; there is no compelling reason to concur with speculation that the composer may be identifiable with the boy of this name who, having been born in Salisbury around 15 August 1451 or 1452, was elected a King's scholar of Eton College on 8 July 1467.
The composer first occurs during 1476/7, as a lay clerk of the choir of Holy Trinity collegiate church, Arundel.
On 5 January 1479 he was entered on the payroll, and on 13 February formally admitted, as a lay clerk of the choir of St George's chapel, Windsor.
During the autumn of 1479 he was appointed in addition to the office of master of the choristers, and he continued to occupy both appointments until his departure between 1 October 1484 and 30 September 1485.
In fact, he returned to Arundel, where he was once again a lay clerk during 1490/1; eventually, however, he returned to his former lay clerkship at Windsor on 1 July 1492.
The rationale behind this curious career pattern is not at all evident.
He was not reappointed as master of the choristers, but continued in employment as a lay clerk at least until 30 September 1499; because of loss of documentation at Windsor, his career beyond that date cannot be traced, and his date of death is unknown.
Lambe's surviving compositions comprise one setting of the Magnificat and seven Marian votive antiphons.
All this music is preserved in the Eton Choirbook, compiled in c .1500–4 for use by the choir of Eton College chapel.
A further four pieces, listed in the index, have been lost from the manuscript; indeed, only John Browne [q.v.]
was represented by a greater number of compositions, and certainly Lambe's work was well known and widely circulated.
The text of Stella celi is an invocation for deliverance from plague, and may have been written in the summer of 1479, when an outbreak assailed the staff of St George's; beyond this, no chronology for his work can be suggested.
Lambe emerges as amongst the two or three most accomplished representatives of that generation of composers who brought to maturity the uniquely English manner of late fifteenth-century composition.
He wrote with equal assurance both for ensembles of men's voices and for full choir in up to six parts; his work is extended in scale, virtuosic in the demands which it makes on its performers, and no less imaginative in melodic invention than in the sonorities drawn from his ensemble.
[Frank Harrison, ‘The Eton Choirbook’,Annales Musicologiques , vol. i, 1953, pp. 151–75;idem (ed.),
The Eton Choirbook ,Musica Britannica , vols. x–xii, 2nd edn., 1969–73; unpublished archives of Arundel Collegiate Church, Arundel Castle; Nicholas Sandon, ‘Walter Lambe’,The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians , ed.
Stanley Sadie, vol. x, 1980.]
John Harvey
,William (fl. 1468–1504), architect, was a Freemason and citizen of Oxford, where from 1468 he was master of the building of Magdalen College, founded by Bishop William Waynflete [q.v.].
He was probably also employed by Balliol College in the 1470s, when mention is made of his wife Agnes and son John Orchard.
The plan of Magdalen was set out in 1473 and the foundation stone laid on 5 May 1474; the buildings were occupied in 1480.
Orchard had been granted a rent for his ‘good and praiseworthy service and counsel’ in 1475, and he was engaged as a contractor for several parts of the college buildings, including the great west window of the chapel to his own ‘portraiture’(design).
From Magdalen College Orchard leased farm-land in Headington, where he was also a quarryman, engaging to supply stone to Eton College for Waynflete's work there, which included the antechapel.
Between 1479 and 1483 Orchard was in the service of Oxford University, apparently inserting the stone vault in the Divinity School.
By 1482 he was described as ‘esquire’, indicating his high social status.
Orchard desired to be buried in St Frideswide's church and he was probably the architect for the magnificent vault of the choir (c .1478–1503) and for the cloisters of c .1489–99.
From 1502 until his death Orchard was in charge of the building of the Cistercian College of St Bernard (now St John's) and also supplied stone for it.
On grounds of style and also of known associations, several works can be attributed to Orchard: the Harcourt aisle (c .1470) of Stanton Harcourt church and ‘Pope's Tower’ there; the church of South Leigh, a chapelry of Stanton; and an aisle of the church in Waterstock built in 1500–1 for Thomas Danvers, lord of the manor and one of Waynflete's agents.
By the time that Orchard made his last will in January 1504 he had married for a second time.
He left this wife, Katherine, land in Headington and a garden in Oxford.
Orchard was one of the most distinguished architects of his time and seems throughout to have dealt with works in Oxford and the neighbourhood.
[J. Harvey,English Mediaeval Architects , 1984.]
Bridget Hill
,Judith (fl. 1696), writer of feminist polemic and medical practitioner, was the daughter of a Cambridge solicitor and the younger sister of James Drake [q.v.],
physician and political writer.
It was probably from her brother, a fellow of the Royal Society and of the College of Physicians, that she acquired her medical knowledge.
In 1723, summoned to appear before Sir Hans Sloane [q.v.],
president of the College of Physicians, she defended herself against accusations of medical malpractice made by ‘a malicious informant’.
Apparently she regularly dispensed medicines to ‘those not in acute distempers’ among her ‘own sex and little children’.
She is best known for her probable authorship of the anonymous pamphlet An Essay in Defence of the Female Sex (1696), frequently ascribed to Mary Astell [q.v.].
It was included in a catalogue of second-hand books sold after 1741 by the publisher Edmund Curll [q.v.],
where it was described as written by ‘Mrs. Drake, probably a sister of Dr. James Drake, who attended to the publication of the pamphlet’.
The author's preface refers to ‘the gentleman, who was so kind as to take care of the Publication of it, only to excuse me from appearing’.
‘The same gentleman’ persuaded her not to put her name to the pamphlet for fear of the ‘Malice’of men who ‘greedily…suck in anything to the prejudice of A Woman’.
The pamphlet is prefaced by an elegant poem in praise of the author by James Drake.
Written in a lively and witty style, the pamphlet defends women against the accusations of vanity, impertinence, enviousness, dissimulation, and inconstancy which men make against them.
In satirical sketches of the Scholar, the Country Squire, the Beau, the Virtuoso, the Poet, and the Coffee-house Politicians she revealed the weaknesses of men.
While admitting to ‘a very great Veneration’ for the Royal Society in general, she thought there was ‘a vast difference between the particular Members’.
She attacked the ‘Mushrome and Cockel-shell Hunters’.
What ‘noble Remedies, what serviceable Instruments’ had they produced to equal ‘so good a Med'cine as Stew'd Prunes, or so necessary an Instrument as a Flye-Flap’?
She argued that women by nature were no less talented than men.
She had sharp words for those men who believed time spent in women's company was ‘mis'employ'd’ but admitted that among the ‘inferior sort’, ‘the Condition of the two Sexes’was ‘more level’than among their social superiors.
Although almost certainly influenced by Astell's Serious Proposal to the Ladies (1694), she attached little importance to the role of education in achieving greater equality between the sexes.
After 1696 she appears to have abandoned writing.
But when her brother died in 1707, having just completed his second volume of Anthropologia Nova: or A New System of Anatomy , Judith published it, edited the text, and was responsible for the dedication that prefaced it.
[Florence M. Smith,Mary Astell , 1916, appendix ii; British Library, Sloane MS 4047 f. 38; William Munk,The Roll of the College of Physicians of London , vol. ii, 1861, pp. 16–18.]