

I G Doolittle
,Brackley (c. 1713–1782), wine merchant and London politician, was born c. 1713 of obscure origins, the son of John ‘Kinnick’, a waterman in Putney.
His business career remains equally obscure, but it is likely that he began working on the rougher side of the tavern trade.
He emerged as a wine merchant in Pall Mall; respectability and civic office came by way of his membership of the Vintners' Company, of which he was master in 1768.
He became sheriff of the City of London in 1765–6, and was elected alderman of Cornhill ward in 1767.
He was elected lord mayor in 1779, and was thus in office during the Gordon riots of 1780, when a campaign by Lord George Gordon [q.v.]for the repeal of the Catholic Relief Act of 1778 led to a week of mob rule.
The lord mayor's ineffectiveness was unfavourably portrayed by Charles Dickens [q.v.]in Barnaby Rudge (1841).
The evidence is partial, but it seems that Kennett was timid to the point of indifference.
When he was asked on 3 June to protect the Catholics in Moorfields, he is said to have replied: ‘You do not know anything of the business.
I have orders to employ the military if necessary, but I must be cautious what I do lest I bring the mob to my house.
I can assure you that there are very great people at the bottom of the riot.’
Next day, when the mob was destroying the Catholic chapel in Moorfields, he apparently turned a deaf ear to requests for orders from the soldiers and the fire officers in attendance; and when the rioters' work was done he uttered the mildest of rebukes: ‘That's pretty well, gentlemen, for one day; I hope you will now go to your own homes.’
On 5 June he is said to have ignored a request from a Catholic merchant for protection for his family in the Mansion House; and he stirred himself only when the Bank of England was reported to be in the mob's sights.
In March 1781 Kennett was charged with neglect of duty and, after a little  hesititation on the part of the jury, found guilty.
Another charge, relating to the release of some rioters apprehended during an attack on a prison, was dropped.
Kennett died 12 May 1782 with his sentence for neglect of duty, and a suit for defamation brought by Thomas Howard, third Earl of Effingham (whom Kennett had alleged to have been one of the rioters), still outstanding.
The possibility of suicide cannot be ruled out.
His first marriage was to Frances Boure.
He was survived by his second wife, Hannah, and two sons.
Two girls took his surname but were either illegitimate or adopted.
He was buried in Putney church.
[J. P. de Castro,The Gordon Riots , 1926; various studies by George Rudé; account of Kennett's trial in F. A. Carrington and J. Payne,Reports , vol. v, 1833; Public Record Office, PCC 235 Gostling; information supplied by the Corporation of London Records Office and the Guildhall Library.]
Sandra Raphael
,Christopher (1694–1764), nurseryman, was born in 1694, probably the second son of William Gray, senior, and his wife Sarah.
William Gray, junior, the older son, had a nursery garden in Fulham, at Parson's Lane, later Peterborough Road, but the better known Fulham garden of the period was the one established before 1700 by the elder William Gray and later taken over by Christopher.
It occupied nearly thirty acres between Hurlingham Road and the (New) King's Road, with some land on the other side of the King's Road added by the middle of the century.
Early in his career, soon after the death in 1713 of Henry Compton, bishop of London [q.v.],
Christopher Gray was one of the nurserymen who bought plants from the bishop's collections in the gardens of Fulham Palace.
Many North American plants were there, and this introduction may have prompted Gray to specialize in them.
Gray was also one of the twenty nurserymen in the Society of Gardeners led by Philip Miller [q.v.], which met frequently in an attempt to standardize the names of the plants they were growing.
The first part of their Catalogus Plantarum , the only section published, appeared in 1730 as a joint catalogue of trees and shrubs, many of them recent introductions and several from North America.
In the preface to his Hortus Britanno-Americanus (written in 1749 but not published until 1763) Mark Catesby [q.v.], the pioneer naturalist of the south-eastern states of America, said that ‘Mr. Gray at Fulham has for many years made it his business to raise and cultivate the plants of America (from whence he has annually fresh supplies) in order to furnish the curious with what they want…
Through his industry and skill, a greater variety of American forest-trees and shrubs may be seen in his gardens, than in any other place in England.’
About 1737 Gray published a broadsheet catalogue in French and English, its alphabetical list of ‘American Trees and Shrubs that will endure the Climate of England’ framing a Magnolia grandiflora which also appeared in the second volume of Catesby's The Natural History of Carolina (2 vols., 1729–47), engraved after a drawing by G. D. Ehret [q.v.]of a magnolia in flower in the garden of Sir Charles Wager [q.v.]in Parson's Green in 1737.
The one in Gray's own garden, planted before 1719, survived until 1810.
Several American oaks, maples, dogwoods, walnuts, the tulip tree, the tupelo, the amelanchier, and other trees now settled in Europe were also in this catalogue, with an occasional less welcome import, like poison ivy.
A later catalogue of 1755 listed more of Gray's stock, ‘a greater Variety of Trees, Shrubs, Plants and Flowers…than can perhaps be found in any other Garden, for Sale, not only in England, but also in any other part of Europe’.
One of his customers was Horace Walpole [q.v.]of Strawberry Hill, who described some of his purchases from ‘the nurseryman at Fulham’ in a letter of 8 November 1755 to George Montagu: ‘I mention cedars [of Lebanon]first, because they are the most beautiful of the evergreen race, and because they are the dearest; half a guinea apiece in baskets…
Gray…sells cypresses in pots at half a crown apiece; you turn them out of the pot with all their mould, and they never fail.’
Gray was buried in Fulham 15 November 1764.
His wife Hannah lived on until 24 February 1778.
Most of his property was left to her, in a will containing no mention of any children.
The nursery was taken over by William Burchell, whose family kept the land until it was sold for building in 1882.
[John Harvey,Early Nurserymen , 1974, pp. 78–9; Blanche Henrey,British Botanical and Horticultural Literature before 1800 , vol. ii, 1975, pp. 348–50; E. J. Willson,West London Nursery Gardens , 1982, pp. 16–20.]
Gavin Young
,John Kidston (1893–1983), businessman, was born 19 February 1893 in London, the elder son and second of four children of John Swire of Hillingdon House, Harlow, Essex, and his wife Emily Kidston, and the grandson of John Samuel Swire (‘the Senior’) who moved the emphasis of the family's trading business from Liverpool to the Far East in the mid-1800s.
‘Jock’ Swire was educated at Eton and University College, Oxford, where he obtained a third class in jurisprudence in 1913.
He joined the family business in 1913, arriving in Hong Kong just before World War I broke out.
He served in the war with the Essex Yeomanry in France, where he was twice wounded; he remained partially deaf for the rest of his life.
In 1920 Swire became the director in charge of the company's overseas staff, and thereafter in a series of long, energetic and often dangerous tours — the civil war in China was at its height — he regularly explored every nook and cranny of the company's Far Eastern empire.
One of the suggestions, revolutionary at the time, which Swire put to his board in London, was that female clerks should work on an equal footing, and for the same pay as men; and that Swire recruits earmarked for Eastern posts should learn Chinese.
In World War II, when German bombing destroyed the Swire head office in the City, Swire moved his entire staff to his mother's house in Harlow and they commuted to London together.
He was high sheriff of Essex, 1941–2.
As chairman of the Port Employers in London (1941–5), Swire was involved in organizing the loading of the myriad vessels needed to carry troops and stores for the invasion of Europe.
Fortunately he had become friendly in the 1930s with Ernest Bevin [q.v.], then a dock-union leader.
Once, after a long negotiation, Swire invited Bevin for a drink and a sandwich at the City of London Club, and was reprimanded by the chairman for having brought ‘a working man into the club’.
Swire was delighted when Bevin subsequently became wartime minister of labour.
Swire's finest hours came after VJ Day.
His contribution, as chairman of John Swire & Sons, to the rebuilding of Hong Kong was inestimable.
The colony had been devastated during the Japanese occupation.
Swire's Taikoo dockyard was in ruins, Swire's ships sunk or dispersed.
Hong Kong's great harbour, full of sunken vessels, was stagnant; the docks were at a standstill; so was public transport.
Thanks to Swire's optimism, foresight, and dogged determination, the firm's operations were restored.
The joint efforts of Swire's, Jardine Matheson, and the Hong Kong Shanghai Bank (which provided unstinting financial support) enabled Hong Kong to rise from its rubble and become one of the commercial successes of the eastern world.
Swire was chairman of the China Association in 1951–5.
Swire's other triumph was his creation of one of the world's great airlines.
Before 1939 Swire & Sons had tinkered with the idea of ‘going into air’.
By 1947 it was obvious to John Swire that the future of transport in the East, as elsewhere, lay in the sky.
Despite the misgivings of his more conservative directors, he induced his company to acquire a small Hong Kong-based airline, Cathay Pacific Airways, recently founded by two wartime fliers.
Though somewhat ramshackle, the airline had proved successful.
Swire intended to make it into a top-class regional airline serving cities in the East and Australia.
With the jet age, however, Cathay was obliged to expand.
Before he died in 1983, Swire had the exhilarating experience of watching one of his Cathay Pacific aircraft landing at Gatwick airport, the first of innumerable scheduled passenger flights from and to Hong Kong by the airline he had built up as an international enterprise.
Swire was very tall and good-looking, had a zest for life, and was a good horseman.
He was warm, gregarious, crotchety, and humorous.
In 1923 he married Juliet Richenda (died 1981), daughter of Theodore Barclay, stockbroker, of Hertford.
They had two daughters and two sons.
Swire died 22 February 1983 at his home at Hubbards Hall, Old Harlow, Essex.
[Charles Drage,Taikoo: an Account of the Firm of Butterfield & Swire , 1970; Gavin Young,Beyond Lion Rock: the Story of Cathay Pacific Airways , 1988; private information.]
A A M Duncan
, bán (fair), ‘Donalbane’(b. c. 1039), king of Scots 1093–4 and 1094–7, was born before, probably not long before, 1040 when his father, Duncan I, king of Scots [q.v.], was killed in battle ‘at an immature age’.
His mother was an unnamed cousin of Siward, Earl of Northumberland [q.v.], and he had an elder brother, Malcolm III [q.v.].
The other reputed brother, Maelmore, is attested only by the Orkneyinga saga, and the relationship should be viewed with scepticism.
On his father's death and the succession of Macbeth [q.v.],
Donald is reputed to have fled to the (Western) Isles, and nothing is known of him during the reigns of Macbeth and Malcolm III.
On Malcolm's death, and that of his oldest son by Margaret [q.v.], daughter of Edward the Atheling [q.v.], at Alnwick on 13 November 1093, the Scottish nobility chose Donald to be their king.
Malcolm's oldest son (by his first wife), Duncan, had lived in England probably for twenty years, and was associated with Anglo-Norman culture; there was almost certainly a reaction also against Margaret (who died within a week), her sons, whom Donald exiled, and English immigrants.
Hence when Duncan II [q.v.], with the help of William II [q.v.], expelled Donald after six months in 1094, Duncan was unable to retain the throne, being forced to send his French knights packing, and then falling victim when Donald returned, aided, it seems, by Edmund, second son of Malcolm III and Margaret.
The kingdom may now have been partitioned between these two, as William of Malmesbury [q.v.]asserts.
Although Donald seems to have made no attack on northern England (the usual means by which a new king rewarded his followers), William II set about destabilizing his rule, first recognizing Edgar [q.v.], the oldest surviving son of Malcolm III, as king-in-exile, then sending north Edgar Atheling to put Edgar on the throne (1097).
According to William of Malmesbury, Donald was killed by David, later David I [q.v.].
To be preferred is the Scottish king-list, which claims that he was captured and blinded by King Edgar, dying in Rescobie (Angus, Tayside); the annals of Tigernach confirm this by noting that he was blinded in 1099, probably the date of his death.
The king-list also claims that he was first buried in Dunkeld but that ‘Iona holds his bones’; if so, he was the last Scottish king buried there.
But the reported burial of Scottish kings on Iona may reflect only unfounded pretensions by the monastery there.
The claim that he strangled a son of David I in revenge for being blinded is late and seems improbable.
His part in Shakespeare's Macbeth derives from the fanciful tales in Scotorum Historiae (1526) by Hector Boece or Boethius [q.v.].
The name of Donald's wife (if he married) is unknown, but he had a daughter, Bethoc, from whom John Comyn of Badenoch [q.v.]derived his claim to the throne in 1291.
[Archibald H. Dunbar,Scottish Kings , 2nd edn., 1906; A. O. Anderson,Early Sources of Scottish History A.D. 500–1286 , 1922; A. O. Anderson,Scottish Annals from English Chroniclers, A.D. 500 to 1286 , 1908.]
David S Eastwood
,Thomas (1787–1869), economist, political theorist, and journalist, was born 12 December 1787 in Chatham, the son of a keeper of stores at the Admiralty docks.
Hodgskin described his childhood as impoverished and joyless.
When he reached twelve his father cut short his education and procured him a naval cadetship in March 1800.
For the next twelve years he cruised in the North Sea and Mediterranean and along the coasts of Africa.
Although he distinguished himself in action, Hodgskin found naval discipline irksome and his comrades' company desultory.
Whilst at sea he began to read widely, but necessarily unsystematically.
Conflicts with his superiors deprived him of the prospect of promotion, and at the age of twenty-five he found himself on the retired list, reduced to half pay in 1812.
In his first published work,An Essay on Naval Discipline (1813), he contrasted the arbitrary brutality of naval life with the good government with which Britain was reputedly blessed.
Publication of the Essay brought Hodgskin to the attention of the London radicals, notably Francis Place [q.v.], who was to offer Hodgskin intellectual companionship and patronage.
In July 1815 Hodgskin embarked on a walking tour which took him first to Paris and later to Germany, where he made a detailed study of the political and economic institutions of Hanover.
Although Hodgskin's investigations were shaped by a questionnaire devised by Jeremy Bentham [q.v.], his suggestion, in Travels in North Germany (2 vols., 1820), that ‘many evils are in Germany, occasioned by governing too much’ was far from Benthamite.
Hodgskin expounded a minimalist conception of the state, insisting that government tended to shackle the energies and liberties of individuals.
The guarantor of good government was the influence of public opinion.
Hodgskin concluded that if Britain was better governed than the states of Germany this was principally because of the greater freedom of expression in Britain and because the political education of the working classes had progressed further in Britain than in Germany.
By 1819 Hodgskin was in Edinburgh, married to Elisabeth, a young German woman whose surname is unknown.
The next few years were marked by excruciating poverty.
Hodgskin failed to break into the charmed circle of the Edinburgh reviewers, and was constantly held back by his painful self-abnegation and the growing radicalism of his opinions.
Late in 1822 he arrived back in London and Place secured him a position as a correspondent for the Morning Chronicle .
Respectable journalism gave Hodgskin a regular income, but no outlet for his real opinions.
In 1823 he was instrumental in establishing the Mechanics' Magazine and the Mechanics' Institute where, in 1825, he delivered a course of lectures later published as Popular Political Economy (1827).
Hodgskin's reputation as an economist rests on these lectures, the trenchant Labour Defended against the Claims of Capital (1825) and The Natural and Artificial Right of Property Contrasted (1832).
Hodgskin has frequently been described as a ‘Ricardian socialist’, but the description is more ironic than accurate.
Certainly Hodgskin used elements from Ricardian economics, but only as tools with which to undermine the Ricardian edifice.
At the same time he pressed the labour theory of value to far more radical ends than David Ricardo [q.v.], seeing skilled labour as both the measure and producer of all value.
Fixed capital was no more than accumulated labour.
Hodgskin saw a shameless deception at the centre of Ricardian economics and British capitalism: both pretended that capital was productive and the essential spring to greater prosperity, but, Hodgskin argued, capitalists were always parasitic, holding wages close to subsistence levels and diverting the fruits of labour's productivity to unproductive and anti-social consumption.
Although Karl Marx's formulation of the theory of surplus value was more sophisticated, his debt to Hodgskin is unmistakable.
Hodgskin fathered seven children, and the need to provide for his family may explain his failure to produce any major work after 1832.
He intended to complete a critical study of law, ‘The Absurdity of Legislation Demonstrated’, but this never appeared.
Instead he became a prolific journalist, contributing to at least four daily newspapers, as well as several provincial weeklies; and for a time he assisted Thomas Hansard [q.v.]in publishing parliamentary reports.
In the early 1840s he published pamphlets for the Anti-Corn Law League, and in 1846 he joined the staff of The Economist .
In the same year the navy awarded him the rank of retired commander.
Hodgskin's enthusiasm for free trade was rooted in a belief that the power of governments would wither as the relationships within society became subject to economic laws rather than arbitrary legal systems.
In two lectures in 1857 he attributed crime not to personal depravity but the corrupting tendencies of the law.
He died in Feltham, Middlesex, 21 August 1869 after a short illness.
No London newspaper published a notice of his life and work.
[Elie Halévy,Thomas Hodgskin , 1903 (new edn. and trans.
A. J. Taylor, 1956); William Stafford,Socialism, Radicalism, and Nostalgia: Social Criticism in Britain, 1775–1830 , 1987; Samuel Hollander: ‘The Post-Ricardian Dissension’,Oxford Economic Papers , vol. xii, 1980.]
Catherine Crawford
,Elizabeth (1723–post 1772), midwife, was born in London.
She studied midwifery at the Hôtel-Dieu in Paris under Marie-Claude Pour for two years during the late 1740s.
As a foreigner she had great difficulty getting admitted there as an apprentice, but eventually succeeded with assistance from the Duke of Orleans.
It was an impressive practical training, for a handful of apprentice midwives delivered about 1,300 women every year.
By 1754 she was back in London, living in Panton Square near the Haymarket with her husband, Edward Nihell, who practised surgery.
Elizabeth Nihell deplored the growing fashion for men-midwives.
In A Treatise on the Art of Midwifery (1760), she argued that male practitioners lacked patience and sensitivity, and were too quick to resort to metal instruments, causing needless infant deaths.
She also condemned the practice of paying men-midwives higher fees than women.
She vigorously criticized William Smellie [q.v.], who taught midwifery to surgeons using a leather mannequin, but she also considered it unethical to oblige poor women in charitable institutions to give birth in the presence of male students.
Her arguments were ridiculed by Tobias Smollett [q.v.](a former pupil of Smellie's) in an essay in the Critical Review (1760), which nevertheless paid her the compliment of insinuating that her husband must have written the book.
Elizabeth Nihell's defence of her profession helped to raise public awareness of an important problem.
A French translation of her book, updated, was published in 1771.
Elizabeth Nihell had at least one child.
That she was still in practice near the Haymarket in 1772 is indicated by a list of London midwives published that year.
[London Evening Post , 21–3 February 1754, p. 3b; anon.,The Danger and Immodesty of the Present Too General Custom of Unnecessarily Employing Men-Midwives , 1772; J. H. Aveling,English Midwives: their History and Prospects , 1872; H. Carrier,Origines de la Maternité de Paris , 1888; P. J. Klukoff, ‘Smollett's Defence of Dr. Smellie in The Critical Review ’,Medical History , vol. xiv, 1970; Jean Donnison,Midwives and Medical Men , 1977.]
A K Newmark
, Sir Max , baronet (1872–1934), industrialist, was born 3 February 1872 at Seaforth Hall, Liverpool, the second of three sons (the eldest died in childhood) and fourth of seven children of Edmund Knowles Muspratt [q.v.], industrial chemist, and his wife Frances Jane, daughter of Thomas Baines [q.v.]of Liverpool, proprietor of the Liverpool Times , then parliamentary agent for Liverpool Corporation.
He was the grandson of James Muspratt [q.v.], founder of the Muspratt alkali works.
He was educated at Hemel Hempstead and Clifton College, then at the Polytechnic in Zurich, becoming the first Englishman to receive the Swiss government diploma in industrial chemistry.
In 1895 he entered the alkali business.
Founded by his grandfather in Liverpool in 1823, the Muspratt alkali works moved to Widnes in 1852.
His sons continued the business after James Muspratt retired, and Max Muspratt's father was largely responsible for the merger which formed the United Alkali Co. in 1890.
It was this giant concern of nearly fifty factories that Max joined.
In 1901 he became a director and succeeded John Brock as chairman in 1914, a bleak time for the over-capitalized firm.
When the United Alkali Co. became part of the newly formed Imperial Chemical Industries in 1926 Max Muspratt became a director, a post he held until his death.
At the outbreak of World War I he was a member of the special committee on explosives chaired by Viscount Haldane [q.v.], and was jointly responsible, with R. G. Perry and William Pearce, for production and supply of sulphuric acid during the war years.
He advised the ministry of munitions on matters concerning chemical warfare, and it was chiefly these wartime contributions that led to his baronetcy in 1922.
Muspratt was also active in politics.
He was first elected to the Liverpool city council as a Liberal in 1903, was leader of its Liberal party in 1918, and served almost continuously until his death, at which time he was chairman of the finance committee.
He was returned as Liberal MP for Liverpool Exchange division in the general election of January 1910, but was defeated at the election of December 1910.
He was the leader of the Liberals on Merseyside for many years until 1926, when his withdrawal was a serious loss to the party.
He was elected lord mayor of Liverpool for 1916–17 and became an alderman in 1921.
He was vice-president of the Society of Chemical Industry, chairman of the Association of British Chemical Manufacturers in 1924, president of the Federation of British Industries in 1926, and a founder member of the National Sulphuric Acid Association (1919).
He was a member of the Liverpool university council, the advisory committee of E. G. V. Stanley, seventeenth Earl of Derby [q.v.], the Mersey tunnel committee, and the Mersey Docks and Harbour Board.
He attended the 1927 economic conference at Geneva, sponsored by the League of Nations.
In 1896 he married Helena Agnes Dalrymple, daughter of T. W. Ainsworth of Blackburn; they had a son who died at the age of nine, another son, and two daughters.
Their son Rudolph, whose wedding was the first to be celebrated in Liverpool Cathedral, died in 1929 after an operation for appendicitis; his twin sons died in infancy.
Muspratt died at home in Liverpool 20 April 1934, and the baronetcy became extinct.
[The Times , 21 April 1934;Chemistry and Industry , 27 April 1934.]
Kenneth Garlick
,Hugh Andrew Johnstone (c. 1797–1864), art collector, was the only son (there was also a daughter) of Sir Alexander Munro, at one time consul-general in Madrid, and his wife Margaret Penelope Johnstone.
The precise date and place of his birth are uncertain.
His uncle was Sir Hector Munro, general [q.v.].
On the death of his father in 1809, he became head of the Munros of Novar and succeeded to large estates, including that of Novar House, Ross-shire, thus becoming one of the chief landed proprietors in the counties of Ross, Cromarty, and Moray.
From 1814 to 1817 he was a gentleman commoner at Christ Church, Oxford, but appears to have left without taking a degree.
In 1816 he was admitted to Lincoln's Inn but there is no record of his ever being called to the bar.
His London house was at 6 Hamilton Place.
Munro was an amateur artist and a distinguished collector, becoming, like Elhanan Bicknell [q.v.], one of the chief patrons of J. M. W. Turner [q.v.].
He was of a shy, diffident, and even morbid temperament, a characteristic which enabled him to mix on more intimate terms than other collectors with the somewhat shy but more forceful and eccentric Turner.
They became close friends, travelling together through France to Italy in 1836 and sketching alongside each other.
Turner is said to have suggested the tour to help alleviate Munro's depression.
He had financed Turner's journey to Venice in 1833 and in 1844 he became one of the four trustees of Turner's charity for the relief of decayed and indigent artists.
He was also one of Turner's executors.
Unlike Bicknell, he formed a large collection of old masters in addition to the work of Turner and other contemporary British artists, such as Richard Bonington, John Constable, and Sir David Wilkie [qq.v.].
This included Raphael's ‘Madonna dei Candelabri’(Walters Arts Gallery, Baltimore), Veronese's ‘Vision of St Helena’(National Gallery, London), and Rembrandt's ‘Lucretia’(National Gallery, Washington).
His collection of Turners was of greater and paramount importance.
He owned some dozen oils, twenty or so large drawings, and fifty-five vignettes, all of which fetched high prices at sales from the collection during his lifetime and after his death.
Among the more important Turner oils were ‘Venus and Adonis’(c .1803, private collection), ‘Venice from the Porch of Madonna della Salute’(1837, commissioned by Munro but not liked by him, later sold, and now in New York, at the Metropolitan Museum), ‘Snow-storm, Avalanche and Inundation’(1837, Art Institute, Chicago), ‘Modern Italy, the Pifferari’(Glasgow Art Gallery), and ‘Ancient Italy’(1838, private collection).
At his death the whole collection, old and modern masters, numbered some 2,500.
Seven sales by Christie's between 1860 and 1878 aroused great public interest.
Munro never married.
He had several illegitimate children, his son by Penelope Forbes being the distinguished classical scholar, also called Hugh Andrew Johnstone Munro [q.v.].
Munro died at Novar House 22 November 1864.
[Walter Thornbury,The Life of J. M. W. Turner, R.A. , 2 vols., 1862; G. Redford,Art Sales , 2 vols., 1888; Martin Butlin and Evelyn Joll,The Paintings of J. M. W. Turner , 2 vols., 1977; James Holloway, ‘H. A. J. Munro of Novar’,Review of Scottish Culture , Autumn 1991.]
Godfrey Lienhardt
,Alfred Reginald (1881–1955), social anthropologist, was born 17 January 1881 in Birmingham, the second son of Alfred Brown and his wife Hannah, whose maiden name, Radcliffe, he added to his own by deed poll in 1926.
His father died in 1886, leaving the young family in straitened circumstances.
He was educated at the Royal Commercial Travellers' School, Pinner, Middlesex, and then, as a foundation scholar, at King Edward's School, Birmingham (1896–8).
In 1901 he won an exhibition to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he received a second class (division I) in part i of the moral sciences tripos (1904) and a first class in part ii (1905).
(Sir) James Frazer [q.v.], then also of Trinity College, was an influential supporter of anthropological field research, and Brown was encouraged by his tutor, W. H. R. Rivers, and by A. C. Haddon [q.v.], to make a field study of the Andaman islanders (1906–8).
He followed this by research among the tribes of Western Australia (1909–13), meanwhile retaining a fellowship at Trinity College, Cambridge (1908–14) and a lecturership in ethnology at the London School of Economics (1909–10), where he taught when in England.
Though his ethnography was judged inadequate by standards set a little later by Bronislaw Malinowski [q.v.]and he was slow to publish, he was the first British social anthropologist to undertake protracted fieldwork.
This gave him his reputation as a young scholar of great originality, and, combined with his gift for the clear and persuasive exposition of his ideas, brought him an international range of senior academic appointments.
He first became director of education, Tonga (1916–19), and thereafter held professorships in Cape Town (1921–5), Sydney (1926–31), Chicago (1931–7) with Yenching University in China (1935), and Oxford (1937–46) with a fellowship of All Souls College and a wartime secondment to Sao Paulo.
After retirement he continued as professor in Alexandria (1947–9), Grahamstown (1951–4), and titularly in Manchester and London.
He thus made a very memorable personal impression as a teacher on many of the most prominent social anthropologists of his time.
Radcliffe-Brown's lifelong conviction was that by a kind of Newtonian revolution, replacing the historical speculations of ethnology by a scientific methodology, social anthropology might become ‘a theoretical natural science of society’, in a sociological tradition he traced to Montesquieu, Comte, Herbert Spencer [q.v.], and Durkheim.
In his younger days his acquaintance with the anarchist Prince Peter Kropotkin had suggested to him that the fundamental principles of social order (for Radcliffe-Brown, the ‘structure’ and ‘function’of social institutions) might best be discerned in simple self-regulating communities without formalized governmental authority.
Later developments in the understanding of kinship and lineage relationships owed much to his discussions of this topic, but many of his academic successors — notably (Sir) E. E. Evans-Pritchard [q.v.]and (Sir) E. R. Leach — effectively dismissed his doctrinaire methodology.
Nevertheless all professional anthropologists had assimilated some of his ideas about the theoretical interpretation of particular social customs scattered through his writings, of which the most important were The Andaman Islanders (1922),The Social Organization of Australian Tribes (1930–1), and the occasional papers collected with a very laudatory foreword by Evans-Pritchard and the leading American social anthropologist Professor Peter Eggan in Structure and Function in Primitive Society (1952).
Personally Radcliffe-Brown could appear politely overbearing on a wide variety of subjects, and in later life somewhat aloof, though not without glimpses of his urbane sociability and intellectual panache.
He was Malinowski's only rival as a dominant figure in pre-war social anthropology, and his intellectual and administrative services to the subject were recognized by many honorary academic offices and awards of merit.
In 1910 he married Winifred, daughter of Algernon Lyon of Cambridge.
They had one daughter.
The marriage was dissolved in 1933.
Radcliffe-Brown died 24 October 1955 in London.
[Raymond Firth in Proceedings of the British Academy , vol. xlii, 1956; Meyer Fortes (ed.),
Social Structure: Studies presented to A. R. Radcliffe-Brown , 1949; W. E. H. Stanner, ‘Radcliffe-Brown, A. R.’ in David L. Sills (ed.),
International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences , vol. xiii, 1968; George W. Stocking (ed.),
Functionalism Historicized: Essays on British Social Anthropology , 1984; personal knowledge.]
Bernard Richards
,Ernest Christopher (1867–1900), poet, was born 2 August 1867 in Lee, Kent, the elder son (there were no daughters) of Alfred Dowson, nephew of Alfred Domett [q.v.]and friend of Robert Browning and R. L. Stevenson [qq.v.], and his wife Annie Swan, of Scottish descent.
His father owned a dry dock, Bridge Dock, on the Thames at Limehouse, described as ‘Rainham's Dock’ in A Comedy of Masks .
After irregular schooling, in 1886 he went up to Queen's College, Oxford.
He left in 1887 after five terms, without completing the papers for honour moderations.
After leaving Oxford he worked supervising the dry dock, but not with any great commitment, preferring instead the London literary society of Lionel Pigot Johnson, Richard Le Gallienne, Oscar Wilde, and Aubrey Beardsley [qq.v.].
Dowson contributed to the principal aesthetic magazines:Century Guild Hobby Horse ,Yellow Book ,Savoy , and the anthologies published by the Rhymers' Club (1892 and 1894).
He collaborated with Arthur Moore on the novel A Comedy of Masks (1893).
His principal published works were Dilemmas (1895),Verses (1896),The Pierrot of the Minute: a Dramatic Phantasy in One Act (1897),Adrian Rome (1899)(with A. Moore), and Decorations (1899).
He also translated Pierre Choderlos de Laclos' Les Liaisons dangereuses (1898), Voltaire's La Pucelle d'Orléans (1899), and several other works.
The principal love affair of his life was with Adelaide Foltinowicz (‘Missie’), who was twelve when he first met her serving in a restaurant, ‘The Poland’, at Sherwood Street.
She was his Beatrice and the dedicatee of Verses .
She married the tailor August Noelte, causing Dowson ‘the torture of the damned’.
Through the letters and poetry there runs a strong current of paedophilia, which has an erotic strain; but it is tempered by a humane appreciation of the freshness and generosity of children not yet tainted by the manners of society.
In the letters this positive appreciation runs alongside outbreaks of striking misanthropy.
‘Youth’ is an important poem on the loss of childhood.
Dowson's poetry is mannered, literary, mellifluous, and in a diction operating on a narrow register.
The principal modern influence is A. C. Swinburne [q.v.].
T. S. Eliot [q.v.]described Dowson as ‘the most gifted and technically perfect of his age’.
His most famous poem is ‘Non sum qualis eram bonae sub regno cynarae’, modelled on the first ode in book iv of Horace and containing the well-known refrain ‘I have been faithful to thee, Cynara! in my fashion.’
‘Vitae summa brevis spem nos vetat incohare longam’, with its reference to ‘the days of wine and roses’ is a quintessentially 1890s piece.
In about 1891–2 Dowson was received into the Catholic Church, and produced certain religio-aesthetic poems, such as‘Nuns of Perpetual Adoration’ and ‘Carthusians’.
The dry dock was relinquished to the foreman in 1894 and Dowson lived in Brittany, principally in Pont Aven.
Leonard Smithers paid him a salary for producing translations.
Both his parents committed suicide, his father in August 1894 and his mother six months later.
R. H. Sherard nursed him during the last six months of his life.
He died 23 February 1900 at 26 Sandhurst Gardens, Catford.
He was unmarried.
[Victor Plarr,Ernest Dowson 1888–1897: Reminiscences, Unpublished Letters and Marginalia , 1914; M. Longaker,Ernest Dowson , 1945; Desmond Flower and Henry Maas,The Letters of Ernest Dowson , 1967; B. I. Evans,English Poetry in the Later Nineteenth Century , 1933, revised 1966, pp. 402–8; Edgar Jepson,Memories of a Victorian , vol. i, 1933.]
Michael Prestwich
(d. 1282), royal minister and an important landowner in Yorkshire and Northumberland, was constable of Tickhill and Knaresborough at the end of the barons' wars of Henry III's reign.
A thoroughgoing royalist, he was responsible for beheading some of those he captured, apparently after some form of trial.
He went with the future Edward I on crusade in 1270, acting as his admiral.
On return from the crusade, he was appointed as seneschal of Gascony.
He already had an interest there, as he had been granted the town of Lalinde by Edward in 1267.
After Edward's departure for England in 1274 Tany's powers and authority as seneschal were carefully defined, but his rule does not appear to have been successful.
He was involved in the major dispute between Edward I and Gaston de Béarn.
A succession of other legal disputes went unresolved, and appeals were made to the parlement of Paris.
There was trouble at Bazas, and a major dispute in Dax, where the bishopric had been taken into Edward's hands in 1272, and the townspeople resisted Tany by force.
In 1278 Sir Otho de Grandson and Robert Burnell [qq.v], the two men on whom the king perhaps most relied, went to Gascony to investigate.
Luke de Tany was removed from office, but was not disgraced.
His failure was the result of attempting to rule with too firm a hand, and there was no incompetence or corruption to be laid at his door.
In the Welsh war of 1282–3, he was appointed on 18 August 1282 to command the English troops on the island of Anglesey.
An ambitious plan was formed for a bridge of boats to be constructed so that an attack on the mainland could be mounted.
In the second half of October Tany, along with Roger de Clifford [q.v.],
William Audley, and others sailed for Anglesey.
On 6 November Tany and his men, acting prematurely, crossed the bridge to attack the Welsh on the mainland.
The move was conceivably intended to thwart peace negotiations conducted by the archbishop of Canterbury.
Precisely what happened is not clear, as chronicle accounts vary, but is seems that Tany and his men advanced inland some distance, and then returned to the bridge of boats.
One version is that the route was cut off by the rising tide; the Welsh swooped, and drove the English into the sea.
An alternative suggests that as the English made the return crossing, the bridge became overloaded, and as the barges sank many were drowned.
Whatever the truth of the matter, Tany was one of the main casualties in a rare disaster.
[H. Rothwell (ed.),
The Chronicle of Walter of Guisborough , Camden Society, vol. lxxxix, 1957; T. Wright (ed.),
The Chronicle of Pierre de Langtoft , vol. ii (Rolls Series), 1868; J. P. Trabut-Cussac,L'administration anglaise en Gascogne sous Henry III et Edouard I , 1972; M. C. Prestwich,Edward I , 1988; S. Lloyd,English Society and the Crusade 1216–1307 , 1988.]
Jose Harris
, Lady Constance Georgina (1869–1923), suffragette, was born 12 February 1869 in Vienna, the second daughter and third child in the family of four sons and three daughters of Edward Robert Bulmer (later first Earl) Lytton [q.v.], poet, and his wife Edith, daughter of the Hon.
Edward Villiers and niece of George Villiers, fourth Earl of Clarendon [q.v.].
She was the great-granddaughter of the early nineteenth-century feminist Anna Wheeler.
Her paternal grandfather, Edward, first Baron Lytton [q.v.], was a prominent Victorian man of letters.
Her childhood was spent in Vienna, Paris, Lisbon, and India, and at the family seat at Knebworth, Hertfordshire.
She was taught by a governess, and acquired a permanent love of music and art from a visiting Austrian music teacher, Fraülein Oser.
She was connected by kinship and marriage to a wide range of aristocratic, artistic, and literary circles; one sister married Gerald Balfour (later second Earl Balfour), brother of the future prime minister, and another married the architect (Sir) Edwin Lutyens [q.v.].
From 1887 to 1891 she lived in Paris, where her father was ambassador.
In 1892 she went with her mother on a visit to South Africa, where she met the feminist Olive Schreiner [q.v.]and fell traumatically in love with an unmarriageable man.
From an early age she had a strong dislike for conventional aristocratic ‘society’.
After the death of her father in 1891 she withdrew entirely into private life, devoting herself almost obsessively to the care of her mother, even though the latter soon came out of retirement to become a royal lady-in-waiting.
For many years her life was almost a caricature of the daily round of the Victorian upper-class spinster.
But her correspondence reveals a woman of decisive and original views about art, literature, politics, and religion.
Her family and friends made many attempts to draw her into public life, including offering the sub-editorship of a literary magazine, but these were all rejected.
In 1899 she wrote of herself as in a state of ‘waiting, not actually living’.
Her life changed dramatically in 1906, when her godmother and great-aunt, Lady Blomfield, left her a legacy of £1,000, which she donated to the revival of morris dancing.
Mary Neal, a leading protagonist of the folk-dance movement, was also the organizer of the Esperance Guild for working girls, which she had founded jointly with Emmeline Pethick-Lawrence [q.v.], who was treasurer of the Women's Social and Political Union.
Lady Constance visited some suffragettes imprisoned in Holloway gaol, and this experience transformed her into a public figure with a single-minded burning cause.
She joined the WSPU in 1909 and thereafter she lobbied Parliament, travelled the country addressing mass meetings, and mobilized her influential contacts on behalf of the suffrage campaign.
Early in 1909 she was imprisoned in Holloway, but rapidly released when the authorities became aware of her powerful connections.
A year later she was again arrested for throwing stones at a ministerial car during a political meeting in Liverpool.
On this occasion she had assumed the dress and name of a working girl, Miss Jane Warton.
She was imprisoned in Walton gaol, went on hunger strike, and was force-fed eight times before her release.
Her account of her imprisonment, delivered to a mass meeting at the Queen's Hall on 31 January 1910, did much to bring the practice of force-feeding to an end.
Some months later she became a paid organizer for the WSPU, and moved into a worker's tenement in the Euston Road.
However, the strain of her ordeal proved to have permanently undermined her health.
In August 1910 she suffered a heart attack, and two years later she had a stroke which left her a paralysed cripple.
With her left hand she wrote Prison and Prisoners (1914), an account of her suffragette experiences and an indictment of conditions in prisons.
She died 22 May 1923 in London.
She was unmarried.
[Letters of Constance Lytton , selected and arranged by Lady Betty Balfour, 1925; Constance Lytton and J. Warton,Prison and Prisoners , 1914.]
Peter Gaunt
,Humphrey (1603–1654), administrator and politician, was born 27 January 1603, the eldest of three children and the only son of Richard Mackworth (d .
1617) of Betton Strange, Shropshire, and his wife Dorothy, daughter of Lawrence Cranage of Keele.
The family held property in several parishes south of Shrewsbury.
Educated at Shrewsbury School and Gray's Inn, Mackworth subsequently practised law and was called to the bar.
In 1638 he became an alderman of Shrewsbury under its new royal charter.
Despite connections by marriage with several Shropshire Royalist families, from the outbreak of civil war Mackworth was a parliamentarian and was condemned by a royal proclamation of October 1642.
In 1643–4 he was appointed by Parliament to a string of Shropshire committees, though the county was then almost entirely in Royalist hands.
Indeed, Mackworth spent part of 1644 in Coventry, where he held a stewardship.
Although he played only a minor military role in the war, he was a colonel by 1646 and was present at the capture of Ludlow in May.
In June 1646 Parliament appointed Mackworth governor of Shrewsbury, an office he held until his death.
In August 1648 he suppressed Royalist activity in the area and in August 1651 he firmly rebutted the entreaties of Charles Stuart and his army.
He was recorder of Shrewsbury from November 1645, of Wenlock from September 1647, and of Bridgnorth by 1653.
He was named to all the parliamentary committees for Shropshire from 1646 until his death.
In 1648 he was appointed an attorney-general for north Wales and vice-chamberlain of Chester.
In 1649 he became deputy chief justice of the Chester circuit, in which capacity he presided over the trials of James Stanley, seventh Earl of Derby, Sir Timothy Fetherstonhaugh [qq.v.], and John Benbowe in October 1651.
On 2 February 1654 the council of state of the Protectorate recommended that Mackworth be added to its number.
With Oliver Cromwell's approval he took his seat on 7 February, bringing his legal and administrative experience to the task, and he attended all but a handful of recorded meetings between 7 February and 5 December.
He was also on many council committees, and chaired the committee which excluded some members of the first Protectorate Parliament.
Mackworth himself was returned as MP for Shropshire and was active within the House, nominated to sixteen committees between September and December.
Mackworth married firstly, by May 1624, Anne, daughter of Thomas Waller of Beaconsfield, who died in 1636, and secondly, on 12 July 1638, Mary, daughter of Thomas Venables.
By his first wife he had three sons and three daughters.
By his second he had a son who died in infancy, and a daughter born 1641.
Richard Gough [q.v.], in whose History of Myddle (ed.
D. Hey, 1981) Mackworth occasionally appears as ‘Judge Mackworth’, erroneously gives him a third wife.
In fact, his second wife outlived him by a quarter of a century.
Mackworth died in December 1654 at the mews house he held as a councillor.
He was buried in Westminster Abbey on the night of 26 December.
In 1660 his corpse was disinterred and dumped in a pit near St Margaret's church.
[J. B. Blakeway, ‘History of Shrewsbury Hundred or Liberties’,Transactions of the Shropshire Archaeological and Natural History Society , 2nd series, vol. i, 1888–9; H. T. Weyman, ‘Shropshire Members of Parliament’, ibid., 4th series, vol. xi, 1927–8; H. Johnstone, ‘Two Governors of Shrewsbury’,English Historical Review , vol. xxvi, 1911;Commons Journals ;Calendars of State Papers Domestic ; British Library Add.
MS 35962; Public Record Office, SP 18, SP 25, SP 28, C 142, Ward 5, Ward 7, PROB/11, PROB/12.]
Ronald M Birse
,Matthew (1753–1781), engineer and inventor, was born at 3 Narrow Wine Street, Bristol, where he was baptized 18 November 1753, the son of Mary and William Wasbrough, originally a barber-surgeon and peruke maker, who was in partnership with Roger Rice in a brass-founding and clock-making business in Narrow Wine Street.
He had at least three older brothers.
Taking an early interest in his father's work, he constructed a steam engine with which to drive all the lathes and other machines; in order to do this, he had to convert the reciprocating movement of the Newcomen-type beam engine into rotary motion.
He achieved this by using a ratchet-and-pawl mechanism to produce the rotary motion, combined with a flywheel which reduced the otherwise excessive variations in the speed of rotation.
On 10 March 1779 Wasbrough was granted a patent (no. 1,213) for a ‘machine, which when applied to a steam-engine or any perpendicular motion…will cause such movement to become circular, without the medium of a water-wheel, for grinding wheat and other grain, and for grinding, rolling, hammering, and other uses in mechanical operations’.
The ratchet-and-pawl device was quite effective in principle, but not robust or reliable enough in constant use, and it seems that, after he completed an engine to drive a mill owned by James Pickard at Snow Hill in Birmingham, it was found to be unsatisfactory, and a crank was substituted.
It is not known who suggested this alteration, but anyhow the problem was solved; in the words of John Farey [q.v.]:
‘The engine then answered so much better than anything which had been tried before that the same principle has been followed ever since.’
This was probably the first successful application of the crank to a steam engine in order to produce rotary motion.
A patent (no. 1,263) was granted to Pickard on 23 August 1780 for a ‘new-invented method of applying steam engines to the turning of wheeles, whereby a rotative motion is performed, and the power of the engine is more immediately and fully applied…than by the intervention of water’.
There was apparently an agreement between Pickard and Wasbrough allowing the latter to use the crank, and the engine-builder who was most incensed at the patenting of a device which he maintained had been known for centuries was James Watt [q.v.].
In any case, Wasbrough benefited little from either his invention or his arrangement with Pickard.
He had entered into negotiations with the commissioners of His Majesty's Victualling Office for the erection of an engine to drive a corn mill, and manufacture of the parts was well advanced, when for some reason they turned to John Smeaton [q.v.]for an opinion, and he recommended a pumping engine and water-wheel.
This disappointment, coming at a time when he was already in a precarious state of health, is said to have accelerated Wasbrough's death, which occurred 21 October 1781.
A notice of his death in the Bristol Journal supports the view that had he lived he would have made an even greater mark as an engineer: ‘The public have to deplore in him the loss of one of the first mechanics in the kingdom, whose early genius brought to perfection that long-wished-for desideratum, the applying the powers of the fire-engine to rotular movements.’
On 23 January 1776 he married Elizabeth Dowell at St Peter's, Bristol.
[Notes and Queries , 3rd series, vol. i, 1862, pp. 292–3;Engineer , 13 February 1920, pp. 162–4; H. W. Dickinson,A Short History of the Steam Engine , 1939, 2nd edn., 1963; H. W. Dickinson and R. Jenkins,James Watt and the Steam Engine , 1927, reprinted 1981.]
G Dyfnallt Owen
,William , Viscount Cranborne and second Earl of Salisbury (1591–1668), parliamentarian, was born in Westminster 28 March 1591, the only son of Sir Robert Cecil (later first Earl of Salisbury, q.v.), and his wife Elizabeth, daughter of William Brooke, tenth Baron Cobham.
His mother died when William was six years old and he and his only sister Frances were placed in the care of their aunt, Lady Frances Stourton, while their father attended to the boy's education.
William was admitted in 1602 to St John's College, Cambridge, Sir Robert's former college.
Upon the creation of Sir Robert Cecil as Earl of Salisbury in 1605 William became Viscount Cranborne.
In 1608 he was sent to France, but brought home to marry Catharine, daughter of Thomas Howard, first Earl of Suffolk [q.v.], on 1 December that same year.
He then retuned to France, his father insisting that he should reside abroad for two years.
However, in the arrangements made for the investiture of Henry, the king's eldest son, as prince of Wales, Salisbury, now lord treasurer, saw an opportunity for Cranborne to win royal favour and he was summoned home to share the privilege of holding the king's train at the ceremony on 4 June 1610.
He then resumed his tour and travelled to Venice.
He fell ill of a fever at Padua, left Italy, and arrived in England resolved never to go abroad again.
The death of both his father and the prince of Wales in 1612 left Cranborne, now Earl of Salisbury, to his own resources.
He became lord lieutenant of Hertfordshire in 1612 and his punctilious implementation of orders from the Privy Council impressed the king, who made him a knight of the Garter in 1624.
Charles I was equally well disposed towards Salisbury and made him a privy councillor in 1626.
During the period of Charles's personal rule Salisbury conformed.
He was disappointed at being denied the mastership of the Court of Wards, but his ambitions were partially satisfied with the captaincy of the Band of the King's Gentlemen Pensioners in 1635.
Until 1639 he employed much of his time in improving his estates.
He also made Hatfield House a centre of taste and culture, patronizing the painters George Geldrop and Peter Lely [qq.v.], the musicians Henry Oxford and Nicholas Lanier [q.v.], and the gardener John Tradescant the elder [q.v.].
In 1633 Salisbury accompanied Charles to his coronation in Edinburgh and became a member of the council of Scotland.
But the king's failure to impose his ecclesiastical policy on Scotland and the tension between him and the English Parliament in 1640 forced the earl to reconsider his position.
He gradually inclined to the moderate party in the Lords while supporting the Commons in the removal of the instruments of royal despotism.
Since he did not commit himself unreservedly to any party he earned a reputation for political inconsistency, and had to confront the hazards of non-alignment when war broke out in 1642.
While Hatfield was saved from depredation, the estate at Cranborne in Dorset suffered much damage.
Salisbury's reaction at the end of hostilities was to seek security wherever it could be found.
The House of Lords could offer none, since the victorious army was determined to suppress it.
But that did not prevent Salisbury from acting as a member of the commission charged with negotiating an agreement with Charles in the Isle of Wight in 1648.
When that failed he refused to approve the king's trial and execution.
With the disappearance of the old order Salisbury decided to support the Republic.
He found no difficulty in signing the engagement drawn up by Parliament which bound him to be faithful to a commonwealth without king and House of Lords.
That two of his sons had fought for Parliament may have played a part in this transfer of loyalty.
He may also have been influenced by the favour shown by Parliament to his friend, Philip Herbert, fourth Earl of Pembroke [q.v.], when it voted that he should be indemnified for his losses in the war.
Many of his closest friends amongst the nobility, notably Algernon Percy, ninth Earl of Northumberland [q.v.],
Salisbury's son-in-law, had declared for Parliament, and this again may have encouraged him to join them.
He became a member of the council of state from 1649 to 1651, and its president for a while, and entered the Rump Parliament as MP for King's Lynn.
The Protectorate, however, led to a change in the official attitude towards him, and by 1656 he was ousted from public activities, being excluded even from Oliver Cromwell's second Parliament, though elected for Hertfordshire.
Salisbury retired to Hatfield where he died 3 December 1668, but not before Charles II had appointed him high steward of St Albans in 1663.
He was succeeded in the earldom by his grandson James (born 1648), his eldest son Charles having died in 1659.
[Historical Manuscripts Commission,Salisbury (Cecil)Manuscripts , vol. xxii, 1971, introduction; Lawrence Stone,Family and Fortune , 1973.]
D H Weinglass
,Maria Woodley (1772–1808), poet, was born in England 4 November 1772, the sixth of seven children and youngest of three daughters of William Woodley, a West Indian plantation owner, twice governor and captain-general of the Leeward Islands, and his wife Frances Payne.
Maria first demonstrated her literary bent at the age of fifteen, jousting in verse with Joseph Jekyll [q.v.], a noted wit twice her age; her ‘Inscription on an Hermitage’, written during a stay in the Caribbean in 1788, displays real poetical maturity.
In the course of a second visit, 1790–1, she composed her Voyages to the Madeira, and Leeward Caribbean Isles: with Sketches of the Natural History of these Islands (Edinburgh, 1792; Salem, 1802), published with the help of William Smellie [q.v.], who praised its ‘science, minute observation,[and]accurate description’.
Her acquaintance with Robert Burns [q.v.], to whom she owed her introduction to Smellie, began in Dumfries in late 1791.
Despite the ‘Rape of the Sabines’ episode during Christmas 1793, when a drunken Burns may have overstepped the bounds of propriety towards his hostess, and notwithstanding the lampoons with which he requited his subsequent exile from her house, the intimate friendship that Burns formed with this ‘really first-rate woman’survived its year-long breach.
She wrote a highly perceptive appreciation of Burns's character in the Dumfries Journal (August 1796) and collaborated energetically with Burns's biographer, James Currie — thereby also effectively protecting her own interests and reputation.
She left Scotland in 1797 for London, where she remained until granted, in 1803, apartments in Hampton Court Palace.
Intelligent, beautiful, and widely read in four languages, she cultivated men of ‘unquestionable genius’ like Sir Thomas Lawrence and Henry Fuseli [qq.v.], whom she compared with Burns: his ‘Lament for Maria’(1809?) was probably written in response to her death.
Other literati who frequented her soirées included Sir James Mackintosh, Samuel Rogers, and ‘Conversation’ Richard Sharp [qq.v.].
Her only other published work was The Metrical Miscellany (1802, 2nd edn. 1803), an anthology of fugitive verse by contemporary celebrities, in which she also published twenty of her own poems (including the hitherto uncounted prefatory verses of 1802 by ‘The Editor’).
Of her prolific correspondence, little beyond that with William Roscoe [q.v.]and James Currie has survived.
Her portrait by Lawrence (1806) hangs at Kingston Lacy, Dorset.
She married, firstly, 16 September 1790, on St Kitts, Lieutenant (on half pay) Walter Riddell (1764–1802), widower, a plantation owner on Antigua, second son of Walter Riddell of Newhouse, a well-connected Dumfriesshire merchant, whose other son, Robert of Glenriddell, was a noted antiquary and friend of Burns.
Two daughters, Anna Maria (1791–1859) and Sophia (1792–1797), were born of the marriage.
Walter departed for Antigua in 1796, where he died.
She married, secondly, in 1808, an officer of dragoons, Phillips Lloyd Fletcher (1782–1863), of Gwernhaylod, Ellesmere, Flintshire.
She died 15 December 1808 in Chester and was buried in the Fletcher family vault at Overton.
[H. S. Gladstone, ‘Maria Riddell, the Friend of Burns’,Transactions of the Dumfries and Gallow Antiquarian Society , 1915; J. C. Ewing (ed.),
‘Maria Riddell's Letters to James Currie’,Burns Chronicle , 1920–4; John M. Wood,Robert Burns and the Riddell Family , 1922; Angus Macnaghten,Burns' Mrs. Riddell , 1975; D. H. Weinglass, ‘The Painter's Muse: Henry Fuseli and Maria Riddell’,Gazette des Beaux-Arts , 1978; MS letters, Roscoe papers, Liverpool City Libraries; MS poems, Osborn Collection, Yale.]
Eric Midwinter
,Charles Philip (1887–1958), cricketer, was born 9 March 1887 in Battersea, London, the eldest son and second child in the family of four daughters and three sons of Matthew Orlando Mead, wharf labourer, and his wife Louisa Hannah Mann of Battersea.
After elementary schooling, and having found little chance of advancement with his native Surrey county club, he opted to qualify by residence for Hampshire.
He made his début in 1905 versus the touring Australians, and then played first in the county championship in 1906.
Almost immediately he became the anchorman of the Hampshire batting and he was to score over 1,000 runs in a season twenty-seven times, including twice when he passed the 3,000 mark, and nine times when he exceeded 2,000.
He did not leave Hampshire until 1936, during which lengthy spell he played 700 matches — a record — for them.
He scored 48,892 runs for Hampshire at an average of 48.84, and, in all first-class cricket, he accumulated no less than 55,061 (average 47.67), leaving him fourth in the world rankings.
With 153 centuries and a highest score of 280, not out, against Nottinghamshire in 1921, it is fair to describe him as one of the most acquisitive bats of all time, and as Hampshire's most successful cricketer.
Strangely, he played only seventeen times for England, and his 182, not out, in 1921 remained the highest test score against Australia in England for seventeen years.
A nimble slip fielder and occasional spin bowler, he played for Suffolk in 1938 and 1939 after leaving Hampshire.
Of large build and possessed of ritual mannerisms when facing the bowling, his technique was founded in the securest of defence, and, although he was a shrewd placer of the ball, it was perhaps his seeming doggedness that left him out of the international reckoning at a time when England possessed several middle-order batsmen of sterling class.
None the less, he proved to be a left-hand bat of the highest possible calibre, and a character much respected as well as affectionately regarded for what John Arlott called his ‘pin-toed toddle’.
On 14 September 1908 he married Beatrice, daughter of George Henry Englefield, boot-maker, of Southampton.
They had two sons and one daughter.
Mead was blind for the last ten years of his life, but his interest endured in the game to which he had brought such commitment and talent.
He died 26 March 1958 in Boscombe, Bournemouth.
[Wisden Almanack s; information from Neil Jenkinson.]
John Harvey
(fl. 1275–1321), master mason, lived in Canterbury, where he rented a house in Northgate from Christ Church Priory continuously from 1275 to 1290.
He was being paid in 1275–8 for work on the prior's house next to St Mary-le-bow in London, and travelled between Canterbury and London several times, working in Canterbury in 1279–80.
He probably moved to London in 1290–1, and in 1291–4 was in charge of making the Cheapside Eleanor cross, of which fragments survive in the Museum of London.
He and his wife, Mary, were still concerned with property near Canterbury in 1293.
On 28 April 1292 work began under his charge on the new chapel of St Stephen in Westminster Palace, and he was still master in charge there in September 1321, but probably died soon afterwards.
Work was interrupted by a fire in the palace in 1298 and little seems to have been done until 1320, but Michael was occupied on other works for the Crown, being sent to Winchester Castle in 1306.
In 1315–17 he designed a wall to be built around the royal manor of Eltham, Kent, and had to act as surety for the contractors, whose faulty work necessitated its rebuilding.
Master Michael was also, by 1312, in charge of the building works of the Black Friars of London, and in 1316 was appointed to head a commission for paving the City.
Close resemblances of style and detail suggest that Michael was also responsible for several important tombs: of Archbishop John Peckham (q.v., died 1292) in Canterbury Cathedral; of Edmund Crouchback and Aveline of Lancaster in Westminster Abbey, probably made c .1296; and of Bishop William Louth (died 1298) in Ely Cathedral.
These monumental works employed the ogee curve, an important development in English Gothic, soon to be exported as the basis for continental Flamboyant.
Other architectural works to be attributed to Michael of Canterbury are the chapel of St Etheldreda in Ely Place, London, built for Bishop Louth, and the splendid lost Lady chapel of Old St Paul's Cathedral, completed in c .1307–12.
[J. Harvey,English Mediaeval Architects , 1984.]
J P Ferris
, Sir Walter (1586–1665), soldier and politician, was born 22 November 1586, the elder son of Thomas Erle, landowner, of Charborough, Dorset, and his wife Dorothy Pole.
His grandfather, a courtier, had acquired Charborough by marriage in 1549.
Of his siblings, only two attained maturity, a brother Christopher who became a lawyer, and a sister who married the elder brother of William Strode (died 1645, q.v.).
Erle was educated at Queen's College, Oxford, and the Middle Temple.
Soon after coming of age, his ‘hard conscience’ towards his tenantry drew on him a judicial rebuke from the lord chancellor Thomas Egerton, Baron Ellesmere [q.v.], and he steadily enlarged his estate by buying out minor gentry families in the vicinity.
His Puritan inclinations found favour with the electorate of Poole, which he first represented in the Addled Parliament of 1614, and he sat, always for Dorset constituencies, in ten of its next twelve successors.
He was knighted on his marriage (7 May 1616) to Anne, daughter and heir of Francis Dymoke of Erdington, Warwickshire; they had one son (Thomas, MP) and two daughters.
The promoter of a Sabbatarian bill in the Parliament of 1621, he was derided as a sectary and a disturber of the peace by a histrionic lawyer, who was expelled from the Commons for this offence.
A keen supporter of colonial projects, Erle served as governor of the Dorchester New England Company.
His unpublished journal of the 1624 Parliament is particularly useful for its coverage of election cases.
A county member in 1625, he proposed to break with precedent by granting the new king tunnage and poundage for one year only.
Imprisoned as a loan resister in 1627, he was one of the ‘five knights’ who applied unsuccessfully for a writ of habeas corpus.
Again knight of the shire in the next Parliament, he took the chair for the inquiries into billeting and losses of shipping.
In the 1629 session he told the Commons that ‘religion offers itself to your first consideration at this time’, and reproached the Speaker for undue readiness to obey the king's orders.
After the dissolution he went overseas to serve as a volunteer in the Dutch army.
Erle returned to Dorset a few years later to become a ship-money refuser and to head the poll in the county election of March 1640; but he resigned the seat to George Digby, second Earl of Bristol [q.v.], and served for Lyme Regis in the Short Parliament, to which he reported on innovations in religion.
He ‘valued himself upon the sieges and services he had been in’; and as a military expert he drew the attention of the Long Parliament (summoned on 3 November 1640) to the danger from the Irish army under the command of Thomas Wentworth, first Earl of Strafford [q.v.].
He insisted on managing this charge in the impeachment of the fallen minister, but without success.
He helped to draft the Grand Remonstrance reciting the chief points of the king's misgovernment (November 1641), and forced his ‘entire friend’ William Strode to seek sanctuary in the City when the king came to arrest the ‘five members’(4 January 1642).
He ‘used much pains’ in raising forces to attack the Royalists in Sherborne; but his military career came to an ignominious end with the failure of his assault on Corfe Castle, which was in the hands of Mary, Lady Bankes [q.v.], and her Amazonian maidservants.
At Westminster, however, John Pym [q.v.]found him a useful henchman, particularly adept at inculcating tension.
He succeeded Pym in control of the ordnance, and was thanked by the House for deciphering intercepted letters.
One of the parliamentary commissioners who escorted the king to Holdenby, he was regarded as an enemy by the army council.
He supported the establishment of Presbyterianism and the continuance of negotiations with the king, and was briefly imprisoned at Pride's Purge (1648).
In the records of the first Protectorate Parliament of 1654 Erle appears only on the committee of privileges, presumably because he refused to sign the Recognition, and he was not re-elected in 1656, although approved at a preliminary gentry meeting.
But in 1659 he won a landslide victory over a crypto-Royalist, and in the Parliament of Richard Cromwell [q.v.]he proposed Chaloner Chute [q.v.]as Speaker and rose to his feet ‘20 times a day’.
As the threat of a military coup increased he rallied to the Protectorate.
But he accepted the Restoration, though striving in the Convention to ensure a moderate religious settlement.
He was buried at Charborough 1 September 1665.
His heir was his grandson Thomas [q.v.], more distinguished as a soldier, but less of a politician.
Erle was a puritan and a ruthless exploiter of his estate.
The civil war exposed his pretensions to military expertise, to the delight of the Cavalier propagandists.
In politics he was more impressive; as his long parliamentary career suggests, he was seldom far from the majority view and the middle ground.
[B. D. Henning,The House of Commons 1660–1690 , 1983; J. P. Ferris, ‘Walter Erle’(typescript draft for the History of Parliament); Dorset Record Office, D53 sub anno 1639;Commons Journals ;D'Ewes Journal , ed.
W. Notestein, 1923;D'Ewes Journal , ed.
W. H. Coates, 1942; B. Whitelocke,Memorials , vol. i, 1853; A. Fletcher,Outbreak of the English Civil War , 1981; A. R. Bayley,Civil War in Dorset , 1910; J. Rushworth,Collections , vol. vi, 1721, pp. 394, 515, and vol. viii, pp. 1355, 1369; Northumberland MSS 551, f. 94 and 552, f. 65; T. Burton,Parliamentary Diary , vol. iii, 1828, p. 3, and vol. iv, pp. 216, 473.]
Mavis E Mate
(fl. 1285–1331), monastic administrator, was born to unknown parents, probably in the village of Eastry, Kent, as his name indicates.
While still a young man he entered the Benedictine priory of Christ Church in Canterbury.
Over the next few years he gained considerable administrative experience, serving first as a member of the household of Archbishop Robert Kilwardby [q.v.]and later as warden of the priory's Essex manors and as treasurer for two terms.
In 1285 he was elected prior after the resignation of Thomas de Ringmere, and he remained in charge for the next forty-seven years.
By the 1290s the priory's financial base was secure enough to enable Eastry to invest in the local land market and, after the expulsion of the Jews, to acquire the former Jewish tenements in the city of Canterbury.
But the election of Archbishop Robert de Winchelsea [q.v.]and the outbreak of war with France and Scotland imposed new strains on the priory's resources.
Furthermore, the monks' support of Winchelsea in his struggle with the Crown caused them to be temporarily driven out of their house and they had to watch their grain rot in their granary.
Eastry, however, reorganized and improved the method of collecting revenues from the manors, bringing in additional funds.
Later high grain prices, at a time of excellent harvests, allowed the treasurers to build up a substantial surplus.
By the end of 1299 the priory had nearly one year's revenue in hand.
This surplus revenue financed agricultural improvement and extensive rebuilding at both the local and central level.
Under Eastry's leadership the priory poured substantial sums into increasing the size of sheep flocks and cow herds.
In addition, on some manors, the liberal application of marl made possible an extension of the area under wheat.
The priory also invested in the construction of new wind, water, and fulling mills.
The building of sea-walls helped to protect its marsh manors from flooding.
On the manors themselves new barns, halls, and chapels were erected and in the house at Canterbury, Eastry renovated the choir and chapter house.
During the political unrest of Edward II's reign, Eastry sought to restore tranquillity to the realm.
He co-operated with Walter Reynolds [q.v.]after Reynolds became archbishop of Canterbury, and they wrote to each other constantly, passing on gossip and information.
Both men were anxious not to antagonize any faction, but their pleas for order, at a time of political violence and uncertainty, went unheeded.
Nor was Eastry any more successful in maintaining peace at home.
Within the convent he faced a group of unruly, ill-disciplined monks; his tenants at Sandwich were ousted from their houses, and at one point the citizens of Canterbury rose in revolt and threatened to blockade the monks.
None the less, he did succeed in maintaining the rights of the convent and on his death in 1331 he left the priory a considerable estate of books, vestments, plate, and horses.
[Eastry correspondence, Canterbury Cathedral archives and library; Cambridge University Library, MS Ee V 31; British Library, Cotton MS Galba E IV; T. L. Hogan, ‘The Memorandum book of Henry de Eastry, prior of Christ Church, Canterbury’, Ph.D.
thesis (1966) for London University; J. B. Shepherd (ed.),
Literae Cantuarienses , vol. i (Rolls Series), 1887–9.]
R A Higgins
,John Turtle (1821–1890), archaeologist, was born 13 February 1821 in Hackney, north London, the only child of John Wood, from a Shropshire family, and his wife Elizabeth Turtle.
He was educated privately and at Rossall, and went on to study architecture under a tutor at Cambridge.
In 1850 he was studying in Venice.
After his return to England he was articled to H. E. Kendall, and practised as an architect in London, at Victoria Square, Grosvenor Place.
In 1853 he designed a house in Oatlands Park for J. T. Darke.
In 1858 he accepted an appointment as architect to the Smyrna and Aidin Railway in western Turkey, designing stations on that line.
But his great ambition was to discover the remains of the famous Temple of Artemis (or Diana) at Ephesus, south of Smyrna, which had completely disappeared from sight in the middle ages.
Accordingly, in 1863 he resigned his appointment and began his search.
The British Museum agreed to get him a permit and to give him a grant, in return for any antiquities he might discover.
In 1867, whilst excavating in the ancient theatre at Ephesus, he found an inscription in Greek referring to some gold and silver statuettes, which, on festive days, were carried from the temple to the theatre by way of the Magnesian Gate.
If he could find this gate, he reckoned that there would be a paved road leading to the temple.
Late in 1867 he found the gate and the road.
Following its course, on 2 May 1869, he found the wall of the temple enclosure.
He now bought the site on behalf of the British Museum and set out to find the temple.
He found it on the last day of 1869 under nearly twenty feet of sand.
The excavation was far from easy.
The ground was waterlogged, necessitating constant pumping, so that progress was very slow; but by April 1874 the job was considered done.
The temple was a sad ruin, but Wood managed to recover a quantity of very broken sculptures and architectural features, which he sent back to England.
In 1874 he returned to England.
For eleven years, loyally assisted by his wife, he had worked under almost intolerable conditions.
He suffered constantly from fever; he was frequently threatened by bandits and once nearly murdered; he was injured several times; he endured hot summers and cold winters and periodical earthquakes.
In 1875 he gave four lectures on his discoveries at the Royal Institution, and 1877 saw the publication of his book,Discoveries at Ephesus ; a second book,Discoveries on the Site of Ancient Ephesus , published posthumously in 1890, added little to the earlier work.
He returned briefly to Ephesus in 1883, without, however, achieving any significant results.
In addition to his architectural and archaeological activities, he was also an accomplished artist, and frequently exhibited at the Royal Academy.
He was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1875, a fellow of the Royal Institute of British Architects in 1874, and an honorary fellow of the RIBA in 1878.
In 1875 the British government awarded him a pension of £200 per annum in recognition of his discoveries at Ephesus.
In 1853 he married his first cousin, Henrietta Elizabeth, daughter of Samuel Wood.
They had one son, who died aged thirty-two in 1889.
This domestic tragedy probably hastened his own death from heart disease, 25 March 1890, in Worthing.
[Journal of the Royal Institute of British Architects , 3 April 1890, pp. 275–6;Times Literary Supplement , 13 March 1937.]
Michael J Turner
,Abraham (c. 1793–1860), bricklayer and the last man subjected to an ‘appeal of murder’, by which a person acquitted of murder could be tried for the same offence a second time, was born c .1793, the son of a Castle Bromwich builder.
He was accused of rape and murder after attending a dance where he became intimate with a gardener's daughter named Mary Ashford.
They left the dance together and her body was found the next morning in a deep pool of water near a local footpath.
Thornton was tried at the Warwick assizes on 8 August 1817.
Since the marks on Mary's body were not necessarily inconsistent with Thornton's claim that she had consented to sexual intercourse, and since the times on the morning in question when Thornton was seen walking home to Bromwich suggested he could not have been with her when she met her death, the jury found him not guilty.
The case aroused much interest and reminded people of the similar murder of a local woman a year earlier.
Many were convinced of Thornton's guilt and he was assailed in local and London newspapers.
A group collecting around the Birmingham solicitor William Bedford invoked the old legal process of ‘appeal of murder’, generally regarded as obsolete (though there had been several in the eighteenth century).
More controversy arose when Thornton came before the court of the King's Bench in November 1817 and demanded ordeal by battle — open to the subject of an ‘appeal of murder’ but not claimed since Charles I's reign.
After several hearings between November 1817 and April 1818 the court decided that the appellee did have this right.
The ‘appeal of murder’ was dropped.
‘Appeals of murder’ were abolished in 1819 partly because of this case.
Thornton was corpulent, about 5 ft. 7 ins. tall, of ‘forbidding’ and ‘very lusty’appearance with powerful limbs, a short, thick neck, and a swollen, shining face.
He had a local reputation as a sportsman and a strong man, and also as a womanizer.
In all his court appearances he was noted for his calmness and composure.
Opinion remained hostile towards Thornton; he had to be protected from the London crowds during the hearings there, and back in Bromwich he was hated.
Unable to live a normal life, he emigrated to the USA in September 1818.
He prospered, married, and died in Baltimore in 1860.
[J. Hall,Trial of Abraham Thornton , 1926;The Times , 11, 25 August, 7, 18, 24 November 1817, 26, 30 January, 7, 9 February, 17, 21 April 1818; E. A. Kendall,An Argument for construing largely the Right of an Appellee of Murder , 1817; Luke Booker,A Moral Review of the Conduct and Case of Mary Ashford ; E. Holroyd,Observations Upon the Case of Abraham Thornton , 1819.]
Edward R Norman
,John Malcolm Forbes (1821–1911), civil administrator and social critic, was born in Nimach, India, 8 March 1821, the youngest in the family of two sons and three daughters of Lieutenant-Colonel John Ludlow of the East India Company, and his wife Maria, eldest daughter of Murdoch Brown, a merchant and traveller of Edinburgh.
His father died very shortly after the birth, and his mother took the family back to England, and then to France in 1826.
From 1829 to 1838 he was educated at the fashionable Collège Bourbon in Paris, and thereafter, on the family's return to England, he studied law at Lincoln's Inn.
There he fell under the influence of Bellenden Ker, the head of his chambers and a noted Whig Radical.
He was called to the bar in 1843 and for most of the rest of his life he practised as a conveyancer.
It was for his contribution to social reform that he is most remembered.
While still at Lincoln's Inn he had joined the British India Society and the Anti-Corn Law League, both of which confirmed his radical political leanings.
In 1839 he also underwent a religious conversion experience which was associated, in a direct echo of his French background, with the humanitarian ideals of socialism.
This eventually drew him into the company of Frederick Denison Maurice [q.v.]and the band of young men who surrounded him, and the combination of their enthusiasm and insights produced the Christian Socialist movement of 1848 to 1854.
Ludlow may reasonably be taken as the actual founder of the movement: it was his earlier experience of social visiting among the London poor, and his knowledge of the French co-operatives, which gave content to Maurice's theological groundwork.
Whereas Maurice was always reluctant to involve himself in practical agitation and action, Ludlow was a concrete thinker who was never satisfied until ideals received some sort of institutional expression.
Despite adopting the political label of socialism, however, he was always insistent that social reform rather than political organization was the appropriate priority for nineteenth-century England.
He was a convinced  democrat and, unlike the other Christian Socialists, he had a genuine vision of social transformation.
He made close contacts with leaders of popular movements, and it was he who provided the major link between the co-operatives and trade unionism.
His legal expertise proved of invaluable service in the legislative attempts to protect working-class enterprise; in 1850 he gave evidence to the House of Commons select committee on middle-class and working-class savings, and he appeared before the royal commission on limited liability set up in 1853.
In 1870 he was appointed secretary to the royal commission on Friendly and Benefit Building Societies, and from 1874 until 1891 he was chief registrar of Friendly Societies — years he described as ‘the happiest of my life’.
To the very end of his long life he continued to be consulted about these types of issues, and lived to be present at the Pan Anglican Congress of 1908, at which so many of his ideals were acclaimed.
He was appointed CB in 1887.
Though remaining attached to French Protestantism — he attended the French church in London — his contribution to Anglican social thought was important.
Through his advocacy of a heightened place for deaconesses in the Church, made in 1865, he may indeed be categorized as an early champion of the modern women's ministry.
The author of Woman's Work in the Church (1865), he also wrote books on the history of India and North America.
In 1869 he married his cousin, Maria Sarah (died 1910), daughter of Gordon Forbes of Ham Common.
They had no children.
Ludlow died in London 17 October 1911.
[N. C. Masterman,John Malcolm Ludlow , 1963; Alan D. Murray (ed.),
John Ludlow, the Autobiography of a Christian Socialist , 1981; Edward Norman,The Victorian Christian Socialists , 1987.]
Anne Baker
,Hugh Owen (1834–1891), orthopaedic surgeon, was born 23 August 1834 in Bodedern, Anglesey, the eldest child in the family of five sons and three daughters of Evan Thomas, a bone-setter, of Liverpool, and his wife Jane Owen.
His father came from a long line of bone-setters in Anglesey, but by the middle of the nineteenth century medical opinion was becoming increasingly hostile to these unqualified practitioners, and Evan Thomas sent all of his five sons to study medicine at Edinburgh University.
After attending the local school in Anglesey, Thomas went to Dr Poggi's school in New Brighton.
In 1851 he began four years' apprenticeship with his uncle, Dr Owen Roberts of St Asaph, who prepared him for Edinburgh University, where he spent two years at the medical school.
After a year at University College London, he became MRCS in 1857.
He spent a short time in Paris, studying French surgical methods, and then returned to Liverpool and joined his father's practice in 1858.
After a year he parted from his father and set up his own practice at 24 Hardy Street, in the heart of the Liverpool docklands.
In 1866 he moved to 11 Nelson Street, where he remained until his death, turning 24 Hardy Street into a private nursing home.
Although he became critical of the methods of the old bone-setters, and especially of their views on diseases of the joints, he had learned from watching his father's manipulative practices, and in his workshop he followed their practice of making their own splints.
He also constantly experimented with new designs, and the Thomas splint for compound fractures of the lower limbs was widely used during World War I, from 1916, for the transport of stretcher cases from the front to casualty stations, and saved many lives and limbs.
His patients were mainly Merseyside dockers and shipyard workers, and seamen injured at sea, and he had to deal with many severe accident cases.
His free Sunday clinics at 11 Nelson Street from 1870 onwards became famous, and patients arrived in handcarts, wheelbarrows, and donkey carts.
He went on his daily rounds in a scarlet phaeton designed by himself, pulled by two black horses, with his wife beside him.
As he never held a hospital or university appointment, his work was slow to gain recognition.
In 1875 he published Diseases of the Hip, Knee, and Ankle Joints, with their Deformities , and for the rest of his life published many pamphlets setting out his ideas, but these were not widely distributed.
They were badly printed by a local printer, and few read them.
Many were polemical, and he made enemies among English surgeons whom he attacked in print.
But he had a wide following in the United States, and several American orthopaedic surgeons visited him.
In 1890 he received the honorary degree of MD from the University of St Louis.
After his death his work was forgotten, until, through the efforts of his nephew and former assistant,(Sir) Robert Jones [q.v.], who was director of orthopaedic surgery for the British army during World War I, the Thomas splint became famous.
During the winter of 1917–18, in his course on the principles underlying the treatment of injuries to muscles, bones, and joints,(Sir) Arthur Keith [q.v.]gave a lecture on Thomas at the Royal College of Surgeons, and in 1920 the Liverpool Medical Institution founded a Hugh Owen Thomas memorial lecture.
Very small, with a brusque, hectoring manner, his only relaxation was playing the flute, which he had modified in his workshop.
He was an agnostic, and a friend of Charles Bradlaugh [q.v.].
In 1864 he married Elizabeth, daughter of Robert Jones, an architect and builder, of Rhyl, Wales.
They had no children.
Hugh Owen Thomas died of pneumonia 6 January 1891 in Liverpool, and thousands of Liverpool poor followed the hearse and crowded the church at his funeral.
[Arthur Keith,Menders of the Maimed , 1919; Frederick Watson,The Life of Sir Robert Jones , 1934, and Hugh Owen Thomas , 1934.]
I G Doolittle
,Antony (1756–1815), merchant and banker, was born at the family home in the cathedral close in Exeter, the sixth in the family of five sons and six daughters of George Abraham Gibbs, surgeon at the Royal Devon and Exeter Hospital, and his wife Anne Vicary; an elder son, Sir Vicary Gibbs [q.v.], became chief justice of common pleas.
Antony Gibbs went to Exeter Grammar School.
His first trading venture was as a woollen exporter, principally to Spain and Italy; he was also briefly involved with a woollen-cloth factory near Exeter.
In 1787–9, in circumstances that are unclear, he got into financial difficulties, losing not only his own money but some of his family's: it became a matter of pride to make good those losses.
The first step in his financial recovery involved setting up an agency business in Madrid to serve English and other textile manufacturers.
Later, he joined a partnership in Malaga to sell Spanish produce in England.
When Spain declared war in 1796, Gibbs faced another financial crisis; but he was eventually able to use Lisbon as an illicit (and profitable) means of entry to the Spanish market for English woollens.
When peace came in 1801, Gibbs was able to set up a profitable business in Cadiz.
However, the outbreak of war again in 1805 forced Gibbs to close in Cadiz, and once more he had to struggle to survive.
A key to the realization of his assets in Spain was a perilous shipment to Peru; the success of at least the outward journey meant financial relief, but it was not until the war with Spain ended in 1808 that Gibbs's difficulties really began to abate.
The reopening of the Cadiz house, and the opening of a London house in partnership with his eldest son under the style ‘Antony Gibbs & Son’, marked the beginning of a period of real prosperity.
Debts were paid and a profitable trade to and from the south of Spain energetically fostered.
The siege of Cadiz by the French between 1810 and 1812 led to the closure of the Cadiz house; but when the siege was abandoned trade and profits rapidly regained their former levels.
In 1813 a second son was taken into partnership, and the London house became Antony Gibbs & Sons.
Gibbs died in London 10 December 1815.
It was the trading contacts that he had established in Spain which enabled his firm, after his death, to exploit so efficiently the opportunities afforded in South America after its liberation from Spanish control.
He married 3 October 1784 Dorothea Barnetta, youngest daughter of William Hucks, a Yorkshire wine merchant; they had seven children, two of whom died in infancy.
[J. A. Gibbs,The History of Antony and Dorothea Gibbs , 1922, which is based on the extensive Gibbs archive in the Guildhall Library, London.]
Katharine F Pantzer
or ,Thomas (c. 1490–1555), king's printer under Henry VIII, was probably born about 1490, since in his earliest testimony, under the surname Bercula, he named himself as printer and servant to John Rastell [q.v.]during the latter's unsuccessful attempt to sail to the new world in 1517.
It seems possible that he had worked as a journeyman for Rastell on some part of the massive volumes of Sir Anthony Fitzherbert's Graunde abbregement , 1516, and its Table , 1517 (Short-Title Catalogue 10954–5).
Between at least 1520 and 1523 he was with Richard Pynson [q.v.], then king's printer, in the latter's printing house beside St Dunstan's Church in the West, signing prose or verse to the reader, still as Bercula, in Pynson editions of Robert Whittinton's Vulgaria (STC 25570) and John Constable's Epigrammata (STC 5639) in the former year and John Fitzherbert's Boke of surveyeng (STC 11005) in the latter year.
His earliest appearance under the name of Barthelett, when he was still in St Dunstan's parish, was in the application of 23 August 1524 for a licence to marry Agnes Langwyth, widow, at St Bride's church, Fleet Street (Allegations for Marriage Licences 1520–1610 , Harleian Society, vol. xxv, p. 4).
On 27 September of the same year he published his first book, Galfredus Petrus,Opus sane de deorum dearumque gentilium genealogia (STC 19816.5), from his new premises near the conduit in Fleet Street, where his printing-house remained for the rest of his life.
Among his later publications were a few yearbooks of Edward III, 1527–32 (STC 9562, 9565), and Sir Anthony Fitzherbert's La novel natura brevium , 1534 (STC 10958), proving that he remained familiar with the legal milieu of Rastell and Pynson.
Although nothing is known of his family or education, Berthelet was clearly a man of intelligence, culture, and enterprise.
Two of his early publications were works of Erasmus:A devout treatise upon the Pater noster , 1526?
(STC 10477), translated by Margaret Roper [q.v.], daughter of Sir Thomas More [q.v.], and Berthelet's own translation of Dicta sapientum , 1527?
(STC 10478.7).
He was also the first to print five more Erasmus titles in English or Latin, the latest being Sir Thomas Chaloner's translation,The praise of folie , 1549 (STC 10500).
All editions of the eight original works or compilations and five translations by Sir Thomas Elyot [q.v.]issued from Berthelet's house during the latter's lifetime, and he was evidently well respected in humanistic circles.
Berthelet did not immediately succeed Pynson as king's printer (the statutes of 21 Henry VIII — STC 9363.6 — when Parliament was in session between 3 November and 17 December 1529, were printed by John Rastell) but received his appointment early in February 1530.
From that time until Henry's death he printed all statutes and proclamations with exemplary skill and efficiency, on at least one occasion being required to work at night and set the type himself (Letters & Papers Henry VIII , 7, no. 1415).
An account he submitted for payment covering the period 9 December 1541 to 12 June 1543 (Arber II.50–60) is admirably detailed, concerning not only quantities and costs of proclamations but also special purchases of books for the king, with the style and price of binding.
Also king's business were several works fostering uniformity in religion such as The Bishops' Book , 1537 (STC 5163) and The King's Book , 1543 (STC 5168), of which multiple editions had to be printed.
Following Henry's death in 1547 Berthelet seems to have made no effort to renew his patent as king's printer, and Richard Grafton [q.v.], an ardent Protestant, obtained the office under Edward VI.
About this time Berthelet turned active supervision of his printing-house over to his nephew, Thomas Powell, probably by 1549 when he was granted a coat of arms.
Berthelet died 26 September 1555, leaving a second wife, Margaret, and two young sons, Edward and Anthony.
Among the property Margaret inherited was ‘the house with the ways, walks, etc.’ in the parish of St Andrew's, Holborn, which Berthelet had reserved to his own use, and where he may have lived during his retirement.
[Edward Arber,A Transcript of the Registers of the Stationers' Company 1554–1640 , 1875–94; E. Gordon Duff,A Century of the Book Trade , 1905; Henry R. Plomer,Abstracts from the Wills , 1903; A. W. Reed,Early Tudor Drama , 1926; Colin Clair, ‘Thomas Berthelet, Royal Printer’,Gutenberg Jahrbuch , 1966; A. W. Pollard et al.,
A Short-Title Catalogue…1475–1640 , revised edn., 1976–90.]
,Gilbert of (ante 1260–1321), administrator and judge,[.]
G E Aylmer
,Maximilian (1617–1662), Leveller, was baptized in Tetsworth, Oxfordshire, 3 June 1617, the second son of John Petty, of a gentry family from Tetsworth (on the old main road from London to Oxford).
He was apprenticed in the Grocers' Company of London in May 1634.
It was probably his uncle, another Maximilian, who was MP for Westbury, Wiltshire, in 1628–9, and his cousin Edmund who sat for Chipping Wycombe, Buckinghamshire, in the Convention Parliament of 1660.
The well-known political economist, Sir William Petty [q.v.], was not a close relative.
John Aubrey [q.v.]states that Petty was related to Oliver Cromwell; in fact the Pettys were connected by marriage with the Ingoldsbys and the Hampdens, who in turn were in-laws of the Cromwells.
Petty was evidently of sufficient prominence in the radical popular movement, among those soon to be known as Levellers, to be chosen as one of their spokesmen or representatives to attend the meetings of the general council of the army in 1647.
His most significant appearance was at the second day of the Putney debates, where he was the only civilian present besides the legally trained and dialectically more skilled (Sir) John Wildman [q.v.].
Petty's main contribution was to modify the Agitators' and Levellers' position on the parliamentary franchise, and thereby to make possible a compromise with the army grandees and their independent allies in Parliament on that issue.
Having initially taken the position ‘that all inhabitants that have not lost their birthright should have an equal voice in elections’, he then spoke about the origins of government and in favour of property as the basis of representation, while denying strongly that the franchise should be restricted to forty-shilling freeholders, calling for its extension to leaseholders.
At the same time he attacked the monarchy and the House of Lords.
As a result he was reprimanded by Henry Ireton [q.v.]for airing his views unnecessarily and not keeping to the point.
Petty had already intimated that he might not be able to continue his attendance at the debates further (after 29 October), but before the end of that day's proceedings he explained why ‘we [the Levellers]would exclude apprentices, or servants, or those that take alms, it is because they depend upon the will of other men and should be afraid to displease [them]’.
Much controversy has attached to the word ‘servants’ in this passage, as to whether it cancelled the previous Leveller insistence on full, unqualified adult manhood suffrage and was intended to exclude all wage-earners from the vote, or — more likely — was meant to cover only those living in, and so dependent on their master or mistress for board and lodging.
Petty spoke only once more, again chiefly to attack king and lords.
He had by his own testimony taken part in the debates of the previous summer on the famous ‘heads of the proposals’, but is not noted by name as a speaker at Reading — the only earlier occasion on which a full record was kept by (Sir) William Clarke [q.v.].
Petty's next appearance was as a member of the Leveller team in its renewed negotiations with the grandees and their allies in November–December 1648.
The divisions proving irreconcilable, both parties published their own enlarged ‘agreements of the people’, that of the officers being presented to the Rump Parliament in mid-January 1649.
On the suffrage there was no substantial difference between the two.
Petty was not considered active or dangerous enough to be arrested with the other Leveller leaders in late March 1649, although he was later named as a leader of those who remained at large.
There is little trace of his activities from then until his participation during 1659 in the debates of the Rota Club formed by James Harrington [q.v.].
Unlike the proceedings of the general council twelve years before, these were the meetings of a debating society, not a struggle for power to control the army and through it the government of the country.
Petty probably died in London soon after the Restoration at the house of a brother in the legal profession, having himself by then settled at a property in Berkshire which the spendthrift republican MP Henry Marten [q.v.]had sold to trustees acting for John Wildman.
It is characteristic of the popular movement in the mid-seventeenth century that someone who helped to formulate an effective compromise on a crucial and contentious constitutional issue should remain so obscure a figure.
[G. E. Aylmer, ‘Gentleman Levellers?’,
Past and Present , vol. xlix, 1970; C. Thompson, ‘Maximilian Petty and the Putney Debate on the Franchise’, ibid., vol. lxxxviii, 1980; R. L. Greaves and R. Zaller (eds.),
Biographical Dictionary of British Radicals in the Seventeenth Century , 3 vols., 1982–4; B. D. Henning,The House of Commons 1660–1690 , 1983;Victoria History of the Counties of England, Berkshire , vol. iv, 1924, pp. 211–12; ibid.,Oxfordshire , vol. vii, 1962, pp. 118, 148–53, 209–12; F. G. Lee,History of the Church of Thame , 1883, pp. 85, 218; Public Record Office, PROB/11/PCC 2 Coventry, 148 Lort.]
C N Brown
,John James (1811–1883), physicist and physical chemist, was born in 1811 in Edinburgh, the sixth of nine children, at least five of them sons, of George Waterston, a manufacturer of sealing-wax and stationery requisites, of Edinburgh, and his wife Jane Blair of Dunkeld.
He was educated at Edinburgh High School, was a pupil in a firm of civil engineers, and attended lectures at the university in mathematics, physics, and other subjects.
At the age of twenty-one he moved to London, working briefly as a civil engineer before joining the Admiralty hydrographers' department.
From 1839 he worked as a naval instructor in Bombay, which left him time for his main interest, the study of science.
Waterston's ideas were advanced but, being outside the scientific establishment, he was not always taken seriously.
His most significant paper, in which he developed much of the kinetic theory of gases, was refused publication by the Royal Society in 1845.
Some years later, better-known physicists developed similar ideas, which gained acceptance rapidly.
Waterston, never interested in personal glory, did not try to claim priority, but J. W. Strutt, third Baron Rayleigh [q.v.], rediscovered the paper and had it published in the Philosophical Transactions in 1892, with an introduction which belatedly gave Waterston due credit.
Between 1845 and 1868 Waterston published papers in various journals, on the nature of heat, the behaviour of gases and liquids, related chemical topics, and on astronomical matters.
He also had other papers rejected.
In 1857 he returned to Edinburgh to live an agreeable bachelor life among his family and friends.
On 18 June 1883 he left his lodgings and disappeared.
It is surmised that he fell into the sea near Leith, perhaps overcome by the giddiness to which he was prone, following an attack of sunstroke in India.
[J. S. Haldane (ed.),
The Collected Scientific Papers of John James Waterston , 1928; C. C. Gillispie (ed.),
Dictionary of Scientific Biography , vol. xiv, 1976.]
D W Jones
, Sir Nathaniel (1661–1728), merchant, contractor, and MP, was born 3 December 1661, the third (but first surviving) son of John Gould, a wealthy Nonconformist merchant of London, and his wife Mary.
In 1688 Gould married Frances, daughter of Sir John Hartopp, third baronet [q.v.], of Freathby, Leicestershire, and he was knighted on 14 April 1721.
There were two daughters of the marriage.
It was after the Revolution that Gould first came to prominence when he became one of the largest suppliers of hemp, pitch, and tar to the Royal Navy; and in this capacity, immediately before the War of the Spanish Succession, he played an important part in providing the navy with Russian hemp from Archangel in place of the supplies that could no longer be obtained from Riga (beleaguered by the Russians).
In 1694 Gould had invested £2,000 in the newly founded Bank of England and he was one of those instructed to draw up its by-laws.
In 1697 he became a director of the bank and served continuously (with statutory intervals) down to his death.
He was deputy governor of the bank 1709–11 and governor 1711–13.
It was in the former role that, with the governor and two other directors, he attended the queen on 15 June 1710 to desire on the bank's behalf that she make no further ministerial changes following the replacement of Charles Spencer, third Earl of Sunderland, by William Legge, first Earl of Dartmouth [qq.v.].
Gould was a member of the so-called tobacco contractors who in 1698 had secured from Peter the Great the right to export tobacco from England to Russia.
But to be able to do this the contractors needed to gain admission to the Russia Company and Gould played his part in the attack on the company.
Eventually he gained admission to the company and became a director and sometime governor.
After having been an interloper in the East India trade in 1696, he was a major investor in the ‘new’ East India flotation of 1698, and was both a director of the company and manager for the united East India trade over the years 1699–1708.
It was probably the affairs of the East India trade that propelled him into politics; with the ‘old’ East India company still in existence, many members of the ‘new’company sought election to Parliament to protect the company's interests.
Accordingly, Gould contested New Shoreham, a venal borough in Sussex, and won it in both of the 1701 elections.
(Following the first election, however, he was successfully petitioned against and had to withdraw, but he survived the petition that followed the second.)
He represented New Shoreham 1701–8 and 1710 until his death.
In Parliament Gould's career was of little note until the later years of Anne's reign when, in 1713, he spoke three times (and very effectively) against the treaty of commerce with France.
Following the accession of George I, he seconded a motion of 12 April 1717 that English trade to the Baltic could not be carried on unless the king of Sweden was brought to reason, and during the South Sea crisis he advocated strong measures against the directors.
Thereafter he spoke on two occasions (1723 and 1725) on customs matters, and in 1726 he published a pamphlet entitled ‘An Essay on the Public Debts’ which in 1727 prompted a rejoinder, ‘A State of the National Debt’, reputedly by William Pulteney, Earl of Bath [q.v.].
It was on this subject that Gould made his last recorded parliamentary speech in February 1728.
He died six months later, 21 July 1728.
[Public Record Office, PCC 208 Brook (will); Jacob M. Price, ‘The Tobacco Adventure to Russia’,Transactions of the American Philosophical Society , new series, vol. li, part 1, 1961; R. Sedgwick,The History of Parliament: the House of Commons 1715–1754 , 1970; unpublished biography of Gould for the 1690–1714 History of Parliament, History of Parliament Trust.]
H F Oxbury
,Henry William (1870–1937), golfer, was born 9 May 1870 in Marais, Grouville, Jersey, the fourth of six sons (the were also two daughters) of Philippe George Vardon, a domestic servant and later gardener, and his wife Elizabeth Augustine Bouchard.
Harry, as he was known, left the local school at thirteen to become a gardener like his father, but, from the time he was seven, there had been a golf-links at Grouville, and the local lads could earn pocket money as caddies.
They could also provide themselves with home-made clubs and teach themselves to play.
Harry's employer, Major Spofforth, was himself a golfer; he recognized that the young man had skill, and encouraged him to persevere with the game.
In 1890 Vardon went to Studley Royal Club in Ripon as a golf professional and greenkeeper.
A year later he moved to Bury, and then in 1896 to Ganton, where he stayed until 1902, when he became professional at the South Herts Club in Totteridge, north London.
He remained in that post until his death.
Between 1894 and 1914 British golf was dominated by ‘The Triumvirate’, James Braid, John Henry Taylor [qq.v.], and Vardon.
Vardon won the British Open Championship for the first time in 1896 at Muirfield, beating Taylor in a play-off.
He won again in 1898 and 1899; in 1900 he was runner-up to Taylor and in 1901 runner-up to Braid.
In 1902 he was also runner-up, but in 1903 he won the championship for the fourth time.
Vardon's success in 1903 put a temporary halt to his triumphs.
He was suffering from tuberculosis and had to enter a sanatorium at Mundesley in north Norfolk.
There he was gradually nursed back to health, but another eight years passed before he became champion again.
In 1911 he won both the British Open at Sandwich and the German Open.
In 1912 he was runner-up at Muirfield, and in 1914 at Prestwick was champion again for the sixth and last time.
Vardon first visited the USA in 1900, when he won the US Open Championship and aroused considerable interest by his style and technique.
In 1913 he tied for the Open, losing a celebrated play-off to the young local amateur Francis Ouimet.
Vardon was also a keen teacher of the game.
He wrote How to Play Golf (1912),Success at Golf (1914), and Progressive Golf (1922).
The famous Vardon grip, immortalized in a bronze cast at the South Herts Club, was, with slight modifications, adopted by subsequent professional players and was accepted as orthodox by professional teachers all over the world.
Vardon owed his success to the simplicity of his golf, using a smooth, rhythmic, upright swing when driving and keeping his head absolutely still when making his putts.
He had an open stance and let his left arm bend before straightening it as he came into the shot.
In 1891 he married Jessie, an ironer, daughter of John Bryant, a ginger beer maker in Jersey.
They had no children.
In his later years he took to gardening again.
He died in Totteridge 20 March 1937.
[Harry Vardon,The Complete Golfer , 1905, and My Golfing Life , 1933; Donald Steel (ed.),
The Guinness Book of Golf Facts and Feats , 1980; Alex Hay,The Handbook of Golf , 1985.]
Michael S Moss
,Gustav Wilhelm (1834–1913), shipbuilder, was born in Hamburg 14 November 1834, the son of Moritz Wolff, merchant, and his wife Fanny Schwabe.
In 1819 his parents, along with other members of this Jewish family, had been baptized into the Lutheran Church.
In 1849 Gustav Wilhelm left Hamburg to live with his uncle, Gustav Christian Schwabe, a partner in the Liverpool shipping line of John Bibby & Sons.
He attended Liverpool College before being apprenticed to the well-known Manchester engineering firm of Joseph Whitworth & Company.
He proved so able that he was chosen to represent the firm at the Paris exhibition of 1855.
On his return he joined B. Goodfellow Ltd. of Hyde, on the outskirts of Manchester, as a draughtsman.
In 1857 his uncle secured him the post of personal assistant to (Sir) Edward Harland [q.v.], the manager of Robert Hickson's shipyard on Queen's Island, Belfast.
In 1861 he became a partner in the enterprise, which was named Harland & Wolff.
Both his uncle and his mother made substantial loans to the new firm, which was already engaged in a large contract for John Bibby & Sons.
At first Wolff's duties were to manage the yard and provide engineering skills; but later, through his links with the Jewish community in Britain and Hamburg, he was to bring a large amount of business to the yard.
He shared in the firm's success up to Harland's death in 1895, playing his part in the extension of the yard, particularly the construction of the engine works in 1879–80.
When Harland & Wolff was converted into a limited company in 1888, he became a director or principal.
By this time he played little active part in the business, devoting his attention to the management of the Belfast Ropeworks, which he had helped to found in 1872–3 with W. H. Smiles, the son of Samuel Smiles [q.v.].
Under Wolff's chairmanship from 1876, the firm had grown quickly to become a serious competitor of the Clyde-based Gourock Ropework Company, the largest rope-makers in the world.
After Harland & Wolff extended the system of building on a cost-plus basis to the majority of their established clients, Wolff was influential in securing a connection with the Hamburg Amerika Line, managed by the Jewish Albert Ballin.
At the same time Wolff personally bought into the ailing Union Steamship Co., with its services to South Africa, becoming a director and winning its custom for the yard.
He helped to negotiate the merger in 1900 with the Castle line of Sir Donald Currie [q.v.].
He retired formally from Harland & Wolff in 1906, although effectively he had been a sleeping partner for over ten years.
A Unionist in politics, Wolff was elected MP for East Belfast in 1892 and was returned unopposed at the next four general elections, until his retirement in 1910.
In Parliament he was a determined opponent of home rule.
He was a very modest man, refusing to take any credit for the enterprise that bore his name.
Throughout his life he was a committed member of the Church of Ireland, giving generously to local charities.
He never married and died at his London home 17 April 1913.
[Michael Moss and John R. Hume,Shipbuilders to the World: 125 Years of Harland and Wolff, Belfast 1861–1986 , 1986; D. J. Jeremy (ed.),
Dictionary of Business Biography , vol. v, 1986.]
Allan I Macinnes
,James , of the Glen (Seumas a'ghlinne)(c. 1700–1752), was wrongly executed as accessory to the murder of Colin Campbell of Glenure in Argyllshire in 1752, an event immortalized by R. L. Stevenson [q.v.]in Kidnapped and Catriona .
Born before 1700, James Stewart (the son of John Stewart of Ardsheil) was the illegitimate elder brother of Charles Stewart, fifth of Ardsheil, who led out the Appin Stewarts in the rebellion of 1745.
James Stewart was judicially assassinated by the Scottish Whig establishment: in part, to deter further resistance by clans to the forfeiture of chiefs and gentry and, in part , to demonstrate that the suspicion of the Scots which had gripped the court and Westminster since the battle of Culloden was no longer justified.
Although James Stewart had fought at Culloden on 16 April 1746, as a captain in the Appin Regiment, his talents were entrepreneurial rather than military.
As well as managing the township of Glen Duror, he was a leading shopkeeper in Appin, associated with smugglers, and was connected to colonial traders in Fort William by his marriage (c .1725) to Margaret, sister of William Stewart, a merchant in Maryburgh.
They had two sons and a daughter.
Because of his business acumen, James Stewart was entrusted with the management of his half-brother's estate at the outset of the 1745 rebellion and, subsequent to the enforced exile and forfeiture of Ardshiel, remitted his rents to France.
Stewart's covert dealings were tacitly supported by Colin Campbell of Glenure (usually called Glenure), Crown factor for the Ardshiel estate.
However, amicable relations deteriorated steadily as Glenure came under increasing pressure from the Scottish exchequer to discriminate against known Jacobites.
Lady Ardshiel was prosecuted through the courts in an unsuccessful attempt to recover rents received by her since Culloden.
James Stewart lost Glen Duror, and though compensated with a lease of the township of Aucharn, was deprived of his shop.
On the date of the Appin murder, Glenure was due to evict eleven Stewart families from Ardshiel, against which James Stewart led the fight for legal redress.
Despite indiscretions induced by excess alcohol, relations between Stewart and Glenure had not broken down irretrievably.
Indeed, Glenure's relationship with the Camerons of Callart and of Lochiel was more fraught, troops having been called in to collect rents and effect evictions while he factored these forfeited estates.
Oral tradition affirms that the Camerons as well as the Stewarts of Appin were actively countenancing two, if not three, attempts on Glenure's life on 14 May 1752, the day on which he was shot in the back by a killer who escaped unrecognized.
The naming from the dock of John Cameron (alias Sergeant Mor), a vindictive Jacobite soldier of fortune, cannot be written off as an act of desperation by James Stewart, who was promptly marked out as accessory once the actual murder occurred in Appin.
His former ward, Alan Breac Stewart, a military adventurer and Jacobite courier recently returned from France, was presumed to be the murderer, though never apprehended.
Denied effective legal counsel prior to his indictment, Stewart's trial at Inveraray in September 1752 was a travesty of justice.
Archibald Campbell, third Duke of Argyll [q.v.], the political manager for the Scottish Whigs, presided.
Faced by a prosecution concerned primarily with political advancement, confronted by intimidated witnesses who produced no convincing evidence, and his guilt attested by a jury of eleven Campbells and four others, James Stewart was sentenced to hang at Ballachulish ferry on 8 November 1752.
His body, bound in chains, was left on the gibbet for over two years before being removed by John Stewart, younger of Ballachulish, the one member of the Appin gentry who actively promoted the legal defence of his kinsman.
The Appin murder has always aroused great curiosity because of its insolubility as well as its treatment by Robert Louis Stevenson.
[David N. Mackay (ed.),
The Trial of James Stewart , 2nd edn., 1931; Sir W. MacArthur,The Appin Murder and the Trial of James Stewart , 1960; Revd J. Mackechnie (ed.),
The Dewar Manuscripts , vol. i, 1964; A. Matheson,The Appin Murder , 1975.]
Peter J T Morris
, Sir William Augustus (1842–1926), chemist, was born 15 August 1842 in Regent's Park, London, the elder son (there were no daughters) of Augustus Tilden, a clerk of the Bank of England, and his wife Anne, daughter of Henry Balls of Cambridge.
He was educated at schools in Kidderminster, Bedford, and East Dereham.
When Tilden was fifteen, he was apprenticed for five years to Alfred Allchin, a London pharmacist, and attended lectures at the Royal College of Chemistry and the Pharmaceutical Society.
Between 1863 and 1872 he worked as a demonstrator at the Pharmaceutical Society under Professor John Attfield; he also obtained a B.Sc.
in chemistry (1868) and a D.Sc.
(1871) from the University of London.
Tilden became senior science master at Clifton College, Bristol, in 1872 and was elected to the chair of chemistry at the newly founded Mason College in Birmingham (later the University of Birmingham) eight years later.
In 1894 he replaced (Sir) T. E. Thorpe [q.v.]as professor of chemistry at the Royal College of Science, which became part of the Imperial College of Science and Technology in 1907, two years before Tilden retired in 1909.
In 1875 he found that nitrosyl chloride could be used to characterize terpenes, compounds which are found in turpentine and other essential oils.
Thereafter, the terpenes and related compounds were Tilden's major interest.
One important consequence of this research was his discovery in 1884 that isoprene (the building block of natural rubber) could be prepared by passing turpentine oil vapour through a red-hot iron tube.
Much later, in 1892, a sealed bottle of this isoprene was found to contain yellowish lumps which appeared to be similar to natural rubber.
Tilden even vulcanized this forerunner of synthetic rubber with sulphur, but did not pursue this line of research in the absence of any pressing need for rubber.
In his latter years Tilden also studied the specific heat of metals over a wide range of temperatures, and the history of chemistry.
He published seven textbooks, the most enduring being his Introduction to the Study of Chemical Philosophy (1876), and four historical works, including a biography of the chemist Sir William Ramsay [q.v.](1918).
Tilden was president of the Institute of Chemistry (1891–4) and of the Chemical Society (1903–5).
He was elected FRS in 1880, and was awarded the Davy medal in 1908.
Honorary degrees were bestowed by Dublin, Birmingham, and the Victoria University of Manchester, and Tilden was knighted in 1909.
In 1869 he married Charlotte Pither, daughter of Robert Bush of St Helier, Jersey.
They had one son.
She died in 1905 and in 1907 he married Julia Mary, daughter of C. W. Ramié of St Helier.
Tilden died in Ruislip, London, 11 December 1926.
[Obituaries in Journal of the Chemical Society , vol. ii, 1927, pp. 3190–202, and Proceedings of the Royal Society , series A, vol. cxvii, 1928.]
Rosemary Hill
,Christopher (1834–1904), designer and botanist, was born 4 July 1834 in Glasgow, the second son and third of six children of Christopher Dresser, excise officer, of Yorkshire, and his wife Mary Nettleton of Norton, near Doncaster, Yorkshire.
The family was posted to Sussex in 1847 and Dresser was educated at the Government School of Design at Somerset House in London from 1847 to 1854.
He became arguably the first industrial designer, working in ceramic, glass, metal, furniture, wallpapers, and textiles.
He was influential as a theorist in Britain and America and anticipated, especially in his metalwork, the functional style of the Modern movement.
The interests that provided a consistent source of inspiration throughout his career, botany and oriental art, developed while he was still at the School of Design.
He also came under the influence there of Henry Cole, Richard Redgrave, and Owen Jones [qq.v.], whose Grammar of Ornament of 1856 included Dresser's first published illustration.
Unlike William Morris [q.v.], who was in some ways influenced by him, he realized the importance of co-operation with industry in bringing well-made objects within reach of the widest possible public.
He made a point of working with modern materials such as cast iron and linoleum.
His design theory was based on the belief that natural forms should be abstracted and made geometric for use in ornamentation, and he likened the designer's mind to ‘the vital force of the plant ever developing itself into forms of beauty’.
His interest in natural sciences ran parallel with his design work at the beginning of his career, and his appointments included the chair of botany applied to the fine arts at the department of science and art, South Kensington (1860), and the chair of ornamental art and botany at the Crystal Palace (1862).
Among his first important writings were ‘On the Relation of Science to Ornamental Art’, a paper given to the Royal Institution in 1857, and The Rudiments of Botany and Unity and Variety , both of 1859.
On the strength of the two latter he was awarded a doctorate by Jena University in 1860.
He was always extremely proud of this and made a point of being known as Dr Dresser.
He was disappointed in the same year when his application for the chair of botany at London University was unsuccessful.
In 1862 he published The Art of Decorative Design .
It shows the influence of A. W. N. Pugin [q.v.]and was important as the first popular book on design to show readers how to create designs themselves.
In 1880 he set up the Art Furnishers' Alliance at Bond Street to sell ‘artistic house furnishing material’.
Gradually his scientific interests took less of Dresser's time.
In 1876–7 he made his first visit to Japan and this confirmed his admiration for oriental design and inspired much of his best work, as well as a book,Japan: its Architecture, Art, and Art Manufactures (1882).
In 1854 he married Thirza, daughter of William Perry, a lay missionary of Madeley, Shropshire.
They had five sons and eight daughters, and Dresser's hectic career was driven in part by the need to support them all.
He died at the Hotel Central, Mulhouse, 24 November 1904, and was buried at Mulhouse in an unmarked grave.
His work was largely forgotten until 1937 when (Sir) Nikolaus Pevsner [q.v.]acclaimed him as one of the pioneers of modern design.
[Christopher Dresser 1834–1904 , catalogue of an exhibition at Camden Arts Centre, 1979; Wider Halén,Christopher Dresser , 1990; information from Stuart Durant.]
P M Oppenheimer
,Ernest Terah (1859–1947), company promoter and dealer in shares and real estate, was born 5 February 1859 in Sneinton, Nottinghamshire, the only child of Terah Hooley, lacemaker, and his wife Elizabeth Peach.
In his autobiography he claimed that the family had been farmers at Long Eaton, Derbyshire, since the eighteenth century.
At the age of twenty-one he joined his father's lace business, and in the following year (1881) he married Annie Maria Winlaw, the daughter of a baker, with whom he had four daughters and three sons.
His earnings in his father's business (possibly helped by an inheritance from his mother) enabled him in 1888 to buy Risley Hall for £5,000.
In 1889 he left the lace business in search of larger fortunes and set up as a stockbroker in Nottingham.
In the 1890s Hooley discovered a talent for making large sums of money by selling off companies at inflated prices and pocketing a sizeable percentage of the proceeds.
Among them was his first public flotation in 1894 — that of an American subsidiary of Humber & Co.
Ltd., cycle manufacturers — as well as household names such as Raleigh, Singer, Swift, and above all the Dunlop Pneumatic Tyre Company, bought by Hooley and M. D. Rucker in 1896 for £3 million and promptly floated at £5 million (which was 80 per cent over-subscribed).
Other celebrated companies to pass through Hooley's hands included Schweppes and Bovril (both in 1897).
He also caused a stir with his purchase in 1896 and resale in segments of the Trafford Park estate in Manchester.
Partly for reasons of image-building, Hooley moved his business to London in 1896.
He cultivated members of the aristocracy and sprinkled them among his company boards to impress potential investors.
He affected a lavish lifestyle, purchasing Papworth Hall in Cambridgeshire for £70,000 in 1895, and later adding several adjacent estates costing £210,000.
His entertainment featured abundant wine and cigars, though he himself was a non-smoking teetotaller.
Hooley's gilded years came to an abrupt end in June 1898, when he himself filed a petition for the first and most sensational of his four bankruptcies.
The background to this was the ending of the cycle boom in the previous year.
The specific causes of Hooley's failure remain obscure, owing partly to deliberate obfuscation and partly to the erratic nature of his business methods, including a total absence of accounts.
He was certainly faced with claims for large commission payments arising out of his company promotions; and he alleged that his partner Martin Rucker had removed £506,000 from the business (in addition to shares) in six months.
Bankruptcy sharply lowered Hooley's social position, but made less difference to his lifestyle, not least because before his crash he had made over to his wife both Papworth and Risley Hall and their contents.
He was also allowed to continue trading, on condition that he kept his trustee supplied with a record of his financial affairs, so as to facilitate repayment of outstanding creditors.
In the years 1899–1904 Hooley was involved in a series of dubious companies concerned with exploiting concessions on foreign territories.
It was in relation to one of these, the Siberian Goldfield Development Company formed in May 1900, that Hooley and his associate H. J. Lawson were charged in 1904 with fraudulent share promotion.
Hooley was acquitted but Lawson received a twelve-month jail sentence.
Thereafter Hooley steered clear of companies for some time, concentrating on land deals.
In 1911–12 he was involved almost simultaneously in three distinct sets of legal proceedings.
First, his trustee, Mr Basden, charged him with contempt of court for failing to produce statements of his financial affairs over the preceding five years, and Hooley was eventually committed to Brixton Prison for a month.
Secondly, in October 1911 he faced a charge of obtaining money on false pretences in connection with an abortive land deal in Nottinghamshire, which ended with a twelve-month jail sentence.
Thirdly, he was declared bankrupt for the second time in 1912 on a creditor's petition.
During the boom which followed the end of World War I, Hooley became involved in trading shares in the cotton industry.
In 1921 he and five others were charged with fraudulent misrepresentation in floating shares of Jubilee Cotton Mills Ltd. in 1919–20.
Hooley as ringleader received a three-year jail sentence.
He was also declared bankrupt for the third time in September 1921.
His fourth bankruptcy followed in January 1939 on a petition of the Inland Revenue for an income-tax claim of £699 17s. 5d.
For all his legal transgressions, Hooley was not an unattractive character: warm-hearted, dynamic, musically gifted (he played the piano and the organ), and with a contagious sense of humour.
His enduring legacy was on the Papworth estate, where he left behind, not merely a reputation for kindness and generosity, but a series of ‘new model cottages’ for farm workers which continued to be appreciated several decades after his death.
He died 11 February 1947 in Long Eaton.
[The Hooley Book , 1904; E. T. Hooley,Hooley's Confessions , 1925; Rowland Parker,On the Road: the Papworth Story , 1977; P. L. Payne, ‘The Emergence of the Large-Scale Company in Great Britain, 1870–1914’,Economic History Review , vol. xx, 1967; D. J. Jeremy (ed.),
Dictionary of Business Biography , 1985.]
Anthony H Willbourn
,Reginald Oswald (1902–1983), chemist and joint discoverer of polythene, was born 30 September 1902 in east Dulwich, London, the only child of Samuel Gibson, civil servant, and his wife Ethel Crowther.
From Wilson's Grammar School in Camberwell he won a scholarship to St Dunstan's College, and from there in 1921 he entered the honours school of chemistry at University College London.
With a first-class degree (B.Sc.) he took a junior research post at Leiden University in 1925.
Gibson joined Brunner, Mond & Co. as a research chemist at Winnington in Cheshire in October 1926 and about that time he acquired his nickname, ‘Hoot’.
(Hoot Gibson was a character in the Wild West films of the 1920s.)
In 1927 Gibson introduced his friend and research collaborator, Anton Michels of the University of Amsterdam, to his colleagues in what was by then ICI.
This led to Gibson being seconded in 1928 to work with Michels on the properties of gases at high pressures, and to ICI becoming interested in the chemical effects of high pressures, the theme of Gibson's work on his return to Winnington in 1931.
Gibson was joined in this research by E. W. Fawcett [q.v.].
On Friday 24 March 1933 they set up an experiment in which a mixture of ethylene and benzaldehyde was pressurized to 1,900 atmospheres at 170°C in the hope that the two substances would combine together.
They did not, but when the apparatus was dismantled on the Monday Fawcett noticed that the tip of a steel tube was coated with a waxy substance.
It was less than half a gram, and was the first solid polymer of ethylene ever made — to be known as polythene.
Their apparatus was primitive and they could not control the reaction, so it was another two years before a different team took up the work again.
Polythene went into production just in time to play a crucial role in enabling radar equipment to be deployed effectively in the Battle of Britain.
During World War II ICI operated a factory making anti-knock additives for aviation fuel and Gibson was in charge of the process work.
The business was transferred after the war to the British Ethyl Co.
Ltd. and in 1948 Gibson transferred too, as chief chemist.
The postwar years saw an enormous expansion of the business, and Gibson became research and development manager with a team of some 150 staff.
A long illness caused him to relinquish his management role, but he returned to work as scientific adviser until his retirement in 1963.
Gibson played a full part in local and professional affairs, holding office in the United Nations Association, the Chester Sailing Club, and the Royal Institute of Chemistry.
His chairman's address to the Institute's north-west section on ‘The Discovery of Polythene’ became no. 1 in the RIC lecture series (1964).
In 1937 he married Lesley Shena, daughter of William George Randles, barrister.
They had a daughter and two sons.
The children's abiding memory of their father is his patience and thoroughness: he never lost his temper, and all tasks were thought out and executed with minute attention to detail.
The highlight of Gibson's later years was the Polyethylenes 1933–83 golden jubilee conference in London in June 1983.
Gibson died at the Royal Naval Hospital, Plymouth, 22 July 1983.
[ICI company records; private information; personal knowledge.]
Eric Midwinter
,Fred (1866–1941), comedian, was born Frederick John Westcott 26 March 1866 in Exeter, the eldest of the six sons and the seven children of John Westcott, cabinet-maker and french polisher of Exeter, and his wife Emily Bowden, also of Exeter.
He had a perfunctory elementary education in Exeter and Nottingham.
He began as a circus acrobat and gymnast with the Karno Trio (from which he took his stage name in the 1880s), but, by the 1890s, he had developed his flair for low comedy, and established himself as an entrepreneur of often ‘speechless’ sketches.
From Karno's Fun Factory in Camberwell he sent forth teams of comedians to perform his endless series of slapstick mini-shows as set pieces on music-hall bills.
He had an early success with ‘Jail Birds’, while other favourites were ‘The Football Match’, starring Harry Weldon as Stiffy the goalkeeper, and ‘Karno's Komics’.
However, the cameo which won everlasting fame was ‘Mumming Birds’, first performed in 1904 at the Star Music Hall, Bermondsey.
This is reputed to be the funniest burlesque of music-hall there has been, and, with its stage within a stage, it ran in one form or another for thirty years.
In 1913 he expended a huge part of the fortune he had gathered on buying Tagg's Island on the Thames in Hampton and there built his ‘Karsino’ at a cost of £70,000.
The outbreak of World War I ruined all chance of its success, and he never quite recovered financially or professionally.
He ran an off-licence in the latter part of his life.
His ‘Army’ gave either a solid start or valuable experience to dozens of comedians.
(Sir) Charles Chaplin [q.v.]was spotted as a film prospect when with a Karno company, while other famous names associated with him include Stan Jefferson (Laurel, q.v., of Laurel and Hardy), Fred Kitchen (of the famous catchphrase, ‘Meredith, we're in’) Will Hay [q.v.],
Sandy Powell, Wee Georgie Wood, and Max Miller.
Immortalized by the soldiery in the war of 1914–18, Fred Karno's Army lives on as a descriptor of chaotic organization.
He married Edith, daughter of John Cuthbert, journeyman rope manufacturer of Stockport, in Lambeth, 15 January 1889.
They were to have eight children, of whom six died in extreme infancy and only two sons, Frederick Arthur and Leslie, survived.
On 16 June 1927, after the death of his first wife, he married Marie Theresa Laura, daughter of Thomas William Moore of London, theatrical manager and co-founder of the Moore and Burgess Minstrels.
Fred Karno died 17 September 1941 near Poole, Dorset.
[J. P. Gallagher,Fred Karno — Master of Mirth and Tears , 1971; S. Theodore Felstead,Stars who Made the Halls , 1946.]
Michael Thornton
,Dennis (1915–1973), actor, was born Dennistoun John Franklin Rose Price 23 June 1915 in Ruscombe, Berkshire, the younger son and second of the three children of Brigadier-General Thomas Rose Caradoc Price, an army officer descended from a Cornish baronet's family, the Prices of Trengwainton, and his wife Dorothy Patience, daughter of Sir Henry Verey, official referee of the Supreme Court of Judicature.
Price was educated at Radley College and read theology at Worcester College, Oxford, where he joined the Oxford University Dramatic Society.
On leaving Oxford without a degree he studied for the stage at the Embassy Theatre School, and made his London début at the Queen's Theatre on 6 September 1937 with (Sir) John Gielgud in Shakespeare's Richard II .
In 1939 he married the beautiful blonde actress, Joan Schofield, daughter of Major-General Arthur Cecil Temperley of Beaconsfield.
They had two daughters.
The marriage was soon undermined by Price's homosexuality and alcoholism.
After being invalided out of the Royal Artillery in 1942, Price joined the company of (Sir) Noël Coward [q.v.], who was so impressed by his charm that in 1943 he gave Price the leading role of Charles Condamine in his play,Blithe Spirit , at the Duchess Theatre.
In 1944 he won his first starring role on screen in A Canterbury Tale , directed by Michael Powell.
Tall, handsome, and urbane, Price swiftly became one of Britain's leading international film stars.
He played the title role in The Bad Lord Byron (1948), was chosen by Ivor Novello [q.v.]for the lead in the Technicolor film of Novello's musical,The Dancing Years (1949), and reached the peak of his career with Kind Hearts and Coronets (1949), in which he was supremely sardonic as the heartless murderer of eight ducal cousins, all played by (Sir) Alec Guinness.
Joan Schofield divorced Price in 1950, and the British film recession brought a sharp decline in his popularity.
On 19 April 1954 he was found unconscious in his gas-filled flat in Egerton Gardens, Kensington, but the dramatic publicity generated by his attempted suicide led to a revival in his fortunes.
He starred on the South African stage in Separate Tables (1957), made an acclaimed Broadway début as Hector Hushabye in Heartbreak House (1959), and had further notable film roles in Private's Progress (1955),The Naked Truth (1957),I'm All Right, Jack (1959),Tunes of Glory (1960), and Tamahine (1963).
In 1965 his nonchalant interpretation of the butler, Jeeves, in the BBC television series,The World of Wooster , delighted its creator,(Sir) Pelham Grenville Wodehouse [q.v.], who felt that Price had ‘that essential touch of Jeeves mystery’.
Troubles with the Inland Revenue caused a strategic withdrawal in 1966 from his home in Curzon Street, Mayfair, to settle on the Channel island of Sark.
He was declared bankrupt in 1967.
He died from cirrhosis of the liver at the Princess Elizabeth Hospital, Guernsey, 6 October 1973.
[The Times , 8 October 1973; Terence Pettigrew,British Film Character Actors , 1982; personal knowledge.]
T C Graham
,The (fl. 1125), manuscript artist, was active at St Albans Abbey, and probably at Bury St Edmunds Abbey, in the 1120s and 1130s.
The name ‘Alexis Master’, first coined in German by the art historian A. Goldschmidt, derives from the illustrations of the life of St Alexis which this artist contributed to the great St Albans Psalter.
O. Pächt identified the Alexis Master as Anketil, a monk-goldsmith of St Albans Abbey, who completed a new shrine for the relics of St Alban in 1129, and spent part of his career at the Danish court as royal moneyer.
C. R. Dodwell proposed that the Alexis Master was a secular artist hired by Geoffrey of Gorham [q.v.], abbot of St Albans (1119–46).
The surviving corpus of the Alexis Master's work comprises historiated initials, full-page paintings, and tinted drawings.
It is believed to span six manuscripts, being concentrated in two: the St Albans Psalter at Hildesheim Cathedral, and the Life and Miracles of St Edmund in the Pierpont Morgan Library, New York.
His chief monument is his work in the St Albans Psalter: forty full-page prefatory paintings illustrating the life of Christ and other subjects; tinted drawings of the life of St Alexis and of Christ at Emmaus; the historiated initial at the beginning of Psalm 1; and under-drawings for other historiated initials.
Made in the 1120s, the manuscript was originally intended for the St Albans monastic community.
During production, or soon afterwards, the Alexis Master adapted it for the use of St Christina of Markyate (born c .1096, q.v.) by adding the Alexis and Emmaus drawings, intended to echo incidents in Christina's own life.
The master probably travelled to Bury St Edmunds Abbey some time between 1130 and 1135 to provide the cycle of thirty-two full-page pictures which prefaces the New York manuscript.
These pictures illustrate the life, passion, and posthumous miracles of the martyr-king Edmund (841–870, q.v.).
The sacrifice of formal organization to dramatic tension in the pictures has raised doubts about their attribution to the Alexis Master, but this characteristic can probably be ascribed to the natural evolution of his style.
The Alexis Master's full-page narrative pictures show stylistic and iconographic links with Anglo-Saxon and Ottonian art and the monumental art of Italy, which he may have visited.
His pictures represent a new departure in post-Conquest English manuscript art, hitherto largely confined to decorative initials.
Through his stimulus, the art of pictorial narrative experienced a major revival in twelfth-century England.
His style was inherited and perpetuated at St Albans, Bury St Edmunds, Canterbury, and Winchester.
Apart perhaps from Master Hugo of Bury St Edmunds [q.v.], he was the most influential English artist of his generation.
[O. Pächt, C. R. Dodwell, and F. Wormald,The St Albans Psalter , 1960; R. M. Thomson,Manuscripts from St Albans Abbey 1066–1235 , 1982; C. R. Dodwell,The Pictorial Arts of the West 800–1200 , 1991.]
Trevor I Williams
,Edmund Knowles (1833–1923), industrial chemist, was born 6 November 1833 in Linacre, near Bootle, the youngest in the family of four sons and six daughters of James Muspratt [q.v.], founder of the alkali industry in Lancashire, and his wife Julia Josephine Connor of Dublin.
He was educated at the Pestalozzian Institute, Worksop, after which, in 1850, his father sent him to study chemistry under his close friend Justus von Liebig, at the University of Giessen, in Hesse-Darmstadt.
When Liebig moved to the University of Munich in 1852 Muspratt followed him to study medicine.
In 1856 he returned to Liverpool to join his father's rapidly expanding chemical company, largely concerned with the manufacture of soda by the Leblanc process.
The demands of the business prevented his following his original intention of becoming a professional chemist.
He was, however, always keenly interested in industrial chemistry and was a founder member of the Society of Chemical Industry (1881) and its president (1885–6).
In 1890 James Muspratt & Sons, with many other Leblanc soda manufacturers, amalgamated to form the United Alkali Co., of which Muspratt became a director and later honorary president.
The object was to resist increasing competition from the intrinsically superior ammonia-soda process, developed by the Solvay brothers in Belgium, and operated under licence by Brunner, Mond & Co.
Ltd. at Winnington since 1873.
It was, however, a losing battle: by the turn of the century the Solvay process was producing six times as much soda as the Leblanc.
In 1926 both United Alkali and Brunner, Mond were absorbed into the newly created Imperial Chemical Industries, of which Muspratt's son (Sir) Max Muspratt [q.v.]became a director.
Despite his business commitments Muspratt found time to develop many other interests — in politics, education, foreign travel, and (like his father) in music and the theatre.
Politically he was a radical, keenly interested in free trade and home rule.
He unsuccessfully contested the Widnes division in 1885.
Interest in local politics led him to become a member of Liverpool town council and Lancashire county council; he also served as chairman of Liverpool chamber of commerce.
His interest in education was reflected in his active role in founding University College, Liverpool, in 1881: when it became the University of Liverpool in 1903 he was elected pro-chancellor.
Later, in 1910, he helped to establish the Liverpool repertory theatre.
Those who knew him described Muspratt as energetic, public-spirited, accomplished, and generous.
In 1861 he married Frances Jane, daughter of Thomas Baines [q.v.], a former editor of the Liverpool Times ; they had five sons (one of whom died as a child) and four daughters.
Muspratt died 1 September 1923 at Seaforth Hall, near Liverpool, which his father had built when he settled on Merseyside.
[E. K. Muspratt,My Life and Work , 1917; D. Reilly, ‘The Muspratts and the Gambles’,Journal of Chemical Education , vol. xxviii, 1951, pp. 650–3; D. W. F. Hardie, ‘The Muspratts and the British Chemical Industry’,Endeavour , vol. xiv, 1955, pp. 29–33;Journal of the Society of Chemical Industry , jubilee number, July 1931, p. 54.]
John Huxtable
,Peter Taylor (1848–1921), Congregational minister, was born 12 May 1848 in Aberdeen, the eldest child in the family of two sons and three daughters of Isaac Forsyth, a bookseller and later a postman, from the Cabrach, and his wife Elspet McPherson, a crofter's daughter from Kingussie in the Highlands.
Forsyth was educated at Aberdeen Grammar School, and entered Aberdeen University in 1864.
Graduating MA with first-class honours in classical literature in 1869, he spent one year as a private tutor and then from 1871 to 1872 he was an assistant in the department of humanities at King's College, Aberdeen.
Following a period of study in Göttingen in 1872 under Albrecht Ritschl, he started theological studies in September 1872 at New College, London, but did not complete the course, leaving in 1874.
The writings of F. D. Maurice [q.v.]were an early influence on him.
In London he became a member of the congregation of J. Baldwin Brown, a famous Congregational preacher in Brixton, and in 1876 he was ordained minister at the Congregational church in Shipley, near Bradford.
For the next twenty-five years he held a series of appointments as minister: St Thomas's Square, Hackney (1880–5); Cheetham Hill Congregational church, Manchester (1885–8); Clarendon Park, Leicester (1888–94); and Emmanuel church, Cambridge (1894–1901).
Meanwhile he had begun to publish, starting with Pulpit Parables for Young Hearers in 1886.
Religion in Recent Art appeared in 1889, based on lectures on pre-Raphaelite paintings and Richard Wagner's Parsifal .
His early leanings towards socialism were evident in articles he wrote under a pseudonym from 1885 to 1889 for the Manchester Examiner .
In 1889 he was one of the delegates to the International Congregational Council in Boston, and he made several further trips to North America, including one in 1907 to give the Lyman Beecher lectures at Yale University.
In 1901 he became principal of Hackney College, Hampstead, and in 1905 he was elected chairman of the Congregational Union.
In 1911 he was appointed dean of the faculty of theology at London University.
Aberdeen University awarded him an honorary DD in 1895.
Forsyth was very distressed at the outbreak of World War I, for he loved Germany and German literature, and had been greatly influenced by German theologians such as Jacob Boehme, but he was not a pacifist, and in The Justification of God (1916) he supported the war.
Forsyth came to be regarded as the greatest Congregational theologian of his day.
A pillar of orthodoxy, he challenged the theological liberalism fashionable at the time.
Some have found that Forsyth's more strictly theological writings anticipated those of Karl Barth and Emil Brunner, and there are striking similarities.
While he was an enthusiastic supporter of biblical criticism, he reacted strongly against the Hegelianism which was then becoming fashionable in British circles.
‘The liberal theology finds Christ's centre of gravity in what he has in common with us; a positive theology in that wherein he differs.’
It was on this issue that his controversy with R. J. Campbell, then minister of the City Temple in London, centred; many had accepted the views to which Forsyth had taken exception.
To reduce the power of the Gospel to a merely ‘human’ Jesus, without the cross and the resurrection as the heart of the Christian message, seemed fatal.
The heart of Forsyth's theology was that the holiness of God needed to deal drastically with the sin of humanity; his sermon on the Holy Father (1897) marked a focal point in his life.
In The Person and Place of Jesus Christ (1909), a book often regarded as his best, he found the two-nature doctrine of Christ deficient, inclining to the kenotic theory, which he modified by thinking of a ‘pleroma’ following the resurrection and exaltation of Jesus.
A good deal of Forsyth's work derived from lectures, delivered within the actual context of his day, and to that extent his writings are somewhat dated.
His epigrammatic style is not to everyone's taste.
It is also true that to wrestle with his thought demands a rethinking of the Gospel: that his students found him so witty and stimulating a teacher is understandable.
He married Minna Magness in 1877.
She died in 1894, and in 1897 he married Bertha Ison.
He had one daughter from his first marriage.
Forsyth died 11 November 1921 in Hampstead.
[Memoir by Jessie Forsyth Andrews in P. T. Forsyth,The Work of Christ , 1938 edn., pp. vii–xxviii; Gwilym O. Griffith,The Theology of P. T. Forsyth , 1948; W. L. Bradley,P. T. Forsyth: the Man and His Work , 1952; Harry Escott,P. T. Forsyth and the Cure of Souls: an Appraisement and Anthology of his Practical Writings , 1970; personal recollections of former students.]
M K Lawson
(fl. 1046–1069), bishop of Worcester, Hereford, and Ramsbury, and archbishop of York, A monk of Winchester, Ealdred became abbot of Tavistock, and by 1044 was witnessing royal charters as bishop, probably as suffragan to Lyfing of Worcester, whom he succeeded in 1046.
In July 1049 he was with men of Gloucestershire and Herefordshire defeated by the Welsh.
In April 1050 he and Bishop Hermann [q.v.]of Ramsbury visited Rome on an errand of Edward the Confessor [q.v.]; according to later and possibly unreliable sources it was to secure the king's release from a vow of pilgrimage made before his accession.
Returning the same year, Ealdred reconciled Earl Sweyn Godwinsson [q.v.]with the king.
In 1051 almost the entire Godwin family was exiled, and Edward sent Ealdred with troops to intercept Earl Harold Godwinsson [q.v.]as he fled, but, according to the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle , ‘they could not or would not.’
On 17 July 1054 he consecrated Godric abbot of Winchcombe, having held the abbey himself since the death of Abbot Godwin in 1053.
Later in 1054 the king sent him to Germany to arrange the return from Hungary of Edward Atheling [q.v.].
He was received with honour by Archbishop Hermann of Cologne and Emperor Henry III, remained in Germany for a year, and was presented, among other gifts, with a psalter and sacramentary sent there by Canute [q.v.].
In 1056 he and the earls Leofric [q.v.]and Harold made peace with King Gruffydd of north Wales, and Ealdred took the diocese of Hereford, whose bishop had been killed fighting the Welsh.
He also administered that of Ramsbury between Bishop Hermann's resignation and departure from England in 1055 and return in 1058.
In the latter year Ealdred consecrated the abbey church of St Peter in Gloucester, which he had rebuilt, and then travelled with great ceremony by way of Hungary to Jerusalem, where he gave a gold chalice worth five marks to the church of the Holy Sepulchre.
He was elected archbishop of York on Christmas day 1060, and gave up the see of Hereford, while intending to hold York and Worcester together, like some earlier archbishops.
In 1061 he went to Rome on the king's business and for his pallium, but was denied it and deprived of episcopal rank by Pope Nicholas II because his transference from one see to another was against church law.
However, he and Earl Tostig Godwinsson [q.v.]were robbed by brigands on their way home, and forced to return to Rome, where Nicholas reinstated Ealdred and gave him the pallium, while insisting that he give up Worcester.
Papal legates were with Ealdred in England in 1062 to see this implemented, and on 8 September he consecrated Wulfstan [q.v.]bishop of Worcester.
It was probably he who crowned Harold Godwinsson on 6 January 1066, and he wished Edgar Atheling [q.v.]to succeed after Harold's death at Hastings.
However, he was among the English leaders who submitted to the Normans at Berkhamsted, and crowned William I at Westminster on Christmas day 1066.
On 11 May 1068 he also crowned William's queen, Matilda.
Ealdred was active within his archdiocese, building refectories for the communities at York and Southwell, and completing the refectory and dormitory and building a presbytery at Beverley, where he decorated the church with paintings and gave a bronze, silver, and gold pulpit and crucifix in the German style.
He also commissioned Folcard [q.v.], a continental monk under his protection, to write a Life of St John of Beverley.
His building works were part of an attempt to introduce a more regular life to the chapters of these churches, apparently inspired by his observations in Cologne.
He also gave lands to them, and had those of Beverley protected by royal writs.
Much more is known about Ealdred that most Anglo-Saxon churchmen, partly because both the ‘D’ version of the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle and the Chronicon attributed to Florence of Worcester [q.v.]were written in his former dioceses not long after his death.
They, and Folcard, speak well of him, and William of Poitiers thought him ‘wise, good and eloquent’.
He is not said to have been holy, and looks like a successful career churchman, often occupied with the king's business, and willing to contravene church law by practising pluralism.
Nevertheless, he was clearly respected by contemporaries, and is said to have admonished both William I and the Norman sheriff of Worcester.
Ealdred died 11 September 1069 and was buried at York.
[Anglo-Saxon Chronicle , ed.
C. Plummer, 1892–9; Florence of Worcester,Chronicon , ed.
B. Thorpe, 1848–9;Vita Ædwardi Regis , ed.
F. Barlow, 1962; William of Malmesbury,Vita Wulfstani , ed.
R. R. Darlington, 1928; William of Poitiers,Histoire de Guillaume le Conquérant , ed.
R. Foreville;Anglo-Saxon Writs , ed.
F. Harmer, 1952;Historians of the Church of York , ed.
J. Raine, 1879–86; J. M. Cooper,The Last Four Anglo-Saxon Archbishops of York , 1970; F. Barlow,The English Church 1000–1066 , 1963.]
Trevor I Williams
,Harry (1871–1948), steel metallurgist, was born 18 February 1871 in Sheffield, Yorkshire, the youngest of five sons and the eighth of nine children of John Brearley, steel melter of Sheffield, and his wife Jane Senior, daughter of a blacksmith of Penistone, Yorkshire.
He was educated at Woodside Board School, but left at the age of eleven to become a cellar lad with Thomas Firth & Son Ltd.
In 1883 he entered the laboratory as bottle washer to James Taylor, chief chemist, who encouraged him to study the principles of chemical analysis.
He did so to such purpose that he subsequently wrote several widely acclaimed technical books on the processing of steel and in 1920 received the Bessemer gold medal of the Iron and Steel Institute.
In 1901 he left Firths to start a new laboratory for Kayser Ellison & Co.
Ltd. but returned in 1903 to take up an appointment as chief chemist in their Salamander works in Riga.
His chief responsibility was to improve the hardening of armour-piercing shells.
In 1907 he returned to Sheffield to establish a new joint laboratory for Firths and John Brown & Co.
Ltd., and developed a particular interest in alloy steels for military purposes.
In May 1912 he visited the Royal Small Arms factory at Enfield to advise on rifle barrels which had failed through internal corrosion.
In a confidential report he reviewed the properties of steels containing upward of 5 per cent chromium, and concluded that steels containing over 10 per cent chromium should be investigated.
After various experiments, an ingot was cast in August 1913, containing around 13 per cent chromium with a little manganese.
From part of this twelve gun barrels were forged and sent to Enfield, but they did not show the desired improvement.
Nevertheless, Brearley thought that the alloy might have uses in other high-corrosion situations and, as it did not tarnish, might be suitable for cutlery.
Accordingly, some of the rest of the ingot was made into knife-blades, but they did not appeal to local cutlers because they were hard to forge.
Only when Brearley demonstrated that the problem could be solved by carefully controlled heat treatment did the stainless-steel knife become widely used.
Brearley was undoubtedly the pioneer of the commercial development of stainless steel, but his claim to have been the ‘true and original inventor’ is hard to sustain, as workers elsewhere had carried out similar experiments.
In France, A. M. G. R. Portevin, working with de Dion-Bouton, noted in a report to the Carnegie Foundation (1909) the corrosion resistance of steels containing more than 10 per cent chromium and subsequently described thermal treatment (patented May 1911) to make them amenable to standard milling processes.
In Germany, B. Strauss and P. Monnartz in 1913 developed corrosion-resistant steels containing upward of 12 per cent chromium.
Brearley was bitterly disappointed in Firths' reaction to his innovation.
They sought no patent; they ordered him to give information freely to their customers; and they denied him the reward to which he believed he was entitled under the terms of his contract.
In December 1914 he resigned and became works manager at Brown Bayley steelworks, advising them on the manufacture of stainless steel and eventually becoming technical director.
Meanwhile he had succeeded in gaining an American patent in 1916 and after some acrimony the Firth–Brearley Syndicate was established to license and promote the production of stainless steel worldwide.
Brearley retired from Brown Bayley in 1925, though he remained a director.
In 1895 he married Nellie Dacey, daughter of a Sheffield railway guard.
After his retirement they went to live in Torquay, where he died 14 July 1948.
His wife survived him but his only child, Leo, died two years earlier.
[J. H. G. Moneypenny,Journal of the Iron and Steel Institute , August 1948, p. 428;75 Years of Stainless Steel 1913–1988 , 1988;Harry Brearley Stainless Pioneer: Autobiographical Notes , British Steel Stainless/Kelham Industrial Museum, Sheffield, 1989; Harry Brearley,Knotted String: Autobiography of a Steel-Maker , 1941.]
Anne Baker
,Robert (1863–1917), boxer, was born 26 May 1863 in Helston, Cornwall, the youngest child of the seven sons and five daughters of James Fitzsimmons, of Omagh, county Tyrone, and his wife Jane Strongman of Truro, Cornwall.
His father was a police constable in the borough police at Helston, but the family emigrated to New Zealand, probably in 1872, and settled at Timaru, South Island, where most of the settlers were of Cornish descent, and James Fitzsimmons set up as a blacksmith.
Bob Fitzsimmons joined his father's business after various jobs, including that of painter with a coach-building firm.
His boxing career began in 1880, when he won a boxing tournament organized by the bare-knuckle champion Jem Mace [q.v.], who was touring New Zealand, and later defeated Mace's protégé, the Maori Herbert Slade.
He moved to Australia to box professionally, and fought there successfully for ten years until his attempt at the Australian middleweight title in 1890, when he was defeated by Jim Hall.
In the mistaken belief that Jim Hall intended to sail to the United States, Fitzsimmons embarked for San Francisco in 1890, with the intention of fighting a return match.
His American career took off in 1891, when he beat Jack Dempsey in the thirteenth round to win the world middleweight title.
He held this title until 1897, while fighting his way through the heavyweight ranks with the ambition of challenging James J. (‘Gentleman Jim’) Corbett for the world heavyweight title.
Corbett refused to recognize the challenge on the grounds that Fitzsimmons was not American, and so Fitzsimmons took out US citizenship.
He knocked Corbett out in the fourteenth round at Carson City, Nevada, in 1897, with what has been described as the most famous single punch in the history of boxing.
He held the world heavyweight title until 1899, when he was beaten in his first defence of the title by James J. Jeffries in eleven rounds.
In the return match in 1902, Fitzsimmons was beaten in eight rounds after breaking his right hand trying to knock Jeffries out.
His career did not end there, for in 1903, when the light heavyweight division was created, he became the first man to win three world titles when he became the world light heavyweight champion after beating George Gardner in twenty rounds at San Francisco.
He held this title until 1905, when he lost to Jack O'Brien.
He continued to box until 1914, when he retired at the age of fifty-two.
Bob Fitzsimmons, known as ‘Fitz’ in boxing circles, was the only English world heavyweight champion, though he never fought in England.
Although he never weighed more than 175 pounds, he had the build of a heavyweight from the waist up, and he fought the world's leading heavyweights, with few of his fights lasting beyond the first few rounds.
Fitzsimmons was married four times.
His first wife was Alice Jones of Timaru, whom he married in Australia.
The date of this marriage is unknown.
They had one son.
They were later divorced, and in 1893 he married Rose Julian.
They had two sons and a daughter.
After her death in 1903, he married Julia May Gifford.
They were divorced in 1915.
His fourth wife, whom he married in 1915, was Mrs Temo Slomonin, née Ziller, of Portland, Oregon, the divorced wife of Henry Slomonin.
Bob Fitzsimmons died of pneumonia, 22 October 1917, in Chicago, Illinois, USA.
[The Times , 23 October 1917; Gilbert Odd,The Fighting Blacksmith , 1976.]
Joseph M McCarthy
,William (1792–1848), physician and pioneer, was born in Greenock, Scotland, 19 November 1792, the youngest of three sons (there were no daughters) of Alexander Dunlop, banker, of Keppoch House, Dumbartonshire, and his wife Janet Graham, and great-great-grandson of William Dunlop [q.v.], principal of Glasgow University.
He was educated in Greenock and entered Glasgow University in 1806 to study medicine and, though not on the official roll of graduates, used the initials MD for the remainder of his life.
In 1813 he was appointed assistant surgeon in the second battalion of the 89th Regiment of Foot (‘Blayney's Bloodhounds’) and served in Canada for the remainder of the American war of 1812–14.
Following half-pay retirement in England, he embarked for India in 1817 and spent three years editing a Tory newspaper in Calcutta and acting as agent of a failed scheme to make the island of Saugor, at the mouth of the Hooghly river, an entrepôt and health resort, after ridding it of tigers (hence his nickname ‘Tiger’).
A fever sent him back to Britain, where he wrote for Blackwood's Magazine under the pseudonym ‘Colin Ballantyne’, edited a Tory paper,British Press or Morning Literary Adviser , and established the Telescope , a paper focusing on Indian affairs, which ran until 1825.
Meanwhile he was also re-editing Elements of Medical Jurisprudence , by P. R. Beck (1825), inserting his observations from wartime.
In 1826 Dunlop entered the Canada Company with John Galt [q.v.], helped found Guelph, then founded Goderich, where he made his home while holding the post of warden of the forest.
His 1832 book,Statistical Sketches of Upper Canada , is a compendium of witty tales, as charming and personable as they are fantastic, a good inducement for prospective settlers.
A founder of the Toronto Literary Club in 1836, he contributed to the Canadian Literary Magazine (Toronto) and the Literary Garland (Montreal).
Elected in 1841 to the first legislative assembly of Upper and Lower Canada as an independent representing Huron, he served five years before resigning in 1846 to become superintendent of the Lachine canal and publish his Recollections of the American War, 1812–1814 .
Never married, though once engaged, he was esteemed as a literary wit and rough-hewn eccentric.
His self-description was, ‘a strong, broad-shouldered, carrotty-headed, slovenly, coarse-looking Scotchman’.
He died in Lachine 29 June 1848, leaving a curious and much-reprinted will.
[A. H. U. Colquhoun, introduction to 1898 edn. of Dunlop's Recollections ; D. G. Draper, ‘Tiger: a Study of the Legend of William Dunlop’, Ph.D.
thesis (1978) for the University of Ontario; Archibald Dunlop,Dunlop of that Ilk: Memorabilia of the Families of Dunlop , 1898; John Graham Dunlop,The Dunlops of Dunlop , 1939; Carl F. Klinck,William Tiger Dunlop, Blackwoodian Backwoodsman , 1958; W. H. Graham,Tiger Dunlop , 1962; Robina and Kathleen Lizars,In the Days of the Canada Company, 1825–1850 , 1896, and Humours of ‘37 , 1897.]
J Sutton
,John (1848–1928), geologist, was born 1 January 1848 in Campsie, Stirlingshire, the son of James Horne, farmer of Newmill, Campsie, and his wife Janet Braid.
Educated at Glasgow High School and Glasgow University, he joined the Geological Survey in 1867, and served in Scotland until his retirement in 1911.
Geologists link his name with that of B. N. Peach [q.v.].
Their collaboration, the most productive in Scottish geology, led to sixty publications.
Their most famous works were their prolonged surveys of the Southern Uplands and the North West Highlands.
Together Horne and Peach were the intellectual leaders of Scottish geology for half a century.
It was Horne's ability as a writer, editor, and speaker, that brought the partnership's discoveries to the public, for Peach's talents lay elsewhere.
Horne once wrote ‘Peach is a genius, the gift of the gods; I am not’, a statement which illuminates the relationship between the two, both scientists of the first rank, the clarity of Horne complementing the insight of Peach.
The partnership with Peach began in 1867, when Horne joined Peach in the survey of the Southern Uplands.
Horne then independently investigated glacial deposits.
He surveyed the Dalradian of north-east Scotland (1877–85), which led to his discovery of progressive regional metamorphism, a previously unrecognized phenomenon.
Work with Peach resumed in 1888, after Charles Lapworth [q.v.]had demonstrated the stratigraphical value of fossil graptolites.
During their holidays the two men investigated the glacial deposits and Old Red Sandstone of Caithness, Orkney, and Shetland, publishing papers (1879–84) for which both received awards from the Geological Society.
In 1883 (Sir) Archibald Geikie [q.v.], director of the Geological Survey, selected Peach and Horne to lead a survey of the North West Highlands, long a subject of geological controversy.
Lapworth's recognition of thrusting was incompatible with an interpretation advocated by Geikie's predecessor, Sir Roderick Murchison [q.v.].
Within a year Horne and Peach settled the issue in Lapworth's favour and went on to demonstrate great horizontal displacements of rock along the Moine Thrust, a discovery which established their international reputation.
It fell to Horne to prepare the resulting North West Highland Memoir (1907).
His chapter reviewing the thirty years controversy that had followed Murchison's work demonstrates Horne's judicial cast of mind, as the strengths and weaknesses of the opposing views are clearly set out.
As assistant director of the Geological Survey of Scotland (1901–11) Horne established harmonious working conditions, set about the revision of the work on Scottish coalfields, saw to the publication of many memoirs, and recruited excellent young geologists.
On retirement he retained his connection with the Survey, his last memoir, on the Findhorn district, appearing in 1923.
Horne was president of the Royal Society of Edinburgh (1915–19) and played an active part in many other Scottish scientific societies, where he was renowned for his excellent lectures.
Elected FRS in 1900, he received honorary degrees from Aberdeen, St Andrews, and Edinburgh, and, jointly with Peach, the Wollaston medal (1921) from the Geological Society.
Horne was fair-minded, generous, companionable, an excellent organizer, and able to handle men.
The accuracy of his geological maps was legendary, his crisp and lucid style apparent in everything he wrote.
Horne married Anna Leyland (died 1926), daughter of Henry Taylor of Pernambuco, Brazil.
They had two sons and one daughter.
Horne died in Edinburgh 30 May 1928.
[The Times , 1 June 1928; obituary in Proceedings of the Royal Society , series B, vol. civ, 1929; private information.]
Charles Webster
,Benjamin (c. 1617–1677), projector, was born in 1617 or 1618, the eldest son of Francis Worsley of Kenton, Warwickshire, and his wife Mary, daughter of Shipman Hopkins of Coventry.
Worsley was probably brought up in London.
The only certain detail concerning his formal education is his admission as a pensioner at Trinity College, Dublin, in 1643 at the late age of twenty-five.
Worsley claimed to possess a degree from Trinity College.
He entered public service under Thomas Wentworth, first Earl of Strafford [q.v.], and was in 1643 surgeon-general in the army in Ireland.
His career as a projector began in 1646, when his scheme for the manufacture of saltpetre attracted attention, primarily on account of its value for gunpowder production.
Worsley capitalized on this opportunity by making the saltpetre project the centre-piece of a programme for revitalization of the British economy and the development of an integrated manufacturing and trading system embracing an expanding colonial empire.
He published little, but elaborations of his proposals for the exploitation of technical innovation and the regulation of trade are found in abundance in such archives as the Hartlib papers and Shaftesbury papers, and his views were seriously regarded, even though his reputation suffered as a result of a bitter controversy with (Sir) William Petty [q.v.].
At first Worsley was ahead of Petty.
In 1646 his saltpetre scheme impressed the young Robert Boyle [q.v.]and brought patronage from Boyle and his sister, Lady Ranelagh.
Worsley was the prime mover in the ‘Invisible College’ established at this time: a group of intellectuals, exchanging ideas by correspondence, motivated by utopian aspirations, and particularly engaged in promoting science and technology.
This agency brought Worsley into association with Samuel Hartlib [q.v.].
Worsley was reappointed surgeon-general to the army in Ireland in 1647, but seems not to have taken up the post.
Between 1647 and 1649 he was based in The Netherlands, where he acted as a major source of intelligence on economic and scientific affairs.
In 1649 his hopes revolved around a scheme for developing the economy of Virginia.
With the promise of a situation in America, he returned to England, and his efforts contributed to the council of state's decision to establish a council of trade, presided over by Sir Henry Vane the younger [q.v.],
Worsley's patron.
The council's main achievement was the 1651 Navigation Act, of which Worsley claimed to have been ‘the first sollicitour’.
He also wrote at this time The Advocate (1652), in defence of the Navigation Act, and a related economic tract,Free Ports (1652).
Renewed prospects opened up for preferment in Ireland.
Between 1651 and 1653 Worsley served as secretary to the commissioners in Ireland and commissioner-general for the revenue, and then, having failed to be selected to join the embassy to Sweden, he returned to Ireland as surveyor-general of forfeited estates.
He remained in this post until 1658, but the real work was undertaken by William Petty, for whom Worsley developed a deep jealousy.
Petty responded with venom in his History of the Down Survey (1659).
Having failed as surveyor-general, Worsley made an unsuccessful attempt in 1659 to secure the Post Office farm surrendered by John Thurloe [q.v.].
His tenuous hold on office was reduced to his positions as justice of the peace in Queen's County and commissary-general of musters.
After the Restoration Worsley was inhibited from his more radical schemes for social and religious reform.
He played no part in the newly founded Royal Society or the College of Physicians, although at this time he began to describe himself as an ‘MD’.
He concentrated on economic issues, especially on American colonial affairs.
Repeating the pattern of 1650, in 1660 he was implicated in the establishment of the council of trade.
Worsley continued to write on general policy questions, but he also tried to turn his knowledge to profit.
For instance, in 1666 he was granted a licence for the cultivation of senna in the plantations.
The continuing strength of his reputation is witnessed by his involvement between 1668 and 1673 in the revival of the committees involved with trade and plantations.
After serving as a commissioner of trade between 1668 and 1669, he was appointed assistant secretary of the council of foreign plantations in 1670, and in September 1672 he was promoted to the post of secretary and treasurer of the council of trade and foreign plantations, under the presidency of his patron, Anthony Ashley Cooper, first Earl of Shaftesbury [q.v.].
Worsley resigned on account of the Test Act in September 1673, being succeeded by John Locke [q.v.].
A catalogue of his fine library was published in 1678, revealing a huge collection of Nonconformist, and especially Socinian, religious literature.
Worsley married in 1656 Lucy, daughter of William Cary of Dartmouth, Devon.
After the Restoration, they lived in Tuthill Fields.
Worsley died in 1677.
[C. W. Andrews,British Committees, Commissions, and Councils of Trade and Plantations , 1908; K. H. D. Haley,The First Earl of Shaftesbury , 1968; T. A. Larcom (ed.),
The History of the Down Survey , 1851; G. H. Turnbull,Hartlib, Dury and Comenius , 1947; C. Webster,The Great Instauration , 1975; J. B. Whitmore in Notes and Queries , vol. clxxxv, 1943, pp. 123–8; Clarendon MSS, Bodleian Library, Oxford; Shaftesbury papers, Public Record Office; Hartlib papers, Sheffield University Library.]
M Mac Curtain
,Constance , Countess Markievicz (1868–1927), revolutionary, was born 4 February 1868 at Buckingham Gate, London, the eldest in the family of three daughters and two sons of Sir Henry Gore-Booth, fifth baronet, Anglo-Irish landowner and Arctic explorer, and his wife Georgina Mary, daughter of Colonel Charles Hill of Tickhill Castle, Yorkshire.
Eva Gore-Booth [q.v.]was her sister.
She was educated privately at Lissadell Court, the family estate in county Sligo, Ireland.
In 1887 she was presented at court and studied art at the Slade School in London in 1893 and in Paris (1898–1900).
In London on 29 September 1900 she married the painter, Count Casimir Dunvin-Markievicz, son of a Polish landowner in the Ukraine, after the death of his estranged wife.
At Lissadell, Constance's only child, Maeve Alys, was born in November 1901 and the Markieviczs, with one surviving son from Casimir's previous marriage, settled in Dublin in 1903.
Countess Constance was drawn to the nationalist movement including the Abbey Theatre and the Gaelic League.
She was, with her husband and Ellen Duncan, a founder-member of the United Arts Club in 1907.
A chance perusal of The Peasant and Sinn Féin journals led her to enter Sinn Fein politics in 1908.
She joined Inghinidhe na hÉireann, a feminist society founded by Maud Gonne [q.v.], and wrote for its journal,Bean na hÉireann , which brought her into contact with the Irish suffragettes.
In 1909 she founded Na Fíanna, an organization for boys, to whom she taught drilling and the use of arms.
Drawn to socialism by her sister, Eva, she met the Irish labour leaders, James Connolly and James Larkin [qq.v.], and helped the 1913 lockout strike of Dublin workers by running a soup kitchen in Liberty Hall.
Casimir left Dublin for the Balkans as a war correspondent and enlistment.
In the 1916 Easter rising Constance served with the Irish Citizen Army company at the College of Surgeons, Dublin, second-in-command to Commandant Michael Mallin.
After laying down arms she was court-martialled in Kilmainham Gaol, but her death sentence was commuted to penal servitude for life in Aylesbury Gaol.
Released in the general amnesty of June 1917, she converted to Catholicism.
Sligo city declared her a freeman.
Rearrested in May 1918, from Holloway Prison she went forward to win the seat for St Patrick's division, Dublin, in the December 1918 general election, the first woman elected to the British Parliament.
In accordance with Sinn Fein policy, she did not take her seat.
A member of the first Dáil Éireann, 21 January 1919, she was appointed minister for labour.
Proscribed as a member of illegal organizations, she served two gaol sentences in Mountjoy and Cork.
Opposed to the Anglo-Irish Treaty (1921) she toured America as an anti-treatant.
Defeated in the 1922 general election for Dáil Éireann, she secured a seat in Dublin in the 1923 election but abstained from taking her seat as a Sinn Fein republican.
Briefly on hunger strike after her arrest for advocating republicanism, she wrote a pamphlet,James Connolly's Policy and Catholic Doctrine (1924), and a play,Broken Dreams .
Re-elected to the Dáil (1927) she died at Sir Patrick Dun's Hospital in Dublin, 15 July 1927, supported by Casimir, her stepson, and her daughter.
Accorded a public funeral, she was buried at Glasnevin cemetery.
[J. Van Voris,Constance de Markievicz: In the Cause of Ireland , 1967; Diana Norman,Terrible Beauty: a Life of Constance Markievicz 1868–1927 , 1987; Markievicz archives, National Library of Ireland and National Museum of Ireland.]
Asa Briggs
, Sir Swire (1842–1918), textile manufacturer and pioneer of technical education, was born 4 March 1842 at a small house, Wagon Fold, in Keighley, Yorkshire, the elder son and one of the four children of George Smith, also a textile manufacturer, and his wife Mary, of yeoman stock but completely uneducated.
As proud of his Keighley ancestry on both sides as he was of his ‘liberal principles’, he claimed that his ancestors had fought at Flodden.
He was educated locally at the National School and later at Wesley College, Sheffield, before becoming apprenticed to a wool spinner, John Brigg.
In 1862 Smith set up in business on his own account.
He subsequently had two partners at different times, the first the young W. S. Bright Maclaren, nephew of John Bright [q.v.], the second his own younger brother Samuel.
Described by his only biographer as the ‘master spinner’, Smith was an active businessman who expanded his interests, not always wisely, across the Atlantic in Texas and Florida.
His business career, local and international, was eclipsed, however, by that of his cousin, Prince Smith, the Keighley textile-machinery manufacturer.
Smith was a leading figure in the local and national movement to promote technical education, beginning with the provision of a new Mechanics' Institute in Keighley in 1870 — he was secretary of the building committee — and continuing, after a formative visit to France, Germany, and Switzerland in 1872, with the setting up of an associated ‘trade school’, providing technical and art classes.
In the aftermath of the Franco-Prussian war and the unification of Germany Smith had already calculated that British industry, and with it the country's future, would be jeopardized unless there were a completely different and far more positive official approach to both technical and art education.
He secured some West Riding support for what came to him to be a cause, but his own town, proud of its independence in educational provision, was reluctant to set up a school board after the Education Act of 1870.
When it did so, Smith was elected at the head of the poll.
In 1881 he was made a member, the youngest, of a royal commission on technical education, chaired by (Sir) Bernhard Samuelson [q.v.]and inspired by the junior minister charged by W. E. Gladstone with education, A. J. Mundella [q.v.].
Few practical results followed, and it was not until 1889 that the first Technical Instruction Act was passed.
In the course of his continuing campaigns Smith's role began to be more fully appreciated, and in 1898, when he was knighted, he received congratulations from hundreds of his well-wishers.
Smith had a wide circle of friends who included the members of the locally influential Brigg family, Sir Isaac Holden, first MP for Keighley, John Bright, whose free-trade views he shared unreservedly, John Morley (Viscount Morley of Blackburn), Sir Henry Roscoe, and, not least, Andrew Carnegie [qq.v.], whom he considered the most remarkable man that he had ever met.
Smith became a Carnegie trustee, and it was thanks to the association between the two men that Keighley became the first town in England to acquire a new Carnegie free library.
Among the writers who influenced Smith were the Lancashire dialect poet Edwin Waugh, whose poems he liked to read aloud, and Samuel Smiles [qq.v.], who may have been the first man to interest him in technical education.
In 1912 Smith was awarded an honorary LLD by Leeds University, and in 1914 he became a freeman of Keighley.
In 1915, in difficult wartime conditions, he became Liberal MP for Keighley.
He died unmarried 16 March 1918 in London.
[Keighley Snowden,The Master Spinner , 1921.]