

Ronald M Birse
,Joseph (1819–1883), agricultural engineer, was born at Dog Dyke on the Witham river in Lincolnshire 12 July 1819, the son of John Allenby Shuttleworth of Coningsby, a boat builder, and his wife Rebecca Newton.
He was baptized Joshua.
He left school at the age of fourteen to follow the same trade, and two years later in 1835 took over the management of a boat-building yard at Lincoln which his father had acquired.
Within a few years the increased prosperity of the yard had so impressed John Shuttleworth that he turned the business over to him.
Nathaniel Clayton was working in adjoining premises as an iron founder and steam-packet owner, and in 1842 they established the firm of Clayton, Shuttleworth & Company.
Iron founding soon became their main interest, with the railway boom at first providing a rapidly expanding market.
This was followed by the start of their rise to prominence as agricultural engineers.
With some financial backing from a local firm of corn merchants and millers they began the manufacture of portable steam engines in 1845 and steam threshing machines in 1849.
They were one of the first, and certainly one of the most successful, manufacturers of steam-powered farm machinery.
They were not outstanding, however, as technical innovators, preferring simply to adopt, or in some cases adapt, the best of the available designs and put their efforts into efficient manufacture, a high standard of materials and workmanship, and competitive marketing.
At an early stage in their expansion they came to realize the opportunities presented by overseas markets, and they established an office and works in Vienna in 1857 to serve the countries of central and eastern Europe.
A decade later they developed a substantial export trade to Australia and South America.
By the time of Shuttleworth's death the firm had manufactured 19,000 portable steam engines and 17,000 threshing machines, as well as finishing machines, straw and hay elevators, and portable grinding-mills.
Shuttleworth's other business interests included at various times directorships of the Metropolitan Railway, the Great Northern Railway, the Sutton Bridge Dock Company, and the Agricultural Hall Company, and he was a valued member of the council of the Royal Agricultural Society.
He was elected a vice-president of the Agricultural Engineers Association when it was formed in 1875.
He was active also in the Volunteer Militia (forerunner of the Territorial Army), in which he rose to the rank of captain.
For many years he was a member of the town council of Lincoln and in 1858–9 was chief magistrate.
He was a JP and DL of the county of Lincoln, and in 1881 was elected high sheriff of Bedfordshire.
The local charities found in him a generous benefactor.
In 1842 Shuttleworth married Sarah Grace, daughter of Nathaniel Clayton senior and sister of his partner.
They had two sons.
His first wife died in 1849, and in 1861 he married Caroline Jane, daughter of Lt.-Col. Richard George Ellison of Boultham Hall.
They had no children.
He died at home at Hartsholme Hall, near Lincoln, 25 January 1883.
[D. J. Jeremy (ed.),
Dictionary of Business Biography , 1986;Journal of the Royal Agricultural Society of England , 2nd series, vol. xix, part i, 1883, pp. 270–6;Engineering , vol. xxxv, 1883, pp. 115–16.]
Vivian Salmon
,, or ,Francis (1619–1694), phonetician, and inventor of a universal language and a Dutch shorthand, was baptized in the Dutch church in London 8 August 1619.
His parents, Waldrave Lodwick and Judith Roussel, were married in the French church, London, on 14 May 1616, the former being described as a native of ‘Belle’(Bailleul), Flanders, and the latter as born in London.
Waldrave, a Protestant refugee, was a London merchant, Francis being his eldest surviving son.
In the introduction to his first published work, Lodwick describes himself as not a scholar but a ‘mechanick’, but his surviving library catalogue demonstrates that, even if self-educated, he was extremely well read.
He was engaged in trading abroad, in cloth and books, and by 1650 was an important member of the community associated with the London Dutch church; he was also a friend of Samuel Hartlib [q.v.], who often describes him as an ‘informant’.
By 1657 he owned a large house in rural Wandsworth; his London house, in Botolph Lane, was burned down in the fire of 1666, when he moved to Fenchurch Street.
By 1672 he was a close friend of Robert Hooke [q.v.], as the latter records in his diary; the two men met frequently to discuss linguistic matters.
In 1681 Lodwick was elected to membership of the Royal Society, and thereafter frequently acted as auditor to the council.
Lodwick published three works, leaving many others in manuscript.
In 1647 he implemented a suggestion for a universal ‘character’ made by Francis Bacon [q.v.](1605), and later by John Wilkins [q.v.]in Mercury (1641), by inventing A Common Writi ng , i.e. a system of symbols which, like Arabic numerals, represented words which could be realized in any language.
In 1652 he produced a more sophisticated system, in The Ground-work or foundation laid…for the framing of a new perfect language , in which he proposed the establishment of conceptual classes to which ‘radical’ symbols were assigned, with regular diacritics denoting subclasses.
Although little more than a sketch, his work helped inspire John Wilkins's An Essay Towards a Real Character (1668), in which Wilkins acknowledges his indebtedness to Lodwick.
His third publication was a proposal for a phonetic alphabet in which related sounds were denoted by related symbols; this appeared in the Royal Society's Philosophical Transactions (1686).
After Wilkins's death, Lodwick collaborated with John Aubrey [q.v.]and others in an unsuccessful attempt to improve the Essay .
Lodwick's unpublished manuscripts, including an innovatory Dutch shorthand, are listed in his Works (1972), all of which display originality and intelligence, but failed to find practical implementation by his successors.
Lodwick seems to have been an attractive and popular person, to judge by the entries in Hooke's diary, and he was undoubtedly modest about his qualifications and achievements.
However, he could display a hasty temper, as noted in an incident which took place in Wandsworth, and even on occasion came under suspicion of unethical behaviour.
Lodwick married first, Elizabeth, and secondly, Mary (surnames unknown), and had several children, but only one son, Simon, and possibly a daughter, Mary, survived him.
Simon too was a merchant, trading to New York, where his cousin, Charles Lodwick, formerly the master of Daniel Defoe [q.v.], became mayor.
Lodwick died 5 January 1694, and was buried in St Mary Abchurch, London.
[Vivian Salmon,The Works of Francis Lodwick , 1972; J. H. Hessels,Ecclesiae Londino-Batavae Archivum , 2 vols., 1887 and 1889; H. W. Robinson and W. Adams (eds.),
The Diary of Robert Hooke , 1935; David Abercombie, ‘Forgotten Phoneticians’,Studies in Phonetics and Linguistics , 1965, pp.45–75.]
Alan Macfarlane
,Ralph (1617–1683), diarist, was born in Roxwell, Essex, 26 January 1617, the first son and third child of John Josselin, farmer, and Anne his wife.
He was educated at Jesus College, Cambridge, where he received his BA in 1636–7 and his MA in 1640.
After several moves, in March 1641 he became vicar of Earls Colne in Essex, where he remained until his death.
Josselin's reputation is based on the detailed diary which he kept from 5 August 1644 until a few days before his death.
He was buried 30 August 1683.
Josselin was a clergyman throughout the more than forty years covered by the diary and this, above all, gave his life its shape.
The diary gives an intimate record of his ministry and of his private doubts and triumphs as a Christian.
During the years 1650–6 he was particularly interested in the promised second coming of Christ and speculated extensively on millenarianism.
From 1655 to 1656 he was especially fearful about the Quakers and records their progress in the neighbourhood.
Between 1660 and 1669 his diary illustrates the insecurities of the Restoration for a man on the borderline of Nonconformity.
His own backslidings, fears of death and damnation, attitude to neighbouring ministers, and many other subjects are vividly recorded.
Josselin gradually built up a large farm in Earls Colne, starting with a land purchase in 1646.
The diary provides a detailed description of farming life in the middle of the century: the price of commodities, state of the harvest, debts and loans, yearly accounts of his estate, the weather, manorial transfers, and farming methods.
Josselin was married 28 October 1640 to Jane, daughter of Thomas Constable of Olney, Buckinghamshire.
His wife had ten live-born children, six daughters and four sons.
There are numerous allusions to the rearing of the children, from the agonies of pregnancy and child-bearing, weaning and teething and walking, through to apprenticeship and marriage.
We also learn much of the deep but often difficult relationship of husband and wife.
Family and kinship relations in an Essex village are laid open to us through the diary.
Josselin's life as a villager, village events, epidemics, small accidents, crimes, witchcraft beliefs, fires, friendships, and conflicts are vividly recorded.
Likewise his interest in local, national, and international politics is well shown.
He served with the Parliamentary army as a chaplain on two occasions, although he also disapproved of putting the king to death.
His frequent comments on events occurring on the Continent as well as in England show how well informed and absorbed were the lower levels of the ‘political nation’ at this period.
Intimate details of Josselin's health, moving descriptions of the frequently fatal sickness of his children, and numerous comments on the epidemics which afflicted the village reveal another side of his character.
The overriding importance of death and disease in the seventeenth century have seldom found such a chronicler.
Josselin was schoolmaster of Earls Colne from 1650 to 1658 and we learn about education and about his own reading habits, as well as his theories and even his dreams.
Josselin himself does not emerge from his diary as lovable or even endearing.
His conscientious and suffering figure simply stands before us, to wonder at, pity, and, for all its frailty, respect.
He stands alongside Samuel Pepys, Oliver Heywood, James Woodforde, and Francis Kilvert [qq.v.]— the great English diarists.
[Alan Macfarlane,The Family Life of Ralph Josselin:a Seventeenth Century Clergyman , 1970;idem (ed.),
The Diary of Ralph Josselin, 1616–1683 , 1976.]
Peter Leach
,Sanderson (1716–1780), amateur architect, was born in 1716 at Radway Grange, Warwickshire, the son of Sanderson Miller, a wealthy wool merchant of Banbury, and his wife Maria, daughter of the Revd John Welchman.
For two or three years from 1734 he was an undergraduate at St Mary Hall, Oxford, where, under the influence of the principal of the college, the Jacobite Dr William King [q.v.], he developed an interest in antiquarianism and a romantic attitude to the English past.
Then, on the death of his father in 1737, he succeeded at the age of twenty-one to the Radway estate, which the latter had bought in 1712, and to the life of a cultured country gentleman.
A few years later, between 1743 and 1747, he carried out some improvements to his property, partly remodelling the modest Elizabethan house in the Gothic style and building a picturesque thatched cottage and an octagonal Gothic tower on the nearby escarpment of Edgehill; and these works at once establish Miller as an important figure in the early history of the Gothic revival.
Advancing beyond the purely decorative rococo Gothic of William Kent [q.v.], his designs reflected both the beginnings of a more scholarly approach to Gothic detail and the sentimental appeal of medieval buildings.
The tower at Radway was based on the medieval Guy's tower at Warwick Castle, but it was also intended to underline the historical associations of the place: standing on the spot where King Charles I is supposed to have raised his standard before the battle of Edgehill, it was designed to house a statue of the British hero Caractacus and was decorated with emblems of the Saxon heptarchy, and its ceremonial opening took place on the anniversary of the death of Oliver Cromwell.
The impact of the Radway buildings was immediate, and from the mid-1740s onward Miller was in much demand among a wide circle of aristocratic friends and acquaintances for architectural advice and designs.
The period of this activity was relatively short, virtually coming to an end c .1760, but during it he produced a significant body of work both in his own region of Warwickshire and Oxfordshire and further afield as well.
The two most ambitious of these projects, the Shire Hall in Warwick (1754–8) and Hagley Hall, Worcestershire (1754–60), are in a competent if conventional classical manner, the latter being based on the Palladian Houghton Hall, Norfolk; but most of his work continued to be in the Gothic style with which he had made his reputation.
His first proposals for Hagley were Gothic, while other projects included some designs for Arbury Hall, Warwickshire (c .1750–2), one of the best Gothic houses of the mid-eighteenth century, and his well-known work at Lacock Abbey, Wiltshire (1754–5); but his most characteristic products were his half-ruined mock castles — at Hagley (1747–8), Wimpole Hall, Cambridgeshire (designed 1749–51, built 1772), and Ingestre Hall, Staffordshire (c .1750, demolished)— which, developing the theme of the Radway tower, constituted pictorial embodiments of historical memory.
Of the Hagley castle, even Horace Walpole [q.v.]— who as a fellow-pioneer in the same field was in general highly critical of Miller's performances — was obliged to concede, in an oft-quoted aphorism, that it had ‘the true rust of the Barons’ wars'.
Miller's excursions into architecture were in essence a facet of his active social life — which through his patron at Hagley (George, first Baron Lyttelton, q.v.) included contact with the interlocking family ‘cousinage’ of the Lytteltons, Pitts, and Grenvilles — and like other amateur architects he made use of the assistance of professionals.
His designs for Hagley Hall were drawn out by the architect John Sanderson, the Warwick Shire Hall was executed by the well-known mason-architects William and David Hiorne, who described themselves as its ‘surveyors’ as well as its ‘builders’, and he had as his regular assistant a mason called William Hitchcox.
This regime, however, did not always guarantee a satisfactory result, as in the case of the tower he added to Wroxton church, Oxfordshire (1747–8), the top stage of which rapidly collapsed — as Walpole pointedly reported: ‘Mr Miller…unluckily once in his life happened to think rather of beauty than of the water-tables, and so it fell down the first winter’— but that does not seem to have affected his popularity.
In 1746 Miller married Susanna, daughter of Edward Trotman, gentleman, of Shelswell, Oxfordshire: they had two sons and four daughters.
In his later years he suffered from occasional bouts of insanity.
He died 23 April 1780 and was buried at Radway.
[H. M. Colvin,A Biographical Dictionary of British Architects 1600–1840 , 1978; L. Dickins and M. Stanton,An Eighteenth-Century Correspondence , 1910; A. C. Wood and W. Hawkes,Sanderson Miller of Radway , Banbury Historical Society, 1969.]
Julia J Smith
,Thomas (1637? –1674), poet and devotional writer, was born in Herefordshire c .1637.
His father, according to Anthony Wood, was a shoemaker of Hereford, but nothing further is known of his parents, or of the date and place of his birth.
He had a younger brother, Philip (1640–1723), who was chaplain to the Levant Company in Smyrna, and subsequently minister of Wimborne Minster.
The earliest record of Thomas is of his admission as a commoner at Brasenose College, Oxford, on 1 March 1653; he matriculated on 2 April 1653, and was admitted to the degree of BA on 13 October 1656, created MA on 6 November 1661, and admitted BD on 11 December 1669.
Traherne must have conformed to the religious requirements of the Commonwealth.
On 30 December 1657 he was admitted by the commissioners for the approbation of public preachers to the rectory of Credenhill in Herefordshire, with supporting certificates from some of the leading Herefordshire Presbyterian clergy.
At the Restoration, however, he sought episcopal ordination long before there was any obligation on him to do so; he was ordained deacon and priest by Robert Skinner [q.v.], bishop of Oxford, in Launton on 20 October 1660.
Although Traherne held the living of Credenhill until his death in 1674, it is not clear for how long he actually acted as minister there.
He probably kept a further period of residence at Oxford in the 1660s, and at an unknown date became domestic chaplain to Sir Orlando Bridgeman [q.v.], lord keeper of the Great Seal.
He was living in Bridgeman's house at Teddington some months before Bridgeman's death on 25 June 1674, and remained with Bridgeman's widow until his own death later in the same year.
He may have acted as minister of Teddington, but was not its incumbent.
Traherne published only one work during his lifetime, the polemical Roman Forgeries (1673); another work,Christian Ethicks (1675), entered in the Stationers' Registers shortly before his death, was published posthumously.
These works do not seem to have been widely read, and his reputation as an author now rests on his Thanksgivings , published as A Serious and Pathetical Contemplation Of the Mercies of God in 1699 ‘at the request of a Friend of the Authors’, who was perhaps the devotional writer Susanna Hopton [q.v.]; and on a number of manuscript works which have become known, in a remarkable series of discoveries, in the course of the twentieth century.
Two manuscripts, containing poems and the prose Centuries , were purchased by W. T. Brooke for a few pence from two London book-barrows in the winter of 1896–7, and were identified as Traherne's by Bertram Dobell [q.v.].
Subsequently another volume of poems, several notebooks, and a book of liturgical devotions were discovered; in 1964 the discovery of a manuscript of Select Meditations was announced; and in 1982 a large manuscript entitled Commentaries of Heaven , which had been rescued from a burning rubbish tip in south Lancashire about 1967, was identified as Traherne's.
In these works Traherne expresses his vision of the felicity for which mankind was created.
This is powerfully represented through the imagery of Eden and of childhood, but also through a lively interest in the diversity of human experience, in contemporary scientific discoveries, and in Restoration political and ecclesiastical affairs, all of which Traherne seeks to relate, often in an ingenious and idiosyncratic way, to ‘GOD, Angels and Men’.
His finest and most original writing is usually to be found in his prose, rather than his poems.
The few contemporary references to Traherne which survive all speak highly both of his learning and of his character.
Thomas Good [q.v.], master of Balliol, thought him ‘one of the most pious ingenious men that ever I was acquainted with’, while to the anonymous friend who wrote a preface to A Serious and Pathetical Contemplation , he was ‘a man of a cheerful and sprightly Temper…very affable and pleasant in his Conversation’, although he was so full of his vision of God's love and man's felicity that ‘those that would converse with him, were forced to endure some discourse upon these subjects, whether they had any sense of Religion, or not.’
As far as we know, Traherne never married; according to Wood, he led ‘a single and a devout life’.
He died in the Bridgemans' house in Teddington, where he made his nuncupative will on or about 27 September 1674, leaving all his books and his best hat to his brother Philip.
The exact date of Traherne's death is not known, but he was buried in Teddington 10 October 1674 under the reading-desk in the church.
[Anthony Wood,Athenae Oxonienses , ed.
Philip Bliss, 1813–20; H. M. Margoliouth, introduction to Thomas Traherne,Centuries, Poems, and Thanksgivings , 1958; Richard D. Jordan in Notes and Queries , vol. ccxxv, 1980, pp. 341–5; Julia J. Smith in Notes and Queries , vol. ccxxxi, 1986, pp. 25–31; J. M. Osborn in Times Literary Supplement , 8 October 1964, p. 928; Elliot Rose, ibid., 19 March 1982, p. 324; Hilton Kelliher, ibid., 14 September 1984, p. 1038; Oxford University archives; ecclesiastical and probate records.]
J M Cleary
,Robert (1560–1615), priest of the Society of Jesus, and superior of the English Mission 1609–13, was born in 1560 near Chirk, Clwyd, or in Oswestry.
In 1581 he travelled to France with Richard and Francis Edwardes of Chirkland, and he was with Richard in Rome on 6 November 1582.
He entered the Jesuit novitiate on 26 May 1583.
From 1590 he was professor of philosophy at the Roman College (now Gregorian University) and students' notes of his lectures exist in several European libraries.
He was sent back to England in 1595 and by 1605 he had set up an organization of recusant Welsh gentry, Welsh secular priests, and Jesuits (centred in Gwent and extending up the marches).
His convert, Lady Frances Morgan of Llantarnam, funded the enterprise while Jones was her chaplain.
He maintained two Jesuits in north Wales and two in south Wales, later based in the ‘college’ of St Frances Xavier at a farm called the Cwm, in Llanrothal, Herefordshire.
In 1604 he sent students to Valladolid and Douai from Shropshire, Worcestershire, Herefordshire, and Gwent, and in 1605 the sheriff of Hereford accused ‘Jones the Jesuit, the firebrand of all’ of political subversion.
On 30 March 1609 Jones became vice-prefect of the whole Jesuit mission at a time of severe government repression.
Henry Foley's Records contain forty-eight pages of his letters, which display resolute leadership.
In 1609 he completed an English translation of a treatise De Potestate Papae , but the Jesuit general refused to allow its publication.
He also wrote (in Italian) the story of the execution of Roger Cadualadr at Leominster in 1610.
In appearance he was tall, broad-faced, with a high forehead, and large eyes.
His health declined in 1611, and he laid down his office in 1613.
He died 20 August 1615 of a fall at night on his way to baptize a child.
By that date, largely thanks to his efforts, there were ten Welsh Jesuits, and fifty-seven priests in England and Wales.
[Henry Foley,Records of the English Province of the Society of Jesus , 7 vols., 1875–83, vols. iv, vi, vii; Stonyhurst MS Anglia , ii, 4;Catholic Record Society , vols. x (1911), xxx (1930), xxxvii (1940), xlix (1942);Archivum Romanum SJ , Anglia, Epp.
Gen. 1, transcripts at 114 Mount St., London; R. J. Jenkins (ed.),
Dictionary of Welsh Biography , 1959; ‘Worcester Recusant’ in Journal of the Worcestershire Catholic History Society , no. 47, June 1986.]
Rosemary T Van Arsdel
,Florence Fenwick (1854–1935), journalist, lecturer, and feminist, was born 5 November 1854 in London, the eldest in the family of two sons and one daughter of Captain John Miller, a sea captain in the merchant marine, and his wife Eleanor Fenwick Estabrook, daughter of Simon Fenwick, railway engineer.
She was privately educated, then went to Edinburgh University and passed part of the preliminary examination in medicine.
Following the failure of the attempt to get Edinburgh to grant medical degrees to women, she moved to London and qualified at the new Medical College for Women in 1873, but practised only briefly.
In 1876 she was elected to represent Hackney on the London School Board.
She served three consecutive terms from 1877 to 1885, and was noted for her fearlessness and power of debate.
Her reputation as a lecturer grew through her appearances before the London Dialectical Society and the Sunday Lecture Society from 1873 to 1883.
Beginning in the mid-1870s, she made annual lecture tours throughout England and Scotland, often speaking to audiences of several thousand people on a variety of literary and social topics.
Her work for the early suffrage campaigns also began in the mid-1870s, when she lectured widely for the cause in London, Manchester, Birmingham, and elsewhere.
It was as a pioneer woman journalist that she earned her most lasting renown, sometimes using the pseudonym ‘Filomena’.
Early in her career she contributed frequently to such journals as Fraser's Magazine ,Lett's Illustrated Household Magazine ,Belgravia , and the Governess .
In March 1886 she became a columnist for the Illustrated London News , writing the Ladies' Notes, a post which she held until 1918.
She also wrote for the Lady's Pictorial ,Women's World , the Young Woman , and the Echo , among others.
In 1890 she became editor of Outward Bound , a quarterly journal for colonists, and Homeward Bound , 1892, for those who returned.
Perhaps her greatest accomplishment came when she assumed from 1895 to 1899 the editorship and proprietorship of the Woman's Signal , one of the most influential and outspoken feminist periodicals.
She was on the staff of the London Daily News , 1902–4.
She travelled to the United States in 1893, to the world fair in Chicago, the Columbian exposition, as a foreign correspondent for the Echo , and as an official delegate to the World's Congress of Representative Women.
She visited the United States a second time in 1902, as a founding member, with Susan B. Anthony, of the International Council of Women.
Her books included The House of Life (1878);An Atlas of Anatomy (1879);Lynton Abbott's Children (1879), a novel which was published anonymously;Animal Physiology for Elementary Schools (1882);Readings in Social Economy (1883);Harriet Martineau (1884);Hughes's Natural History Readers (1884); and In Ladies' Company (1892).
She was a member of the Institute of Journalists.
In 1877 she married Frederick Alfred Ford, a stockbroker's clerk; the son of Frederick Alfred Ford, publisher.
Because her public reputation was already established, she kept her own name, henceforth being addressed as Mrs Fenwick Miller.
After her marriage attempts were made to unseat her from the London School Board because of the alleged illegality of her name.
There were two daughters of the marriage, the elder, Irene, in 1906 becoming the first woman in London to be arrested in the cause of militant feminism.
Florence Fenwick Miller died 24 April 1935 at her home in Hove.
[Frances Hays,Women of the Day : a Biographical Dictionary of Notable Contemporaries , 1885; R. T. Van Arsdel,Mrs. Florence Fenwick Miller: Feminism and the Woman's Signal, 1895–1899 , 1979; Patricia Hollis,Ladies Elect , 1987.]
David Hey
,Celia (1662–1741), traveller and author, was born 7 June 1662 in Newton Toney, near Salisbury, the daughter of Colonel Nathaniel Fiennes [q.v.](the second son of William Fiennes, first Viscount Saye and Sele, q.v.) and his second wife Frances, the daughter of Colonel Richard Whitehead of West Tytherley, Hampshire.
Her family were prominent and staunch parliamentarians and, after the Restoration, noted dissenters.
Celia had two half-brothers by her father's first marriage, namely Nathaniel (c .1637– c .1672) and William (1639–98, the third Viscount), and four sisters by the second marriage (three of whom died in infancy).
Her younger sister, Mary (1663–1737), married Sir Edmund Harrison, a London merchant who traded with Turkey.
After the death of her mother in 1691 Celia moved to London to live either with or near her sister's family.
She began to travel in order‘to regain my health by variety and change of aire and exercise’.
Her early journeys were to various southern counties, Bath, London, and Oxford.
In 1697 she made a tour of the north and of Kent and in the following year she made her ‘Great Journey to Newcastle and to Cornwall’.
During the first decade of the eighteenth century she made further journeys through some of the southern counties and about 1712 she visited Epsom, Hampton Court, and Windsor.
On some journeys she was accompanied by relations, but on her ‘Great Journey’ in 1698 she travelled on horseback with only one or two servants, staying at inns or at private houses where she had family connections.
Travelling was becoming fashionable at this time, but it was still unusual for a woman to tour the country in this way.
She began to write a journal of her tours (apparently from notes made during her journeys) in 1702.
In a prefatory note ‘To the Reader’ she claimed that her relations were the only people likely to read what she had written.
The manuscript was published in imperfect form in 1888 and fully in 1947.
She urged others to ‘spend some of their tyme in Journeys to visit their native Land, and be curious to inform themselves and make observations of the pleasant prospects, good buildings, different produces and manufactures of each place’.
She was interested in the modern rather than the ancient, preferring Nottingham to York, new country seats and their furniture, paintings, formal gardens, and waterworks to ancient houses, and contemporary manufacturing, mining, and drainage projects to antiquities.
She was a connoisseur of the relative merits of spa waters.
The sharpness of her observations on numerous aspects of contemporary life has made her journal a prime source for social and economic historians, ranking with that of Daniel Defoe [q.v.].
She died 10 April 1741 in Hackney and was buried in Newton Toney.
She never married.
[C. Morris (ed.),
The Illustrated Journeys of Celia Fiennes, c.1682–c.1712 , 1982.]
Paul Brand
(ante 1249–1301), judge, makes his first appearance in surviving records in 1270, bringing an action of trespass in the Common Bench as rector of Shotley in Suffolk.
He was probably already a clerk of Gilbert de Preston [q.v.], the chief justice of that court, and his service to Preston may go back to at least 1265.
After Preston's death he received appointment as one of the regular justices of the newly established assize circuits in 1274.
When arrangements were made in the summer of 1278 to establish two permanent circuits of the general eyre he was one of the justices appointed to the ‘northern’ circuit and he sat as a junior justice in every eyre of that circuit down to 1288.
He became chief justice of the circuit for the 1288 Dorset eyre.
Mettingham seems to have been assigned special responsibility for hearing quo warranto and related pleas on his eyre circuit, but this was certainly not the only business that he heard.
Surviving reports and other evidence show that he also sat in on the hearing of ordinary civil litigation in at least five counties.
From 1285 onwards he was also (like most of his colleagues) assigned to take assizes during vacations in one of the newly reorganized assize circuits.
Mettingham seems to have been fortunate to escape conviction during the so-called ‘State Trials’ of 1289–93.
When one complainant alleged that he had been sitting in the Common Bench while the complainant had had his proper challenges to jurors refused, the auditors of complaints simply accepted his statement that he had been sitting on the bench not as a justice but as a well-wisher of the complainant's opponent (the prior of Sempringham).
In a series of other cases from eyres where Mettingham had been one of the justices the auditors accepted his ‘record’ that he had not been sitting in the court when the case concerned was decided.
By the time these cases were heard Mettingham had replaced the disgraced Thomas de Weyland [q.v.]as chief justice of the Common Bench, a post which he held from the beginning of 1290 until the time of his death.
During this period, as the surviving reports show, Mettingham was clearly the major figure in his court, though this dominance came increasingly to be shared from the mid-1290s with his colleague William de Bereford [q.v.].
John of Mettingham was a beneficed clergyman and seems to have left no issue.
He died between the end of Trinity term and 19 September 1301, when Ralph de Hengham [q.v.]replaced him as chief justice of the Common Bench.
[Public Record Office, JUST 1/540B; mainly unprinted law reports; David Crook,Records of the General Eyre , 1982;Calendars of Patent and Close Rolls of the reign of Edward I.]
W F Deedes
,Archibald Gordon (1895–1941), author and journalist, was born 3 November 1895 in Poona, India, the younger son in a family of two sons and one daughter of William Robert Macdonell, LLD, East India merchant and chairman of the Bombay Chamber of Commerce, later a distinguished figure in Scotland, and his wife Alice Elizabeth, daughter of John Forbes White, classical scholar and patron of the arts.
He was educated at Horris Hill and Winchester, where he was a scholar and which he left after the summer term of 1914.
He served as a lieutenant in the Royal Field Artillery of the 51st Highland division in 1916–18.
It was an experience which heavily influenced his subsequent life.
After the war he worked with a Quaker mission on reconstruction in eastern Poland (1921), and on famine in Russia (1922).
Between 1922 and 1927 he was on the headquarters staff of the League of Nations Union.
In the general elections of 1923 and 1924 he stood unsuccessfully as Liberal candidate for Lincoln.
Macdonell began his career as an author in 1927 by writing detective stories, sometimes under the pseudonyms of Neil Gordon or John Cameron.
By 1933 he had produced nine of these, bearing such titles as The Seven Stabs (1927),The Professor's Poison (1928), and The Factory on the Cliff (1928).
At the same time he contributed to the London Mercury , founded in 1919 by (Sir) John Collings Squire [q.v.].
A pugnacious as well as perceptive dramatic critic, Macdonell at one point occupied twelve pages of the London Mercury with a criticism of the art of (Sir) Noel Coward [q.v.].
His comment on Private Lives offers a sample of his style: ‘Mr Coward's plot is the contrast between brilliant cosmopolitanism and stodgy Anglo-Saxondom, his standby is Infidelity and his device of stage-craft is the Bicker…’
Squire did not admire Macdonell's early fiction and advised him to write more from observation.
There followed in 1933 England Their England , a collection of satirical essays on English social and sporting life which won instant acclaim.
Macdonell's description of a village cricket match against a team of authors, most of them recognizable characters in Squire's own team, ‘The Invalids’, became required reading.
In 1934 he published another successful satirical novel,How Like an Angel , and a totally different book,Napoleon and his Marshals .
This was the product of much research, which Macdonell thought poorly rewarded financially, but the book was admired by military experts and it illustrated the range of his abilities.
A Visit to America (1935), a lesser essay in observation, followed.
Between 1933 and 1941 Macdonell produced in all eleven more books, including Lords and Masters (1936),My Scotland (1937),Autobiography of a Cad (1938), and the best of his thrillers,The Crew of the Anaconda (1940).
A talented broadcaster, he undertook in the summer of 1940 to contribute three times a week in the small hours of the morning to the BBC's short-wave service to the empire and the United States.
Part of this task, for which he was admirably suited, was to dwell on the absurdities of enemy broadcasts monitored by the BBC.
With all these gifts, lightly worn, there went a swift wit and sense of fun which delighted his friends, an unexpected tenderness towards the misfortunes of others, and high purpose gently disguised as simple enthusiasm.
He was a first-rate golfer.
In 1926 he married Mona Sabine, daughter of Harrington Mann, artist; they had one daughter.
The marriage was dissolved in 1937.
In 1940 he married Rose Paul-Schiff, a Viennese, whose family was connected with the banking firm of Warburg Schiff and came to England just before the Anschluss .
Macdonell died 16 January 1941 in Oxford.
[A. G. Macdonell,England Their England , 1942 edn. with prefatory note by Sir John Squire, and Folio Society edn., 1986, with introduction by Hugo Vickers; personal knowledge.]
Denis Evinson
,William Wilkinson (1823–1899), architect and engineer, was born 27 September 1823 at 60 Cotton Street, Poplar, the eldest of three sons (there were no daughters) of Thomas Wardell, baker, and his wife Mary Dalton.
His parents subsequently became master and matron of Poplar union workhouse.
Following a spell at sea, he served in the offices of Mr Morris, surveyor to the commissioners of London sewers, and W. F. East, an architect.
Whilst surveying land for new railways, he began measuring and drawing medieval buildings.
Simultaneously the influence of A. W. N. Pugin [q.v.]drew him to the Catholic Church, into which he was received in 1846.
Wardell designed about thirty Catholic churches, principally in London and the south-east, in a Gothic Revival style almost indistinguishable from Pugin's own, as well as presbyteries, convents, and schools.
His town churches in Southwark, Clapham, Greenwich, Commercial Road, and Brook Green rank among the finest work of the 1850s.
During these years he was elected FRIBA (1850), freeman of the City of London (1851), member of the Company of Fishmongers (1852), and associate of the Society of Civil Engineers (1858).
Owing to the state of his health, Wardell sold his practice to Messrs Hadfield and Goldie of Sheffield, and emigrated to Australia with his family in 1858.
As inspector-general of public works in Victoria from 1861, he was responsible for such undertakings as docks and harbours, as well as government buildings.
Holding also the right of private practice, he designed churches and schools in and around Melbourne, principally St Patrick's Cathedral.
His career in Melbourne ended abruptly when all principal officers were dismissed on ‘Black Wednesday’ 1878 in a government upheaval.
He then moved to Sydney, where he confined himself to private practice, designing mainly houses.
Wardell's principal contribution to his age lay in his church work.
His article in the Weekly Register (1849–50) demonstrates his concern for building within reasonable financial limits, his care for responsible historicism, and above all a strong commitment to the revived Gothic style.
Never as fanatical as Pugin, however, Wardell compromised his commitment to Gothic with Italianate designs at St Mary in Hampstead, SS Peter and Edward in Westminster, and Government House in Melbourne.
His drawings of his English work, which survive in the Mitchell Library, Sydney, demonstrate also his competence in designing such furnishings as altars, screens, fonts, and stained glass.
Despite suffering from tuberculosis, Wardell worked energetically and efficiently.
The advice of A. S. Hamilton in 1869 ‘to rest your exhausted brain' demonstrates a busy lifestyle of endless examinations, commissions, reports, surveys, and designs.
With hindsight, his dismissal in 1878 was a blessing.
Throughout these stormy years, however, he had refuted criticisms of his work with patience and gentle good manners.
Formative influences here were his happy marriage and his staunch commitment to his Catholic faith.
In 1847 he married Lucy Ann, daughter of William Butler, wine merchant, of Headington.
They had five sons and six daughters.
Wardell died at his home in Sydney 19 November 1899.
[D. I. M. McDonald, ‘William Wilkinson Wardell: Architect and Engineer’,Victorian Historical Magazine , vol. xli, no. 2, 1970;Weekly Register , 12 January 1850, pp. 389–93;Tablet , 6 January 1900, pp. 27–8; private information.]
George W Carpenter
,Timothy (1786–1850), engineer, was born 22 December 1785 in Wylam, Northumberland, the eldest of three sons and five daughters of John Hackworth, master blacksmith at Wylam colliery, and his wife Elizabeth Sanderson of Newcastle.
He went to Wylam school and at the age of fourteen was apprenticed, initially to his father, who died in the following year.
He showed a natural aptitude for mechanical construction, and on completing his apprenticeship he was appointed to his late father's post at the colliery.
There he was involved in experiments with steam locomotion.
In 1812 Hackworth and Jonathan Foster, the colliery engine-wright, were responsible for the ‘Wylam Grasshopper’ and in 1813 for the ‘Wylam Dilly’, two locomotives incorporating novel means of propulsion.
In 1816 Hackworth regretfully left Wylam colliery, because Sunday work offended his Methodist principles, and became foreman blacksmith at the nearby Walbottle colliery.
In 1825 he became locomotive superintendent, and also manager and contractor, for the Stockton and Darlington, Britain's first public railway.
Its early locomotives were unreliable, and in 1827 the owners' committee authorized Hackworth to build a new one to his own design.
The result was the ‘Royal George’, a marked advance on previous types, which established the effectiveness of the steam locomotive.
It had two vertical cylinders with direct rod drive to cast-iron wheels with shrunk-on tyres of wrought iron, the first of their type; most importantly, it pioneered the discharge of exhaust steam through a converging nozzle blast pipe, in the chimney, greatly increasing combustion intensity and steam production.
It was also the first to use controlled pre-heating of boiler feed-water.
Twelve similar locomotives, with further improvements, were built.
In 1830 Hackworth built the ‘Globe’, which had inside cylinders and crank axle, and a boiler with transverse water tubes running through the main flue — a forerunner of the Galloway patent boiler.
In 1840 Hackworth left the Stockton and Darlington Railway to concentrate on his own engineering business, conducted from new workshops at New Shildon, where locomotive, marine, and industrial engines and boilers were built.
Hackworth was one of the great pioneers of the steam locomotive and the eminent railway engineer, D. K. Clark, stated that no single individual had, up to the year 1830, done so much for the improvement of the locomotive.
He had the reputation of a kindly man, much respected by those who worked for him.
He was elected to the British Association for the Advancement of Science.
His ‘Sanspareil’, which competed unsuccessfully in the Rainhill locomotive trials of 1829, instituted by the directors of the London and Manchester Railway and won by the ‘Rocket’ of Robert Stephenson [q.v.], gave excellent service until 1844 and then became an exhibit at the Science Museum, London.
In 1813 Hackworth married Jane Golightly, who shared his devout Methodism.
They had three sons and six daughters; the eldest son, John Wesley Hackworth (1820–1891) carried on the business after his father's death, 7 July 1850, at his home in Shildon, county Durham.
[Wylam and its Railway Pioneers , 1975; Robert Young,Timothy Hackworth and the Locomotive , 1923; Joseph Tomlinson, presidential address 1890, in Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers , vol. xli; Daniel Kinnear Clark,Railway Machinery , 1855.]
Ronald M Birse
,Percy Sinclair (1867–1899), aeronautical pioneer, was born in Bath 16 January 1867, the youngest in the family of three sons and two daughters of Thomas Webb Pilcher, formerly curator of the British Museum picture gallery in Rome, and his second wife Sophia Robinson, a ‘very young and energetic Scottish lady’.
In 1874 Pilcher's father died and Sophia took her four surviving children (one son had died in childhood) to Celle, near Hanover in Germany, where she died in 1877.
Thomas David Pilcher, the head of the family at nineteen, brought his sisters and brother back to England and sent them to school.
In 1880 Pilcher entered the Royal Navy as a cadet.
In 1887 he was allowed to resign at his own request.
He went to Glasgow and began an apprenticeship in the engineering department of Randolph Elder, shipbuilders of Govan.
For a short time in 1890 he attended classes at University College London as an unmatriculated student.
In the same year he published Gliding , which was reprinted as no. 5 of the ‘Aeronautical Classics’ in 1910.
He then worked for eighteen months in the Southampton naval works before returning to Glasgow late in 1891 as an assistant lecturer in naval architecture and marine engineering at the university, and it was soon after this that his intensive study of the design of bird-like gliders began.
In 1895 he began to build his first full-size glider, the Bat ; it had pronounced dihedral, and was fitted with a rudder but no tailplane.
In April 1895 he discussed the construction of the Bat with Otto Lilienthal, the German hang-gliding pioneer, and learned a great deal about the practical problems of controlling hang-gliders in the air.
Pilcher's first trials with the Bat in the summer of 1895 showed that Lilienthal had been right to insist that a horizontal tail surface was essential, and after modifications Pilcher succeeded in making a number of short downhill glides, but the dihedral angle was still too great for lateral stability.
The goal for which he was striving was clearly shown in his remarkable patent of 1896, which described the world's first practical design for a powered aeroplane developed from gliders which had actually flown.
In the winter of 1895–6 he built another machine, the Hawk , equipped with the world's first sprung-wheeled undercarriage, in which, often with the assistance of a towed take-off, he made many ‘flights’ including his record glide of some 750 feet on 20 June 1897.
By 1899 he had completed and tested a 4-hp engine weighing only 40 lb. and had built a triplane in which to mount it.
At a demonstration on 30 September 1899, at Stanford Hall near Market Harborough, he flew Hawk , but crashed to the ground.
Pilcher was severely injured and never regained consciousness; he died two days later, 2 October 1899, at Stanford Hall.
He was buried at Brompton cemetery in London.
He was unmarried.
Had Pilcher lived he might have achieved proper powered, sustained, and controlled flight before the Wright brothers did so in December 1903.
[P. Jarrett,Another Icarus: Percy Pilcher and the Quest for Flight , 1987; C. H. Gibbs-Smith,Aviation: an Historical Survey from its Origins to the End of World War II , 1970, 2nd edn. 1985.]
M R D Foot
,Violette Reine Elizabeth (1921–1945), secret agent, was born in Paris 26 June 1921, the second child and only daughter in the family of five children of Charles George Bushell, a regular soldier, and his wife Reine Blanche Leroy, a dressmaker from Pont-Rémy, Somme, France.
He held various jobs in France and England before settling in 1932 in Brixton as a second-hand motor-car dealer.
From her mother's family Violette picked up fluent French, spoken with an English accent.
She left the LCC school in Stockwell Road, Brixton, at fourteen to work as a shop assistant.
She was under five feet five inches tall, but strikingly good-looking, with dark hair and eyes and vivacious manners.
She married in Aldershot, 21 August 1940, Étienne Michel René Szabo, a thirty-year-old Frenchman of Hungarian descent from Marseilles, who had fought in Norway with the French Foreign Legion and elected to join General de Gaulle's nascent Free French forces.
He was soon posted to north Africa, and never met their only child, a daughter born 8 June 1941.
He died 27 October 1942 from wounds received the previous day in battle.
To revenge him, his widow joined the independent French section of the Special Operations Executive in October 1943.
During the usual paramilitary, parachute, and security training it emerged that she was an admirable shot.
She parachuted twice into occupied France, each time as courier to Philippe Liewer, an experienced agent.
Her first mission began 5–6 April 1944.
They found that the Gestapo had broken up Liewer's former group of saboteur friends between Rouen and Le Havre; they returned to England by light aircraft on 30 April.
Between her first and second missions she was commissioned an ensign in the First Aid Nursing Yeomanry.
She and Liewer returned to France 7–8 June 1944 to set up a new group of resisters between Limoges and Périgueux.
On 10 June she and two companions, in a motor car, encountered a German roadblock at Salon-la-Tour, some thirty miles south-east of Limoges.
Both sides opened fire.
Violette, armed only with a sten sub-machine-gun, covered her companions' retreat through standing corn for twenty minutes until she had no more ammunition, and was taken prisoner.
She said nothing she should not have done under interrogation.
On 8 August, handcuffed to a neighbour on a train bound for Germany, she crawled round offering water to her fellow prisoners while the train was under attack by the RAF.
She was put in Ravensbrück concentration camp, whence she went with two SOE colleagues, Lilian Rolfe and Denise Bloch, on a working party at Torgau.
They were then sent on a much fiercer one, some sixty miles eastward, at Klein Königsberg.
Even her tremendously high spirits were lowered by its regime.
Her companions returned from it hardly able to stand; she was not much sturdier.
About 27 January 1945, shortly after their return to Ravensbrück, all three were shot dead.
She was awarded a French croix de guerre in 1944, and a posthumous George Cross in 1946.
[R. J. Minney,Carve her Name with Pride , 1956; M. R. D. Foot,SOE in France , 1968 edn.; private information.]
William Ravenhill
,Joel (1650–1705), chart-maker, surveyor, and cartographer, was baptized in Holy Trinity parish, Hull, 31 October 1650, the younger child and only son of Thomas Gascoyne, master mariner.
The family was of some eminence in Hull and especially in the Hull Trinity House.
Joel Gascoyne was apprenticed for a period of seven years from 21 October 1668 to John Thornton.
Thornton was one of a group of manuscript chart-makers, who, since the early seventeenth century, had plied their trade as members of the Drapers' Company in shops lining the streets and alleys down-river from the Tower of London.
In 1675 Gascoyne established himself in business as a chart-maker at ‘The Signe of the Platt neare Wapping Old Stayres three doares below the Chappell’.
As a full member of the Drapers' Company and with apprentices indentured to him he produced manuscript and engraved charts.
He built up a considerable reputation in chart-making, his advice being sought in 1680 and again in 1685 by Samuel Pepys [q.v.], secretary to the Admiralty.
Gascoyne's last payment of dues to the Drapers' Company was recorded in February 1689 and from this date his energies were directed mainly, but not exclusively, towards land surveying.
In 1691 Gascoyne mapped the estates of James Cecil, third Earl of Salisbury [q.v.]; the following year he mapped Sayes Court for John Evelyn [q.v.], and in 1692 he was directed by Samuel Travers, surveyor of land revenue to King William and Queen Mary, to make a survey of the ‘Mannor of East Greenwich in Kent’ following the grant by the monarchs of ‘the house at Greenwich to be a hospital for wounded seamen’.
Gascoyne's most important work was done in Cornwall.
He produced two large atlases of estate maps; the Stowe Atlas of thirty-three manuscript maps on vellum, detailing estates owned by the Grenville family around Kilkhampton, and the Lanhydrock Atlas of four large volumes containing 258 manuscript maps on vellum, compiled between 1694 and 1699, of properties scattered widely over the county belonging to the Robartes family.
At the same time Gascoyne took the opportunity of surveying the whole of Cornwall; as a result of this new field-work a map, dedicated to Charles Bodville Robartes, second Earl of Radnor and lord lieutenant of Cornwall, was published on 27 March 1699; it is on what was for the period the large scale of almost one inch to the mile.
In 1700 Gascoyne issued proposals to produce a similar map for Devon but, probably through lack of support, this did not materialize and he returned to London.
He continued surveying for the Earl of Radnor in Oxfordshire and for the Earl of Salisbury in Hertfordshire, among others.
Between 1702 and 1703 he surveyed the parish of Stepney, producing manuscript and printed maps of the individual ‘hamlets’.
Joel Gascoyne died in London 13 February 1705 leaving a wife, Elizabeth.
He was undoubtedly a pioneer in his specifications for county maps and initiated the eighteenth-century remapping of England on large scales.
[W. Ravenhill, ‘Joel Gascoyne, a Pioneer of Large-scale County Mapping’,Imago Mundi , vol. xxvi, 1972, pp. 60–70.]
Michael De-la-Noy
, Sir Hugh Stevenson (1874–1952), composer and conductor, was born in Glasgow 23 February 1874, the second son and third in the family of four sons and two daughters of James Roberton, founder of the family firm of undertakers, James Roberton & Son, and his wife Mary Sim.
He was educated in Glasgow, trained in the family business, and at the age of twenty-one was appointed general manager of the funeral department of the Glasgow Tramway & Omnibus Company.
But, inspired by his mother, an untrained singer who knew hundreds of folk songs, he exhibited instinctive musical gifts from an early age, conducting a group of children when he was ten.
As a composer and conductor he was entirely self-taught, gaining experience by singing in and directing church choirs.
In 1901 he was appointed conductor of the Toynbee Musical Association, a mixed-voice choir attached to a men's social club, and in 1906 he founded the Glasgow Orpheus Choir, with which his name became indelibly linked for the rest of his life.
Within two years the choir was booked to sing at the Queen's Hall in London, and a royal command performance soon followed at Balmoral.
In addition to the traditional songs of Scotland, the Glasgow Orpheus Choir gave early performances of most of the part-songs of Sir Edward Elgar [q.v.]and included in their programmes music by Bach, Brahms, and Roman Catholic and Greek Orthodox liturgical music.
Roberton published some 300 pieces of his own, and his work became an integral part of the choir's programmes.
They included Songs of the Isles (1937), based on Highland airs, a Concert Edition of Scottish Airs , and his best-known part-song anthem All in the April Evening .
In 1911 he founded the Glasgow Music Festival and in 1921 he was one of the founders of the British Federation of Music Festivals.
He became well known as a music festival adjudicator, working in Canada every alternate year between 1924 and 1938, and he took the Glasgow Orpheus Choir on tours to Canada, the USA, and half a dozen European countries.
Roberton's interests extended to chamber music, and for some years his concerts featured visits from the London String Quartet and the Lener String Quartet.
Roberton wrote two plays, published as Kirsteen (1922); a collection of humorous sketches,Curdies (1931); and Choir Singing (1925).
In 1951 he took on the vice-presidency of the newly formed Musician's Organization for Peace.
He had always been a socialist and a pacifist, a brave position for a man in public life to adopt at the time, and he and his colleagues paid a heavy price for his principles when in 1940 the BBC banned the Glasgow Orpheus Choir from the air waves.
This outrageous action became the cause of a debate in Parliament, leading to one of (Sir) Winston Churchill's most astute and amusing comments: he did not see, he said, why being a pacifist should make a man play flat.
The ban was rescinded.
In 1951 Roberton decided he could no longer provide the dynamic leadership needed to maintain the choir's international reputation, and stepped down.
As a result, the Glasgow Orpheus Choir, so totally identified throughout its life with just one man, ceased to exist.
Roberton was knighted in 1931.
From Aberdeen University he received an honorary LLD in 1951.
He married firstly, in 1895, Joan, daughter of Donald McGillivray, and secondly, in 1909, Helen, daughter of John Birkmyre, fisherman.
There were two daughters and four sons by the first marriage, and three sons by the second.
Roberton died 7 October 1952 in Glasgow.
[Hugh S. Roberton,Prelude to the Orpheus , 1946;The Times , 8 October 1952;Musical Times , November 1952; Harry M. Willsher in Grove's Dictionary of Music and Musicians , 5th edn., ed.
Eric Blom, 1954; private information.]
K Fine
,Arthur Norman (1914–1969), philosopher, was born 4 December 1914 in Masterton, New Zealand, the only child of Elizabeth Munton Rothesay Teague (who died shortly after his birth) and Norman Henry Prior, medical doctor, who remarried shortly after his wife's death, and had two other sons and a daughter.
He went to Wairarapa High School in Masterton, and then to Otago University, where he obtained a BA in 1935 and MA (second class) in 1936.
During 1937 he was an assistant lecturer at Otago.
From 1938 to 1940 he was in England; he returned to New Zealand in 1940, working at various jobs until 1942, when he joined the NZRAF, in which he spent three years.
From 1946 to 1952 he was first lecturer and then senior lecturer in the department of philosophy and psychology at the University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand, and was professor of philosophy there from 1952 to 1958.
In 1959 he moved to England to become professor of philosophy at the University of Manchester.
From 1966 to 1969 he was a fellow of Balliol College, Oxford, and had just been appointed to a readership at the time of his death.
He was John Locke lecturer at Oxford, 1955–6, and Flint professor of philosophy at UCLA, California, 1965–6.
He was elected FBA in 1963.
From 1960 to his death he was an editor of the Journal of Symbolic Logic .
Prior worked in many fields.
His early research was in moral and religious philosophy, two interests which never left him.
Later, he turned to a variety of topics within logic and philosophy: modal and many-valued logic; the logic of entailment and of questions; the paradoxes; the Polish school of reism; action theory; ontology; and intentionality.
His work was always informed by a strong historical sense, and he made distinguished contributions to the history of both logic and philosophy.
However, his main achievement concerned the logic and metaphysics of tense: he succeeded both in putting tense logic on a firm foundation, and in making plausible the view that reality was essentially tensed.
His Time and Modality (1957), which came out of the John Locke lectures, established tense logic as a serious discipline, and his subsequent publications elaborated the technical and philosophical implications of his approach.
His work was significant not only within philosophy and logic, but also within linguistics and computer science.
He had apparently endless energy, producing throughout his career a steady stream of pamphlets, reviews, papers, and books.
His books included Logic and the Basis of Ethics (1949);Formal Logic (1955);Past, Present and Future (1967); and Papers on Time and Tense (1968).
After his death there appeared Objects of Thought (1971),The Doctrine of Propositions and Terms (1976), and Papers in Logic and Ethics (1976), all of them edited by P. T. Geach and A. J. P. Kenny; and Worlds, Times and Selves , by A. N. Prior and K. Fine (1979).
His philosophical and logical correspondence and papers were deposited in the Bodleian Library, Oxford.
In 1937 he married Claire, daughter of Walter Sydney Hunter, solicitor, of Riverton, New Zealand.
They were divorced in 1943.
There were no children.
In 1948 he married Mary Laura, daughter of Frank Howitt Wilkinson, a Presbyterian minister, of Timaru, New Zealand; they had a son and a daughter.
Prior's intellectual energies still left him time for his family and for a wide circle of friends, colleagues, and pupils.
He was always happy to discuss a new idea, often (with the aid of a suitable beverage) late into the night.
He died suddenly, 7 October 1969, in Trondheim while on a lecture tour in Norway.
[Olav Flo, ‘Bibliography of the Philosophical Writings of A. N. Prior’,Theoria , vol. xxxvi, part 3, 1970, pp. 189–213; A. J. P. Kenny in Proceedings of the British Academy , vol. lvi, 1972;Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic , 1971;Australasian Journal of Philosophy , 1971; private correspondence.]
W D Rubinstein
,Richard Austin (1862–1943), detective-story writer, was born 11 April 1862 at 27 Thayer Street, in Marylebone, London, the youngest of five children (four of them sons) of Richard Freeman, a journeyman tailor who rose to become the manager of a bespoke tailoring business, and his wife Ann Maria Dunn.
Virtually nothing is known of Freeman's early years; he shrouded his early life in great mystery and even the details of his secondary schooling — which apparently took place at a boarding-school in north London — remained unknown to his closest relatives.
On leaving school, he worked in a chemist's shop and he later qualified as an apothecary (LSA) in 1886.
At eighteen he entered Middlesex Hospital, qualifying as MRCS in 1886.
Newly married and impecunious, Freeman entered the Colonial Service as assistant colonial surgeon in Accra on the Gold Coast, where he landed in June 1887, remaining for four years.
The Gold Coast was notable for the high mortality rate suffered by Europeans, and in 1891 he contracted black-water fever and was invalided home.
Freeman's continuing ill health prevented the establishment of a successful medical practice in London, and in 1896 he retired to Broadstairs to become a writer.
From 1902 he lived in Gravesend, where he both wrote books and practised medicine.
In 1902 Freeman became the co-author of the first of his fictional works to become well known,The Adventures of Romney Pringle , written under the pseudonym of Clifford Ashdown, and the fruit of Freeman's collaboration with the physician John James Pitcairn.
In 1907, now working on his own, Freeman produced the first of the Doctor Thorndyke stories, the novel The Red Thumb Mark , whose plot revolved around the ‘forgery’ of a set of fingerprints by an ingenious mechanical device.
Thorndyke, both a barrister and physician, was the first of the fictional ‘scientific detectives’.
In 1912 Freeman published a new series of Thorndyke short stories in Pearson's magazine, starting with ‘The Case of Oscar Brodski’, which made secure his important place in detective fiction.
‘Brodski’ was the first ‘inverted’detective story ever written — that is, one in which the identity of the criminal is known to the reader at the outset and the plot concerns the efforts of the detective to ascertain his identity.
Between 1907 and 1942 Freeman produced forty Thorndyke short stories and twenty-one Thorndyke novels, to great critical acclaim.
The best stand comparison with those of Sir Arthur Conan Doyle [q.v.].
After World War I (in which he served as a captain in the Royal Army Medical Corps, stationed in Maidstone) Freeman increasingly became involved in the eugenics movement, producing a lengthy work on the ills of society,Social Decay and Regeneration , in 1921.
He believed that machinery and urban life had ruined modern life, and advocated what he termed the ‘voluntary segregation of the fit’ to live and breed in a utopian community of farmers and skilled craftsmen.
Freeman was closely associated with the Eugenics Society from World War I until the end of his life.
In mature life Freeman was a large, distinguished-looking man with a walrus moustache; he was noted for his humour and self-effacement.
In 1887 he married Annie Elizabeth (died 1948), daughter of Thomas Edwards, a master plumber of St Pancras Road, London.
They had two sons.
Freeman died at his home at Windmill Street in Gravesend, Kent, 28 September 1943.
[Norman Donaldson,In Search of Dr. Thorndyke , 1971; Oliver Mayo,R. Austin Freeman: the Anthropologist at Large , 1980; Chris Steinbrunner and Otto Penzler,Encyclopedia of Mystery and Detection , 1976, pp. 157–9, 387–8; ‘Charles Dickens, R. Austin Freeman and the Spirit of London’, in W. D. Rubinstein (ed.),Élites and the Wealthy in Modern British History , 1987.]
Michael Wheeler
,John Frederick (1804/5–1890), novelist, was the son of George Smith, manager of the Norwich Theatre circuit.
The date and place of his birth, and the early years of his Bohemian adult life, remain obscure, although it is known that he worked as an actor in England and travelled widely on the Continent.
Partly educated by a Jesuit, he spent some years in Rome, and rendered services to Pope Gregory XVI, but later he left the Roman Catholic Church.
Having previously written some plays and two novels —The Jesuit (1832) and The Prelate (1840)— his break came when he returned from a continental tour in 1849 to write for the London Journal .
Smith raised the Journal 's circulation to 100,000 copies that year, first with his short story ‘Marianne, a Tale of the Temple’ and then with instalments of his most ambitious novel,Stanfield Hall .
Subsequently published as a three-decker (1888–9), the novel traces the fortunes of the Stanfield family from the middle ages to the Restoration, and combines historical romance, influenced by Sir Walter Scott [q.v.], with anachronistic treatment of Victorian inventions.
Minnigrey (1851–2), illustrated by (Sir) John Gilbert [q.v.], is said to have increased sales of the London Journal to half a million copies, for which newsagents had to send special wagons to the station.
Other novels include Amy Lawrence, the Freemason's Daughter (1851),Woman and her Master (1854),The City Banker (1856),Milly Mogue (1859),Warp and Weft (1863), and Sir Bernard Gaston (1867).
When Smith was enticed away to Cassell's Illustrated Family Paper in 1855 he ended his current story by blowing up all the main characters on a Mississippi steamboat.
He returned to the London Journal , however, ten years later.
Smith's habit was to write in the printing office itself.
He would closet himself with a bottle of port and a cigar or pipe, read the end of the previous instalment, and then write the next, drawing his fee when he handed over the text.
He raised the tension from episode to episode until the mill girls of the north and midlands had to buy their own copies rather than waiting to borrow one.
But neither the formulaic quality of his fiction (virtue, for example, is always rewarded) nor the sensationalist action of the weekly instalments was suited to the form of the novel.
Although for a time earning the salary of a parliamentary under-secretary and writing thrilling romances of fashionable life, Smith lived quietly in a Bloomsbury lodging-house, cut off from society through his deafness.
Later in life he moved to America, where England's most popular novelist of the mid-nineteenth century died in obscurity and want, in March (before 15 March) 1890, in New York.
He was unmarried.
[Athenaeum , 15 March 1890; Frank Jay,Peeps into the Past (extracts from London Journal ), 2 vols., 1919–21;Times Literary Supplement , 25 December 1930; Louis James,Fiction for the Working Man, 1830–50 , 1963.]
A K Newmark
,Rudolph (1848–1920), industrial chemist, was born 14 January 1848 in Darmstadt, the second of five children of Simon Messel, banker.
After his father died in 1859 he was sent to a Huguenot school in Friedrichsdorf.
He attended the Federal Polytechnic in Zurich, then he studied under Emil Erlenmeyer in Heidelberg, and finally received a D.Sc.
studying chemistry under Adolf Strecker in Tübingen.
In 1870 he went to Manchester and became assistant first to J. C. Calvert and then to (Sir) Henry Roscoe [q.v.].
At the outbreak of the Franco-Prussian war some months later he was recalled to Germany; he served as a stretcher-bearer in the army of the Loire and was wounded.
After his recovery he returned to England, whee he remained for the rest of his life, becoming a naturalized Englishman.
Although he spoke English fluently he never completely mastered it nor lost his guttural accent.
He became assistant to W. S. Squire of Dunn, Squire & Co. at Silvertown in Essex.
Shortly afterwards, Squire formed Squire, Chapman & Co., taking Messel with him.
Messel developed a form of the contact or catalytic process for the manufacture of fuming sulphuric acid, in great demand as a raw material in the dyestuffs industry.
The key to the process was the catalytic combination of pure sulphur dioxide and oxygen gases, achieved by passing them over platinized pumice.
One of Messel's important contributions was his study of the catalytic reaction and the poisoning of the platinum catalyst.
The process was patented by Squire in 1875, and Squire and Messel described and demonstrated it before the Chemical Society the following April.
Clemens Winkler in Germany simultaneously developed a similar process, but acknowledged the independence of Messel's work.
In 1878 Messel succeeded Squire as managing director of the firm which became Spencer, Chapman & Messel Ltd.
He resigned in 1915, due to ill health.
He was a founder member of the Society of Chemical Industry (1881), and became its foreign secretary in 1910, remaining so for a number of years, and president in 1911–12 and 1914.
His presidential address in New York dwelt on the importance of communication between science and industry.
He was elected FRS in 1912.
He was a vice-president of the Chemical Society (1906–9) and was a member of the board of studies in chemistry at the University of London, and the governing body of the Imperial College of Science and Technology, London.
Messel remained a bachelor and lived in the works at Silvertown until he retired.
A modest and sincere man, his indefatigable hard work and innate sense of justice made him popular with his workforce.
He was in great demand socially and became an admired figure at the Savage Club.
He died in London 18 April 1920.
He left four-fifths of his residuary estate to the Royal Society and the remainder to the Society of Chemical Industry, stipulating that the capital should be kept intact and the income used to encourage scientific research.
In 1921 the Society of Chemical Industry instituted the Messel medal, its senior award given every second year.
[The Times , 20 April 1920; obituaries in Proceedings of the Royal Society , vol. cx, 1926, and Nature , vol. cv, 1920.]
John Harvey
,Hugh (c. 1330–1411), London carpenter, was probably the son of William Herland (died 1375), with whom he impressed carpenters in 1360 for work at Westminster Palace and the Tower of London.
In 1364 Hugh was granted wages of 8d. a day when working at Westminster.
On 10 October 1366 he was granted £6 13s. 4d. a year for life on account of his long service and a small house by the palace for keeping his tools and moulds, and in 1368 and 1370 he had grants of the pesage of wools at Queenborough, Kent.
On William Herland's death in 1375 he received the office of disposer of the king's works of carpentry at £18 5s. a year and a robe.
Next year he supervised works at Havering manor in Essex.
After Edward III's death Herland was regranted the pesage of wools at Queenborough, and in 1378 received also the pesage at Sandwich and was appointed carpenter and controller of works at Rochester Castle.
Appointed in March 1379 one of the king's master carpenters, in 1380 he was charged with works at Leeds Castle, Kent, though he continued at Rochester until 1387.
At this time he also impressed fifty carpenters for service in Brittany, and worked on Portchester Castle, Hampshire.
In 1383 he surrendered his post as a master carpenter because ‘verging on old age’, but his fees and robe were continued.
With the masons Henry Yevele and William Wynford [qq.v.]he entered into a contract for repairs at Carisbrooke Castle (Isle of Wight) in 1384.
From about 1380 Master Hugh was in charge of the timber-work for New College, Oxford, and from 1387 he also worked for Bishop William of Wykeham [q.v.]at Highclere, Hampshire.
In 1388–95 he also worked for Wykeham at Bishop's Waltham.
With Yevele and Wynford he was put in charge of repairs at Winchester Castle in 1390, and also at Canterbury Castle.
From 1387 onwards he supervised the carpentry of Winchester College, though his home was in Upchurch in Kent when in 1390, with his wife Joan, he bought large property in Kingston upon Thames, and also took a sixty-year lease of the Bishop's Hall there from 18 October 1392.
Herland's last and greatest work, the new roof of hammer-beam construction for Westminster Hall, started in January 1394 and continued until shortly after 1400: Master Hugh was both master carpenter and controller.
Notwithstanding this heavy responsibility, Herland was still one of the masters charged with repairs at Winchester Castle, and in 1398 was to impress labour for making a new harbour at Great Yarmouth.
In 1400 he was put on a commission to investigate the repair of the timber bridge over the Thames in Kingston, and in 1402 was entertained to supper by the warden of Winchester College.
At the end of 1404 he retired from his position as king's chief carpenter, but his pensions were paid until 18 October 1411.
Hugh's son Thomas Herland succeeded to the lease of Bishop's Hall in Kingston, and in 1413–14 entertained King Henry V there.
[J. Harvey,English Mediaeval Architects , 1984.]
Adrian Forty
,Charles Harrison (1851–1928), architect, was born 13 May 1851 in Birkenhead, Cheshire, the son of Jackson Townsend, solicitor, and his wife Pauline, the daughter of Felix Yaniewicz, a well-known Polish violinist.
He had five brothers and one sister.
He was educated at Birkenhead School.
From 1867 to 1872 he was articled to the architect Walter Scott of Liverpool.
From 1873 to 1875 he was a draughtsman in the office of Charles Barry, and in 1875 he joined E. R. Robson's office at the recently formed London School Board.
Also in 1875 Townsend made his first tour to the Continent; throughout his life he made regular visits to Europe, especially to northern Italy, where he developed a lifelong interest in architectural mosaics.
In 1877 he started practice on his own in London, and between 1884 and 1886 was in partnership with T. Lewis Banks.
When the partnership was dissolved he moved his office to Great George Street, Westminster, where it remained for the rest of his life.
In 1888 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Institute of British Architects, and also the Art Workers' Guild, of which he was to be an enthusiastic and devoted member, and which provided his main circle of friends; he was elected master of the guild for the year 1903.
Until 1892 Townsend's practice was made up of minor domestic and ecclesiastical work, but in that year he won the competition for the design of the Bishopsgate Institute, the first of the three outstanding public buildings that were to make his reputation.
In 1897 he was commissioned to design the Whitechapel Art Gallery and the Horniman Museum in south London, both of which were completed in 1901.
These were exceptionally original buildings, and belonged to no recognizable architectural tradition.
Writing in 1900, the German architect and critic Hermann Muthesius identified as one of the most significant developments in European architecture the tendency of certain British architects towards what he described as a ‘modern’ style, which referred to no tradition, and created a new architectural language of space and mass.
Foremost amongst the representatives of this new school he placed Townsend, describing him, with Charles Voysey [q.v.], as ‘the prophets of the new style’.
Although the unquestionable and striking originality, particularly of the last two buildings, made this a valid assessment in 1900, Townsend never again produced anything of equal quality.
After 1901 his practice was limited to relatively uninteresting private houses in southern England.
Why he did not sustain the promise of the works of the 1890s is not clear, though it is certainly connected with the change to a much more conservative and less experimental architectural climate in Britain in the 1900s, when there was a revival of baroque and French Renaissance architecture; it may also be to do with Townsend's own equivocal and confused attitude towards the value of architectural traditions.
In 1915 Townsend was appointed assistant director of the London county council's civic survey, a scheme to employ architects deprived of work by the war in the collection of social and physical data on the structure of the city.
In 1917 he was employed as a Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve lieutenant in Avonmouth on the dazzle-painting of ships.
In 1918 he virtually ceased to practise, and in the early 1920s moved to live with his sister in Northwood, Middlesex, where he died 26 December 1928.
He never married and had no children.
He is said to have been convivial, widely knowledgeable, with a fertile imagination and a whimsical sense of humour.
His most regular companions were artists, several of whom, such as Walter Crane, Sir George Frampton [qq.v.], and Robert Anning Bell collaborated with him on his buildings.
[Alastair Service, ‘Charles Harrison Townsend’,Edwardian Architecture and its Origins , 1975, pp. 162–82; British Architectural Library.]
Peter Leach
,James (c. 1751–1820), architect, was probably born in Brecon in south Wales c .1751.
In 1770 at the age of nineteen he went to Italy, and a volume of drawings of friezes, urns, and classical ornaments which he made in Rome is preserved in the Mellon Collection: he later told the diarist, Joseph Farington [q.v.], that he had become well acquainted with Piranesi, and that while abroad he had kept a journal written in Italian but had subsequently destroyed it because he was embarrassed by its poor linguistic quality.
Returning to England in December 1772, he exhibited at the Society of Artists from 1774 to 1778 and his first recorded employment — minor work in London — belongs to this period; then in 1779–80 he published a volume of Original Designs in Architecture, Consisting of Plans…for Villas, Mansions, Town Houses , which was evidently intended as an advertisement for his talents, and thereafter he developed a modestly successful practice mainly as a country-house architect in the south-east of England.
In 1797 he published a second volume of designs which, in contrast to the first, included a significant proportion of executed projects, the product of this practice.
In 1792, however, Lewis was elected surveyor to Christ's Hospital and in the following year he was appointed to the corresponding post at the Bridewell and Bethlehem Hospitals; and from then on these institutional responsibilities appear to have formed the principal element in his career.
For Christ's Hospital he designed the new grammar school (1793, demolished)— receiving a gratuity of 100 guineas ‘for his great attention during the building’ because he had charged at a rate of only 2½ per cent instead of the usual 5 per cent— and additions to the school in Hertford (1800), and also made designs for various ambitious unexecuted schemes for redeveloping the main buildings.
Regarding the Bethlehem Hospital, in 1810 a competition was held for designs for a new hospital in St George's Fields, Southwark; but in the event none of the entries which gained the premiums was actually adopted, and instead Lewis was instructed to incorporate their best features in a new design of his own.
The result, erected in 1812–15, was Lewis's largest undertaking; but his best work lies in the products of his private practice, in the series of houses such as Bletchingdon Park, Oxfordshire (1782), Eydon Hall, Northamptonshire (1788–9), Lavington Park, Sussex (1790–4) and Hackthorn Hall, Lincolnshire (1793–5), which are elegant neo-classical versions of the Palladian villa form, with interior decoration in the manner of Robert Adam [q.v.].
Lewis was one of the fifteen original members of the Architects' Club, founded in 1791.
Persistent ill health induced him to give up the surveyorship at Christ's Hospital in January 1816 and that of the Bethlehem Hospital the following year.
To his two sons and two daughters he left a ‘good fortune’, and he died in Powis Place, London, 16 July 1820.
[H. M. Colvin,A Biographical Dictionary of British Architects 1600–1840 , 1978; W. Papworth (ed.),
An Encyclopaedia of Architecture , 4 edns., 1852–88; J. Greig (ed.),
The Farington Diary , 1922.]
Paul Brand
(c. 1210–1274), lawyer and judge, was probably born in or before 1210 in Buckinghamshire.
His first appearance in the records is in 1231 when he was appointed to act as an attorney in a Buckinghamshire case.
By the late 1230s he had become one of a small group of professional lawyers practising in the Common Bench in Westminster.
Such men spoke in court on behalf of litigants and also stood surety for them when required.
They also performed similar functions for litigants in the eyre when the Common Bench was not in session.
In 1247 Laurence del Brok became the first professional lawyer to be retained by the king.
Thereafter he received an annual salary of twenty pounds a year each year down to 1262 and can be traced acting for the king in litigation until 1267.
The main focus of his activity on the king's behalf during this period was the court of King's Bench, but he can also be found speaking for the king in the Common Bench as well.
It is unclear whether or not he also continued acting for other litigants.
From 1250 onwards he received a number of ad hoc commissions to act as a royal justice and was regularly commissioned to act as a gaol delivery justice at Newgate and elsewhere.
He sat as one of the justices of King's Bench in Easter term 1271 but never became a regular justice of the court.
Laurence del Brok began acquiring property on a small scale in 1236, and over the course of his lifetime he spent well over £1,000 on property acquisitions.
The inquisition post mortem held after his death shows him in possession of lands worth over £60 a year.
These are probably undervalued.
The inquisition also excludes holdings in Middlesex which he had passed to his younger son in 1271 and the lands he is known to have acquired in Oxfordshire and Cambridgeshire and which are later found in the possession of his family.
How the acquisitions were financed is less clear.
He is known to have been in receipt of pensions from at least three institutional clients (the abbeys of Glastonbury and Ramsey and the priory of Durham) and probably received similar pensions from many other individuals and institutions.
At the very end of his life there was also a suggestion that he was in receipt of bribes for the release of prisoners at Newgate, though this allegation seems not to have been proved.
His first wife was Millicent, daughter of Robert Malet.
He married her in 1242 or 1243, and she was the mother of his eldest son and heir, Hugh.
He had married his second wife Maud by no later than Michaelmas term 1245.
Maud was the mother of his second son, William.
Laurence del Brok probably died a few days before 25 December 1274.
[Public Record Office, Curia Regis Rolls, KB 26, and Feet of Fines, CP 25(1);Curia Regis Rolls , vols. xvi–xviii;Calendars of Patent and Liberate Rolls for the reign of Henry III;Close Rolls for the reign of Henry III; G. O. Sayles (ed.),
Select Cases in the Court of King's Bench, vol. v , Selden Society, vol. lxxvi, 1957, pp. xxxii–xxxv;Calendar of Inquisitions Post Mortem , vol. ii, no. 110.]
David Painting
,(Elizabeth) Amy (1845–1935), novelist, feminist, and industrialist, was born at Parkwern, Swansea, 16 May 1845, the second daughter and third child in a family of three daughters and one son of Lewis Llewelyn Dillwyn, Liberal MP for Swansea 1855–1892, and his wife Elizabeth, only legitimate daughter of Sir Henry Thomas de la Beche [q.v.], geologist.
Amy Dillwyn was the granddaughter of Lewis Weston Dillwyn [q.v.], owner of the famous Cambrian pottery, and great-granddaughter of William Dillwyn, the American Quaker abolitionist.
Educated privately at her homes at Parkwern and Hendrefoilan she inherited a long family tradition of unorthodox and innovative ideas.
Shortly after her début into London society in 1863 she became engaged to Llewellyn Thomas of Llwynmadoc, the heir to a large coal fortune, but his early death from smallpox in 1864 on the eve of their wedding left her to face a lifetime of spinsterhood and good works, divided between Swansea and her London home in fashionable Knightsbridge.
Bored with the formalities of mid-Victorian high society, often scornfully documented in her private diaries, she sought refuge in a form of neurasthenia and turned her hand to writing popular fiction, producing half a dozen still very readable novels which reflected her rebellious discontent with women's role as second-class citizens in a world dominated by largely untalented men.
Having thus resigned herself to the passive lifestyle of a semi-invalid literary lady, she became a regular contributor to the Spectator , then edited by her father's close friend Richard Holt Hutton [q.v.], in which she published over fifty articles between 1880 and 1893.
But when her father, the widely respected leader of the Welsh radicals in Parliament, died suddenly in 1892 she found to her horror that he had left a crippling burden of debt and that his principal business enterprise, the Dillwyn spelter works at Llansamlet, Swansea, was on the verge of bankruptcy.
Determined to honour the family tradition of social responsibility, she forgot her various ailments, put aside her various unfinished manuscripts, and took on the onerous commitment of managing one of the most important zinc factories in the United Kingdom at a time when women were virtually excluded from the boardrooms of business and commerce.
After several years of sheer hard work and dedicated self-sacrifice, which involved giving up her fine mansion and living in cheap lodgings, she finally turned the bankrupt enterprise around and by 1904 was able to sell her shares in Dillwyn & Co. at a very substantial profit to the German industrial giant, Metallgesellschaft of Frankfurt, which was then striving to create an international monopoly of zinc manufacture.
By 1902 her fame as a hard-headed, cigar-smoking, businesswoman, capable of holding her own with the shrewdest of her male rivals in the intensely competitive world of industry, had already won her recognition (from the Pall Mall Gazette ) as ‘one of the most remarkable women in Great Britain', famous enough to be caricatured by the Punch cartoonist, Bert Thomas, in the comic journal Ally Sloper in 1904.
For a brief period Amy Dillwyn became a national celebrity.
An ardent but always non-violent feminist, she campaigned vigorously for women's rights, fought hard to improve rudimentary state education and medical services, and was one of the first women to stand for election to a borough council after the passing of the Qualification of Women Act in 1907.
By this time she was consciously beginning to play the role that most appealed to her ironic sense of self-awareness: the rather eccentric and certainly unorthodox grand old lady of her native Swansea, whose celebrated love of a good cigar, smoked in public, was matched at a less superficial level by deep attachment to the uncompromising principles instilled into her by her Quaker family background.
Yet for all her passionate dedication to public service she also knew how to enjoy herself and as an elderly lady was often seen at the gaming tables of Monte Carlo in the late 1920s, savouring to the full the social pleasures made possible by her unique commercial success.
Shortly after her ninetieth birthday she died at West Cross, Swansea, 13 December 1935, leaving a personal fortune of £112,000, almost exactly equalling the debt she had inherited from her father over forty years earlier.
[David Painting,Amy Dillwyn , 1987; family papers; private information.]
Sandra Raphael
,John (c. 1621–1677), gardener and nurseryman, was born in Amesbury, Wiltshire, the younger son of Stephen Rose, yeoman farmer.
His gardening career may have started at Amesbury House, the property of Sir William Seymour, later second Duke of Hertford and second Duke of Somerset [q.v.].
The duke's London residence was Essex House, the property of his brother-in-law, Robert Devereux, third Earl of Essex [q.v.], another of Rose's employers, who encouraged him to the extent of sending him to France for the first time, probably early in the 1640s.
This was the perfect preparation for importing the influence of French garden design to England, with the Restoration of Charles II in 1660, for both Rose and his master were ready to follow some of the examples given in the work of André Le Nôtre, particularly at Versailles.
On 14 October 1661 Rose was appointed the king's gardener at St James's — that is, the man in charge of establishing a garden between the Mall and the backs of houses in Pall Mall, a garden disturbed about 1709 for the building of Marlborough House and Carlton House.
Later Rose also took charge of St James's Park across the Mall.
Just before his royal appointment Rose may have been the ‘Mr Rowse’ looking after the gardens at Woburn Abbey from about 1658 to 1661.
In 1666 the first edition of Rose's little book,The English Vineyard Vindicated , was published, with no indication on its title-page of the share of John Evelyn [q.v.]in the book's composition, though his identity was revealed in the preface by ‘Philocepos’, who mentioned his recent Sylva .
Evelyn's material came from Rose, for ‘He reason'd so pertinently upon the Subject (as indeed he does upon all things which concern his hortulan Profession)’, as the preface says.
Rose dedicated the book to the king, ‘the Prince of Plants to the Prince of Planters’.
Although the Vineyard had little effect on the planting of vines in England, it was popular enough to be reprinted four times as an appendix to Evelyn's translation of Nicolas de Bonnefons' The French Gardiner in successive editions from 1669 to 1691.
Rose used the book to sell vines too, ‘my self also with so plentiful a Stock of Sets and Plants of all those Sorts which I chiefly recommend, that those who have a desire to Store their Grounds, may receive them of me at very reasonable Rates’.
The gardener presenting a pineapple to the king in a painting attributed to Hendrik Danckerts, possibly painted about 1670 (later in the collection at Houghton House) is said to be John Rose, and several copies of this picture — at Ham House and elsewhere — demonstrate an interest in this exotic fruit.
Though pineapples from Barbados were first brought to England in 1657 and more West Indian ones were given to the king in 1661 and 1668, it is unlikely that the fruit was grown successfully in England until about 1690 at Hampton Court, then in the charge of George London [q.v.],
Rose's pupil, who succeeded him as the royal gardener.
London's later partner in the Brompton Park nursery, Henry Wise [q.v.], was another of Rose's apprentices, whose influence on the design of formal gardens was handed on in this way to the next generation.
Though Rose is most often associated with vines and pineapples, he also planted dwarf fruit trees, especially pears, in the St James garden, and earlier in his career he exchanged rare auriculas, anemones, and other flowers with gardeners as eminent as Sir Thomas Hanmer and John Rea [q.v.].
Rose died 10 September 1677 and was buried in his parish church of St Martin-in-the-Fields a week later.
His will, which mentions no immediate family, left bequests for the establishment of schools for boys and girls in Amesbury, where Rose's Grammar School survived into the nineteenth century.
[‘G.’, ‘Early Writers on English Gardening.
No. 6.
John Rose’,Journal of Horticulture and Cottage Gardener , new series, vol. xxix, 1895, pp. 114–16; John Harvey,Early Nurserymen , 1974; R. H. Jeffers, ‘John Rose’, appendix to Rose's The English Vineyard Vindicated , reprint 1965.]
H S Offler
(c. 1080–1152), bishop of Durham, had obscure antecedents.
Born c .1080, he was presumably a Norman from Ste Barbe-en-Auge in Calvados,arrondissement of Lisieux, canton of Mézidon.
He occurs at York as clerk and canon during the 1120s in the entourage of Archbishop Thurstan [q.v.]; about 1135 he became dean of York, presiding as such in June 1141 when William Fitzherbert [q.v.]was chosen to succeed Thurstan.
The reforming monastic prelates in the province, convinced that royal interference had imposed an improper candidate, fiercely impugned Fitzherbert's election.
In March 1143 Pope Innocent II decreed that its validity was to depend on Ste Barbe swearing that it had been canonical; he had not made this oath by February 1146, when Eugenius III suspended Fitzherbert.
The political overtones to this imbroglio reflected the need of King Stephen [q.v.]to control the northern sees during the civil war, for David, king of Scots [q.v.], the ally of the Empress Matilda [q.v.], reinforcing his acquisitions in England north of Tyne, had in 1139 secured the earldom of Northumberland for his son Henry.
When Bishop Geoffrey Rufus of Durham [q.v.]died on 6 May 1141, the Scots tried to intrude David's chancellor, William Cumin, as his successor, and Cumin immediately seized Durham Castle and the bishopric's temporal resources.
But a pertinacious local opposition, headed by Prior Roger of Durham and Archdeacon Ranulf (the nephew of Ranulf Flambard, q.v.), persuaded Innocent II to order a free election and to enjoin David to stop supporting Cumin.
Escaping to York, the Durham electors there chose William of Ste Barbe as bishop on 14 March 1143, while he was absent attending the legatine council in London which excommunicated Cumin.
Consecrated in Winchester by the legate Henry of Blois [q.v.]on 20 June, Bishop William excused himself from the consecration of Fitzherbert in late September because of difficulties in his bishopric, where Cumin was maintaining his position by force and guile.
Not till 18 October 1144 could Ste Barbe be enthroned in Durham by Fitzherbert, after gradually winning over Earl Henry and the local lay feudatories; it had been a savage struggle, though lurid partisan denunciations of Cumin's atrocities are probably exaggerated.
Henceforward Ste Barbe depended on the sometimes exigent tolerance of the Scots, who still dominated the area politically.
When it came to electing a successor to the deposed Archbishop Fitzherbert at Richmond (North Riding) on 24 July 1147, Bishop William opted for Henry Murdac [q.v.], favourite of the Yorkshire reformers, against King Stephen's candidate; presumably it was Murdac who released him from the suspension he incurred for failing to attend the Council of Reims in March 1148.
Ste Barbe's episcopal acta confirm his sympathy for the ethos of the Yorkshire monastic reform movement.
He died 13 November 1152 in good repute for charity, learning, and prudence; he was less notable for those masterful qualities demanded by the circumstances of his exposed see.
[T. Arnold (ed.),
Symeonis Monachi Opera Omnia , Rolls Series, 1882–5; W. Holtzmann (ed.),
Papsturkunden in England II, vol. ii, Berlin, 1936; H. S. Offler (ed.),
Durham Episcopal Charters, 1071–1152 , Surtees Society, vol. clxxix, 1968.]
Eric Midwinter
,John (1826–1884), cricketer and producer of the Wisden Cricketers' Almanack s, was born in Brighton 5 September 1826, the son of Thomas Wisden, builder.
Little is known of his early life, save that he had a brother, William, went to school in Middle Street, Brighton, and, on his father's death, went to live with Tom Box, the well-known wicket-keeper.
He soon became involved with cricket, first as a boy earning pennies as a longstop on the Montpellier ground, Brighton, but soon as a member of the famous All-England Eleven, the original and most reputable of the great Exhibition teams.
In 1852, with Jem Dean, he founded a rival combine, the United England Eleven, and, with George Parr [q.v.], he later leased the Leamington cricket ground.
He played county cricket for Sussex, but also once for Kent and thrice for Middlesex, and he toured North America in 1859.
A tiny, slight figure — hence his sobriquet, ‘the Little Wonder’— he developed into a ‘very fast and ripping’ right-handed round-arm bowler.
He took 681 wickets in first-class cricket, including all ten in an innings (amazingly, all were clean bowled) for the North versus the South in 1850.
But much of his work was done in minor cricket, and, for instance, in the seasons 1848–51 it has been calculated that he took no less than 1,307 wickets, including 455 in forty-one matches in 1851.
During his American trip he took six wickets in six balls, bowling underarm against teams composed of twenty-two men from the USA and Canada.
He retired in 1863 and, like other well-known professional cricketers of the age, had already embarked on a small-scale business venture.
He was for a time the coach at Harrow School and, from 1857 to his death, secretary of the Cricketers' Fund Friendly Society.
However, his chief venture was the opening in 1855 of a cricketing and cigar business at 2 New Coventry Street, London, initially with Fred E. W. Lillywhite [q.v.].
It was from this ‘Mecca for cricket lovers’ that the first Wisden cricketing almanack was published in 1864, although that introductory offering was of a very general nature.
In the next annual, all first-class scores were published for the first time; in 1867 the convention began of including the births and deaths of cricketers; and in 1870 descriptions of matches were contained in the almanack.
There were competitors, but eventually Wisden outstripped these rivals and emerged as the cricketers' bible.
John Wisden, who was unmarried, died of cancer at 21 Cranbourn Street in Westminster, London, 5 April 1884.
[Wisden Cricketers' Almanack s;Sporting Mirror , June 1884 (portrait); private information.]
D W Hayton
, Sir John , fourth baronet (c. 1666–1737), patron of the charity-school movement in early eighteenth-century Wales, and, more generally, of the evangelical revival, was born c .1666 (the evidence of his funerary monument as to his date of birth being demonstrably unreliable), the second but first surviving son of Sir Erasmus Philipps, third baronet, of Picton Castle, Pembrokeshire, a Commonwealth commissioner for the propagation of the gospel, and his second wife Catherine, daughter of Edward Darcy of Newhall, Derbyshire.
Having been a King's scholar at Westminster, he attended Trinity College, Cambridge, and was entered at Lincoln's Inn.
Of Puritan stock, and imbued with his family's sober piety, Philipps grew up a wholly devout Anglican, anxious above all for the survival and renewal of a Church beset, as he saw it, by spreading laxity and licentiousness.
While MP for Pembroke boroughs from 1695 to 1702 (he was to sit again, for Haverfordwest, 1718–22), he was responsible for the introduction of several legislative measures to suppress ‘vice and profaneness’, notably the Blasphemy Act of 1698, aimed principally at anti-trinitarian heretics, and the ill-fated ‘immorality’ bill the following year, originally designed to tighten the laws against prostitution, but injudiciously extended to make adultery itself a misdemeanour, and for this reason rejected by Parliament as impracticable.
To his critics it seemed as if Philipps, the ‘Welsh owl’, had ‘run mad with reformation’.
Outside Parliament Philipps was active in the local societies for the reformation of manners, and was one of the first to join the similarly orientated Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge (SPCK), taking an active role in its agitations against playhouses and against duelling.
On one occasion he ostentatiously refused a challenge from an infuriated opponent in a lawsuit, preferring to endure public humiliation rather than call out his tormentor (though he did complain to the Commons of the breach of privilege), and earned the public thanks of the Society for setting such a ‘noble and Christian’ example.
When the SPCK switched its primary focus towards educational and evangelizing enterprises, Philipps was a generous and constant benefactor, ‘the ornament, and in a great manner the support’ of the society for many years.
At his own expense he established no less than twenty-two charity schools in Pembrokeshire alone.
He was a member of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts and the East India mission, and a commissioner for the building of fifty new churches, and he also took a close interest in the relief and resettlement of continental Protestant refugees.
There was always a subsidiary social and political objective behind Philipps's reforming zeal, to combat crime and disorder through a reimposition or at least an encouragement of religious discipline.
He viewed himself as a ‘patriot’(of an old-fashioned Whiggish stamp), and his philanthropic efforts as an extension of his ‘patriotism’.
‘The endeavours of a man truly good,’ he once wrote, ‘are not confined to this or that particular design, but lay hold on all opportunities of doing the best service he can to the souls and bodies of mankind.’
But the real impetus derived from an overpowering experience of Christian faith.
A correspondent of the Hallé Pietists, and heavily influenced by them, he was an enthusiastic patron of many evangelical preachers, notably George Whitefield and the Welsh revivalist Griffith Jones [qq.v.], who became his brother-in-law and intimate friend.
In his latter years, though plagued by failing eyesight, he gave considerable practical encouragement to the Oxford ‘methodists’, whose predilection for preaching and catechizing accorded fully with his own.
Philipps married in 1697 Mary, daughter and heiress of an East India merchant, Anthony Smith.
They had three sons and three daughters.
He died 5 January 1737, ‘suddenly, of a fit of apoplexy, as he was sitting in his chair at his house in Bartlett's Buildings, Holborn’, and was succeeded first by his son Erasmus [q.v.], the author of several treatises on economics, and then by a younger son, John, ‘a notorious Jacobite’.
[Sir John Lloyd (ed.),
Dictionary of Welsh Biography , 1959; Thomas Shankland, ‘Sir John Philipps…
’,Transactions of the Honourable Society of Cymmrodorion , 1904–5; R. R. Sedgwick,The House of Commons 1715–1754 , 1970; unpublished biography, History of Parliament Trust; National Library of Wales, Picton Castle MSS.]
Graham Heath
,(Egerton) St John (Pettifor)(1890–1971), social worker, was born in Leicester 22 August 1890, the sixth child and fourth son in the family of five sons and two daughters of Thomas Kingham Catchpool, hosiery manufacturer, and his wife Florence Emma Pettifor.
He was educated at Quaker institutions: Sidcot School and Woodbrooke College, Birmingham, where he took the social studies course.
During World War I his pacifist convictions led him to serve with the Friends' Ambulance Unit in France and then with the Friends' War Victims' Relief Committee in Russia.
Returning to England, he took up the post of sub-warden of Toynbee Hall, the universities' settlement in the East End of London, 1920–9, serving also as a co-opted member of the London County Council education committee, 1925–31.
The years in east London had given him an insight into the restricted lives of inner-city youth and when, in 1930, he was invited to become the first national secretary of the newly formed Youth Hostels Association, he readily accepted.
‘This seemed just the movement’, he wrote in a letter, ‘to give scope for all my enthusiasms and even hobby-horses.’
He threw himself into the cause with immense energy, addressing meetings all over the country, persuading, lobbying, begging for funds.
He recruited G. M. Trevelyan [q.v.], the historian, as president of the association, and William Temple [q.v.], then archbishop of York, as vice-president.
He secured financial support from the Carnegie Trust, the King George V Jubilee Trust and, later, from the government's National Fitness Council.
He acted as the focal point for the enthusiasm of many hundreds of volunteer workers of every social background up and down the country.
Soon, tens of thousands of young city-dwellers, on bicycle or on foot, were enjoying their first taste of the countryside with the aid of the new network of youth hostels.
Catchpool also saw the importance of the youth hostels as centres of international contact and friendship among people.
He worked closely with the German founder of the movement, Richard Schirrmann (later ousted by the Nazis), and with the idealists who were establishing youth hostels in other countries.
In 1938 he was elected president of the International Youth Hostel Federation, an office which he held for the next twelve years.
After his retirement as secretary of the English Association in 1950 he spent four years in India, encouraging the growth of youth hostels in that country, and subsequently paid two extended visits to Africa for the same purpose.
Catchpool (known to his friends as ‘Jack’ and to his colleagues as ‘Catch’) combined in his personality the innocent enthusiasm of a child and the tenacity of purpose of a mature and deeply spiritual man, enlivened by a puckish sense of humour.
Impatient with committee work, he was at his best when exploring new paths and communicating his enthusiasms to others.
He was appointed chevalier of the Dutch Order of Orange-Nassau in 1948 and CBE in 1951.
He married in 1920 Ruth Allason, daughter of Henry Lloyd Wilson, chemical manufacturer.
Trained as a doctor, she never practised, devoting her life instead to the care of their son and four daughters and to the support of her husband's work for the youth hostel movement.
Catchpool died in Welwyn Garden City 13 March 1971.
[E. St John Catchpool,Candles in the Darkness , 1966; personal knowledge.]
Austin Woolrych
,Samuel (c. 1609–1683), republican merchant and financial administrator, was born in Leigh, Essex, the second son of James Moyer, master mariner.
Given a merchant's upbringing close to London's dockland, and enrolled as a mercer, he rapidly made his mark among a group of rising ‘outsiders’, prominent in colonial trades and colonizing ventures, who were challenging the politically conservative oligarchy of mainly Levant and East India Company merchants that dominated the corporation of London before the civil war.
An ardent Puritan and uncompromising parliamentarian, Moyer in June 1642 was made a manager of the ‘Sea Adventure’, through which the city undertook to find ships and men for the reconquest of Ireland.
His talents, his wealth, and the changing times raised him to the court of assistants of the Levant Company from 1644 to 1648, and in 1645 Parliament appointed him to the Goldsmiths' Hall committee, through which Royalists redeemed their sequestrated estates by paying compositions.
His employment on financial commissions and committees multiplied with the increasing ascendancy of the Independents from 1647, and still more from the establishment of the Commonwealth in 1649.
Though not a Leveller sympathizer, he sat as a leading London Independent on the committee that drafted the second Agreement of the People.
The Rump Parliament appointed him to a special commission to overhaul naval and customs administration, to the second high court of justice, to the post of check inwards at the London customs, and to the Hale commission on law reform.
He chaired the compounding commission for twenty months in 1650–1.
He acquired Pitsea Hall in Essex and nearly £9,000 worth of bishops' lands, and in 1653 he was master of the Mercers' Company.
By then, however, he was alienated by the Rump's lukewarm attitude to religious and civil reform, and when Oliver Cromwell expelled it he was one of the few London aldermen who approved.
His unusual combination of financial expertise with millenarian enthusiasm gained him a place on the small council of state that administered the country until the Nominated Assembly (or Barebone's Parliament) took over in July 1653.
Both in that body, in which he sat for London, and in its enlarged council of state, he was highly active, and clearly one of the leaders of an emerging radical faction.
But he was not re-elected to the council in November, for by then that faction's aims and conduct were offending the moderate majority in the House.
When the moderates finally marched out and surrendered their authority to Cromwell, the radical remnant called Moyer to the Speaker's chair and sat on until the military evicted them.
Deploring Cromwell's Protectorate as a betrayal of the saints' quest for a godly commonwealth, Moyer lost his lucrative customs post and ceased to be publicly employed, except as (nominally) a JP and (from 1655) a master of Trinity House.
He did not conspire against the regime, but in February 1659 he and other London republicans presented Richard Cromwell's Parliament with the same subversive petition that had led Oliver Cromwell to dissolve his last Parliament a year earlier.
Moyer spoke in support of it for almost an hour.
When the Rump was restored in May, he appeared before it to urge that the government ‘may not be too long trusted in any man's hands: that it may not be perpetuated to men’.
He returned briefly to the Commonwealth's service, but retired when the Restoration became inevitable and procured a royal pardon.
This did not save him from being imprisoned from 1661 to 1667 on suspicion of plotting against Charles II.
Thereafter he resumed his City career, serving again on the Levant Company's court of assistants (1669–74, 1677–8, 1679–80), and the committee of the East India Company (1672–82).
Moyer has often been called a Baptist, since he associated closely with such prominent Baptists as William Kiffin [q.v.]and Josiah Berners.
He was in fact a Congregationalist, a member of the church of Thomas Goodwin [q.v.], and John Collins [q.v.],
Goodwin's successor at two removes, was still his ‘deare Pastor’ when he made his will in 1682; it also named John Owen [q.v.].
Moyer's Puritanism was more extreme that Goodwin's or Owen's, but neither fanatical nor over-rigid; for instance, he championed a bill in Barebone's Parliament to abolish lay patronage over ecclesiastical benefices, but he exercised his own right of presentation to the rectory of Pitsea in 1656.
He died in July 1683.
His will (made on 7 April 1682 and proved on 30 August 1683) attests to considerable wealth and wide commercial interests.
His wife Rebecca, daughter of Thomas Thorold, had evidently predeceased him; the Pitsea estate was entailed on his elder son Samuel, who was made a baronet in 1671.
[G. E. Aylmer,The State's Servants , 1973; R. L. Greaves and R. Zaller (eds.),
Biographical Dictionary of British Radicals in the Seventeenth Century , 1982–4; M. Tolmie,The Triumph of the Saints , 1977; A. Woolrych,Commonwealth to Protectorate , 1982; Public Record Office, PROB/11/373, 96 Drax.]
Jacob M Price
,David (1729–1809), merchant, banker, and brewer, was born in 1729, the younger son of David Barclay [q.v.],
Quaker merchant, and his second wife Priscilla, daughter of John Freame of Lombard Street, banker.
The elder David Barclay was the son of Robert Barclay [q.v.], the Quaker ‘apologist’.
David and his brother John became partners in their father's linen and merchant house in Cheapside.
Even before the death of his father in 1769, David Barclay had begun a strategic redirection of the family's efforts and resources.
Perceiving more clearly than most the dangers inherent in the darkening American situation, the Barclay brothers first gave up their commission merchant business and then gradually reduced their export trade to North America.
By 1783 they had decided to wind up their old linen business.
Through his mother, David Barclay was to inherit a share in the Freame bank, the oldest Quaker bank in London.
In 1776 he became an active partner in this firm, now styled Barclay, Bevan & Bening.
(After many changes of partners, this firm was to be the nucleus of the later Barclays Bank Ltd.)
In 1781 he and his nephews, Robert Barclay and Silvanus Bevan, bought the Anchor Brewery in Southwark from Mrs Hester Thrale [q.v.].
This became Barclay, Perkins & Co., one of the three great London breweries of the nineteenth century.
Like his father, David Barclay was a conscientious and active Quaker and pacifist.
He was a good friend of Benjamin Franklin and tried unsuccessfully in 1774–5 to mediate between Franklin and the government of Lord North to avoid the impending break with the American colonies.
His philanthropies were many and he used his influence to move English Quakers into a stronger stand against slavery — a difficult position for a retired West India merchant.
On a Jamaican cattle ranch acquired in settlement of some debts, he freed the slaves and transported them at his own expense to Philadelphia for resettlement.
On 6 May 1749 he married his first wife Martha, daughter of John Hudson, of Thames Street, London, hop merchant.
They had an only child, Agatha, who married (3 August 1773) Richard Gurney, a Quaker banker of Norwich.
She was the mother of Hudson Gurney [q.v.], banker, man of letters, and principal heir of the considerable fortune of David Barclay.
In 1767 Barclay married his second wife Rachel, daughter of Sampson Lloyd II [q.v.], banker.
In his will Barclay also remembered numerous nephews and cousins, some of whose descendants were active in his bank and brewery until well into the twentieth century.
He died in Walthamstow, Essex, 30 May 1809.
[Charles W. Barclay et al .,
A History of the Barclay Family , 3 parts, 1924–34; Peter Mathias,The Brewing Industry in England 1700–1830 , 1959; P. W. Matthews and A. W. Tuke,History of Barclays Bank Ltd. , 1926; R. S. Dunn and M. M. Dunn (eds.),
The World of William Penn , 1986.]
Peter Leach
,Francis (1672–1738), architect and builder, was baptized 4 January 1672 in Tettenhall, Staffordshire, the youngest of the three sons of Francis Smith, a bricklayer of Tettenhall, and his wife Elizabeth Hitchins.
He was trained as a mason, and in 1697 he and his brother William contracted to rebuild the nave and tower of St Mary's church, Warwick, which had been destroyed in the great fire of 1694, to the design of Sir William Wilson.
The work was carried out between 1698 and 1704, and during the course of it Francis settled in the town, with which, as ‘Smith of Warwick’, he is particularly associated.
Subsequently, continuing on occasion to work in partnership with his brother, he developed a business which made him one of the most successful of such craft-based figures in English history.
The rebuilding of the town of Warwick after the fire presumably provided him with an initial opportunity, and he was later responsible for a further group of churches and other public buildings; but the predominant element in his practice was the building of country houses for the midlands gentry.
Of these he produced a remarkably large number, in almost all the counties of the region, becoming unrivalled as the leading master builder there and establishing a reputation which extended well beyond it.
As early as 1707 Hugh, first Earl of Cholmondeley [q.v.], was advised by a surveyor in London that the Smiths did a ‘great deal of busness in the Contry and they have done a great deal of work thearabout & in Warwick you may easy hear of them’; and when in the 1730s Sarah, Duchess of Marlborough [q.v.], was building a house as far away as Wimbledon, Surrey, she stipulated that ‘Mr. Smith of Warwickshire the Builder may be employed to make Contracts and to Measure the Work and to doe every thing in his Way that is necessary to Compleat the Work as far as the Distance he is at will give him leave to do.’
The scope of the operation which enabled Smith to achieve this position was complex and wide-ranging.
Its basis appears to have been that, although himself a master of one building trade only, like other leading master builders of the period he was prepared to build a whole house ‘by the great’, performing the masonry himself and subcontracting the work of the other trades; and he evidently built up a team of craftsman associates — joiners, carpenters, painters, plasterers — whom he called upon regularly in these circumstances.
In addition, he acted as a supplier of set-piece marble masonry works such as chimney-pieces and, occasionally, funerary monuments, and there is some evidence that he also dealt in timber.
As for the actual designs, both he and his brother normally provided these themselves, but sometimes he continued the practice of contracting to build to those of other architects: the principal examples of this are Heythrop House, Oxfordshire (1705–8), designed by Thomas Archer [q.v.], and a number of buildings by James Gibbs [q.v.], notably Ditchley House, Oxfordshire (1720–1) and All Saints church, Derby (1723–5, later the cathedral)— although in both cases he appears to have had some influence on the design as well.
Very occasionally he also made designs to be carried out by others — and if acting in an architect's supervisory capacity only he would charge the 5 per cent fee which was normal at the time — while at Ditchley he was, remarkably, employed as both ‘surveyor’, receiving his 5 per cent, and mason contractor.
Whatever role he was playing, however, it is clear that the foundation of his success was a reputation for honesty and reliability.
Lord Cholmondeley's correspondent referred to the Smiths as ‘very good Workmen’, and when Francis died in 1738 Sir Edmund Isham of Lamport, Northamptonshire, lamented the loss of ‘our honest Builder Mr. Smith of Warwick’.
What in general cannot be claimed for him is a specially high level of distinction as a designer.
His houses are always monuments of excellent craftsmanship, but as one eighteenth-century critic who had seen a number of them observed, although ‘all of them [are]convenient and handsome…there is a great sameness in the plans, which proves he had but little invention’.
His typical product is a three-storeyed rectangular block, which represents in essence the standard late seventeenth-century ‘double pile’ brought up to date by the replacement of the hipped roof of the latter by an attic storey and crowning parapet.
A repertoire of ornament of a vernacular baroque character is applied with varying degrees of restraint, while the interiors, usually arranged with the hall and saloon across the centre and the staircase to one side, are enriched with fine joinery and plaster-work but little in the way of spatial incident.
Examples among the many are Buntingsdale Hall (1721), Davenport Hall (1726), Kinlet Hall (1727–9), and probably Mawley Hall (1730), all in Shropshire.
Of the relatively few exceptions to the pattern two which call for mention are Chicheley Hall, Buckinghamshire (1719–21), and Sutton Scarsdale, Derbyshire (begun 1724): the exotic façade of the former probably owes more to the taste of the patron, Sir John Chester, than to Smith's own devising; but Sutton Scarsdale, in part evidently inspired by Gibbs's unexecuted design of 1721 for the university buildings at Cambridge, is his finest work, a wholly convincing essay in the heroic grand manner, in which the giant Corinthian order is handled with total assurance.
Smith suffered periodically from gout — in 1720 he wrote that the drawing of a sketch ‘at this time has occasioned me to make many a wry face by reason I could neither sit nor stand to do it’— and in his later years he put on weight: ‘It is unlucky that Mr. Smith is grown so unweildy,’ commented Dr George Clarke [q.v.]of All Souls College, Oxford, in 1730.
He bought a country estate at Knowle, Warwickshire, for £10,000 and he twice served as mayor of Warwick, in 1713–14 and 1728–9.
In 1702 he married Anne Lea, a native of Warwick: they had four sons and one daughter but only two of the sons survived their father.
Of these the elder, William (1705–1747)— to whom he left ‘all my stock of Marble and Timber…in my Marble Yard in Warwick’— continued in his father's business and built some more country houses in the midlands.
Smith was buried in Warwick 9 April 1738.
[H. M. Colvin,A Biographical Dictionary of British Architects 1600–1840 , 1978, and ‘Francis Smith of Warwick’,Warwickshire History , vol. ii (2), 1972–3; A. Gomme, ‘Architects and Craftsmen at Ditchley’,Architectural History , vol. xxxii, 1989.]
Gillian Avery
,Elizabeth (1896–1952), author and dramatist under the pseudonyms of ‘Josephine Tey’ and ‘Gordon Daviot’, was born in Inverness 25 July 1896, the eldest of the three daughters (there were no sons) of Colin Mackintosh, fruiterer, and his wife Josephine Horne.
She was educated at Inverness Royal Academy and the Anstey Physical Training College in Erdington, Birmingham (her thriller,Miss Pym Disposes , 1946, was to be set in such a college).
She taught briefly in schools in Liverpool, Oban, and Eastbourne, and for a longer period in Tunbridge Wells, but eventually returned to Inverness to keep house for her invalid father, whom she outlived by only two years.
Her first detective novel,The Man in the Queue , a highly accomplished piece of a work for a novice hand, was published in 1929 under the pseudonym of Gordon Daviot — the name by which she preferred to be known, in both public and private — though for her seven other works in this genre she took the name Josephine Tey.
She was to refer to them wryly as her ‘yearly knitting’, but they are classics of their kind, deftly constructed with strong characterization and a meticulous prose style.
Five of them feature as their main character Inspector Alan Grant, a gentleman police officer in the style often favoured by women writers, ‘not coarse like a bobby’ and with independent means ‘to smooth and embroider life’.
It is Grant who, in her most original story,The Daughter of Time (1951), satisfies himself by reading and reason while immobilized in hospital that the infamous Richard III of Shakespeare, school history books, and folk memory is a Tudor fabrication.
Her case for the defence is notably restrained, unlike her treatment of the same subject in Dickon , a play published posthumously in 1953.
The Franchise Affair (1948), a story of two women wrongly accused of kidnapping, and based on an eighteenth-century cause célèbre , was another popular work, later to be made into a film.
Her plays, while well crafted and with shrewdly observed characters, lack the pace and tension of her thrillers.
Her most successful was Richard of Bordeaux , inspired, it was said, by seeing (Sir) John Gielgud in Richard II .
First performed in 1932, it was enthusiastically received and ran for a year.
Later plays fell below this promise.
The Laughing Woman (1934), about the sculptor Henri Gaudier, was a failure.
It was followed in the same year by the rather more successful Queen of Scots .
But The Stars Bow Down , with its biblical theme of Joseph and his brethren, though published in 1939 had to wait ten years before it was performed at the Malvern festival.
The Little Dry Thorn , another biblical play based on the story of Abraham and Sarah, published posthumously in Plays (1953), received its first public performance in Glasgow in 1946.
In these and her historical plays the author made a point of making her characters speak in modern idiom.
‘They have some of the romantic glamour of the old historical drama, without the pseudo-period dialogue and fustian sentiment,’ said John Gielgud in his preface, speaking of her also as an elusive character, deeply reserved, ‘proud without being arrogant, and obstinate, though not conceited’.
During the last year of her life, when she knew herself to be mortally ill, she resolutely avoided seeing anyone she knew.
Her last work,The Privateer (1952), was a romantic novel based on the life of the buccaneer Henry Morgan.
Among her other works are a number of short plays written for broadcasting and a biography,Claverhouse (1937).
Her main interests were the cinema and horse-racing; she drew upon her knowledge of the latter in Brat Farrar (1949), a novel featuring a false claimant to an estate.
She died in Streatham, London, 13 February 1952.
[The Times , 15 February 1952;Inverness Courier , 15 February 1952; private information.]
Sandra Raphael
,Richard (c. 1776–1845), brewer and gardener, His first career as a brewer in Bermondsey came to an end when he retired in about 1820 to a house then called Lawn Cottage (later Colnbrook Lawn) in Colnbrook, near Slough, Buckinghamshire.
A two-acre garden surrounded the house, and here he devoted his time to horticultural experiments, among them the one that produced the apple bearing his name, Cox's Orange Pippin.
Two pips of a Ribston Pippin, sown in a pot in about 1830, grew into seedlings of two new and promising varieties, Cox's Pomona and Cox's Orange Pippin, though the second soon eclipsed the first to become the most popular English dessert apple.
The original tree survived until 1911, when it was blown down in a storm.
In 1836 grafts of both Cox's new apple trees were given to E. Small and Son, nurserymen of Colnbrook, who began to sell young trees locally four years later.
About 1850 trees of the Orange Pippin were given a wider distribution by Charles Turner, of the Royal Nurseries, Slough, and the fruit soon began to attract attention.
Thomas Ingram, Queen Victoria's head gardener at Frogmore and Windsor, showed the apple to a meeting of the British Pomological Society in December 1856, when it was acclaimed as one of the best kinds for the table, ‘sweet, aromatic and very tender, a fair sized and handsome fruit’.
At the Grand Fruit Exhibition of the (Royal) Horticultural Society on 24 October 1857 ‘Cox's Orange Pippin, a medium-sized, warm-looking, brownish-red variety with a yellow crisp flesh of most exquisite flavour’, won first prize.
After that its popularity spread so rapidly that by 1883, the year of the National Apple Congress held at the society's garden in Chiswick, 183 out of 231 exhibitors included it among the varieties they showed.
In spite of its brilliant career, the society's delay in giving it an award of merit and a first-class certificate indicates unusual prudence, for ‘the Château Yquem of apples’, as E. A. Bunyard described it in 1929, did not receive these confirmations of its quality until 1962.
Bunyard's accolade referred to a perfectly ripe Cox, left on its tree until October and not snatched off before it is anywhere near maturity, as so many commercially grown apples were later treated.
The trees bearing Cox's Orange Pippins are vigorous enough to be favourites for orchards in Britain and several other countries with a similar climate, and it has also been used as a parent in breeding a number of other varieties which share some of its desirable characteristics.
Richard Cox did not live long enough to see the triumph of his apple, for he died in Colnbrook 20 May 1845, eight years after his wife Ann.
Both were buried in the churchyard of St Mary's, Harmondsworth.
There was no mention of any children in his will.
[A. Simmonds, ‘Mr Cox of Cox's Orange Pippin',Journal of the Royal Horticultural Society , vol. lxviii, 1943, pp. 347–9; this article also appears in A. Simmonds,A Horticultural Who Was Who , 1948, pp. 11–16.]
C Desmond Walshaw
, Sir Charles William Blyth (1889–1982), meteorologist, was born 10 September 1889 in Edinburgh, the youngest of four sons (there were no daughters) of John Hodge Normand, pharmaceutical chemist, and his wife Mary Baxter, the daughter of a ship's captain; both parents were natives of Fife.
He entered the Royal High School in Edinburgh in 1901.
He was awarded a Heriot bursary to Edinburgh University in 1906, and in 1911 took his MA degree with first-class honours in mathematics and natural philosophy, and also the B.Sc.
with advanced chemistry, based on research supported by a Hope prize.
In 1913 he was offered the post of imperial meteorologist in India.
When he reported for duty in Simla, then the headquarters of the meteorological department, he had no knowledge of the subject; he had to learn it by reading, guided by senior staff.
In 1916 he joined the Indian Army Reserve of Officers and was posted to Mesopotamia as meteorological officer; he was mentioned in dispatches.
The effects of the severe climate on his fellow soldiers caught his attention and he was able to develop his consequent ideas on atmospheric humidity when in April 1919 he resumed his post in Simla.
This work formed the content of his first meteorological papers (1921), and also of his Edinburgh D.Sc.
thesis (1921), and, with related problems of atmospheric thermodynamics, interested him for the rest of his life.
In 1927 Normand was appointed director-general of observatories in India, and in the same year the meteorological department moved to its new headquarters in Poona.
During the next seventeen years Normand presided over massive and almost continuous expansion.
He saw the department totally Indianized.
After his retirement in 1944 Normand stayed on in the department as officer on special duty for maintaining liaison with military organizations.
He left India in 1945; in the spring of 1946 he received an unexpected invitation from Professor G. M. B. Dobson [q.v.]at Oxford to join in his work on atmospheric ozone.
The two men were congenial and complementary partners, and Dobson's small private laboratory on Shotover hill became a centre of international importance.
In 1948 the International Ozone Commission was formed, with Dobson as president and Normand as secretary (until 1959).
The spectrophotometer designed by Dobson in the 1920s was greatly improved (with the assistance of R. H. Kay), so that by the start of the international geophysical year in 1956 there were about fifty instruments in action, almost all of which had been to Shotover to be checked, calibrated, and compared with Dobson's own instrument.
Normand undertook the bulk of the extensive and often tedious calculations (which Dobson detested) produced by all this work.
In 1931 and 1938 Normand was president of the mathematics and physics section of the Indian Science Congress.
He was a founder member of the Indian Academy of Sciences.
In 1938 he was appointed CIE.
He was awarded the Symons gold medal of the Royal Meteorological Society in 1944.
He was knighted in 1945 and in 1953 the American Meteorological Association elected him an honorary member.
From 1951 to 1953 he was president of the Royal Meteorological Society, which made him an honorary fellow in 1976.
In 1920 he married Alison (died 1953), daughter of James MacLennan of Nairnshire.
They had two sons, the elder of whom died in a motor accident in 1960.
After a severe attack of bronchitis in 1959, Normand moved to Winchester where he died 25 October 1982.
There is a portrait of him in the Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society , vol. lxxix, 1953.
[Hundred Years of Weather Service (1875–1975), India Meteorological Department, 1976; G. M. B. Dobson, ‘Forty Years’ Research on Atmospheric Ozone at Oxford',Applied Optics , vol. vii, 1968, pp. 387–405; C. Desmond Walshaw, ‘G. M. B. Dobson — the Man and his Work’,Planetary and Space Science , vol. xxxvii, 1989, pp. 1485–1507; personal knowledge.]
Ray Cooper
,(William) Grey (1910–1977), neurologist, was born in Kansas City, Missouri, 19 February 1910, the only child of Karl Walter, a British journalist then working on the Kansas City Star , and his wife Margaret Hardy, an American journalist.
His parents had met and married in Italy, where they spent much of their lives.
During World War I they moved from the United States to Britain, where Grey Walter spent the rest of his life.
He was educated at Westminster School, where he specialized in classics and then in science, which he continued at King's College, Cambridge.
He took a third class in part i (1930) and a first class in physiology in part ii of the natural sciences tripos (1931), and went on to do postgraduate research on nerve physiology and conditioned reflexes.
His MA dissertation on ‘Conduction in Nerve and Muscle’ was accepted in 1935.
He then joined Professor F. L. Golla, an eminent neurologist who was director of the central pathological laboratories at the Maudsley Hospital.
Golla wanted to apply the new method of investigating the brain by recording its electrical activity (electroencephalogram or EEG) to clinical problems and was able to provide various types of patients for Walter to study.
In 1936 a patient, thought to be suffering from schizophrenia, was found to have abnormal activity in the EEG and then discovered to have a cerebral tumour.
Recordings done in the operating theatre confirmed that the activity was associated with the tumour.
Between 1936 and 1939 many hundreds of patients were investigated; those with epilepsy were shown to have abnormal activity in the EEG between attacks.
In 1939 Golla and Walter moved to Bristol to open the Burden Neurological Institute as a research centre in neuropsychiatry.
There Walter made many novel instruments to analyse the EEG.
On-line frequency analysis was developed in 1943, sensory stimuli used to provoke abnormal activity in the EEG in 1947, and the toposcope to analyse the frequency and phase structure of the EEG in 1950.
The work on conditioning went on and in the early 1960s led to the discovery of the ‘contingent negative variation’, which became a subject of study throughout the world.
Walter also developed models that mimicked brain systems and this involved him with Norbert Wiener and others in early work on cybernetics.
His ‘tortoises’, displayed at the Festival of Britain in 1951, were designed to show the interaction of two sensory systems — light- and touch-sensitive control mechanisms (in effect two nerve cells with visual and tactile inputs).
These systems interacted with the motor drive such that the ‘animals’ exhibited ‘behaviour’, finding their way round obstacles, for example.
Walter was a fluent speaker and writer, on general as well as technical subjects.
He was the author of 170 major scientific publications and gave a number of important lectures.
He relished making broadcasts and giving talks; he was a frequent guest on the BBC television Brains Trust.
He wrote two books:The Living Brain (1953), which was popular science and was the first introduction that many people had to the brain, and a novel,Further Outlook (1956), which was not very successful.
He was awarded a Sc.D. by Cambridge in 1947, and in 1949 was made a professor of the University of Aix-Marseilles.
A member of the Cambridge ‘Apostles’, he was a communist before and during the war but later became more sympathetic, first to anarchism and then to syndicalism.
He was involved in the peace movement but never a pacifist.
He was a firm atheist and was interested in, though unconvinced by, the paranormal, and also did research on hypnosis.
In 1934 he married Katherine Monica, younger daughter of Samuel Kerkham Ratcliffe, a British journalist and lecturer; they separated in 1945 and divorced in 1947.
They had two sons, Nicolas, who became a journalist and lecturer, and Jeremy, who became a physicist.
In 1947 he married Vivian Joan (died 1980), daughter of John Dovey, colour manufacturer.
She was a colleague for many years.
They divorced in 1960; they had one son, Timothy (died 1976).
From 1960 to 1974 he cohabited with Lorraine Josephine, daughter of Mr Donn, property developer, and former wife of Keith Aldridge.
In 1970 he suffered severe brain damage in a road accident which effectively ended his career.
He died of a heart attack at his home in Bristol 6 May 1977.
[Ray Cooper and Jonathan Bird,The Burden , 1989; private information; personal knowledge.]
Richard J Howarth
, Sir Arthur William (1848–1915), physicist, was born 23 October 1848 in Clapham Park, London, the eldest in the family of three sons and three daughters of Daniel Henry Rücker, merchant of colonial produce, of London, and his wife Mary Antoinette, eldest daughter of John D. Williams, a merchant of Coolock, county Dublin.
Educated at Clapham Grammar School, Rücker went to Brasenose College, Oxford (1867), with an open mathematical scholarship, taking first-class honours in mathematical moderations and the junior university mathematical scholarship (1869), and first-class honours in mathematics (1870) and natural science (1871).
Awarded an open mathematical fellowship at Brasenose (1871–6), he was appointed mathematical lecturer at Brasenose and demonstrator at the Clarendon laboratory, but, when the Yorkshire College of Science was founded in Leeds in 1874, he moved to become their professor of mathematics and physics.
In 1886 he was appointed professor of physics at the Royal College of Science, London.
He subsequently assisted the incorporation of the Greater London colleges within London University and, as a result, became the first principal in 1901, holding the position until retirement in 1908.
His research topics included thermal expansion of liquids (1876–84); properties of thin liquid films (1877–93), jointly with A. W. Reinold; and electromagnetism (1855–1901).
His major contribution was undoubtedly to undertake, jointly with (Sir) Thomas Thorpe [q.v.], a series of magnetic surveys of the British Isles (1883–92) which significantly advanced contemporary interpretation methods; and to obtain the first measurements of the magnetic susceptibility of rocks (1890–8).
He was a good-humoured, patient man of great personal charm, an energetic and skilled administrator and excellent public speaker.
His hobbies included rambling, ornithology, sketching, photography, horticulture, and astronomy; and he acquired a remarkable knowledge of the Welsh language.
He stood unsuccessfully as a Liberal Unionist candidate for Parliament in the 1885 and 1886 elections in north Leeds and the Pudsey division of Yorkshire.
In recognition of his work on thin films and terrestrial magnetism he was awarded the Royal medal of the Royal Society in 1891 and became president of the permanent committee on terrestrial magnetism and atmospheric electricity of the International Meteorological Conference in 1896.
He was awarded the honorary degrees of D.Sc.
(Oxford, Cambridge, Victoria (Manchester), Leeds, and Belfast) and LLD (Glasgow and Edinburgh) and was knighted in 1902.
Elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1884, he was on the council (1887–9, 1894, 1898–9) and secretary (1896–1901).
He was also treasurer of the British Association (1891–8) and its president (1901), and president of the Physical Society (1893–5).
In 1876 he married Marian, daughter of John Deakin Heaton, physician, of Claremont, Leeds, but she died following the birth of their daughter in 1878.
Rücker was subsequently married in 1892 to Thereza Charlotte (died 1941), third daughter of Mervyn Herbert Nevil Story-Maskelyne [q.v.]of Wroughton, Wiltshire, keeper of minerals at the British Museum.
A son, Arthur Nevil, was born in 1895.
Rücker died 1 November 1915 in Everington, near Newbury, Berkshire.
[T. E. Thorpe in Proceedings of the Royal Society, series A, vol. xcii, 1916.]
T A B Corley
,Philip Ernest (1873–1944), property developer and financier, was born in Torquay 11 April 1873, the younger son and youngest of three children of Philip Hill, cab proprietor, and his wife Mary Smith.
His mother died when he was ten.
After leaving Taunton Independent College at sixteen, he joined an estate agency in Newton Abbot, later moving to Cardiff.
He set up in the West End of London in 1912, following the death of his first wife and only daughter, having realized that property deals yielded far better returns in the metropolis than in the provinces.
However, a venture as public-works contractor in World War I left him with a considerable bank overdraft, not liquidated until 1922.
He entered the world of company finance and take-overs in 1923, as adviser to the Beecham family, whose pill-making firm had become entangled in property matters after Sir Joseph Beecham's purchase of the Covent Garden estate in London.
By 1924 Hill had bought out the family interests and established Beecham Estates and Pills Ltd.
Four years later, by an adroit property deal, he separated the company's two sides, becoming chairman of Beechams Pills Ltd. and of the Covent Garden Properties Company.
By 1939 he had strengthened Beechams by adding to it the firms which manufactured Macleans toothpaste and powders, Eno's fruit salts, and the hair preparation Brylcreem.
He also acquired the chemists' chains, Timothy Whites and Taylors, gained a large stake in cinemas, and purchased the exhibition centre at Olympia.
In 1935 he helped to form the Hawker Siddeley Aircraft Company, and thus facilitated the development of the Hurricane aircraft which fought in the Battle of Britain (1940).
In 1929 Hill had become a director of the Eagle Star Insurance Company, which, in the economic recovery of the 1930s, grew rapidly and had substantial funds to invest.
With the support of Eagle Star's chairman, Sir Edward Mountain, in 1932–3 he established Philip Hill & Partners (later the merchant bank Hill Samuel) and the Second Covent Garden Property Company (later part of MEPC) to finance industry and commercial properties respectively.
He bought companies for cash, raised by issuing shares that were largely taken up by financial institutions.
However, he seldom subjected his acquisitions to thorough reorganization.
More successful in selecting firms than managers, he was perhaps over-loyal to underperforming subordinates.
His business skills and integrity earned him wide respect, and a strong personality reinforced his large physical presence — he latterly weighed eighteen stones.
With so many business commitments, recreation was necessarily limited.
He had boxed during a brief spell in the army, and he enjoyed golfing and playing poker; he also read thrillers and was a film addict.
An initiative by him in 1944 ensured that the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden, would return to its proper activities after wartime use as a dancehall.
In 1897 he married Katherine Keziah, daughter of Thomas Evans, a Cardiff gentleman.
They had one daughter who died at the age of six; the mother died shortly afterwards.
In 1917, his second marriage was to Jessica Gertrude (daughter of Richard Gerrard, civil engineer), actress and former wife of Eric Spencer Wentworth Fitzwilliam (later ninth Earl Fitzwilliam).
She introduced him to London café society.
After a divorce, in 1922 he married Vera Blanche Neville (daughter of Alfred Neville Snepp, cigarette manufacturer), actress and former wife of Henry Algernon Claude Graves (later seventh Baron Graves), a bookmaker.
Having separated from Vera, in about 1930 he began living with Phyllis Lytton Partington, a racehorse owner twenty-five years his junior, who changed her surname to Hill; they married in 1934.
She was the daughter of Reuben Partington, manufacturer's agent.
There were no children of the last three marriages.
After some years of poor health, Hill died 15 August 1944 in Windlesham Moor, Surrey.
He left £3,008,327 gross.
[J. Max Keyworth, memoir of Hill in Cabbages and Things , privately printed, 1990; D. J. Jeremy (ed.),
Dictionary of Business Biography , 1985; company archives of Beechams Estates and Pills Ltd. and Covent Garden Properties Co.
Ltd. at MEPC, and of Beechams Pills Ltd., at SmithKline Beecham; private information.]
H G Pitt
,Donald Malcolm (1921–1967), land and water speed record-holder, was born 23 March 1921 at Kingston Hill, Surrey, the only son and younger child of (Sir) Malcolm Campbell [q.v.], racing motorist, and his second wife Dorothy Evelyn, daughter of Major William Whittall.
He left Uppingham in 1937, following rheumatic fever, to serve with a Lloyd's underwriting firm.
Invalided from the RAF in 1940, having been rejected for flying training, he spent a frustrating war as a special constable.
In the late 1940s he invested in the Kine Engineering Company of Redhill, becoming managing director and 50 per cent shareholder.
Always involved in his father's ventures, he decided after Sir Malcolm's death in 1948 to defend his water title, set at 141.74 m.p.h. in 1939, using his father's boat.
Only after unsuccessful attempts in 1949, 1950, and 1951 did he seek and find funds for a new boat, called, like all his cars and boats, ‘Bluebird’.
With this all-metal hydroplane, powered by two Metro-Vickers Beryll jet engines, he regained the record on Ullswater on 23 July 1955 at 202.32, raising this on six successive occasions, ultimately to 276.33 m.p.h. on Lake Dumbleyoung, Australia, on 31 December 1964.
In September 1960, Campbell turned to the land record.
Driving a ‘Bluebird’, newly designed by Kenneth and Lewis Norris, using a Bristol-Siddeley Proteus jet engine, he sustained a hairline skull fracture in a crash at 365 m.p.h. while assaulting the land record of 394.2 m.p.h., set by John Cobb [q.v.]in 1947.
Three years later, another new ‘Bluebird’ was prevented from going for the record by floods at Lake Eyre, Australia, a delay which brought much criticism of Campbell from his backers, led by Sir Alfred Owen.
But the following July Campbell returned to cover the measured kilometre at an average speed of 403.1 m.p.h. for the two runs, becoming the first man to take a shaft-driven vehicle over 400 m.p.h. and to break both land and water speed records in the same year.
The next year the American Craig Breedlove took a jet-propelled car over the distance at 600 m.p.h.
At the time of his death Campbell was unsuccessfully seeking backers for a jet-driven car to go through the sound barrier.
Campbell now turned back to the water.
In 1966 a more powerful Bristol-Siddeley Orpheus jet engine with a 5,000 lb. thrust was fitted to ‘Bluebird’, intended to take the record over 300 m.p.h.
After two months of frustrating delay, caused by bad weather and technical difficulties which reduced public interest and renewed public criticism, Campbell finally made his attempt on Coniston on 4 January 1967.
On the outward run he achieved 297 m.p.h.
Returning even faster to get his average over 300 m.p.h., Campbell's fears were confirmed: at this speed the bow lifted, and the boat somersaulted and plunged into the lake.
Campbell's body was never recovered.
Though a trained engineer, an enthusiastic and effective advocate of his own cause, courageous and deeply patriotic, Campbell was not an easy man.
He seemed driven to defend and challenge his father's achievement, but his enthusiasms were too boyish and his concerns overshadowed by the public shift in interest to the achievements of space scientists and astronauts.
Campbell's crusade became uninteresting and irrelevant to the new world and advertisers were finding more rewarding ventures for sponsorship.
He lived into a world which had outgrown him.
He was appointed CBE in 1957.
Campbell married three times: in 1945, Daphne Margaret Harvey Harvey, daughter of William Calvert, engineer (marriage dissolved 1952); in 1952, Dorothy, daughter of Amos McKegg of Palmerston North, New Zealand (marriage dissolved 1957); in 1958, Antoinette Maria (Tonia Bern, the cabaret singer), daughter of Antoine Joseph Bern of Belgium.
He had a daughter, Georgina, born in 1946.
[The Times , 5 January 1967; D. Campbell with A. W. Mitchell,Into the Water Barrier , 1955; A. Knowles,With Campbell at Coniston , 1967; A. Knowles and D. Campbell,Donald Campbell, C.B.E.,
1969; D. A. de S. Young-James,Donald Campbell: an Informal Biography , 1968; L. Villa and T. Gray,The Record Breakers: Sir Malcolm and Donald Campbell , 1969.]
W R Trotter
, Lady Dorothy Fanny (1826–1913), hostess, horticulturist, and collector, was born 1 April 1826 at 11 Berkeley Square, London.
She was the youngest in the family of three sons and two daughters of Horatio Walpole, third Earl of Orford, and his wife Mary, daughter of William Augustus Fawkener, envoy extraordinary at St Petersburg and close friend of Empress Catherine, and minister plenipotentiary in Lisbon and Florence.
She spent her childhood at the family seats at Wolterton in Norfolk and Ilsington in Dorset, and the house in Berkeley Square.
She received no formal education, but was taught Italian, French, Greek, and Latin by an excellent governess.
Lady Dorothy was a lively and captivating young girl, as can be seen in the portrait by G. F. Watts [q.v.], painted in Florence at the age of seventeen.
In 1847 she married Reginald Henry Nevill (died 1878), a distant relation; he was twenty years her senior, and had inherited considerable wealth from a Walpole uncle.
He was the son of George Henry Nevill, in holy orders (the son of George Nevill, first Earl of Abergavenny), and his wife Caroline Walpole.
They had six children, four of whom (one daughter and three sons) survived to adulthood.
In 1851 the Nevills acquired, in addition to their London house, an estate in Sussex known as Dangstein, with a large neo-Grecian mansion, built in the 1830s.
Reginald looked after the large estate, while Lady Dorothy took charge of the house and the twenty-three-acre garden.
The latter soon became celebrated in horticultural circles, particularly for the collection of exotics, housed in its seventeen hothouses, which were the subject of no less than twelve articles in the gardening press.
Lady Dorothy soon struck up a friendship with Sir William Hooker [q.v.]at Kew, with whom she exchanged plants and letters; and the relationship continued with his son and successor, Sir Joseph Hooker [q.v.].
She was on friendly terms with most of the leading horticulturalists of the time, and was able to provide Charles Darwin [q.v.]with a number of rare plants.
As well as these exotics, the garden at Dangstein, tended by thirty-four gardeners, had one of the earliest herbaceous borders, a pinetum, exotic birds and animals, a flock of pigeons with Chinese whistles attached to their tails (Lady Dorothy's ‘aerial orchestra’), a silkworm farm, and a museum with some of her numerous collections — snuffboxes, corset buttons, silhouettes, wax medallions, lockets, and many similar objects.
As well as these trivia, Lady Dorothy was a serious collector of eighteenth-century porcelain and pictures, particularly anything relating to her ancestor, Horace Walpole, fourth Earl of Orford [q.v.].
Above all, she collected people: anyone of distinction — politicians, writers, artists, scientists, and soldiers — all were welcome at her salon and her dinner table.
They were well entertained, for she was described by Sir Edmund Gosse [q.v.]as ‘the finest female wit of her age’.
In politics she was a Conservative; Benjamin Disraeli was a lifelong friend; but so too was the Radical, Richard Cobden [q.v.].
After her husband died in 1878 she moved to Stillyans, in East Sussex, where she also had a garden, but thereafter most of her entertaining was done in London.
As well as a book on silkworms, and another on her Walpole ancestors, she wrote (with assistance from her son Ralph) three autobiographical volumes:The Reminiscences of Lady Dorothy Nevill (1906),Leaves from the Notebooks of Lady Dorothy Nevill (1907), and Under Five Reigns (1910).
These three fat volumes of anecdote and reminiscence are a useful source for biographers and historians of the period, and provide an insight into the lifestyle of the Victorian and Edwardian upper classes.
She died 24 March 1913 at her home in Charles Street, London.
[Ralph Nevill,The Life and Letters of Dorothy Nevill , 1919; Guy Nevill,Exotic Groves: a Portrait of Lady Dorothy Nevill , 1984; E. Gosse, ‘Lady Dorothy Nevill’,Fortnightly Review , vol. ci, 1914, pp. 277–87; W. R. Trotter, ‘The Glasshouses at Dangstein and their Contents’,Garden History , vol. xvi, 1988, pp. 71–89.]
Steven Sturdy
, Sir (Benjamin) Arthur (1852–1933), chief inspector of factories and workshops, was born 17 October 1852 in Manchester, the son of Henry Whitelegge, gentleman, of Tideswell, and his wife Ann Mason Carrington of Carrington Hall, Cheshire.
He was educated at Tideswell Grammar School and from 1870 at University College London.
He took the London University B.Sc.
in 1874, and qualified MRCS in 1876.
There followed a series of clinical appointments: as house surgeon to the Manchester Hospital for Children, then medical officer to the St Pancras Smallpox Sanitarium, and finally medical officer to the Sheffield Fever Hospital.
Meanwhile he continued to study, proceeding MB in 1878 and MD in 1881.
He was particularly interested in infectious diseases and public health, and in 1881 he took the Cambridge University diploma in public health.
In 1884 he was appointed medical officer of health for Nottingham.
In 1889 he became county MOH for the West Riding of Yorkshire, a post he combined from 1894 with the position of chief sanitary officer to the West Riding Rivers Board.
In 1886 the Local Government Board appointed a commission to investigate Louis Pasteur's claims to have found a cure for rabies.
Whitelegge's brother-in-law Victor Horsley [q.v.]served on the commission, and Whitelegge supplied him with pathological specimens from rabid dogs caught around Nottingham.
He subsequently gave evidence to a House of Lords committee on muzzling dogs, which he had found effective in controlling the Nottingham outbreak.
He went on to conduct epidemiological studies of the transmission and variation of several other epidemic diseases, which established his reputation as an authority in this area.
In 1890 the first edition of his Manual of Hygiene and Public Health appeared, and in 1891 he was appointed lecturer on hygiene and public health at Charing Cross Hospital medical school.
Whitelegge's knowledge of epidemiology, and his experience of public health administration in industrial districts, recommended him at this time to the Home Office, which was being pressed to reorganize its industrial health work.
From 1893 he served on a departmental committee to review the collection and publication of factory statistics, and from 1895 on a committee of inquiry into anthrax among wool sorters.
In 1896 he was appointed chief inspector of factories and workshops, the first medical man to hold this position.
Under his guidance, the factory inspectorate was greatly expanded and systematically reorganized.
He served on the royal commission on arsenical poisoning in beer (1901), and on the Home Office committee on the lighting of factories (1913).
By the time he retired in 1917, Whitelegge had proved himself a hard-working administrator.
Punctilious and at times pedantic, he could appear abrupt and unfriendly.
He was not physically robust and his main recreation was playing bridge and parlour games.
Whitelegge was appointed FRCP in 1898, CB in 1902, and KCB in 1911.
In 1885 he married Fanny Marian, daughter of the painter John Callcott Horsley, RA [q.v.].
They had two sons.
Whitelegge died 25 April 1933 at Westminster Hospital, London.
[Whitelegge's published writings; records of University College London;British Medical Journal , vol. i, 1933, pp. 806, 897–8;Lancet , vol. i, 1933, pp. 990–1.]
Rosemary O'Day
or , Sir John (c. 1595–1675), senior trustee for the maintenance of ministers, was the second son in the family of seven sons and a daughter of William Thorowgood of Grimston, county Norfolk, and Anne, his first wife, the daughter of Henry Edwards of Norwich, gentleman.
His father (d .
1625) belonged to an armigerous family in Felsted, Essex.
He had served as commissary to Edmund Scambler [q.v.], bishop of Norwich, and continued his career as ecclesiastical administrator until his death.
It seems reasonable to suppose that John was born and spent his early years in Grimston, Norfolk, where his family was recorded as having an estate in 1664, but there is no record of his educational background.
By 1633 he was already moving in court circles.
He went to Scotland as a gentleman pensioner to King Charles I in that year and was knighted by the king.
In the civil war he sided with Parliament, though the strength of his commitment is unclear.
By now resident in fashionable Kensington, he was appointed to the Middlesex militia committee in 1644 and to both the Middlesex and the Norfolk militia committees in 1648.
He was an assessment commissioner for Westminster and Middlesex in 1649 and in the 1650s he held a number of minor central and local offices and was a commissioner of oyer and terminer.
Thoroughgood's most important position was as one of the trustees for the maintenance of ministers, appointed in 1649 to supplement the work of the parliamentary plundered ministers' committee by augmenting the stipends of clergy and teachers out of funds at their disposal.
He was active, usually as senior trustee, until 1660.
Nevertheless, no measures were taken against him at the Restoration, suggesting perhaps that he had not been a republican by choice and may have worked towards the return of Charles II.
He was even appointed honorary gentleman of the privy chamber to Charles II.
His moralizing work,The King of Terrors Silenced, by Meditations and Examples of Holy Living and Holy Dying…(1664) reveals an orthodox Calvinism, but neither this nor his will gives any hint of Puritan enthusiasm, despite their author's central role in the administration of the Interregnum church.
Thoroughgood married Frances, daughter of Thomas Meautys (1590–1649) of West Ham, Essex, clerk to the Privy Council and MP.
She died childless when still a minor in 1651 and he never remarried.
He died without direct heirs in 1675, and left the residue of his estate to a nephew.
[G. E. Aylmer,The State's Servants , 1973; R. O'Day and F. Heal (eds.),
Princes and Paupers in the English Church , 1500–1800 , 1979;Harleian Society, Visitations of Essex, Norfolk, and Middlesex ; Norfolk Record Society,Visitation of Norfolk, 1664,1934; Public Record Office, PCC Wills 132 Dycer.]
T E Hartley
, Sir Henry (1537? –1598), soldier and MP, was the first son of Sir Henry Knyvet and his wife Anne, daughter of Sir Christopher Pickering.
In 1563 he married Elizabeth, daughter of Sir James Stumpe of Charlton, near Malmesbury, Wiltshire.
She died in 1585, and he subsequently (by 1595) married Mary, daughter of Sir John Sydenham.
Three of his daughters by Elizabeth married into families holding the earldoms of Suffolk, Lincoln, and Rutland.
Knyvet's grandfather, Sir Thomas Knyvet [q.v.], was master of the horse to Henry VIII, and his father a gentleman of the privy chamber.
In 1560 Henry Knyvet became a gentleman pensioner to Queen Elizabeth I. This connection, and the links he sustained with prominent men in Wiltshire, helped to ensure his position among the office-holding gentry, despite enmities fostered by land disputes persisting throughout the 1560s and 1570s.
He was a justice of the peace, served as sheriff of the county, and became a deputy lieutenant in 1585.
He was knighted in 1574.
He was instructed to raise 2,000 Wiltshire men towards the national defences when the Armada threatened in 1588; and his contribution to county military affairs was much valued.
In Parliament he represented either Wootton Basset or Malmesbury from 1571 to 1597, though he never became knight of the shire.
Though considered by one observer to have been a bore, he seems to have done valuable service on a number of committees, many of them dealing with bills concerning arms and defences.
In later years relations with court and council were more strained.
By January 1593 an incident involving a royal servant coming to serve process on a member of his household had resulted in two spells in prison.
In March he probably did his credit no good in the House of Commons when he appears to have argued that proceedings in the subsidy bill should be kept secret, even from the queen herself.
The army was a major part of Knyvet's life.
He was wounded at the siege of Leith in 1560 and nine years later he stood against the northern rising, subsequently advising on the defence of the northern border.
His Defence of the Realm , written in 1596, was prompted by the fall of Calais to the Spanish.
Like many before and since he was concerned about the ability of England to resist an invader, should the navy fail as first line of defence.
His concern about the organization of the militia was timely, but his intended reliance on the longbow was hardly forward-looking.
Knyvet provides an interesting illustration of the problems faced by the Crown in raising revenue.
At his death he owed the queen £4,000 from rents on forest land in his care as sub-warden, but there was a suggestion that he settled lands on his daughters so as to deprive the queen of her due.
Yet in Parliament in 1593 he had apparently spoken of the need to maximize yields from royal assets in order to finance the strong army which he thought so important.
There is a fine monumental effigy of him with his first wife in the church in Charlton, where he was buried 25 July 1598.
He had two sons and four daughters.
[P. W. Hasler,The House of Commons 1558–1603 , 1981; C. Hughes (ed.),
Defence of the Realm , 1906; J. E. Neale,Elizabeth I and her Parliaments , 2 vols., 1953, 1957; Alison Wall, ‘Faction in Local Politics, 1580–1620’,Wiltshire Archaeological Magazine , vol. lxxii, part 3, 1980.]
Ronald M Birse
,Samuel Hansard (1813–1893), civil engineer, was born in St Martin's Lane, London, 12 October 1813, the eldest son in the family of three sons and two daughters of Samuel Foyster Yockney, West India merchant, and his wife Laetitia.
He was educated at Mill Hill School under Dr Thorowgood and was not intended for any profession until family losses made it necessary.
At the age of twenty-four he began an apprenticeship with Stothert & Company of Bath, civil engineering contractors.
Soon afterwards in 1838 he was appointed engineer and manager on the construction of the Box tunnel on the Great Western Railway, acquitting himself so well that he attracted the favourable notice of Isambard K. Brunel [q.v.], so that on the completion of the tunnel he joined the engineering staff of the GWR.
He was first put in charge of the tunnels and other works between Bristol and Bath, as well as being responsible for the manufacture of coke at the company's Bristol works, where he initiated several important improvements.
He moved in 1846 to south Wales, where he was involved in the construction of the Newport tunnel and the Usk and Chepstow viaducts, on the railway line from Newport to Chepstow.
On the completion of this he was placed in charge in 1851–2 of the heavy engineering works on the Oxford and Wolverhampton line, including high timber viaducts and the Dudley tunnel.
In late 1853 he moved to Paris, where he was engaged on bridges and embankments of the Seine, and on railways in and around the city.
He then surveyed for a French company a number of railway lines in Italy and Switzerland, before returning to England, where he worked on the Birmingham and Wolverhampton Railway and the Kennet and Avon and Stourbridge canals.
In 1858–9 he was in the service of the Admiralty, before returning to south Wales, where for ten years he was engineer-in-chief and general manager of the Sirhowy Tramroad, which he converted into a standard railway.
During this time he introduced cast-iron brake blocks of the type which later came into general use.
In 1868 he moved back to London, where he set up in practice at 46 Queen Anne's Gate as a consulting civil engineer, in association with his son Sydney William Yockney.
Together they designed and supervised a large number of contracts, including the Wye Valley Railway, the Guernsey Tramway, the Cardiff and Penarth Tramway, the East Worcestershire Waterworks, and Totland Bay pier, as well as acting as engineers to the West Bromwich sanitary commissioners.
Yockney became a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1860, and was also a fellow of the Geological Society (1865).
He married Frances Emily, daughter of Captain Edward Holmes, RN; she predeceased him.
He died at his son's residence in Chepstow 29 December 1893.
[Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers , vol. cxvi, 1894, pp. 372–4.]
M K Lawson
(fl. 796–821), king of Mercia, son of Cuthbert, and according to a contemporary genealogy descended from Cenwealh, brother of King Penda [q.v.].
He succeeded the son of Offa [q.v.],
Ecgfrith, whose brief reign ended in December 796.
Alcuin [q.v.]says that Offa shed much blood to secure Ecgfrith's position, and if this refers to a purge of the royal kindred may explain why Cenwulf was so distant a relative.
Alcuin describes him as needy before his accession, though a Mercian charter of doubtful authenticity from 785 is witnessed by a Cenwulf ‘minister’.
His early years were troubled.
Offa had been overlord of much of southern England, but in 796 Kent rebelled under Eadbert Praen [q.v.].
In 798 Cenwulf attacked it, captured Eadbert, and took him to Mercia, where his eyes were put out and his hands amputated.
Cenwulf's brother Cuthred was made sub-king of Kent no later than 801, and they granted land there jointly and individually until Cuthred's death (807).
The coins of a King Eadwald precede Cenwulf's in East Anglia, and hint at another short-lived rising against Mercian overlordship.
Relations with Essex are obscure until 811, when King Sigered [q.v.]first witnesses Cenwulf's charters.
In 812 he is described as ‘subregulus’, and in 814 as ‘dux’.
Thus Cenwulf seems to have deprived him of royal status, as Offa did rulers of Kent and Sussex.
Cenwulf's dealings with Sussex are witnessed only by a grant to the bishop of Selsey from 801.
Elsewhere he had little success.
King Beorhtric [q.v.]of Wessex had married Offa's daughter and witnessed Ecgfrith's charters.
There is a grant from 798 of Glastonbury Abbey (Somerset) by Pope Leo III to Cenwulf's son Cynehelm (see below), and a confirmation of it by Cenwulf himself, but both may be later forgeries, and there is otherwise no evidence of his influence in Wessex.
On Beorhtric's death in 802, which also saw the repulse of a Mercian invasion under Ealdorman Æthelmund, it probably passed out of Cenwulf's orbit.
King Eardwulf [q.v.]of Northumbria attacked Mercia in 801, probably for sheltering political refugees, and a long campaign ended in a peace agreement.
By 808 Eardwulf had been expelled from his kingdom, and Mercian involvement is suggested by a papal letter revealing that Cenwulf and the Northumbrian rebels had written to Charlemagne, to whom Eardwulf had fled.
Nevertheless, he was reinstated by envoys of Charlemagne and Pope Leo in 809.
Cenwulf also fought the Welsh, presumably because the difficult situation which had necessitated the building of Offa's dyke persisted.
The Welsh Annals record a battle at Rhuddlan, perhaps involving the Mercians, just after Offa's death; in 816 they attacked Rhufoniog and Snowdonia, and in 818 Dyfed.
Cenwulf was probably engaged in another Welsh campaign when he died near Chester.
Little is known of his administration, though charter witness-lists suggest some continuity with previous regimes in the dozen or so ealdormen also present at grants of Offa and Ecgfrith.
Coins, after c .805 bearing portraits derived from Roman models, were struck at Canterbury, Rochester (after c .810), London, and an East Anglian mint.
Their royal title, ‘COENVVLF REX M(ERCIORVM)’, matches that of the charters.
Although Offa may once have aspired to be ‘king of the English’, Cenwulf did not, and it is arguable, for all his control of southern England apart from Wessex, that Mercian power declined in his reign.
In 825 the Mercians were heavily defeated by the West Saxons, and were subsequently unable to cope with Viking raids.
Sixty years after Cenwulf's death their monarchy no longer existed.
In 797 Alcuin wrote to Cenwulf praising his goodness and nobility and exhorting him to be a model Christian king.
In 798 he founded a monastery at Winchcombe, where a new church was dedicated in 811.
Nevertheless, like his predecessors, Ethelbald [q.v.]and Offa, he had problems with the church, which was too powerful to be left uncontrolled, and Alcuin eventually felt obliged to commiserate with the abbess Æthelburga, Offa's daughter, because ecclesiastics were ruled by tyrants not kings.
Presumably as part of his attempt to rule Kent, Cenwulf gave the abbey of St Augustine's Canterbury to his relative Cunred and the nunnery of Minster-in-Thanet to his daughter Cwenthryth.
He may also have obtained from Popes Leo III and Paschal I privileges giving him control of all the monasteries he had acquired.
Offa's difficulties with the archbishop of Canterbury had resulted in the creation of a Mercian archbishopric at Lichfield.
Possibly pressed by his churchmen, Cenwulf reversed this.
In 798 he suggested to Pope Leo that the province of Canterbury be reconstituted and moved to London — a Mercian city.
This Leo rejected, but after further negotiations he did suppress the archbishopric of Lichfield, and this was accepted by an English synod at Clofesho in 803.
For a time Cenwulf's relations with Canterbury were good, but by 808 a papal letter suggests that he and Archbishop Wulfred [q.v.]were in dispute.
No more is known of this, and in 814 and 815 Canterbury received a number of royal land grants, but in 816 a synod at Chelsea attempted to challenge lay control of monasteries.
A dispute then arose between Cenwulf and Wulfred over the Kentish houses of Reculver and Minster-in-Thanet, and the pope seems to have suspended the archbishop at the king's request.
He was probably not reinstated until 821.
Known relatives of Cenwulf are his brothers Ceolwulf and Cuthred, his queen Ælfthryth, daughter Cwenthryth, Cuthred's son Cenwald, and Cyneberht and Abbot Cunwald, who appear in charters.
A son Cynehelm was evidently buried at Winchcombe, and may be the ealdorman Cynehelm who last witnesses a genuine charter in 811.
By the late tenth century he was venerated as St Kenelm, and an eleventh-century Life claimed that he succeeded his father as a child but was murdered by Cwenthryth.
Contemporary sources say Cenwulf was succeeded by his brother Ceolwulf.
Cenwulf died in 821, at Basingwerk, according to the twelfth-century poet Geoffrey Gaimar [q.v.], and was buried in Winchcombe.
[Anglo-Saxon Chronicle , ed.
C. Plummer, 1892–9; Alcuin,Letters , translated S. Allott, 1974, nos. 45–7; Florence of Worcester,Chronicon , ed.
B. Thorpe, 1848–9; Symeon of Durham,Historia Regum , ed.
T. Arnold, 1882–5; Gaimar,L'Estoire des Engles , ed.
T. D. Hardy and C. T. Martin, 1888–9; C. E. Blunt et al .,
‘The Coinage of Southern England 796–840’,British Numismatic Journal , vol. xxxii, 1963; N. P. Brooks,The Early History of the Church of Canterbury , 1984; P. H. Sawyer,Anglo-Saxon Charters: an Annotated List and Bibliography , 1968; F. M. Stenton,Anglo-Saxon England , 1971.]
Roy Harley Lewis
,Charles Frederick (1832–1879), criminal, was born in Nursery Road, Sheffield, 14 May 1832, the youngest of the four sons of John Peace, shoemaker, and his wife, the daughter of a naval surgeon.
Semi-literate after a cursory schooling, he had a talent for music, being proficient enough with a violin to be billed in his teens at local places of entertainment as the ‘modern Paganini’.
Despite his artistic pretensions, he was apprenticed to a local steel mill, where two accidents left him with a permanent limp and the loss of three fingers of one hand.
Although he was to become Britain's most successful cat burglar, Peace showed no early aptitude, and was frequently arrested.
By 1854 he had ‘graduated’ to longer spells in prison — three sentences totalling twenty years, substantially reduced through remission.
Meanwhile, at the age of twenty-seven he met, and is believed to have married, Hannah Ward, a widow with a small child.
They had a daughter and a son who died in infancy.
But he was learning from experience and moved from town to town to polish his burglary skills.
By 1872 accrued capital enabled him to return to Sheffield with his wife and stepson, setting up as a picture framer.
His income was supplemented from the sale of musical instruments and small antiques.
Success as a burglar was achieved through skill, daring, and an ability to change his appearance — a considerable feat considering his distinctive appearance.
The limp accentuated a natural bandiness, and being very short he was compared to a monkey, an impression heightened by thick features and a heavy lower jaw.
His unfortunate appearance, and lack of education, was offset by a compelling personality, and in 1876 he embarked on an affair with a neighbour, the much younger Katherine Dyson.
However, when he attacked her husband Arthur she protested and, in front of witnesses, Peace threatened her with a gun.
A warrant for his arrest forced him to flee, committing a trail of burglaries in north-country cities.
In Manchester he was intercepted by PC Nicholas Cock, who was shot and killed.
The police arrested John and William Habron, managing to produce ‘eye-witnesses’ at the trial, which Peace attended in disguise.
William was sentenced to death — commuted to life imprisonment because he was only eighteen.
Meanwhile, having returned to Sheffield, Peace shot and killed Arthur Dyson during an argument.
Accompanied by his wife and stepson, he headed south, leaving his mark as a burglar.
In Nottingham he acquired a mistress, Susan Grey, an attractive and educated widow who accompanied the Wards (he was now using Hannah's name) to London, where they eventually settled in Peckham.
Susan was now used to complete the air of respectability — as Mr and Mrs Thompson — with Hannah living in the basement, posing as their housekeeper.
Quite affluent, the newcomers entertained, although Mr Thompson managed to get away at nights, robbing houses across London.
However, after considerable success he was eventually caught in October 1878, breaking into a house in Blackheath.
Ambushed by two policemen, Peace was overpowered by PC Edward Robinson despite a bullet through the arm.
The following month ‘John Ward’ was given a life sentence for shooting with intent to murder.
At that stage Susan Grey revealed his true identity for the £100 reward.
On the train to face trial in the north, Peace jumped through an open carriage window, and although a guard clung to his shoe he wriggled free, only to be found unconscious in the snow.
At Leeds assizes, the evidence of Mrs Dyson was conclusive.
Awaiting execution, Peace finally confessed to the murder of PC Cock, providing the detailed evidence to persuade the authorities of Habron's innocence.
Peace was hanged by William Marwood [q.v.]at Armley prison, Leeds, 25 February 1879, having composed his own memorial card, ending with the words: ‘For that I don [sic]but never intended.’
[Roy Harley Lewis,Victorian Murders , 1988; W. Teignmouth Shore (ed.),
Trials of Charles Frederick Peace , 1926.]
J M Richards
,Samuel Sanders (1812–1873), architect, was born 2 March 1812 in Greenwich, the eldest of the four sons of Samuel Teulon, cabinet-maker and upholsterer (later a surveyor) of Greenwich, and his wife Louisa Sanders from Rotherhithe.
The Teulon family was of Huguenot origin and retained an allegiance to this French connection; Samuel Sanders and his brother William Milford (also an architect) became directors of the French Hospital in south Hackney, London.
Teulon attended the Royal Academy Schools and was then articled to the architect George Legg.
He worked as an assistant to George Porter, starting his own practice in London in 1838.
In 1840 he won a competition for the Dyers' Company almshouses in Islington.
He spent part of 1842 travelling and sketching on the Continent with the architect Ewan Christian.
Teulon developed a vigorous and idiosyncratic neo-Gothic style.
He obtained few commissions for public buildings because, after his early success, he declined to enter the competitions through which, in his day, the architects of many of these were chosen; but he acquired connections with the landed and wealthy, for several of whom he designed country houses.
They valued his vigour and inventiveness and came to respect him as a reliable man of business.
His clients included the Calthorpe family.
Among the most notable of his houses were Tortworth Court, Avon (1853), Bestwood Park, Nottinghamshire (1864), and Elvetham Hall, Hampshire (1862), all in the most energetic of high Victorian styles, with a rich multiplicity of towers and gables, striped walling, and elaborately framed plate-glass windows.
His many churches are equally eclectic, with a frequent use of the patterned brickwork and polychromy that had lately been introduced into English church architecture by William Butterfield and G. E. Street [qq.v.].
Teulon appointed some of the leading architectural craftsmen of his time to embellish them.
Among his most successful churches were St Margaret's, Angmering, Sussex (1854); St Andrew's, Lambeth (1856); St James's, Leckhampstead, Berkshire (1860); and his masterpiece, St Stephen's, Rosslyn Hill, Hampstead (1869).
This is a fine upstanding composition with an impressive vaulted interior.
Teulon's most prominently sited non-ecclesiastical work was the Buxton memorial fountain (1866) in Victoria Tower Gardens, Westminster, a richly decorated structure with Gothic arches and a mosaic-faced spire.
In 1835 he married Harriet Bayne (died 1866).
They had six sons (two died in infancy and the eldest became principal of Chichester Theological College) and four daughters.
Teulon died 2 May 1873 in his house in Hampstead, and was buried in Highgate cemetery.
[Matthew Saunders,The Churches of S. S. Teulon , 1982; Matthew Saunders in The Architectural Outsiders , ed.
Roderick Brown, 1985; British Architectural Library.]
B C Bloomfield
,Emily (1835–1895), printer and propagandist for women's employment, was born 27 May 1835 at Headley rectory, Surrey, the youngest of five daughters and the last of the eight children of the Revd Ferdinand Faithfull, rector of Headley, and his wife Elizabeth Mary.
Educated at home and at a school in Kensington, she was presented at court in 1857.
A member of the Langham Place Circle, she became interested in promoting the employment of women.
In November 1859 she served as secretary to the newly founded National Association for the Promotion of Social Science's committee to consider new channels of employment for women.
Bessie Parkes, a committee member, bought a printing-press and, after becoming familiar with its work, Emily Faithfull decided to open a printing office for women compositors, engaging Austin Holyoake, the brother of George Jacob Holyoake [q.v.], to advise her.
The Victoria Press opened on 25 March 1860 at Great Coram Street and undertook jobbing and book work, notably the Transactions of the NAPSS for 1860 to 1864, and The Victoria Regia (1861), edited by Adelaide Ann Procter [q.v.].
In 1862 she was appointed by royal warrant ‘printer and publisher in ordinary to Her Majesty’, a personal distinction, and in November the press moved to 83a Farringdon Street, where steam was used.
From May 1863 until June 1880 she published and edited the Victoria Magazine monthly (206 numbers in thirty-five volumes).
In August 1864, when Admiral (Sir) Henry Codrington [q.v.]sought a divorce from his wife on grounds of infidelity, the wife counter-claimed that in October 1856 he had attempted to rape Emily Faithfull, then a guest.
The connection with this sensational case damaged Emily Faithfull's reputation in polite society and she consequently undertook more public speaking and journalism.
A quarrel with W. W. Head, the manager of the Victoria Press, entailed the dissolution of their partnership on 3 August 1867, but she retained the editorial office and the imprint.
In 1878 she published a novel Change upon Change (American title,A Reed Shaken by the Wind , 1873) and in 1872–3 made her first visit to North America.
Later in 1873 she moved the Victoria Press to 117 Praed Street, where it remained until April 1881, when its ownership was transferred to the Queen Printing and Publishing Company.
In 1874 she helped found the Women's Printing Society; in 1877 the West London Express ; and in 1881 the International Musical, Dramatic, and Literary Association.
In 1882 and again in 1883–4 she visited North America, and she compared the movements for women's work in England and America in Three Visits to America (1884).
She received £100 from the royal bounty in 1886, an engraving of the queen personally inscribed in 1888, and from 1889 an annual civil-list pension of £50.
Emily Faithfull was described as looking ‘like a stout business gentleman’ and ‘as manly as possible’, and photographs confirm this.
She possessed a musical voice and many friends in theatrical and musical circles.
In later years she suffered severely from asthma.
She died 31 May 1895 at 10 Plymouth Grove, Manchester.
She was unmarried.
[Men and Women of the Time , 14th edn., 1895, revised by Victor G. Plarr; S. M. Ellis (ed.),
The Letters and Memoirs of Sir William Hardman , 2nd series, 1863–5, 1925, pp. 227–31; W. W. Head,The Victoria Press , 1869; W. E. Fredeman, ‘Emily Faithfull and the Victoria Press: an Experiment in Sociological Bibliography’,Library , vol. xxix, 1974, pp. 139–64; J. S. Stone, ‘More Light on Emily Faithfull and the Victoria Press’,Library , vol. xxxiii, 1978, pp. 63–7.]
P G M Dickson
,David (1682–1769), Quaker merchant of Cheapside, was born in Ury 17 September 1682, the second son and second child in the family of three sons and four daughters of Robert Barclay of Ury, ‘the apologist’[q.v.], and his wife Christian, daughter of Gilbert Mollison of Aberdeen.
Barclay's father gave him 9,000 Scottish merks (£500) to start on a mercantile career.
He was apprenticed on 1 March 1698 to John Perry of London (d .
1718), a member of the Drapers' Company since 1686, as the eighth of Perry's sequence of eighteen apprentices.
On completion of his articles, 3 April 1706, Barclay was admitted a freeman of the Drapers' Company, and in 1720 a liveryman.
In 1746 he was elected to the court of assistants, serving until 1768.
He was nominated renter-warden of the company in 1746 (the third of the four wardens) and in 1756 master, but on both occasions paid a fine, as was customary for refusers, to avoid election.
Barclay began to deal in linens while still a freeman, being described in the company's records as ‘linen-draper of Cheapside at the White Bear’.
His cousin John Falconar was already an established Cheapside merchant.
Barclay sold Scottish linens on commission, and dealt in Irish linens with his brother, John Barclay of Dublin.
He gradually extended the range of his business by exporting German linens to Philadelphia on joint account with local merchants.
Already by 1728 one of them was able to describe him as ‘better Acquainted with our Trade than any Draper in London’(see Price, ‘The Great Quaker Business Families’, p. 391, note 8).
By the time of his retirement in 1767, Barclay's firm was ‘the first house in their business’(ibid., note 9), owning ships, and trading to New York, Pennsylvania, the Chesapeake, and the West Indies.
At his death two years later, Barclay was reputedly worth over £100,000.
He was an active member of the monthly, quarterly, and yearly meetings of the Society of Friends, of its committee for sufferings, and of the latter's subcommittee for American affairs.
Barclay married, first, 12 April 1707, Anne (d .
1720), daughter of James Taylor, citizen and glover of London; second, 8 June 1723, Priscilla, daughter of John Freame (1665–1745) of Lombard Street, a leading Quaker banker.
Freame, who was the son of Robert Freame, clothier of Cirencester, was in a banking partnership from the 1690s with his brother-in-law Thomas Gould, son of Thomas Gould, a Quaker of Enfield.
Freame married Thomas Gould's sister Priscilla, and Thomas Gould married Freame's sister Hannah, both events occurring in 1697.
The banking partnership ended at some date in the 1720s, Freame continuing alone, then in partnership with his son Joseph, at what later became 56 Lombard Street.
In 1733 James Barclay, David Barclay's son by his first marriage, married Sally Freame, Priscilla Barclay's sister (thus his step-aunt) and joined the partnership, which became Freame & Barclay, until his death in 1766.
Joseph Freame's own son John (d .
1766) was also a partner from 1759 (Freame, Barclay & Freame).
On Joseph Freame's death in 1770, the Barclay interest in the bank continued through his sister Priscilla's two sons by David Barclay, David and John, who progressively withdrew from their father's linens trade because of the American war, which they strongly opposed.
From 1776 the bank was Barclay, Bevan & Bening, stabilizing as Barclay, Tritton & Bevan from 1797.
It can be seen from this that although David Barclay senior was not ‘the founder of Barclays Bank’ as he has sometimes been named, his sons James, David, and John were important early partners in the bank, and the mercantile fortune he had built up an important source of capital for it from the 1770s.
His house at the sign of the White Bear in Cheapside, opposite Bow church, was earlier used by Charles II (1671), William and Mary (1689), and Anne (1702) to view the lord mayor's procession.
This custom continued under David Barclay, who entertained there George I in 1714, George II in 1727, and the young George III and his new bride in 1761, the last occasion attracting widespread interest in the metropolitan press.
Barclay had two sons and four daughters by his first marriage and two sons and six daughters by his second.
Alexander, by his first marriage, was a collector of customs in Philadelphia.
David [q.v.], by his second, was prominent in the Quaker anti-slavery movement.
Barclay died 18 March 1769 at Bush Hill, Winchmore Hill, Middlesex, a house inherited from his father-in-law John Freame.
[P. W. Matthews and A. W. Tuke,History of Barclays Bank Ltd .,
1926; Charles W. Barclay et al .,
A History of the Barclay Family , 3 parts, 1924–34; F. G. Hilton Price,A Handbook of London Bankers , 1870, repr. 1970; Jacob M. Price,Capital and Credit in British Overseas Trade: the View from the Chesapeake, 1700–1776 , 1980;idem , ‘The Great Quaker Business Families of Eighteenth-Century London’, in R. S. Dunn and M. M. Dunn (eds.),
The World of William Penn , 1986; Drapers' Company records, Drapers' Hall, London; Digest registers, Library of Society of Friends, London.]
A Gordon Kinder
,Cipriano de (c. 1532– c. 1606), theologian and author, was born in Valera la Vieja (Spain)c .1532.
Nothing is known about his early life, except that he graduated from the University of Seville with a bachelor's degree in logic and philosophy.
Even his baptismal and family names have been lost through the monastic practice of using, together with his birthplace, the professional name he assumed when he became an Observant Hieronymite friar in San Isidoro, near Seville.
His monastery was strongly affected by the evangelical movement in Seville in the 1550s, when he was converted to Protestantism, thereafter remaining a convinced Calvinist.
When investigations by the Inquisition threatened in 1557, he fled to Geneva with a dozen fellow monks, proceeding thence to England immediately after Queen Elizabeth I's accession.
He was tried in absentia and his effigy burnt after the auto-da-fé in Seville on 16 April 1562.
He went to Cambridge, being incorporated BA on 9 February 1560, and on 12 January 1561 he was appointed fellow of Magdalene College by royal mandate, serving as college treasurer from 1564 to 1566.
On 12 June 1563 he was advanced to MA, and incorporated MA in Oxford on 23 February 1566.
Early in 1568 he left Cambridge for London, where he was reported to be a preacher and schoolmaster, attending the Italian Protestant church, and married to Anne, with one son, Isaac, and two daughters (one perhaps called Judith).
He seems to have enjoyed the patronage of influential people, who probably subsidized the books he began to publish in the Armada year of 1588.
These works, some of which were strongly anti-Catholic and evidently intended as propaganda in the war against Spain, earned him the epithet of ‘the Spanish heretic’ in the Index .
The first of them,Dos tratados : el primero es del Papa…el segundo es de la misa (1588; greatly augmented edition 1599) was a popularization of his eminent erudition and wide reading on the religious controversy.
In 1596 he published an edition of the Spanish version of Calvin's Catechism (1559), and one of the New Testament from the Spanish Bible of Basle (1569), which was eventually followed by a revision of the whole Bible, printed in Amsterdam (1602), and supervised there by Valera himself in his seventieth year.
He brought out a Spanish translation of Calvin's great work,Institución de la religión Christiana (1597), and the version of a French criticism of the Holy Year,Aviso a los de la Iglesia Romana sobre la indicción del Jubileo (1600).
Precise information on his death is lacking, but it seems to have occurred about four years after his return to England from Amsterdam in 1602.
[E. Boehmer,Bibliotheca Wiffeniana , vol. iii, 1904; A. G. Kinder, ‘Cipriano de Valera, Spanish Reformer 1532? –1602?’,
Bulletin of Hispanic Studies , vol. xlvi, 1969;idem , ‘Further unpublished material and some notes on Cipriano de Valera’,Bibliothèque d'Humanisme et Renaissance , vol. xxxi, 1969; A. Ramirez, ‘Un testimonio inédito de Cipriano de Valera’, ibid., vol. xxx, 1968; P. J. Hauben,Three Spanish Heretics , 1967; N. V. Fenn,Cypriano de Valera and His Descendants , 1800.]
John Davies
,John , second Marquess of Bute and sixth or seventh Earl of Dumfries (1793–1848), landowner and industrialist, was born 10 August 1793 at Dumfries House, Ayrshire, the eldest son (there were no daughters) of John Stuart, Baron Mountstuart of Mountstuart House, Isle of Bute, and his wife Elizabeth Penelope, the younger daughter of Patrick Macdowal Crichton, fifth or sixth Earl of Dumfries.
Baron Mountstuart (1767–1794), who predeceased his father, was the eldest of the eleven children of John Stuart, first Marquess of Bute.
The second marquess inherited the titles and the estates of his maternal grandfather on the death of the fifth/sixth Earl of Dumfries in 1803 and those of his paternal grandfather on the death of the first Marquess of Bute in 1814.
On 26 August 1805 he took the arms and the name of Crichton.
Following the death of his mother in 1797, he spent his boyhood in the various houses of his paternal grandfather.
He was educated at Eton and at Christ's College, Cambridge (MA, 1812), where he was strongly influenced by his tutor, John Kaye [q.v.], later the bishop of Lincoln.
Between 1809 and 1814 he travelled extensively, making the acquaintance of Madame de Staël, Louis Philippe, and Napoleon.
Bute's fame rests upon his achievements as a landowner.
He owned over 100,000 acres; most of his property was situated in the counties of Bute, Ayr, and Wigtown, but he was also a major proprietor in Glamorgan, where the Cardiff Castle estate, originally granted in the sixteenth century to William Herbert, Earl of Pembroke [q.v.], had passed to his grandfather through marriage.
He spent his adult life in a circuit of his estates, staying in turn at Mountstuart House, Dumfries House, Newcastle upon Tyne, Luton Hoo, and Cardiff Castle.
(During the lifetime of his first wife he had also had estate responsibilities at Banbury in Oxfordshire and Kirtling in Cambridgeshire.)
A passionate improver, his vast correspondence chronicles his attempts to develop his estates and to improve the lot of their inhabitants.
His most significant contribution to estate development came in Glamorgan, where the Cardiff Castle estate included almost all the land of the ancient borough together with manorial rights over the valleys of the central part of the south Wales coalfield.
He was the landlord of the Dowlais ironworks, in the 1840s the largest ironworks in the world, and his paltry returns from the Dowlais lease caused him to drive a hard bargain with those seeking the coal of his estate.
As a result, his son John, third Marquess of Bute [q.v.], would by the later nineteenth century be the largest individual receiver of mineral royalties in Britain.
In order to prove the commercial value of his coal reserves in the Rhondda valley, he initiated steps to show that the steam coal of the valley lay at exploitable depths, an act which led to the astounding growth of the Rhondda.
His main contribution to the development of the south Wales coalfield was his construction of a masonry dock at Cardiff; opened in 1839, it was the first of the five Bute docks, docks which would in the late nineteenth century be handling more coal than any other port in the world.
Cardiff, which in 1801 was twenty-fifth in size among the towns of Wales, expanded rapidly in the wake of the dock development, and the marquess paid assiduous attention to the layout of new streets and the design of frontages.
By the 1870s Cardiff had become the largest town in Wales and the marquess was being hailed as its ‘creator’.
An intensely dutiful, rather dour man, he was plagued by eye troubles and as a result he shunned fashionable society.
He was a friend of Arthur Wellesley, first Duke of Wellington, and his views on issues such as Catholic emancipation, parliamentary reform, and the corn laws closely mirrored those of the duke.
An ardent champion of the Established Church, both English and Scottish, he was nevertheless a tireless advocate of the relief of the disabilities of the Jews.
He served as lord lieutenant of the counties of Glamorgan and Bute from 1815 until his death.
He was also colonel of the Glamorgan militia and high steward of Banbury.
His honours included FRS (1818), DCL (Oxford, 1834), LLD (Cambridge, 1835), FSA (1838), and KT (1843).
He was high commissioner to the general assembly of the Church of Scotland in 1842–6, a period which coincided with the disruption crisis.
In 1818 he married Maria, daughter and co-heir of George Augustus North, third Earl of Guilford [q.v.].
Maria died childless in 1841.
In 1845 he married Sophia Frederica Christina, daughter of Francis Rawdon Hastings, first Marquess of Hastings [q.v.], and his wife Flora,suo jure Countess of Loudoun.
They had one son.
Bute died at Cardiff Castle 18 March 1848 and was buried alongside his first wife at Kirtling in Cambridgeshire.
He was succeeded as third marquess by his son John Patrick (born 1847).
[John Davies,Cardiff and the Marquesses of Bute , 1981.]
Anita McConnell
,Robert Brettell (1782–1847), scientific instrument-maker, was born in Old Swinford, Worcestershire, 27 February 1782, the third of four sons of Overs Bate, mercer and banker of Old Swinford, and his wife Susannah Brettell.
Both his parents came from prosperous merchant and landowning families.
No record of his schooling or any apprenticeship has been found, but by 1804 he was in London, living with his uncle, a haberdasher.
On 11 February 1804 he married his cousin Anna Maria, daughter of Benjamin Sikes, a collector of excise resident in Clerkenwell.
They had five children: Mary, Bartholomew (later apprenticed to his father), Anna Maria, John, and Ann, who in 1843 married Richard Thomas Staples-Brown.
Shortly before Sikes's death in 1803 his hydrometer had been adopted by the government excise department for revenue purposes.
The right to supply this instrument passed to his family, and thus Bate, as nephew and son-in-law, was appointed mathematical instrument-maker to HM Excise, a privilege later extended to his widow.
Bate was made free of the Spectaclemakers' Company by redemption in 1814.
Admitted to the livery in 1822, he moved up through the ranks to become master in 1828–30, thereafter sitting in the court of assistants.
He was appointed optician in ordinary to King George IV, this post being renewed on the accessions of William IV and Queen Victoria.
Helped by eminent scientists, Bate worked continually to improve the hydrometers and his skills were acknowledged when he was asked to make the models for the new standard weights and measures of capacity enacted by Parliament in 1825 to replace existing ancient local measures.
Bate and Henry Kater [q.v.]worked on these models in 1825–6, and subsequently Bate supplied hundreds of sets of standards to government and municipal offices throughout the United Kingdom and overseas.
He also made bullion balances for the Bank of England, the East India Company, and other establishments.
John Bate stood in for his father during his frequent absences — he suffered from chronic bronchitis — giving evidence to several parliamentary commissions on weights and measures before his own early death of consumption in 1840.
Appointed sole Admiralty chart agent in 1830, Bate was co-publisher of the Nautical Magazine during its early years, and he wrote and/or published navigation books and some dozen handbooks concerning apparatus which he sold.
He retailed mathematical, scientific, and optical instruments, collaborating with (Sir) David Brewster [q.v.]on the kaleidoscope (1816), and took out patents for hydrometers and spectacle frames.
The firm traded from 17 Poultry, in the City of London, from 1807, moving to larger premises at 20/21 in 1820.
In later years Bate also rented a house in Hampstead where he died 27 December 1847.
His widow ran the firm until 1850, closing it down shortly before her own death in 1851.
Bate and his wife, along with several members of their families, were buried at St John's, Clerkenwell.
[Parish records; PRO Treasury and Excise papers; Royal Society archives; Hydrographic Office archives; Spectaclemakers' Company records.]
Bernard Capp
,John (d. 1654), Seeker and millenarian, was settled by Parliament as minister of St John's, in the Soke, Winchester, from the late 1640s till his death.
His fame rests on the flurry of tracts he published in his last years, and little is known of his background.
He may have come from Somerset: one tract was dedicated to his kinsman Thomas Churchey of Wincanton, and he may be identical with the John Brayne of Crewkerne, a gentleman's son who entered New Inn Hall, Oxford, in 1636, aged twenty-two.
He was certainly fluent in the classical languages and Hebrew, and was once described as ‘Dr Brayne’.
By the later 1640s Brayne had developed radical political and religious ideas.
In September 1647 he had a vision of the impending downfall of monarchy in England, France, and Spain, heralding the reign of Christ on earth.
He sent this prophecy to the MP John Lisle [q.v.], and it circulated in the army.
In 1649 he revealed that General Thomas Fairfax (third Baron Fairfax of Cameron, q.v.)(‘and none else’) was the avenging angel of Revelations xiv.
16, and that God would use the army to restore the true church, paving the way for the calling of the Jews.
In the same year he welcomed news from France of the overthrow of Cardinal Mazarin, ‘the first of the foolish virgins’, and predicted an English invasion of Scotland to root out Presbyterianism.
This prophecy too was sent to Lisle.
Other works reveal connections with the Rumpers John Pyne and William Sydenham [qq.v], and the millenarian polymath John Sadler [q.v.], ‘a dear and faithful friend’.
Brayne's primary interest lay in the nature of the church.
He regarded all existing churches as false, believing the true church would emerge only at the end of the 1,260 years in the wilderness (Revelations xii.
6), which would be in 1666.
There were, however, some true ministers, typified by the two witnesses of Revelations xx, and it was in this sense that he described himself as ‘an unworthy witness’ of the Lord.
Such ministers were to preach the gospel (as Brayne did four or five times a week), but should not administer the sacraments.
He devoted much thought to the shape of the future church.
In 1648 he wrote to the Westminster Assembly, criticizing the Presbyterian system it had devised, but the only result was the suspension of his augmentation at Winchester.
His own studies led him towards a much-modified Congregationalism, with a threefold ministry of evangelists, pastors, and teachers.
Church members would observe the seventh-day sabbath and practise adult baptism; all others would continue to keep the first-day sabbath, and would be barred from the sacraments.
Brayne also held idiosyncratic views on the hereafter.
His version of mortalism distinguished between the soul, remaining with the body till the Last Judgement, and the spirit, which God quickened only in the elect and which returned straight to heaven.
Those with such an awakened spirit might be blessed in this life with divine dreams and revelations.
His views on predestination and the trinity were remarkably conventional.
Like the Fifth Monarchists, Brayne saw the judicial laws of the Old Testament as an essential part of Christ's reign.
He supported Parliament's measures against blasphemy and the Adultery Act of 1650, though he regarded them as inadequate and insufficiently close to scripture.
He also advocated sweeping changes in education.
He attacked Latin authors as profane, wanted schools to use only biblical and early Christian writings in teaching Greek, and urged greater study of Hebrew.
Existing translations of the Bible were so faulty, he complained, that they should be called in.
Astrology was condemned as the doctrine of demons.
Brayne had considerable influence on other millenarian and spiritual writers.
His polemical tracts drew replies from, among others, John Gadbury the astrologer and the Baptist, Peter Chamberlen (1601–1683)[qq.v].
Brayne was buried in Winchester 20 February 1654.
He died in poverty, and the council of state settled a pension of £30 on his widow, Dorcas, and their eight small children.
[Brayne's works, notably The Smoak of the Temple Cleared (1648),Gospel Advice (1648),Babels Fall (1649),The Churches Going In (1649),The Churches Resurrection (1649),The New Earth (1653),The Unknown Being of the Spirit (1654);A Vision, which one Mr Brayne…had (1649);Calendars of State Papers Domestic 1652–55 , ed.
M. A. E. Green (1878–81); parish register of St John's, Winchester.]
Arthur G Credland
,Thomas (1792–1869), owner of a shipping company, was born in Hull 12 February 1792, the youngest of at least nine children of David Wilson, lighter owner, of George Yard, Hull, and his wife Elizabeth Gray.
He was baptized at the Dagger Lane Independent chapel.
Apprenticed to John Wilson (no relation) of Wilson, Wilkinson & Co., iron merchants of 47 High Street, he was a junior clerk and then a traveller in the Sheffield district, promoting the sale of iron ore to the local industrialists.
In 1820, with a growing family, he decided to set up his own business.
He opened a yard to receive consignments of iron ore, which he had arranged through an agent in Sweden, and contacts from his time employed as a salesman were invaluable in developing his trade.
In 1821 he joined in partnership with John Beckinton of Newcastle and set up an office at 14 Salthouse Lane, next door to the Hull branch of the Bank of England.
The firm of Beckinton, Wilson & Co., iron merchants, was dissolved in 1836, but by this time he was investing in a fleet of sailing ships to carry his own cargoes.
In a new partnership — Wilson, Hudson & Co. — he began a regular mail and passenger service to Gothenburg, inaugurated on 2 June 1840.
This was his first venture into steam, using vessels chartered from the St George Steam Packet Co.
In 1850 his eldest son David became a partner and soon six brothers were to be involved in the firm in various capacities.
His second son John West Wilson was a resident agent in Gothenburg and eventually became a naturalized Swede.
Charles and Arthur Wilson were made full partners in 1867 and were by this time effectively running the company, which they transformed from a major European enterprise into an international one with routes to North America and India.
Thomas Wilson was first chairman of the Hull Underwriters Association, founded in 1867, and spent much of his last years in various charitable enterprises.
In 1863 he had given £1,500 to the endowment fund of the Hull Seamen's Orphanage and he was appointed chairman in 1866.
In 1869 he presided over its annual general meeting, his last public engagement before he died, a week later.
Following the purchase of a rival company in 1903 the Wilson Line became the biggest privately owned steamship company in the world.
One son, Charles Henry Wilson (1833–1907, q.v.),
Liberal MP for Hull for twenty-five years, was elevated to the peerage in 1904 as first Baron Nunburnholme.
Another son, Arthur Wilson (1836–1909, q.v.), master of the Holderness Hunt, frequently entertained the prince of Wales at his home, Tranby Croft, scene of the baccarat scandal in 1890.
In 1814 Wilson married Susannah, daughter of John West, wine and spirit merchant.
They had nine sons and six daughters.
Wilson died 21 June 1869 at Park House, Cottingham.
[Hull City Record Office; Hull Town Docks Museum; G. M. Attwood,The Wilsons of Tranby Croft , 1988.]
John H Appleby
,Robert (1710–1781), philanthropist and connoisseur, was baptized 12 September 1710 at St Helen's, Bishopsgate, London, the eldest in the family of two surviving sons and four daughters (there were nineteen children in all) of Robert Dingley, a Bishopsgate jeweller, and his wife Susanna, daughter of Henry Elkin.
Made freemen of the Russia Company in August 1731, he and his brother Charles traded as partners, with an agency in St Petersburg, where, with other merchants, they financed two sugar refineries.
Robert represented the company's interests at the Commons and the Admiralty, becoming its consul and auditor in 1759, as well as a director of the Bank of England (1757–67).
A member of the Society of Dilettanti from its foundation c .1736, he devised an influential plan in February 1749 for a public Academy of Arts, and was also an active fellow of the Society of Antiquaries (1734–48).
Elected FRS in 1748, he contributed useful items to the Philosophical Transactions on gemstones (vol. xliv, 1747) and irregular Thames tides (vol. xlix, 1756).
As a philanthropist, Dingley served on a committee of the Merchant Seamen's Corporation (established in 1747), and was a governor and an innovative inspector (1758–62) of the London Foundling Hospital.
He pioneered the Magdalen Hospital for Penitent Prostitutes, the first English charity of its kind, founded at Prescot Street, Whitechapel, in 1758, largely designing its second building, which opened at Southwark in 1772.
Its treasurer and then, from 1768, vice-president, he is commemorated by Dingley Lane, SW16.
Several of his talented architectural designs exist, including engravings of those for rebuilding the King's and Queen's Baths at Bath (published by I. and J. Taylor c .1787).
His 1757 proposals as a fellow of the Society of Arts resulted in premiums being awarded for modelling in various media.
His exceptional collection of gemstones, engraved gems, drawings, prints, and natural-history specimens was auctioned by White's on 23 June 1785.
Dingley owned a house at Little St Helen's, Bishopgate.
From 1753, when he sold two Sussex farms, until the death of his wife Elizabeth, daughter of Henry Thompson, of Kirby Hall, Yorkshire, in 1759, his country home was in Charlton, moving to Lamorbey, at Bexley, when he married Esther Spencer (died 1784) in March 1760.
He had a son and two daughters (one of whom died very young) by his first marriage.
Dingley died at Lamorbey 8 August 1781, according to the monumental inscription in Charlton parish church, where he and his wives are buried.
His portrait, painted and presented in 1762 by William Hoare [q.v.]to the Magdalen Hospital, was engraved in mezzotint by John Dixon [q.v.]and is in a private collection.
[H. F. B. Compston,The Magdalen Hospital , 1917; S. P. B. Pearce,An Ideal in the Working: the Store of the Magdalen Hospital 1758 to 1958 , 1958; J. H. Appleby, ‘Robert Dingley…
Merchant, Architect and Pioneering Philanthropist’,Notes and Records of the Royal Society , vol. xlv, no. 2, 1991;idem , ‘Mills, Models and Magdalens — the Dingley Brothers and the Society of Arts’,Journal of the Royal Society of Arts , vol. cxl, 1992.]
Trevor I Williams
,David (1839–1916), fine chemical manufacturer, was born in Tottenham, London, in 1839, the third of four sons (there were no daughters) of Robert Howard, chemical manufacturer of Stratford, London.
He studied at the Royal College of Chemistry, London, under A. W. von Hofmann, and in 1860 joined as a partner the well established chemical manufacturing business founded by his grandfather, Luke Howard [q.v.], in 1807.
Howards began by manufacturing fine chemicals, especially the antimalarial drug quinine and its derivatives, for the pharmaceutical industry.
David Howard's uncle, J. E. Howard [q.v.]did much original research on the chemistry of cinchona alkaloids, and he himself pursued the same line of enquiry.
He became an acknowledged authority in this field, publishing a number of papers in the Journal of the Chemical Society from 1871.
During the nineteenth century quinine was the firm's most profitable product, though it also manufactured many other fine chemicals, including cocaine, ether, borax, and citric acid.
In 1888, the year in which the Kodak camera was launched, Howards acquired Hopkin & Williams, of Wandsworth, who made photographic chemicals.
Around the turn of the century manufacture began to be concentrated at a new site in Ilford.
In 1903 David Howard succeeded his father as chairman and there followed a period of rapid growth.
In 1905 the firm acquired an interest in Bowmans of Warrington, making chemicals for the brewing industry, and Thorium Ltd. was established in 1914 to make thorium nitrate for gas mantles.
Two years later aspirin manufacture was commenced.
David Howard's lifelong interest in chemistry and the chemical industry was not limited to manufacture.
He served on the council of the Chemical Society and was president of the Society of Chemical Industry (1886–7) and of the Institute of Chemistry (1903–6).
He was much concerned with strict honesty in business transactions and was closely involved in the agitation that led to the passing of the Prevention of Corruption Act in 1900: he was subsequently chairman of the Bribery and Secret Commissions Prevention League, set up to give effect to the provisions of the Act.
He also served as deputy lieutenant for the county of Essex.
In 1865 he married Anna Dora, daughter of John Jowitt of Leeds.
They had two sons, both of whom became directors of the firm.
David Howard maintained an active interest in his company to the end of his long life.
He died suddenly 14 November 1916 while travelling from his home at Buckhurst Hill to the Ilford factory.
[Journal of the Society of Chemical Industry , vol. xxxv, 30 November 1916, p. 1144; ibid., jubilee number 1931, p. 55; Society of Friends archives, Euston Road, London.]
Nigel Llewellyn
,Epiphanius (1570– c. 1634), metal engraver, sculptor, tomb-maker, and painter, was born in 1570, perhaps on the feast of the Epiphany (6 January), either the ninth or the fourteenth and youngest son of William Evesham, probably a Catholic recusant of Wellington, near Hereford, and his wife Jane, daughter of Alexander Howarth of Burghill.
His childhood is obscure, but in 1589 Evesham made a sundial for his brother John (Hereford Museum).
The family were in London when William died aged sixty-five, on 12 June 1584, and an eighteenth-century source records Epiphanius as the pupil of Richard Stevens (died 1592), one of the Southwark community of alien stone-carvers.
His older brother Alexander (died 28 December 1592) may have been in the household of Lady Dorothy Stafford.
During the 1590s Evesham must have had a London workshop.
There is no securely dated early work, but there are two signed memorial tablets in Kent which may date from this period (Mersham and Hythe).
Probably for reasons of religion, Evesham moved to Paris, where he lived with his family and took apprentices from 1601 to 1614.
His various documented works from this period have not survived: monuments for churches in Paris and near Versailles; a cast fountain figure of Neptune in 1601; various works for a country house near Melun.
In 1608 Evesham was referred to as both sculptor and painter.
No paintings are known, but he did commission from another artist a series of three substantial history pictures in which his family appeared as witnesses to religious scenes.
Soon after 1614 Evesham returned to London and began to produce a range of works for sites across the country and for various patrons, some of whom were papists.
The signed Hawkins monument in Boughton-under-Blean, Kent, must date from about 1618: it shows Evesham's skill in the expressive relief carving which is rare in early seventeenth-century English sculpture.
His mature pictorial manner is exemplified by the signed West brass (post 1618, Marsworth, Buckinghamshire) with its complex iconography and Latin mottoes.
Destroyed in 1666 was the memorial at Old St Paul's to the poet, John Owen (died 1622)[q.v.], referred to by John Penkethman [q.v.]in 1624 in a famous phrase as by ‘that most exquisite artist’.
Although he had many substantial patrons, Evesham may have been in financial straits in the mid-1620s.
Richard Boyle, first Earl of Cork [q.v.], noted (23 October 1628) that his ‘Cozen Evesham’ had started work on a monument but had pawned the carved stones.
The work had to be finished by another tomb-maker.
Evesham's last work is represented by the engraved Erdeswicke stone slab in West Hanningfield, Essex (once signed).
A total of some fifty monuments have been attributed to Evesham on the basis of this small group of secure works, although uncertain connoisseurship has left the oeuvre imprecisely defined.
The patron of the plaster and alabaster monument to Christopher Roper, second Lord Teynham (died 1622, Lynsted, Kent), was the subject's widow (died 1625); it is signed in roman rather than Evesham's usual cursive script.
Alabaster relief panels of narrative scenes or portrait groups in a manner very close to the Hawkins and Teynham monuments in Kent have been cited in attributions to Evesham of several monuments.
That to Sir Adrian Scrope (died 1623, South Cockerington, Lincolnshire) shows the subject's children kneeling against the tomb chest.
The monument to John Farnham (died 1587, Quorndon, Leicestershire) includes a separately mounted panel showing a military encampment.
Soon after 1620 a monument was erected to the memory of the first [q.v.]and second Barons Rich (died 1568 and 1581, Felsted, Essex) which includes a series of reliefs illustrating scenes from the life of the first lord.
A set of circular reliefs showing biblical subjects expressing the doctrine of the seven gifts of the Holy Spirit is included on the massive monument to Sir Thomas Gorges (died 1610, Salisbury Cathedral, Wiltshire).
There are substantial reasons for attributing to Evesham the monuments to Hester Salusbury (died 1614, Stansted Mountfitchet, Essex); Robert Rich, first Earl of Warwick (died 1619, Snarford, Lincolnshire); Sir Justinian Lewin (died 1620, Otterden, Kent); John Troughton (died 1621, Ingatestone, Essex), and the black stone panel engraved with allegorical devices in commemoration of Guy Carleton (died 1628, Cuckfield, East Sussex).
In general, the characteristics of his style are his interest in pictorial relief, his idiosyncratic architectural surrounds, and the expressive emotion of his subsidiary figures.
He seems to have died after 1633.
[Hereford County Record Office MS b/56/1 f.84; Victoria and Albert Museum Library MS L 29–1982; K. A. Esdaile, works listed in Church Monuments I (2), 1986, pp. 117–33; K. H. Jones, ‘The Hawkins Monument by Epiphanius Evesham at Boughton-under-Blean’,Archaeologia Cantiana , vol. xlv, 1933, p. 205; Madeleine Jurgens, ‘Quelques actes inédits concernant Epiphanius Evesham’,Bulletin de la Société de l'histoire de l'art français , 1960, p. 175; Margaret Whinney,Sculpture in Britain 1530–1830 , 2nd edn. 1988, pp. 56–60.]
Max Nicholson
,Charles (1704–1786), landscape gardener, was baptized 13 November 1704 in Dublin, the fourteenth child and youngest of the nine sons of James Hamilton, sixth Earl of Abercorn [q.v.], and his wife Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Robert Reading, first baronet, of Dublin.
He was educated at Westminster School and Christ Church, Oxford (BA, 1723), where he formed a lifelong friendship with Henry Fox (later first Baron Holland, q.v.), to whose social, financial, and vocational backing his career owed much.
Next, making the grand tour to Rome, he became inspired by the landscapes of Claude Lorraine, Nicolas Poussin, and Salvator Rosa.
In 1727 he became MP for Strabane in the Irish Parliament.
In 1732, on a second visit to Rome with Henry and Stephen Fox, his portrait by Antonio David shows him fashionably dressed, holding a gun, with an attendant, dogs, and a brace of partridges — he was highly rated as a shot.
Here he acquired and smuggled home some antique sculpture, including busts of Roman emperors and a seven-feet-tall Bacchus, later to adorn Painshill.
In 1734 his father died, and, needing an income, he won a post in the household of Frederick, prince of Wales [q.v.], in 1738 through the influence of his sister, Lady Archibald Hamilton, the prince's mistress.
He was MP for Truro (1741–7) and receiver-general in Minorca (1743–57).
He was dismissed by the prince of Wales in 1747, and the loss of Minorca in 1756 cost him his receivership.
Henry Fox secured a secret service pension for him of £1,200 a year as compensation.
By 1737 he had begun to acquire over 200 acres of what was regarded as desolate heath-land sloping down to the River Mole near Cobham in Surrey, and he turned it into an ornamental park, Painshill Park.
He used his varied talents as a soil improver, a collector and grower of newly available exotic trees and shrubs, and an impresario of entertaining devices, ranging from a water-wheel pump to a grotto, a hermitage, and rare sculptures and follies, ingeniously placed to create a series of agreeable surprises on a tour revealing successive aspects of nature presented in terms of art.
He created a thirty-acre lake and planted two vineyards.
In his day Hamilton was recognized by discriminating judges as having contributed decisively to the emergence of the new naturalistic style of English landscape, and his guidance was sought by his friends for such outstanding creations as Stourhead, Bowood, Hagley, and Holland Park.
He arrived at a time when converging philosophical, political, scientific, and economic influences had inspired a number of English landowners to transform their estates into prosperous miniature centres for civilized living.
To fulfil the process, however, they needed to integrate nature with inspired landscape design in terms consistent with practical land management, silviculture, and land-forms which could be changed only within strict limits.
By his talents, dedication, social connections, and ability to get quick and exciting results within narrow constraints of money and manpower, Charles Hamilton devised the right model at the right moment.
Unfortunately, after he had to sell Painshill in 1773 in order to repay Henry Fox's loan, the dynamic was lost.
Long afterwards neglect, culminating in damage and destruction, almost destroyed Painshill, until Elmbridge borough council acquired most of it for the Painshill Park Trust, which revived Hamilton's original designs through a vigorous programme of renewal.
It may well have been with mixed feelings that Hamilton gave up Painshill and its burdens after some thirty-five years.
Shattered after losing his young second wife, he moved to Bath, then in its social heyday, where a benign-looking portrait shows him at seventy, grasping a book entitled Views of Painshill .
He was married three times.
Nothing is known of his first wife whom he married c .1730, but they had two daughters.
In 1772 he married Agnes, daughter of Dr David Cockburn of Ayr, and they had one daughter.
After Agnes's death in 1772 he married Frances Calvert in 1774.
Hamilton died 11 September 1786 in Bath and was buried at Bath Abbey.
[Miles Hadfield,A History of British Gardening , 2nd edn., 1969; R. Sedgwick,The House of Commons 1715–1756 , vol. ii, 1970; B. and N. Kitz,Pains Hill Par k, Cobham , 1984, privately published; MS papers of Charles Hamilton, Baronscourt archives; papers relating to the restoration plans at Painshill held by the Painshill Park Trust and land use consultants.]
Barnabas Lindars SSF
,(William) Strowan (Amherst)(‘Father Algy’)(1894–1955), priest and religious, was born at Redlands, 21 Ealing Common, Middlesex, 16 October 1894, the elder son (there were no daughters) of William Robertson, jeweller, and his wife Lucy Ann Amherst.
His father was active in City companies, and was master of the Carpenters' Company in 1906.
Strowan Robertson, small and delicate from birth and frequently ill, was educated at Westminster School and Queens' College, Cambridge.
In the historical tripos he received a third class in both parts i (1915) and ii (1916).
He acquired from his mother a love of hymns and a deeply spiritual religion.
A Congregationalist who turned Anglican, he combined the best of both Catholic and evangelical traditions.
His bright and affectionate nature won him numerous friends from earliest schooldays.
At Cambridge he was always the centre of a circle of friends, willing accomplices in his endless schemes and parties.
By this time he was universally known as Algy.
Various religious influences at Cambridge fired him with the wish to dedicate his life to God.
Being unfit for military service, in 1917 he accepted appointment as lecturer in history and English literature for three years at St Paul's College, Calcutta, where the poverty of the people made a deep impression on him.
He returned to Cambridge for ordination training at Westcott House, and in 1921 was ordained deacon (priest 1922) in Newcastle to the parish of St George, Cullercoats.
Here his whirlwind ministry included the founding of camps for young people, assisted by students.
From 1924 to 1927 he was travelling secretary to theological colleges for the Student Christian Movement, spreading the vision of ecumenism among theological students, but his health became permanently damaged due to his hurried way of life.
In spite of this, he returned to India in 1927 to join the Christa Seva Sangha, an Anglican religious order founded in Poona in 1922 by Father Jack Winslow, inspired by the ideals of St Francis.
In India he developed his work among students, and founded the first Christian hostel for students at the University of Poona, as well as helping to build the ashram at Poona.
In 1930 ill health forced his return to England.
He founded an English branch of the Sangha at St Ives, Huntingdonshire, where he was vicar from 1931 to 1937.
Negotiations with other Anglican Franciscan orders led to the formation of the Society of St Francis (1936), and Father Algy moved to Cerne Abbes in Dorset to take charge of the Home of St Francis at Hilfield, where Brother Douglas Downes had established a brotherhood for work among tramps in 1921.
Hilfield remained his centre until his death.
Here Father Algy did his finest work.
He reorganized the life of the brotherhood, putting it on a sound basis of regular devotion, clear instruction, and caring ministry.
He was in constant demand to conduct retreats and to preach in parishes, schools, and universities.
His personal magnetism attracted men to the brotherhood, and new branches were opened.
He also founded a sisterhood in 1950, the Community of St Clare, near Oxford.
The claims of individuals for personal counselling were unending.
He tried to keep too much under his personal control, so that letters were neglected and he was always late.
Though constantly ill and in pain, his vision and capacity to inspire others never deserted him.
He was appointed honorary canon of Salisbury in 1953.
Father Algy died 23 November 1955 at the Gordon Hospital, Westminster.
[Father Denis,Father Algy , 1964; private information; personal knowledge.]
Eric Hopkins
,Richard (1580–1657), ironmaster, was baptized in Dudley 28 March 1580, the son of Richard Foley, nailer.
Originally in the nail trade, in the 1620s he turned to iron manufacture, and about 1625 established an iron-slitting mill on the River Stour at Hyde, near Kinver, Staffordshire, costing £500.
He was once credited with bringing back from Sweden the secret of how the mill worked, which he discovered while disguised as a wandering fiddler (hence the nickname, ‘Fiddler’ Foley); but it now seems clear that the first slitting mill in England was set up at Dartford, Kent, in 1590.
However, Foley's mill was probably the first erected in the midlands, and may have been of a new design.
Subsequently Foley became a well-known midlands ironmaster.
The precise scale of his industrial undertakings is unknown, but by 1629 his blast-furnace at West Bromwich cost over £1,000 annually in ironstone, wood, and charcoal.
By 1636 he was said to operate five furnaces and nine forges and slitting mills in the west midlands.
In an action brought by the Crown in 1636, he was accused of felling 19,320 trees reserved for shipbuilding, and of having consumed annually 300,000 loads of wood in his ironworks over the preceding seven years.
During the civil war he cast cannon for the king, Prince Rupert staying with him for three days in October 1642.
About 1630 he moved to Stourbridge, living at Stourbridge High Street at the ‘brickhouse’, the later Talbot Hotel.
He still retained property in Dudley, being the largest payer of poor rates there in 1649; apart from houses in the town, his land at Netherton Hall nearby was set down at 195¾ acres.
He was mayor of Dudley in 1616, taking an interest in Dudley Grammar School, where he built a new school house, and appointed Richard Baxter [q.v.], the Kidderminster divine, as schoolmaster.
In his will he left the school house to trustees, and also certain almshouses, together with a yearly sum of £6 for a monthly lecture.
In Stourbridge he was churchwarden at St Mary's in 1634 and 1635, and again in 1650–1.
He left £20 p.a. to the Stourbridge Free Grammar School.
By his first wife he had a son, Richard.
By his second wife, Alice Brindley of Hyde, daughter of William Brindley, he had a further five sons and five daughters.
Of these, Thomas and Robert, the second and third sons, succeeded to the ironworks.
Thomas Foley (1617–1677, q.v.) became very wealthy, with a reputed income of £5,000 a year.
The last-born son, Samuel (1655–1695, q.v.), became bishop of Down and Connor in Ireland.
The Foley family were ennobled in 1711–12.
Richard Foley died 6 July 1657, and was buried in front of the chancel steps at St Mary's, Stourbridge.
[W. H. B. Court,The Rise of the Midland Industries 1600–1838 , 1938; H. E. Palfrey, ‘Foleys of Stourbridge’,Transactions of the Worcestershire Archaeological Society , vol. xxi, 1944; H. R. Schubert,History of the British Iron and Steel Industry from c.450 B.C. to A.D. 1775 , 1957; Treadway Nash,Collections for the History of Worcestershire , 2nd edn., vol. ii, 1799; John Roper,Dudley: the 17th Century Town , 1965.]
William Watson
, Sir Percival Victor David Ezekiel , second baronet (1892–1964), financier and sinophile, was born in Bombay 21 July 1892, the fifth and youngest child in the family of three sons (the elder two of whom died at the age of two) and two daughters of (Sir) Sassoon Jacob David, later first baronet, cotton and yarn merchant, mill owner, and later founder and chairman of the Bank of India, and his wife Hannah, daughter of Elias David Sassoon, of Bombay.
He was educated at Elphinstone College and Bombay University (BA, 1909), and succeeded his father as baronet in 1926.
Always reticent about his personal history, David's public renown grew with his status as collector of Chinese art and promoter of art study as a key to the understanding of the Chinese intellect.
Active in his family's business, he visited China in 1927 and there resolved to devote his life to Chinese connoisseurship.
His frequent presence in Peking afforded him unprecedented opportunities of acquisition among the art objects released on the market as the old social order of China broke down.
Porcelains, stonewares, and books eventually provided the contents of the Percival David Foundation of Chinese Art which in 1952 was attached as his exclusive benefaction to the School of Oriental and African Studies of the University of London and housed in a building, also his gift, at Gordon Square, Bloomsbury.
A condition of the donation was that the university chair in Chinese art and archaeology should again be filled.
The David collection has no rival outside China for post-Tang ceramics.
The international exhibition of Chinese art held at Burlington House in 1935–6, of which David was the chief instigator and director, fulfilled his ambition of showing items from the Chinese imperial collection together with the best of western collections.
For the safety of transport from China the request of protection by the British navy was not thought inappropriate.
The exhibition may be said to have motivated the adoption of Chinese art studies in western universities.
Captured by the Japanese in 1941, David was interned in Shanghai for nine months, and contracted the sclerosis which caused him difficult last years and finally ended his life.
After joining in 1930 the Oriental Ceramic Society, founded in London a decade earlier, David had begun a career of scholarship with papers read to that body, distinguishing himself by identifying the imperial ru ware made between ad 1107 and 1127.
His last work,Chinese Connoisseurship, the Ko Ku Yao Lun , published posthumously and co-operatively in 1971, saw to the first translation of the fourteenth-century album of connoisseurship Gegu yaolun .
David obtained a D.Litt. from London University in 1950, became FSA, and was an officer of the Legion of Honour.
He married his cousin Vere Mozelle, daughter of Abraham (‘Aubrey’) David, financier, in 1913.
They had two daughters, the younger of whom died in infancy.
Following their divorce in 1953, he married in the same year Sheila Jane Yorke, daughter of Arthur Yorke Hardy, mining engineer, of Harrow.
They had no children and the baronetcy became extinct when David died 9 October 1964 at Gordon Square, London.
[Personal knowledge.]
Eryl Davies
,Guglielmo (1874–1937), Nobel prizewinner, electrical engineer, and diplomat, was born 25 April 1874 in Bologna, the younger son of Guiseppe Marconi, landowner and farmer, and his wife Annie, daughter of Andrew Jameson, brewer and distiller, of county Wexford.
Annie Jameson had been sent by her parents to study singing in Italy, where she married.
She travelled extensively with young Guglielmo, who received private tuition.
Later, at the Technical Institute in Leghorn, his aptitude for experimental physics was developed, though his attainment was insufficient for him to enter the university or the naval academy, as his father would have wished.
In 1894 Marconi became interested in the discovery of radio waves by Heinrich Hertz in 1887–8 and resolved to recreate the original experiments.
His own thoughts turned to wireless telegraphy.
In 1896 he moved to London, with financial backing from his father and influential contacts arranged by his mother.
In 1897 ‘The Wireless Telegraph and Signal Company Limited’ was registered (Marconi's own name did not appear in the title until 1900) and with increased funding the experiments became more ambitious.
In 1899 a distance of 130 kilometres, from northern France to Chelmsford, was spanned, fuelling the debate about radio-wave propagation.
While many believed in ‘line-of-sight’, Marconi thought that radio waves could follow the curvature of the earth.
In December 1901 he transmitted the letter S of the Morse code (three dots) across the Atlantic.
His company moved into the marine and international wireless market, though progress in the latter was hampered by the already well-established submarine-cable companies.
Marconi's company went through a difficult period; Marconi had to put all his own money into it for its survival.
In 1910 a proposal for a chain of telegraph stations to link up the empire was submitted to the British government.
A contract was signed, only for the ‘Marconi scandal’ to explode in 1912, when there were rumours of corruption and the scheme was abandoned, leaving Marconi bitter about having his integrity questioned.
Marconi remained an Italian citizen throughout his life.
The outbreak of war in 1914 meant that he was regarded as an alien in Britain, though he was soon allowed to move to Rome, where he joined the senate.
When Italy entered the war he served as a lieutenant in the army, and, later, as a lieutenant-commander in the navy, working as a military communications consultant.
After 1917 he undertook diplomatic duties, including a goodwill mission to America and two visits to London in 1918; in 1919 he attended the Paris peace conference.
In 1923 he joined the Fascist party.
Later he expressed private misgivings about the Italian regime, though he continued his diplomatic missions, the last being a visit to Brazil in 1935 to defend Italy's invasion of Abyssinia.
He returned via London and sought to make his case to the British people in a BBC broadcast; he suffered the humiliation of being told by Sir John (later Baron) Reith [q.v.]that his words would not be welcome.
In 1919 Marconi moved into the most adventurous phase of his work on radio.
He carried out experiments on the propagation of short and ultra-short radio waves, which were then thought to be unusable.
He also contributed to radio navigation and made observations which suggested the possibility of radar.
In the early 1920s he put forward proposals for a short-wave ‘Empire Beam’ system, which was accepted.
A worldwide network of short-wave stations with directional aerials was established, fulfilling Marconi's dream of global radio communication.
At the same time, his company was closely involved with the beginnings of public broadcasting in Britain, though Marconi himself left this work to his engineers.
Early in life Marconi demonstrated a liking for experimentation, starting with childish and destructive episodes which incurred his father's wrath, but maturing into more sophisticated electrical experiments.
He developed a patient trial-and-error approach, and an ability to incorporate to advantage the work of others; these characteristics became hallmarks of his later work.
He enjoyed the company of influential and wealthy people, including royalty.
He had a fine sense of theatrical timing, which helped in publicizing his ventures.
However, he had a darker side, and his commitment to his work, which often made him oblivious of companions' feelings, was partly responsible for the failure of his first marriage.
In private, he could be nervous and irritable, and his later years were plagued by self-doubt as he felt that his creative powers were waning.
In 1912 he lost his right eye in a car accident.
His last decade was marred by heart attacks.
He received nine honorary degrees and in 1914 he was appointed honorary GCVO.
He served as president of both the Royal Society of Arts and the Italian Royal College of Science; the latter made him automatically a member of the council of the Fascist party and entitled him to be addressed as His Excellency.
He became marchese (marquis) in 1929.
He was also elected to honorary membership of the Institutions of Civil, Mechanical, and Electrical Engineers.
He shared the Nobel prize for physics in 1909, ironically with Professor K. F. Braun, a founder of the Telefunken Company, one of the Marconi Company's closest rivals.
On 16 March 1905 he married Beatrice, daughter of Edward Donough O'Brien, fourteenth Baron of Inchiquin, county Clare.
They had three daughters, the eldest of whom died in infancy, and a son.
The marriage was dissolved in 1924 and on 12 June 1927 Marconi married the Countess Maria Christina, daughter of Count Francesco Bezzi-Scali.
They had one daughter.
Marconi died in Rome 20 July 1937; the next day, radio transmitters all over the world fell silent for two minutes.
[Degna Paresce Marconi,My Father, Marconi , 1962; W. P. Jolly,Marconi , 1972; B. L. Jacot and D. M. B. Collier,Marconi — Master of Space , 1935.]
Susanne P Stark
,Mary Amelia St Clair (‘May’)(1863–1946), author, was born 24 August 1863 in Rock Ferry, Cheshire, the only daughter and youngest of six children of William Sinclair, shipowner, of Liverpool, and his wife Amelia, daughter of John Hind, merchant, of Belfast.
Having been educated mainly at home, she attended Cheltenham Ladies' College from 1881 to 1882 and was encouraged by the headmistress, Dorothea Beale [q.v.], to become a writer.
The bankruptcy of William Sinclair's business around 1870 and his death in 1881 dissolved the family unit.
All five of May Sinclair's brothers died between 1887 and 1905.
Remaining unmarried all her life, May Sinclair lived with her mother in Ilford, Cheltenham, Fairford, Wrexham, Salcombe Regis, and London, where Amelia Sinclair died in 1901.
Apart from philosophical essays and translations, May Sinclair's early literary production covered poetry and short stories.
The first of her twenty-four novels,Audrey Craven , was published in 1897.
The Divine Fire (1904), which sold as a best seller in the United States, initiated her breakthrough as a novelist.
In many of her novels May Sinclair was concerned with her characters' struggle for individuality in a suppressive environment, which was frequently identified with the values of the Victorian society the author herself grew up in.
On a semi-autobiographical level this topic was dealt with in Mary Olivier (1919).
May Sinclair also wrote various pieces of literary criticism on both nineteenth- and twentieth-century authors, a Brontë biography (The Three Brontës , 1912), and a few unpublished dramas.
As an active member of the suffragette movement she got to know Dr Jessie Margaret Murray, who in 1913 opened the London Medico-Psychological Clinic, of which May Sinclair became a founding member.
In 1914 she joined a member of staff of this clinic, Dr Hector Munro, in an ambulance corps at the Belgian front.
May Sinclair also wrote theoretical essays on psychology and was interested in Carl Jung and Sigmund Freud, whose theories found an early reflection in her psychological novels.
A further link between psychology and literature was established by her application of William James's term ‘stream of consciousness’ to the style of Dorothy Richardson.
May Sinclair was elected to the Royal Society of Literature in 1916 and the Aristotelian Society in 1917.
In this latter circle, after having written two full-length studies on idealism, she was invited to deliver a paper on primary and secondary consciousness in 1923.
May Sinclair has frequently been described as shy and scholarly.
Her strength lay in her role as an interdisciplinary thinker.
It was characteristic of her creative and theoretical writings to establish original links between various intellectual movements of the transitional period she lived in.
May Sinclair stopped writing in the late 1920s.
Incapacitated by Parkinson's disease, she retired to Buckinghamshire in 1932 and died in Bierton, near Aylesbury, 14 November 1946.
[T. E. M. Boll,Miss May Sinclair: Novelist , 1973; obituaries in The Times and New York Times , 15 November 1946.]