

Richard Greene
,Mary (1688– c. 1762), poet, was born in 1668 near Midhurst, Sussex, of ‘poor, but honest Parents’.
Although her date of birth and parentage are disputed, she is probably the Mary Collier baptized in Lodsworth, Sussex, October 1688, the daughter of William Collier.
Lodsworth is three-and-a-half miles north-east of Midhurst.
This identification would be supported by a poem on the marriage of George II in 1761 which, according to Collier, was ‘Wrote in the Seventy-Second Year of her Age’.
In a brief account of her life Collier describes her education at her parents' hands: ‘I was taught to read when very Young, and took great delight in it; but my Mother dying, I lost my Education, Never being put to School.’
She remained with her father who was ‘long sickly and infirm’.
After her father's death she moved to Petersfield, Hampshire, where she supported herself by washing clothes, brewing, and other types of manual work.
Sometime in the early 1730s she encountered the poems of the thresher Stephen Duck [q.v.], which she learned by heart.
She composed her most important poem,The Woman's Labour: an Epistle to Mr. Stephen Duck , as a riposte to his comments about the idleness of rural women.
The poem was not published until 1739, when she met the expense herself.
She commented afterwards that she had made no money on the venture: ‘I lost nothing, neither did I gain much, others run away with the profit.’
Doubts were expressed as to whether she had actually written the verses herself.
The third edition of 1740 contained a statement by nine residents of Petersfield that she was indeed the author.
She continued to work as a washerwoman until she was sixty-three, when she moved to Alton, Hampshire, to take care of a farmhouse.
She continued in this job until she was seventy and infirm.
At this point (c. 1760) she retired to a garret in Alton where she prepared her Poems on Several Occasions (1762).
It is believed that she did not live long after this publication, and died in Alton.
There is no evidence that she married or had children.
[Janet Todd (ed.),
A Dictionary of British and American Women Writers, 1660–1800 , 1984; Stephen Duck,The Thresher's Labour (1736)and Mary Collier,The Woman's Labour (1739), with introduction by M. Ferguson, Augustan Reprint Society no. 230, Los Angeles, 1985; M. Ferguson (ed.),
First Feminists , 1985, pp. 257–65; D. Landry, ‘The Resignation of Mary Collier’ in The New Eighteenth Century , ed.
F. Nussbaum and L. Brown, 1987; Roger Lonsdale (ed.),
Eighteenth Century Women Poets: an Oxford Anthology , 1989.]
Keith G H Dyke
,Frederick William (‘Peter’)(1877–1950), microbiologist, was born 22 October 1877 in Camberley, Surrey, the eldest of six sons and the second of the eleven children of Dr William Henry Twort, general practitioner, of Camberley, and his wife Elizabeth Crampton, only child of Joseph Crampton Webster, engineer, of London.
He was educated at Tomlinson's School, Woking, and St Thomas's Hospital, London, qualifying LRCP, MRCS in 1900.
In 1901 he became an assistant in the clinical laboratory at St Thomas's Hospital and in December that year was appointed assistant to William Bulloch, bacteriologist at the London Hospital, Whitechapel.
Here he gained valuable experience and, though occupied with much routine work, commenced innovative research.
His study of bacterial fermentation of glucosides won the London University Rogers prize (jointly) in 1908.
He demonstrated bacterial variability and adaptability and formulated his lifelong belief that disease-producing organisms had evolved from non-pathogenic ancestors.
He also showed that the glucoside ericolin acted as a selective inhibitor of bacterial growth, thus aiding the isolation of pure cultures.
In 1909 Twort was appointed superintendent of the Brown Animal Sanatory Institution in London, remaining there until its destruction by bombing in 1944.
Relative isolation suited his character and he followed his own ideas with considerable success.
He demonstrated that supplementation of media with an ‘essential substance’ extracted from dead tubercle bacilli permitted growth of Johne's bacillus and possibly leprosy bacillus.
With his veterinary colleague George Ingram, he wrote A Monograph on Johne's Disease of cattle (1913).
Twort's most important contribution to microbiology was his discovery of bacteriophage.
He noticed that colonies of micrococci had become transparent and that transfer of this material to a growing colony reproduced the condition.
This transmissible lysis, later known as the Twort–d'Hérelle phenomenon, is of central importance to molecular biology.
His 1915 paper illustrates his cautious approach to research, as he lists several possible explanations for the phenomenon, rather than risk premature judgement.
Owing to war and limited facilities he left exploitation of his discoveries to others.
In World War I he served in the Royal Army Medical Corps as temporary captain in charge of the base laboratory at Salonika (1916), and later in Northern Ireland as bacteriologist (1918).
In 1929 he was elected FRS and in 1931 became professor of bacteriology at London University.
Brown Institution trust funds were never adequate, but Twort preferred impecunious independence.
When, after fifteen years, a Medical Research Council grant was withdrawn, he unsuccessfully lodged a Petition of Right against the Crown in 1937.
Twort was a reserved and somewhat unworldly man.
However, over scientific matters he could be roused to considerable passion and was often tactless.
He constructed much of his own research apparatus, experimented with violin making, designed novel coils to improve wireless reception, and was a keen horticulturist.
Twort married Dorothy Nony, eldest daughter of Frederick J. Banister, an architect, in 1919.
They had a son and three daughters.
He died in Camberley 20 March 1950.
[Obituary Notices of Fellows of The Royal Society , vol. vii, November 1951; Sir Graham Wilson, ‘The Brown Animal Sanatory Institution’,Journal of Hygiene , vol. lxxxii, 1979, nos. 1 and 2; private information.]
Alan Davidson
,Edward (c. 1565– c. 1631), politician, was one of the two surviving children and the only son of Roger Alford of Hitcham, Buckinghamshire, and his wife Elizabeth, daughter and heir of Thomas Ramsey of Hitcham, and widow of Nicholas Clerke of North Weston, Oxfordshire.
His father, a cadet of a family of Cheshire origin seated at Holt Castle, Denbighshire, had prospered as a servant of William Cecil, Baron Burghley [q.v.], and sat in the Parliaments of 1558 and 1559.
His uncle Francis Alford [q.v.]was also an MP.
His father died on 16 July 1580, bidding Alford in his will to study till he was twenty, and then to ‘seek’ Burghley.
He matriculated at Trinity College, Oxford, in 1581, and entered Lincoln's Inn in 1583, but is not known to have sought Cecil's patronage.
In 1593 he was returned to Parliament for the Yorkshire borough of Beverley on the interest of his kinsman Lancelot Alford.
He left little mark of his presence in the House of Commons, but was able to boast in 1621 of having ‘been a Parliament man these 30 years’.
Before the end of Elizabeth's reign he settled on the Sussex coast, at Offington in the parish of Broadwater, perhaps hoping to profit from his kinship with the local magnate, Thomas Sackville, later first Earl of Dorset [q.v.].
He began his career as the archetypal country member in 1604, sitting for Colchester.
He retained this seat in the next four Parliaments, working for local bills in 1621 and 1624, but it is clear that the ‘country’ for which he spoke was more often Sussex than Essex.
Alford made his name as a vigorous and informed opponent of impositions, monopolies, proclamations, and purveyance, and was an inveterate foe of Chancery.
Already in 1610 he was one of ‘a select number of the Lower House’ who met with the lord treasurer, Robert Cecil, first Earl of Salisbury [q.v.], son of his father's patron, to discuss impositions.
He was always reluctant to approve subsidies; in 1621, when other members were prepared to pledge their lives and fortunes to recover the Palatinate, he observed bitterly that the farmers would say, ‘if you will have three taxes in one year, we must have three harvests in one year.’
Such rhetoric was backed by a proper concern for the freedom and order of the House, down to such details as a successful motion (16 December 1606) that the adjournment of a committee on a bill should be announced in the House.
In the same Parliament he urged the consideration of precedents for the king's blocking of the petition on religion.
Alford was equally staunch in championing the rights of the Commons against the Lords, whether protesting at the Upper House's attempts to control the negotiations over the Scottish union or complaining against their insistence on members' ‘standing so long bare’ at conferences.
In 1621 he criticized the Speaker, Sir Thomas Richardson [q.v.], for being ‘too courteous’ to the Lords at his first conference, and he clashed with Sir Edward Coke [q.v.]over empowering a subcommittee to discuss the impeachment of Sir John Bennet [q.v.]with the Lords, because ‘then the young lawyers shall be put with the judges’, the Lords' assistants.
Ever a proponent of parliamentary freedom of speech, in 1621 Alford protested against the ‘eyes over him to observe’, but refused to have himself cleared by the House at the end of the session: ‘God forbid that snares should be laid for mens words…
I stand upon the privileges of the House and my own integrity.’
This proved sufficient until the reign of Charles I. He was one of ‘the sticklers in the last Parliament’ pricked sheriff in 1625 to prevent their election to the next (although he was able to secure that of his son for New Shoreham), and in the following summer he was removed from the Sussex commission of the peace, to which he had been appointed only in 1624.
Alford was none the less made a deputy lieutenant of Sussex in 1627, his services being considered essential to the defence of the county.
Also active at this time as receiver of Admiralty droits in Sussex, he was restored to the commission in 1628.
The Colchester corporation re-elected him in 1628, but he was unseated on the protests of the freemen, and forced to fall back on the Sussex borough of Steyning.
On 6 May 1628 he was the first to propose proceeding through the Petition of Right, although he did not use the phrase, and the House waited for word from Coke before acting.
He married about 1590 Judith, daughter of Edmund Downing of Hendon, Middlesex, and had six sons, two of whom sat in Parliament, and one daughter.
He left Offington to this daughter, and named her and his wife executors of his will of 11 February 1631; they proved it on 26 January 1632.
[P. W. Hasler,The House of Commons 1558–1603 , 1981; Robert Zaller, ‘Edward Alford and the Making of Country Radicalism’,Journal of British Studies , vol. xxii, part 2, 1983, pp. 59–79.]
Stephen Conway
,Henry William (1772? –1842), civil servant, was born about 1772 but his origins, and much of his career, are shrouded in mystery.
For several years he drew a salary as distributor of stamps in Ireland, but it seems unlikely that he was one of the Irish Brookes.
He was probably from Kent; at any rate he owned property in Deal and Walmer.
He attended none of the leading schools, nor did he go to university.
Brooke's claim to noteworthiness rests on his role in the Alien Office.
Established in 1793 by the Alien Act of that year, the Alien Office was a branch of the Home Office which ostensibly acted as the administrative centre for the regulation of the conduct of foreigners resident in Britain.
In reality, it co-ordinated counter-revolutionary efforts against ‘disaffected’ Britons as well as suspect foreigners.
The secretiveness of the Alien Office's work makes it difficult to provide details of Brooke's activities: ‘My duties have ever been of the most confidential nature,’ he wrote to R. B. Jenkinson, second Earl of Liverpool, in 1809.
Brooke appears to have joined the Alien Office around 1796, and he was clerk from about 1798 to 1813.
He served briefly (1802–3) as acting superintendent, bridging the gap between the departure of (Sir) Charles Flint and the appointment of John Reeves [q.v.].
Brooke was employed in Manchester, and then in Ireland at the time of the rebellion.
After his return to England, he was involved in the interrogation of François Barthélemy, the former French chargé d'affaires in Britain, who fled from France in 1799.
Two years later, Brooke was given responsibility for the Kent coast from Dover to Whitstable, with the task of preventing any communication between the French and their English sympathizers.
To Lord Liverpool he hinted subsequently at the difficulties in ‘serving the ends of Government in such a situation of delicacy with limited Legal powers’.
Ill health obliged Brooke to retire in 1813.
His salary at this time was £1,000, and upon leaving the service he received a pension of £600 p.a.
He devoted his remaining years to Kentish affairs: he was an active local magistrate; he promoted a loyal address to the king from the inhabitants of Walmer in December 1820; and in 1826 he was one of the main subscribers to the enlargement of Walmer church.
Little is known of Brooke's family.
In a letter of 1809 he refers to his five children.
His wife was Catherine, daughter of the Revd John Tucker, MA, rector of Ringwould, near Walmer.
She died 24 September 1825, aged fifty-five.
Brooke himself died in Walmer 15 April 1842.
[Parliamentary Papers , vol. xxxi, 1839, p. 656;Gentleman's Magazine , vol. cxii, part 1, 1842, p. 564; C. R. S. Elvin,Records of Walmer , 1890; J. de Dampierre (ed.),
Mémoires de Barthélemy , 1914; R. R. Nelson,The Home Office 1782–1801 , 1969; P. Polden, ‘John Reeves’,Journal of Legal History , vol. iii, 1982, pp. 31–51; Roger Wells,Insurrection: the British Experience 1795–1803 , 1933; C. W. Chalkin (ed.),
New Maidstone Gaol Order Book, 1805–1823 , 1984; Liverpool and Peel papers, British Library.]
G H L Le May
,Elizabeth Phillipps (1851–1925), teacher and organizer, was born in Carmarthen 22 June 1851, the eldest of three daughters and second of five children of John Hughes, surgeon of Carmarthen, and his wife Anne, the daughter of a Jewish banker of Haverfordwest who had converted to Christianity and changed his surname from Levi to Phillipps.
Elizabeth's elder brother, Hugh Price Hughes [q.v.], became an eminent Methodist preacher.
Little that is definite is known of her early years, except that she was said to have been a backward child; that she was sent to a private school, Hope House, in Taunton; that she broke away from the family tradition of Methodism and became an Anglican; and that she came to the attention of Dorothea Beale [q.v.], and taught at Cheltenham Ladies' College from 1877 until 1881.
There she acquired the qualifications that took her in 1881 to Newnham College, Cambridge, where she got a first in the moral sciences tripos in 1884, and a second in history in 1885; she also helped to form the Association of Assistant Mistresses.
On going down from Newnham, she was appointed as the first principal of Cambridge Training College, formed with the purpose of training university women to teach in girls' secondary schools.
In 1949, when the college became a ‘recognized institution’ of the University of Cambridge, it was renamed Hughes Hall, in her honour.
The college opened with fourteen students, in cramped premises, in October 1885.
Elizabeth Hughes was responsible at first for most of the teaching, and had no assistant except a resident housekeeper.
By 1898 the college had been incorporated as a limited liability company; it had acquired new premises, a large lecture hall, a library of 3,000 books, a museum, and a gymnasium; there was an academic staff of three besides the principal, and the nucleus of a picture collection acquired by the principal during her extensive travels.
It had been securely established.
In 1899 Elizabeth Hughes resigned as principal, pleading ill health, and went to live with her younger brother, Arthur, in Barry.
She had a private income.
She travelled round the world, paid two visits to the United States, and for a time taught English in Japan.
She was much in demand as a speaker at educational conferences.
She formed the Barry Twentieth Century Club for women.
She was co-opted to the Glamorgan county education committee, and became a member of the court of governors of the University of Wales.
She organized the first Red Cross women's camp, and during World War I was commandant of a Voluntary Aid Deteachment hospital in Glamorganshire, for which she was appointed MBE.
She received an honorary LLD from the University of Wales in 1920.
She developed an interest in Welsh literature, and took the bardic name of Merch Myrddin as a reminder of her birthplace.
She wrote no books, but her strong views on education were expressed in her evidence in 1894 to the Bryce commission on secondary education; in her speeches at educational conferences; and in her pamphlets, especially ‘The Education of the Majority’(a plea for middle schools for boys and girls between the ages of twelve and sixteen), ‘The Training of Teachers’, and ‘A National Education and its Application to Wales’.
In spite of her fears for her health, she was remarkably energetic (she climbed the Matterhorn at the age of forty-eight).
She died in Barry 19 December 1925.
In appearance, she was described as ‘rather short, rotund, and plain'.
A medallion in Hughes Hall portrays her with short hair, an aquiline nose, and a determined chin.
She was unmarried.
[The Carmarthen Historian , vol. viii, 1971; M. V. Hughes (no relation),A London Girl of the Eighties , 1936; Margaret Bottrall,Hughes Hall, 1885–1985 , 1985.]
J H Denton
,, or  (c. 1240–1304), bishop of Winchester, was perhaps born c .1240.
He was it seems an Englishman, though the family no doubt derived from Pontoise.
At some stage during his early career he and his mother Joan were granted the manor of Eastington on the Isle of Purbeck, Dorset, by the priory of Christ Church Twynham, to be held for their lifetimes.
He probably studied at Oxford, though the evidence is indirect: his executors endowed 200 marks to establish a loan-chest for the masters and scholars and, no doubt because he was a benefactor, his death anniversary was to be observed by the university.
Certainly he trained at Bologna and was a doctor of civil law by c .1270, when he was invited to lecture on civil law for a year by the city of Modena in northern Italy.
He was already beneficed in the diocese of York, for in 1264 he had obtained a papal dispensation to hold the rectory of Welwick in Holderness with two other benefices with cure of souls.
It is interesting that he should have first obtained benefices in the north; in the late thirteenth century very many royal clerks were beneficed in the province of York, and it is clear that he was in the king's service by 1262, acting as a proctor for Henry III in the French court.
He became a canon of Exeter Cathedral in May 1274 and archdeacon of Exeter in December, obtaining also the rectory of Tawstock, diocese of Exeter, in 1275.
He was soon in demand as a proctor in Rome, where he must have spent much of his time, acting for the clergy of the province of Canterbury and also the bishop of Exeter in 1277, and for John Peckham [q.v.], archbishop of Canterbury, between 1279 and 1282.
He was a papal chaplain by 1281, and, following two disputed elections to the bishopric of Winchester, he was appointed by papal provision to this see on 9 June 1282.
He was consecrated by the cardinal-bishop of Ostia and Velletri before 15 June, returned to England to profess obedience to the archbishop of Canterbury on 1 August, was granted the temporalities of the bishopric on 11 August, and was enthroned in his cathedral church in September.
At first his relations as bishop with Edward I were tense (partly no doubt because the king had wanted the extremely wealthy bishopric of Winchester for his chancellor, Robert Burnell, q.v.), and he began his career of high office in the English church in close alliance with the archbishop of Canterbury, John Peckham.
But matters soon changed, for he was to become one of the king's leading and most active councillors and diplomats: on royal service in Paris in 1285, with the king in Gascony in 1287–9, presiding with Burnell and others over the trial of royal ministers following the return from Gascony, negotiating for peace in France and Rome in 1296–8 and in France in 1299, back in Rome and Paris in 1300–1, and Paris again in 1303.
His legal training and knowledge of the workings of the Roman curia were put tirelessly at the service of the Crown.
His work for both king and pope marked him out, along with the bishop of Lincoln, for the unpopular role of chief assessor and collector of the famous papal taxes initiated in 1291–2 for the king's planned but unexecuted crusade.
Despite all this external activity he spent long periods of time in his diocese, active in every facet of ecclesiastical administration, as is revealed by his register, the first to survive for the diocese of Winchester.
There is no lack of evidence here for his concern for the welfare of his cathedral church and of the monasteries and churches of his diocese; but this occasionally confused register suggests, even so, a bishop with political and financial interests which extended beyond routine local and parochial concerns, for it includes many documents which show his close interest in international political developments.
He stands in contrast to those prelates of his day, often trained in theology, who shunned close involvement in secular government and even openly opposed royal policies.
He had, for example, little in common with Robert de Winchelsea [q.v.],
Peckham's successor at Canterbury, the champion of ecclesiastical liberties in the face, as he saw it, of the encroachments of the Crown.
His aloofness from Winchelsea was demonstrated by the rare exemption of his diocese from the jurisdiction of the archbishop, obtained from Pope Boniface VIII in 1297.
As a man of affairs and political influence it is not surprising that he had his opponents.
An anonymous memorandum sent to Rome just after his death accused him of storing up great wealth and even of having profited from the neglect of the episcopal estates, accusations which cannot be substantiated but which may not have been complete fabrications.
He died 4 December 1304 at his manor at Wolvesey, close to his newly founded college dedicated to St Elizabeth of Hungary, and was buried on the north side of the choir of his cathedral church.
[C. Deedes (ed.),
Registrum Johannis de Pontissara , Canterbury and York Society, 1915, 1924; A. M. Emden,A Biographical Register of the University of Oxford to 1500 , vol. iii, 1959; J. H. Denton,Robert Winchelsey and the Crown , 1980;idem , ‘Complaints to the Apostolic See in an early Fourteenth-century Memorandum’,Archivum Historiae Pontificiae , vol. xx, 1982.]
Anne Laurence
,John (c. 1615–1674), licenser of the press, was admitted to Emmanuel College, Cambridge, in 1632 as coming from Oxfordshire, and graduated BA in 1636 and MA in 1639.
In 1642 he was appointed by the House of Commons to give a weekly lecture at Lewisham, Kent, but was obstructed by the vicar and some of the local inhabitants.
Other parishioners successfully petitioned the House of Lords in 1643 to confirm his appointment.
Under the 1643 ordinance to control printing, Bachilor was appointed one of the twelve divines empowered to license books of divinity.
Bachilor's licence appears at the beginning of a number of works.
He did not restrict himself merely to giving his assent to publication, but added his comments, as, for example, on Two Treatises…concerning Infant Baptism (1645) by John Tombes [q.v.], where he acknowledged that the author was a godly man ‘and of the Presbyterian judgement, though I am not of opinion with him’ and he agreed to the publication of these treatises to encourage further contributions to the debate on infant baptism.
Licensing The Smoke in the Temple (1645) by John Saltmarsh [q.v.], a work advocating religious toleration, he described the book as ‘this way of Peace and Reconciliation’.
It was this which incensed Presbyterians and led to complaints about him in the Westminster Assembly.
Thomas Edwards (d .
1647)[q.v.]wrote of him that he was ‘such a desperate licenser’ that ‘if the Devil himself could make a book, and give it the title, A Plea for Liberty of Conscience…he would license it.’
He seems to have remained a licenser until 1647, when a new printing ordinance came into force.
He himself published a work extolling the riches of free grace for the saints.
Between 1643 and 1645 he served in the parliamentary army as chaplain to Colonel Valentine Walton [q.v.], governor of King's Lynn.
He then moved to Windsor as chaplain to Colonel Whichcote, governor of Windsor Castle.
Here he encountered Charles I's young daughter Elizabeth [q.v.], to whom he seems to have been some kind of chaplain and with whose virtues he was much taken.
He stayed on as a civilian minister, preaching to both prisoners and garrison at Windsor, having in September 1647 became a fellow of Eton College.
In 1658 he was appointed vicar of Datchet, Buckinghamshire, where the parishioners complained that he was an absentee, but he was exonerated by the trustees for the maintenance of preaching ministers.
He lost all his positions in 1660.
After the Restoration he took pains to dissociate himself from the religious radicals, subscribing both to a declaration against the Fifth Monarchist, Thomas Venner [q.v.], in 1661, and taking the Oxford oath in 1666, abhorring armed resistance to the king.
He seems to have moved to Hackney, Middlesex, and became involved with the school kept by Mrs Perwich in the house of his near relation Robert Perwich.
He wrote a defence of the school and several volumes of religious queries, simple guides to religion, partly aimed against the Quakers, in the form of question and answer.
He was married to Abigail, perhaps the daughter of Robert Perwich, and died 23 September 1674.
He was buried in Hackney.
[John Bachilor,Golden Sands , 1647, and The Virgins Pattern , 1661; A. G. Matthews,Calamy Revised , 1934; Thomas Edwards,Gangraena , 1646; A. Laurence,Parliamentary Army Chaplains 1642–51 , 1990.]
J Nutting
,Cecil Henry (1874–1958), metallurgist, was born in Islington, London, 7 September 1874, the eldest child in the family of two sons and one daughter of Henry Thomas Desch, surveyor, and his wife Harriet Ingerson of Pilton, Devon.
Desch was educated at Birkbeck School, Kingsland; and at the age of fifteen entered Finsbury Technical College, where Silvanus Thompson [q.v.]was principal.
He spent two years studying organic chemistry and a further year as a research student in the laboratory of Raphael Meldola [q.v.].
He then joined F. Kendall & Son, a firm of industrial chemists, in Stratford-upon-Avon, as assistant chemist, and took an external London B.Sc.
degree.
He obtained a Ph.D.
at Würzburg University in 1902, and then studied under Sir William Ramsay [q.v.]at University College London, and was awarded a D.Sc.
His first academic appointment in 1902 was to the metallurgy department of King's College, London.
While there, Sir Flinders Petrie [q.v.]asked him to work on metal implements found during the excavations at Ur.
From 1908 till 1918 he was lecturer in metallurgy at Glasgow University, and became professor of metallurgy at the Royal Technical College, Glasgow, in 1918.
In 1920 Desch succeeded J. O. Arnold as professor of metallurgy at Sheffield Univesity, a post which he held until 1932, when he succeeded another distinguished metallurgist, W. Rosenhain [q.v.], as superintendent of the department of metallurgy at the National Physical Laboratory.
He retired in 1939, but with the outbreak of war he became scientific adviser to the Iron and Steel Research Council and then entered the steel industry, becoming in 1943 director of research of Richard Thomas & Co.
Ltd. and, following reorganization, a director of the Whitehead Iron and Steel Company.
In 1923 Desch was elected FRS.
He was president of the Faraday Society in 1926–8.
President of the Institute of Metals in 1938–40, he was awarded their platinum medal in 1941.
He was president of the Iron and Steel Institute (1946–8), having received the Bessemer gold medal in 1938.
He thus achieved distinction in both ferrous and non-ferrous metallurgy.
As the author of many papers and books on metallurgical topics, Desch's most notable contribution was his book Metallography , which ran to six editions between 1910 and 1942.
It was read with awe by generations of students who wondered how he succeeded in making such an interesting topic so boring.
He was the forerunner of the modern professor of materials in that he wrote, with F. M. Lea,The Chemistry of Cement and Concrete (1956).
He also published papers on social topics and had a great interest in historical metallurgy.
In 1909 Desch married Elison Ann, the daughter of Professor Ivison Macadam, professor of chemistry at the College of Surgeons, Edinburgh.
They had two daughters.
Desch was a lithe man of military bearing whose presence commanded immediate respect.
He died 19 June 1958 in hospital in London.
[Journal of The Iron and Steel Institute , vol. clv, 1947; A. McCance in Biographical Memoirs of Fellows of the Royal Society , vol. v, 1959; personal knowledge.]
Ole Peter Grell
,Cesar (1595–1665), Calvinist clergyman, was born in Stade in Germany 6 February 1595, and belonged to an influential Calvinist family of Italian origin.
His father, Giovanni, fled Lucca in 1567 because of his Reformed faith, and lived subsequently in France, Antwerp, Germany, and then London, where, during the first years of James I's reign, he founded an influential merchant-banking house with his son-in-law, Philip Burlamachi [q.v.].
Cesar appears to have been destined for a clerical career from the start.
In May 1612 he matriculated at the Academy of Geneva and later attended the Calvinist Academy of Saumur.
In April 1616 he was admitted as reader to the Bodleian Library in Oxford, and he matriculated in theology at the University of Leiden on 7 November 1616.
In Leiden he met his lifelong friend and correspondent, the Dutch poet and diplomat, Constantine Huygens.
In March 1618 Calandrini was ordained by the joint body of ministers from the Dutch and French churches in London.
Their support and the backing of the apostate archbishop of Spalato, Marco Antonio De Dominis [q.v.], secured Calandrini the appointment of minister to the Italian Reformed church in London.
Initially, Calandrini was on excellent terms with his mentor, De Dominis, lodging with him at the Savoy Hospital.
Later, after Calandrini had attended the synod of Dort and finished his studies in theology under John Prideaux [q.v.]at Exeter College, Oxford, graduating BD in 1620, he found it increasingly difficult to reconcile his Calvinism with De Dominis's Catholic syncretism.
Before the archbishop left England for Rome, he apparently denounced Calandrini to James I as a dangerous Puritan.
That he was a hard-line Calvinist is confirmed by Anthony Wood [q.v.], who described him as ‘a puritanical theologist’.
Shortly after he received his BD, he was given the rectory of Stableford Abbots in Essex.
It was probably through the patronage of John Prideaux that Calandrini came into contact with James Ussher [q.v.], later archbishop of Armagh, whom he assisted in his scholarly activities during the latter's three-year stay in London.
He became closely involved in Ussher's great Protestant scheme, the Bibliotheca Theologica .
Not until the collapse of Ussher's project in 1626 did Calandrini reside in Stableford Abbots.
Calandrini corresponded with an impressive number of leading European Calvinists and among his English correspondents were such leading Puritan divines as Herbert Palmer, John Davenport, Stephen Marshall, Thomas Gataker, Hugh Peters [qq.v.], and Cornelius Burgess.
In 1639 he was appointed minister to the Dutch church in London, thus becoming a colleague of his stepbrother, Ambrosius Regemorter.
Calandrini's excellent contacts with leading Puritans, such as William Kiffin and Sidrach Simpson [qq.v.], helped to ease many of the difficulties the Dutch community in London faced during the turbulent 1640s.
As the son of a Protestant immigrant, and a pivotal figure in the international Calvinist republic of letters, Calandrini remained actively involved in relief work for European co-religionists until his death in London 26 September 1665.
[O. P. Grell,Dutch Calvinists in Early Stuart London , 1989; A. G. H. Bachrach,Sir Constantine Huygens and Britain , 1962.]
Ronald M Birse
,David (1813–1898), iron- and steel-maker, was born in Campbeltown, Argyll, and was baptized there 17 February 1813, the son of Robert Colvill and his wife Janet Mitchell, the youngest of a family of eleven.
Robert was a cartwright and blacksmith who also owned several small coasting vessels, and had interests in some local businesses of which the most important was the distilling of whisky.
David gained his first experience of business with his father and brothers, but by the late 1840s he had decided to strike out on his own, perhaps partly because of his strong temperance convictions.
He moved to Glasgow and established himself as a provision merchant, but within a few years decided that there were better prospects in the iron trade.
Without any experience of that industry he found a useful partner in Thomas Gray, the manager of a small ironworks at Coatbridge, with whom in 1861 he formed the business of Colville & Gray.
They rapidly erected the Clifton ironworks near Glasgow and early in the following year were producing some 600 tons of finished malleable iron products per month.
By 1870, however, their relationship had become strained, and Colville sold his three-fourths share to Gray.
Thus provided with capital and having gained almost a decade of experience in the iron industry, he resolved to set up a similar ironworks with the assistance of his two elder sons, John and Archibald.
This they did at Motherwell, and the Dalzell works began operations early in 1872, employing 200 men.
About this time steel began to replace malleable iron as the premier construction material, so Colville sent his youngest son David to the Hallside works of the Steel Company of Scotland to gain the necessary experience of steel-making.
Obtaining a licence for the Siemens open-hearth steel process, he built five furnaces at the Dalzell works, together with a rolling mill and finishing shop, the first melt of steel being made in 1881.
This was the start of the decade when mild steel ousted wrought iron from the Clyde shipyards, and demand for the new material was almost insatiable.
In 1879 only 10 per cent of the tonnage launched on the Clyde was of steel construction, but by 1889 that figure had risen to 97 per cent.
The area of the Dalzell works was more than doubled by the end of 1883, and Colvilles were well on the way to becoming the dominating force in the Scottish steel industry, a position which they retained to the end.
David Colville only allowed control of the company he had created to pass to his sons in 1895; three years later he died in Glasgow, 29 October 1898, leaving an estate of £225,839.
He married in 1845 Janet (‘Jessie’), daughter of the Revd John Barr, minister in the Church of Scotland; they had four sons and seven daughters.
Of an extremely retiring disposition, he did not take an active part in public affairs.
His manner was that of the old school — courteous and gentle, and guileless to a degree; nevertheless he possessed great strength of purpose.
He was very generous in a quiet, unostentatious way.
[P. L. Payne,Colvilles and the Scottish Steel Industry , 1979; A. Slaven and S. Checkland (eds.),
Dictionary of Scottish Business Biography , 1986.]
Neil Chalmers
, Sir Sidney Frederic (1862–1950), zoologist and university teacher, was born in Heigham, Norwich, 9 March 1862, the second son among the five children of Frederic William Harmer, wool merchant and manufacturer, and his wife Mary Young Lyon.
He was educated at Amersham Hall, Reading, and at seventeen won a mathematical scholarship to University College London, where he studied natural sciences.
He subsequently went to King's College, Cambridge, where he had a distinguished career as exhibitioner, scholar, and fellow.
He obtained first classes in both parts (1882 and 1883) of the natural sciences tripos.
In 1885 he became university lecturer in advanced invertebrate morphology and five years later he became superintendent of the University Museum of Zoology.
As a teacher he was highly respected for his industry, patience, and accuracy in observation, his clarity and precision in recording, and his ability to impart knowledge.
Throughout his life he inspired affection by his gentleness, courtesy, and kindness.
Harmer's reputation in the University Museum led to his appointment as keeper of zoology at the British Museum (Natural History) in 1907 and in 1919 to the position of director.
His industry was prodigious and he left to the Museum a volume of files, indexes, and notebooks filled with accurate and methodically arranged taxonomic work, together with his exceptionally fine library of works on Polyzoa and whales.
At Cambridge his research centred around the embryology, anatomy, and taxonomy of Polyzoa and Cephalodiscus , for which he was the first of the Cambridge zoologists to use the binocular microscope.
He also developed an interest in whales, worked at the Stazione Zoologica in Naples and the Plymouth Laboratory, and had a long association with the Marine Biological Association.
His first three volumes on The Polyzoa of the Siboga-Expedition were published in 1915, 1926, and 1934, and the material for the fourth was prepared by 1941.
Harmer published numerous influential papers on the Cetacea and enhanced the collections.
As director of the British Museum (Natural History) from 1919 to 1927, Harmer's equanimity enabled him to have good relationships with the trustees and he steered the Museum smoothly through a difficult time with tact and judgement.
Harmer had a long association with the Museums Association, of which he was president in 1904, becoming an honorary member in 1922.
For thirty-one years he was a fellow of the Linnean Society, serving on the council in 1921–4 and 1927–32, being vice-president in 1931–2 and president in 1927–31.
In 1934 he received the Linnean medal.
Harmer was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1898, served on the council, and was a vice-president.
Other honours included being made a foreign member of the Norwegian and Swedish academies and an honorary member of the Boston Society of Natural History and the Société Zoologique de France.
Harmer was appointed KBE in 1920.
He travelled extensively, was fond of music, and was a competent pianist.
He was a keen cyclist on the high bicycle until quite late in life and he was always an enthusiastic and knowledgeable gardener.
In 1891 he married Laura Russell, daughter of Arthur Pearce Howell of the Bengal Civil Service.
They had two sons and two daughters (a son and a daughter predeceased him).
Harmer died in Melbourn, Cambridge, 22 October 1950.
[W. T. Stearn,The Natural History Museum at South Kensington , 1981;The Times , 24 November 1950; W. T. Calman in Obituary Notices of Fellows of the Royal Society , vol. xx, 1951; obituaries in Proceedings of the Linnean Society , vol. clxiii, 1952, and Nature , vol. clxvi, no. 4230.]
David B Quinn
,Richard (fl. 1572–1596), navigator and privateer, claimed to have been born at Buckhurst, Essex, but is generally referred to as ‘of Weymouth’.
He presumably learned his trade in the ships of the latter port, being master of the Pilgrim between Weymouth and Bordeaux in 1572.
Part at least of the next ten years was evidently spent in the Newfoundland fishing trade, as he developed a specialist knowledge of the waters round that island.
He entered the service of Henry Oughtred of Southampton, a major international merchant and shipowner.
In command of Oughtred's Susan Fortune he accompanied the Popinjay of Sir John Perrot [q.v.]to Newfoundland in 1582.
Oughtred claimed he had suffered losses in Spain and employed Clerke to help recover them from Spanish (in fact Portuguese) vessels in Newfoundland.
At Fermeuse the two English vessels attacked and robbed three Portuguese vessels, lading their catch and goods into the São João which they brought back to Southampton, presumably dividing the returns between Perrot and Oughtred.
Masters of English ships at Fermeuse were shocked at this disruption of a peaceful fishing community.
The Portuguese took an action against Clerke in the High Court of Admiralty, supported by testimonies from an English ship's master who had been at Fermeuse, though no conclusion to the action has been found.
When, later in 1582, Sir Humphrey Gilbert [q.v.]was preparing an American colonizing expedition, Clerke entered his service and served as master of his flagship, the Delight , first under William Winter and then Maurice Browne as captains, between June and August 1583.
The Delight was met with opposition at St John's Harbour from the mixed fishing community, but on sight of the queen's commission the squadron was admitted and Gilbert went through the ceremony of annexing Newfoundland to England and issuing passes to non-English vessels to fish there.
Clerke had a shallop built for exploration of the harbours of south-eastern Newfoundland, and fortunately it remained on tow when the ships left for the mainland.
Off Sable Island — Clerke maintained as the result of a changed order from Gilbert —Delight went aground, losing most of her men and all the data so far collected.
Clerke bravely secured the shallop and with fifteen men contrived to sail northward to Newfoundland.
Without stores or adequate sails they suffered great hardships, but eventually arrived in south-west Newfoundland, where Clerke knew the French Basques had fishing stations.
They took his men, restored them to health, and brought them safely to Pasaje, where they were nearly taken by the Spanish, but eventually they reached England at the end of 1583 to find that Edward Hayes [q.v.], whose Golden Hind was the only vessel to survive, accused Clerke of having cast away the Delight .
Clerke made a technical and convincing reply, illustrating his knowledge of these waters.
Richard Hakluyt [q.v.]printed both versions of the disaster in 1589.
Clerke presumably returned to the Newfoundland fishery, as he is not found in the Armada lists.
He was still involved in the fishery in 1596, when he took the Pilgrim of Newport, Isle of Wight, into St John's Harbour to purchase additional salt.
He was received in a friendly fashion by the master of a French Basque ship of St Jean-de-Luz, who then turned on him, imprisoned him and his men, and stripped the Pilgrim of all but a minimum of food and sails.
He had to make his way home with such limited resources but succeeded in doing so successfully.
He then fades out of the records.
[Richard Hakluyt,The Principall Navigations , 1589 and 1600; D. B. and A. M. Quinn and Susan Hillier (eds.),
New American World , vols. iii and iv, 1979.]
Robert C Stacey
(c. 1170–1235/6), moneylender, patron, and scholar, was born c .1170, the only known son of Eliab (Jurnet) of Norwich (c .1130–1197) and his wife Muriel.
His father, also a moneylender and scholarly patron, was the dominant figure in the twelfth-century Jewish community of Norwich, and was one of the half-dozen or so wealthiest Jews in England.
Although Eliab suffered serious losses in 1177 in a failed consortium to lend money to the Crown, and was briefly exiled from England during the 1180s, he returned from the Continent in 1186 on promise of a 2,000 mark fine, and resided thereafter in Norwich until his death in 1197.
Isaac appears in the records in 1194, as a partner with his father and mother in a small loan contract.
Three years later, on his father's death, he paid a 1,000 mark fine to accede as heir to his father's estate.
He appears to have been immediately successful.
In 1199 his personal wealth amounted to more than 10 per cent of the total taxable wealth of the English Jewish community.
His financial transactions extended throughout the eastern counties, and although the bulk of his fortune almost certainly came from moneylending, his six houses in King's Lynn and the quay attached to his own stone house in Norwich suggest that he also had interests in trade.
Like his father, Isaac became the leading figure in the Jewish community of Norwich, carrying on a family tradition of financial support for rabbinical study which earned Eliab, Isaac, and Isaac's own sons Moses and Samuel the honorific title,HaNadib , ‘the generous’.
Under the family's patronage, Norwich became one of the two leading centres in England for Hebrew learning in the half-century after 1190.
Isaac and Samuel may have been rabbinical teachers themselves, as well as patrons of other teachers.
Along with other prominent English Jews, in 1210 Isaac fell victim to the wholesale confiscations and imprisonments ordered by King John in connection with the Bristol tallage of that year.
Isaac avoided execution by promising the king a 10,000 mark fine, and in 1213 was transferred from Bristol to the Tower of London.
But he may not have been released from the Tower until 1217, when his remaining bonds were returned to him and he and the rest of the Jews of Norwich were given letters of royal protection.
In his last years he featured in a number of important legal cases, and also became the subject of a famous caricature drawn on a tallage roll of 1233.
A rumour of his death circulated in 1230, but he did not in fact die until late 1235 or 1236.
Isaac had two sons, Moses (born before 1200) and Samuel (born before 1204), and a sister Margalita, who was active on her own account in 1201.
Moses moved to London, but was dead by October 1238.
Samuel, Isaac's second son, thereupon became the head of the family and the leader of the Norwich Jewish community.
Moses had three sons: Abraham, who returned to London in 1252 or early 1253 but died in 1255; Isaac, who converted to Christianity in 1253 after being accused of coin-clipping; and Eliab (Jurnet), who was also dead by 1255.
All were frequent business partners with their uncle Samuel.
Samuel himself had no known children, however, and with his death in 1273 the line of Eliab and Isaac of Norwich came to an end.
[Public Record Office: Originalia Rolls, E 371, Fine Rolls, C 60, and Pipe Rolls, E 372; V. D. Lipman,The Jews of Medieval Norwich , 1967; H. G. Richardson,The English Jewry under Angevin Kings , 1960.]
Sam McKinstry
, Sir Robert Rowand (1834–1921), architect, was born 5 April 1834 in Edinburgh, the younger son and third of the four children of James Anderson, a solicitor, and his wife Margaret Rowand of Glasgow.
Anderson studied at George Watson's Hospital, Edinburgh, from 1841 to 1848, leaving to take up a legal apprenticeship for four years.
This he abandoned in 1852, joining the office of Edinburgh architect John Lessels, and enrolling as a part-time student at the Trustees' School of Design, Edinburgh, that same year, under Alexander Christie.
Here Anderson won a number of prizes for measured drawings of historic Scots architecture.
In 1856 he joined the London office of (Sir) George Gilbert Scott [q.v.], and in 1858–9 undertook a year-long tour of France and Italy.
He returned to Edinburgh in 1859, taking up an architectural post at the Royal Engineers' Office, where he rebuilt Broughty Castle, Broughty Ferry (1860–1).
In 1868 Anderson left the Royal Engineers, published a book of drawings from his continental tour, and began independent practice.
In the meantime he had designed a number of small Episcopal churches.
His restoration of St Vigean's church, Arbroath (1871–2), established his reputation as a restorer of taste, scholarliness, and principle.
Later, there followed competition wins for the Catholic Apostolic church, Edinburgh (1871–3), Edinburgh school board schools (1874–7), and Edinburgh University medical schools (1874–86).
In 1878 he was commissioned by John Stuart, third Marquess of Bute [q.v.]to rebuild Mount Stuart, near Rothesay, confirmation of his pre-eminent position in Scotland.
Other large commissions followed, including the Central Hotel, Glasgow (1878–84), the National Portrait Gallery and Museum of Antiquities, Edinburgh (1884–9), and the McEwan Hall at Edinburgh University (1884–9).
These buildings, in a mixture of styles, bear all the hallmarks of Anderson's architectural approach: sound building, straightforward planning, and delicate, scholarly detailing.
Believing that architectural beauty derived largely from functional and structural efficiency, Anderson constantly attacked the exponents of the Scots Baronial style, and thus ushered in a new era of refinement in Scottish architecture.
Anderson's restorations at Iona Abbey (1874–6), Dunblane Cathedral (1889–93), Paisley Abbey (1898–1907), and Sweetheart Abbey (1911–14) set standards of scholarliness and restraint for generations to come.
In 1893 Anderson founded the School of Applied Art in Edinburgh, to train architects and craftsmen.
In 1895 he instituted the National Art Survey to record all pre-eighteenth-century buildings.
This, together with some of Anderson's own buildings, inspired a widespread revival of the Scots Renaissance style.
He was awarded an LLD of Edinburgh University in 1884, was made an honorary member of the Royal Scottish Academy in 1897, was knighted in 1902, and was awarded the RIBA gold medal (he was a fellow of the RIBA) in 1916.
His final achievement was the creation of a central professional body, the Institute of Scottish Architects, in 1916.
He became its first president.
Anderson was very Scots in his character, serious, practical, remarkably energetic, and forceful.
Occasionally, in his latter years, his pride could be wounded.
In 1863 Anderson married Mary, daughter of Henry Ross, farmer, of Kinnahaird, Ross-shire.
They had one daughter, who died of typhoid in 1872 at the age of eight.
Anderson died in Edinburgh 1 June 1921.
[Sam McKinstry,Rowand Anderson: the Premier Architect of Scotland , 1991.]
J M Richards
, Sir James Thomas (1831–1908), editor and architect, was born 13 October 1831 in Reigate, Surrey, the eldest in the family of two sons and three daughters of James Thomas Knowles, plumber, glazier, and later architect, and his wife Susannah, daughter of George Brown, surgeon and apothecary of Rotherhithe, London.
In 1846 he was articled to his father and served for seven years in the latter's chambers in Gray's Inn, also attending from 1847 to 1849 the evening lectures on architecture initiated at University College, Gower Street, by T. L. Donaldson [q.v.]in 1842.
After completing his articles Knowles continued working in his father's architectural office.
In November 1850 he launched, with his friend Henry Hewlett (son of a Clapham solicitor and later to marry Knowles's youngest sister Emmeline), a local periodical, the Clapham Magazine .
Although this lasted only for three monthly issues, it was an early indication of Knowles's journalistic instincts.
After becoming ARIBA in 1853 Knowles, accompanied by Hewlett, spent most of 1854 travelling abroad, visiting Rome, Sicily, and Venice.
He then resumed work with his father and was partly responsible for the design of the latter's most notable building, the Grosvenor Hotel at Victoria Station, London (completed 1862) in a rich amalgam of current Victorian styles.
Before his father's retirement in 1869 Knowles began to practise independently.
He designed housing in south London, Albert Mansions, Victoria Street, and several churches, including St Stephen's, Clapham Park (1866).
Simultaneously he increasingly involved himself in the literary life of London, a change in the balance of his career which began when he made the acquaintance of the poet, Alfred (later first Baron) Tennyson [q.v.], who in 1867 commissioned Knowles to design his house in Aldworth, Sussex.
Its style was Anglo-French manorial.
They became close friends, sharing among other things an interest in the legend of King Arthur, about which Knowles wrote a book in 1868.
In 1868 also Knowles, with Tennyson's encouragement, founded the Metaphysical Society, which met monthly until 1880 for evening discussions at Knowles's house on Clapham Common.
Members included at different times Thomas Huxley, Walter Bagehot, James Froude, Archbishop Henry Manning, and W. E. Gladstone [qq.v.].
In 1870 Knowles, who for some years had practised journalism anonymously, was appointed editor of the Contemporary Review , which he made into a highly influential periodical while still continuing his architectural practice.
His editorship ended in 1880 following a change of ownership, but in 1877 Knowles had already founded a new magazine, the Nineteenth Century , which became even more influential, bringing Knowles again into the centre of contemporary thought and politics.
Gladstone, over the years, contributed sixty-seven articles.
Knowles was described by William Skilbeck, his son-in-law, as ‘rather a frail man, under the middle height’, adding that he ‘therefore took to big muscular Christians’.
In 1903, while staying at Sandringham with King Edward VII, Knowles was knighted.
In 1860 Knowles married Jane, daughter of Abraham Borradaile, vicar of St Mary's, Tothill Fields, Westminster.
They had one son and one daughter.
His wife died in childbirth in 1863.
In February 1865 he married Isabel Mary, the sister of his friend Henry Hewlett, and daughter of Henry William Hewlett of Brixton, a barrister with chambers in Gray's Inn.
They had one daughter.
Knowles died in Brighton 13 February 1908.
[Priscilla Metcalf,James Knowles, Victorian Editor and Architect , 1980.]
Peter A Clark
,Thomas (1566? –1635), landowner and MP, was born about 1566, the eldest in a family of four sons and two daughters of Charles Scott, a Puritan landowner and justice of the peace, of Godmersham near Canterbury, and his wife Jane, daughter of Sir Thomas Wyatt [q.v.]of Boxley, executed for rebellion in 1554.
Scott's education is uncertain but it seems likely that he attended the cathedral school, Canterbury, and afterwards went to Cambridge University.
Scott inherited the family estate in 1596, but from 1612 until towards the end of his life he lived for a good part of the year in Canterbury.
In 1613–14 he was in conflict with Archdeacon Charles Fotherby over an amalgam of personal and religious issues.
Increasingly involved in local politics, in 1614 he supported Sir Edwin Sandys [q.v.]as a candidate in the county elections to the Addled Parliament.
In 1618 he obtained the freedom of the city of Canterbury and shortly after became a member of the common council, though he was soon removed, due to the hostility of the corporation ruling group.
A zealous though conformist Puritan, Scott acquired a reputation in the early 1620s as an opponent of the city leaders and as a critic of royal policy.
In 1624 Scott was elected MP for Canterbury in a fierce campaign inflamed by anti-Catholicism.
He also stood in the 1625 and 1626 elections, but was defeated by the corporation's candidates.
He was re-elected as MP for Canterbury in 1628, with wide freeman and Puritan support.
Little is known about his activities in Parliament, but in 1628 he opposed the billeting of troops and was summoned before the Privy Council; four years later he was in conflict with the authorities again over musters.
The principal evidence for Scott's radical opinions comes from his extensive diaries and other unpublished writings.
In 1626 he wrote on the need for parliamentary reform, calling for the expulsion of non-resident borough MPs whom he regarded as illegally elected, and also for a major redistribution of seats in the House of Commons.
In 1627 he produced a radical and wide-ranging indictment of royal policy, denouncing George Villiers, first Duke of Buckingham [q.v.], identifying Charles I as a tyrant, and espousing resistance theory.
Scott's life was dominated by an intense commitment to godly religion, which involved searing spiritual experiences and recurrent bouts of melancholic despair.
But he also showed a striking interest in international developments, particularly the progress of the Protestant cause in France and Germany during the Thirty Years' War.
He was a passionate, combative, choleric, and difficult man, frequently embroiled in legal disputes.
He first married (in 1596) Elizabeth, the daughter of John Webbe, a prominent Canterbury merchant; they had one child, Jane.
His second wife (in 1602) was Mary, the daughter of John Knatchbull of Mersham, a substantial Kentish landowner; they had a son, Thomas (who predeceased him), and three daughters.
His granddaughter was Dorothea Scott, a friend of several of the regicides and a Quaker pamphleteer and preacher during the 1650s.
Thomas Scott died in Godmersham in May 1635.
[Scott's papers in the Kent Archives Office; G. D. Scull,Dorothea Scott , 1883; P. Clark, ‘Thomas Scott and the Growth of Urban Opposition to the Early Stuart Regime’,Historical Journal , vol. xxi, 1978; R. Cust,The Forced Loan and English Politics 1626–1628 , 1987.]
A F Thompson
,James (1876–1947), Irish labour leader and nationalist, was born in Toxteth 21 January 1876, the second son among six children (there was at least one daughter and one of the children did not survive infancy) of James Larkin and his wife Mary Anne McNulty, impoverished immigrants from Ulster, and spent his early childhood in Newry at his grandfather's house.
He returned to Liverpool in 1885 and his father died in 1887.
In 1906, having worked as a foreman on Merseyside, he became general organizer of the National Union of Dock Labourers under (Sir) James Sexton [q.v.], and made his mark as a strike leader and socialist propagandist in Belfast during 1907.
A man of formidable physique and strong emotions, always the flamboyant, charismatic orator, ‘Big Jim’ was soon the best-known Irish trade unionist of his day.
In 1908 Larkin broke with Sexton, moved to Dublin, and founded the Irish Transport and General Workers Union.
Thereafter he set out, increasingly influenced by the syndicalist ideas of his uneasy associate, James Connolly [q.v.], to create, with some success, ‘one big union’ among urban workers, now notoriously discontented in a largely rural society.
He edited his own popular newspaper, the Irish Worker , and, as a self-educated man of wide interests, formed a sympathetic relationship with the Dublin literati.
Ostentatiously non-sectarian, Larkin was invariably opposed by the Catholic hierarchy on social issues.
The high point of his chequered career was the dramatic Dublin strike and lockout of 1913–14, during which Larkin was briefly imprisoned.
This dispute was provoked by the leading local employer, W. M. Murphy, who was determined to end Larkin's proved capacity to exploit the grievances of the Dublin proletariat.
The strikers, some 25,000 strong by involving over 100,000 dependants, initially received the backing, moral and financial, of the British trade-union movement to an unprecedented degree.
However, its leaders were alienated by Larkin's erratic, offensive, and aggressive behaviour and, after much acrimony, withdrew their support.
In February 1914 the strikers were driven back to work on Murphy's terms.
Larkin's humiliating defeat did not prevent his becoming president of the Irish Trades Union Congress, and he had their blessing when he left for the United States in October 1914, hoping to retrieve his union's fortunes.
In part this was due to his commitment to the nationalist cause, though he played at best a minor role in the creation of Connolly's Irish Citizen Army.
In America Larkin lost his way while the situation in Ireland deteriorated.
He became involved in a variety of industrial disputes to little purpose, failed to raise funds for his union, and in 1920 was imprisoned for ‘criminal syndicalism’.
In 1923 he returned to a hero's welcome in Dublin, flirted with Communism, but lost control of his union, now in the staid hands of William O'Brien, once his assistant.
In 1924 Larkin founded the Workers Union of Ireland, which played a modest if troublesome part in the republic until his demise.
Something of the old fire marked his interventions as a member of the Dáil in 1926–32, 1937–8, and 1943–4, and in the fight against the repressive trade-union legislation introduced by Eamon De Valera [q.v.]in 1941, when he secured some trivial concessions.
On 8 September 1903 Larkin married Elizabeth Brown, whose father.
a Baptist lay preacher, managed a working-men's restaurant.
They had three sons.
Larkin died in Dublin 30 January 1947 and was buried, appropriately, in Glasnevin, along with many others who had espoused the nationalist and social causes of his epoch.
[Emmet Larkin,James Larkin , 1965; F. S. L. Lyons,Ireland since the Famine , 1973; H. A. Clegg,A History of British Trades Unions , vol. ii, 1985; George Dangerfield,The Damnable Question , 1976.]
Michael C W Hunter
,Charles (1630–1713), aristocrat and natural philosopher, was born 13 September 1630, the fourth son in the family of nine sons and three daughters of Henry Frederick Howard, third Earl of Arundel [q.v.], and his wife Lady Elizabeth Stuart, daughter of Esmé, Earl of March and later third Duke of Lennox.
In the late 1640s and early 1650s Howard spent time in France and Holland.
In 1652, on the death of his father, he inherited the estate of Deepdene, near Dorking, Surrey, and thereafter he devoted much effort to its beautification, constructing an elaborate Italianate garden of the kind popular in seventeenth-century England, with terraces landscaped on a U-shaped hillside, and with appendages including a laboratory.
The garden was admired by John Evelyn [q.v.]in 1655, while John Aubrey [q.v.]gave a lengthy illustrated account of the estate in his Perambulation of Surrey (1673).
The remains of Howard's landscaping are still to be seen at Deepdene; a further surviving relic of his horticultural activities there is provided by his herbarium, dated 1660, now at Arundel Castle.
In the 1650s Howard evidently also developed an interest in industrial practices, and on 27 October 1660 he applied for a patent for a new method of tanning, the subject of a printed broadsheet,Brief directions how to Tanne Leather according to a new Invention (n.d.).
On 24 December 1662 Howard was elected a fellow of the Royal Society; he almost immediately began to participate in its proceedings, taking a special interest in agrarian and technological matters.
Various of the committees on such topics that the society instituted in 1663 and 1664 met at his lodgings at Arundel House, notably the agricultural or georgical committee.
Howard's own contribution to the latter particularly concerned kitchen gardens and winter greens.
In addition, a paper by him on the cultivation of saffron was published in the society's Philosophical Transactions in 1678 (a paper on his novel tanning technique had appeared there in 1674).
In 1678 he applied for a patent for a new way of processing flax, which may have been related to investigations of this topic made under the society's auspices in the 1660s.
In the early 1680s Howard was twice involved in the public arena.
In 1681 he was the victim of blackmail involving Titus Oates [q.v.].
More important, Howard engaged in protracted litigation against his brother, Henry Howard, sixth Duke of Norfolk [q.v.], concerning the barony of Greystoke.
His father had provided for this title to pass to Charles if his brother inherited the earldom of Arundel; but when this occurred in 1677 Henry refused to give up the title, and Charles took the case to Chancery, in 1682 obtaining a celebrated decision in his favour by Heneage Finch, first Earl of Nottingham [q.v.].
This was challenged by his brother, however, and reversed by the lord keeper, Francis North, first Baron Guilford [q.v.], and the case continued after Henry's death and the succession to the dukedom of Charles's nephew, Henry [q.v.], being finally resolved in Charles's favour in the House of Lords in June 1685.
In his later years Howard seems increasingly to have retired from public life.
His attendance at the Royal Society dwindled after the early 1670s, and he evidently divided his time between London and Deepdene, devoting himself to horticultural, alchemical, and other pursuits.
His wife Mary, daughter of George Tattershall of Finchampstead, Berkshire, whom he had married in the early 1660s, died 7 November 1695, and Howard himself died 31 March 1713, both being buried in Dorking church.
As laid down in the will that he had made on 29 April 1696, revising an earlier one dated 13 July 1685, in which his wife had been named as his sole heir, Howard's estates were inherited by his only surviving child, Henry Charles Howard (born 18 October 1668); from him they descended to his son, Charles Howard [q.v.], who became tenth Duke of Norfolk in 1777.
[Henry Howard,Indications of the Memorials of the Howard Family , 1834, pp. 39, 46–7; D. E. C. Yale (ed.),
Lord Nottingham's Chancery Cases , Selden Society, vols. lxxiii, lxxix, 1957, 1961; Doris Mercer, ‘The Deepdene, Dorking’,Surrey Archaeological Collections , vol. lxxi, 1977; Michael Hunter,The Royal Society and its Fellows, 1660–1700 , 1982;idem ,Establishing the New Science , 1989; H. K. S. Causton,The Howard Papers , 1862; Arundel Castle archives.]
Ronald M Birse
, Sir Gilbert (1899–1978), civil engineer, was born in Hampstead 18 February 1899, the son of Henry William Roberts, pharmaceutical chemist, who died when Gilbert was a child, and his wife Lily Hodgson.
His mother remarried, and he had an elder sister and a half-brother.
He was a bright boy with a gift for mathematics, and was sent to Gresham College to study engineering, but soon after the outbreak of war in 1914 joined the Royal Flying Corps and served as a flight-lieutenant in No. 73 Squadron in France.
In 1918 he was shot in the knee while on a bombing raid and spent some time in hospital before being awarded an army scholarship, which enabled him to complete his studies at the City and Guilds College, London.
He graduated B.Sc.
with first-class honours in 1922.
Roberts started work as an assistant to (Sir) Ralph Freeman [q.v.]of Sir Douglas Fox & Partners on the design of the Sydney harbour bridge for Dorman Long & Company, and when they were awarded the contract in 1924 he was transferred with the rest of the design team to their office in London.
He worked with them for ten years, initially on the Sydney harbour and Newcastle upon Tyne bridges, and then from 1931 on the design and construction of welded steel bridges, of which his Billingham bridge was the first all-welded bridge in Britain.
From 1936 to 1945 he was in charge of construction and development for Sir William Arrol [q.v.]in Glasgow, where he took the initiative in substituting welding for the traditional riveting of joints in steel structures.
He stayed with Arrol for a further four years as director and chief engineer before joining in 1949 Freeman, Fox & Partners, with whom he remained until his retirement in 1969.
He was jointly responsible for the original design work on the great suspension bridges across the estuaries of the Severn, Forth, and Humber, and later developed and patented the revolutionary aerofoil-shaped box-girder deck of the final Severn bridge design.
He was knighted in 1965 for his work on the Forth road bridge, which had been opened the previous year.
Among his many other notable designs were the Dome of Discovery at the Festival of Britain (1951); Auckland harbour bridge, the Wye bridge on the Welsh side of the Severn crossing, the Volta river bridge (later known as Adomi bridge) in Ghana, and the new Maidenhead bridge; radio telescopes in Australia and Canada; and two goliath cranes of 400 tons capacity for use in the construction of nuclear power stations.
He was also involved in the design of two bridges, at Milford Haven in Wales and the West Gate bridge in Melbourne, Australia, both of which collapsed during construction in 1970, with the loss of four and thirty-five lives respectively.
In the first accident the design was certainly not at fault, but the underlying cause and the ultimate responsibility for the West Gate tragedy were never clearly established, in spite of the most searching questioning of Roberts and other witnesses by the Australian royal commission investigating the accident.
A few weeks later he suffered a heart attack, and on recovery was ordered complete rest.
His writings included numerous papers and articles on the design and construction of his bridges and other structures.
He was the holder of fellowships of the Royal Society (1965), the Institutions of Civil and Structural Engineers, the Institute of Welding, the American Society of Civil Engineers, Imperial College, London, and the City and Guilds of London Institute.
He was awarded the Telford gold medal of the Institution of Civil Engineers (1967), the Royal medal of the Royal Society (1968), the James Watt medal of the Institution of Civil Engineers (1969), and the Churchill gold medal of the Society of Engineers (1970).
Awards received by Freeman, Fox & Partners, to which his outstanding designs contributed in no small way, included the Queen's award to industry in 1967, and, jointly with Rolls-Royce, the first MacRobert award in 1969.
In 1925 he married Elizabeth Nada, daughter of Frederick Rudolph Hora, schoolmaster.
They had two daughters.
Roberts died 1 January 1978 at St Stephen's Hospital, London.
[O. A. Kerensky in Biographical Memoirs of the Fellows of the Royal Society , vol. xxv, 1979, pp. 477–503;The Times , 4 January 1978.]
David Bradshaw
,Frederick William (1860–1913), writer under the name Baron Corvo, was born in Cheapside, London, 22 July 1860, the eldest of the four sons and three daughters of James Rolfe, piano maker, and his wife Ellen Elizabeth Pilcher.
He was educated at the North London Collegiate School until, aged about fourteen, he had a cross tattooed on his breast in token of a momentous religious experience, and became a teacher.
He started work at the Stationers' Company School, London, in 1874, and by the time he took up a post at Grantham Grammar School in 1884 he had already taught in Saffron Walden, Winchester, Newbury, and Cambridge.
Rolfe was received into the Catholic Church in 1886.
Later that year he accepted the invitation of the third Marquis of Bute [q.v.]to become headmaster of his cathedral choir school in Oban.
To coincide with this, he relaunched himself as Revd Fr.
Rolfe, a nominal mutation which coupled the enigma and scoundrel in Rolfe.
He left Oban after four acrimonious months, and, following a spell as a private tutor, enrolled at St Mary's College at Oscott, near Birmingham, in October 1887.
Here Rolfe neglected his religious studies and developed his interests in poetry, painting, and photography.
Just over a year after he had been dismissed from Oscott (1888), Rolfe entered Scots College, Rome, in December 1889.
Once again it was his self that he cultivated, rather than the seminarist's vocation, and he was expelled in May 1890.
Adrift and in debt, Rolfe was taken in by the Duchess of Sforza-Cesarini, who conferred on him the title of Baron Corvo before he returned to England later in the year.
Flush with corvine visiting cards, Rolfe took up residence in Christchurch, before the fraudulent offer he made for his hosts' house marked the end of his credit and credibility in Hampshire.
A cantankerous sojourn in Aberdeen ended when he was forcibly evicted from his lodgings.
Rolfe next moved to Holywell, near Chester.
He called it ‘the most bestially disagreeable place I ever saw’, and Holywell's view of Rolfe was no more flattering.
He began to write more steadily, and his first book,Stories Toto Told Me , an idiosyncratic concoction of spleen and whimsy, was published in 1898.
Towards the end of that year three anonymous articles appeared in an Aberdeen newspaper vilifying Rolfe and his murky past, and in January 1899, shattered in mind and body, he entered the Holywell workhouse.
A month later he discharged himself and trudged south to London.
The same tenacious vanity which enabled him to survive the next nine years of penury wrecked his chances of succeeding as a writer.
Chronicles of the House of Borgia was published in 1901, and in 1904 he published his most enduring novel,Hadrian the Seventh .
In it Rolfe rescripted his pathetic, seedy, and unrecognized struggle as the dream-fulfilling election of his protagonist to the papacy.
The novel displayed Rolfe's fondness for neologism, verbal sumptuousness, and quirky spelling in its best light.
In August 1908 Rolfe left for Venice and never returned, living out a kind of degenerate and vituperative envoi to his earlier years.
His squabbles with publishers and his vicious exploitation of those who befriended him continued as before, but, in addition, he gratified his pederastic cravings.
The Desire and Pursuit of the Whole , published posthumously in 1934, mirrored these bitter and penurious years.
His last published novel,The Weird of the Wanderer (1912), aroused as little interest as his previous ones.
Rolfe died 26 October 1913 in Venice.
He was unmarried.
[Miriam J. Benkovitz,Frederick Rolfe: Baron Corvo , 1977; A. J. A. Symons,The Quest for Corvo , 1934; Donald Weeks,Corvo , 1971.]
H F Oxbury
,Ernest (1868–1942), writer, was born Ernest Brammah Smith 20 March 1868 at 1 Rushton Street, Hulme, Manchester, the son of Charles Clement Smith, a Manchester warehouseman, and his wife Susannah Brammah.
He left school in Manchester to go into training as a farmer but, after three years, decided that he had no future in farming.
He later explained his reasons in English Farming, and Why I Turned It Up (1894) in the preface to which he wrote: ‘I can remember the time when people used to talk to me about farming and explain how I ought to go about it.
Alas!
I now know.’
This, like all his other books, was written under the pseudonym Ernest Bramah, and gave no clues to his personal life.
Throughout his career Smith was extremely reticent about his personal affairs and shunned publicity.
He once wrote: ‘I am not fond of writing about myself and only to a less degree about my work.’
Who's Who gives only his pen-name.
His farming having failed, Smith decided to try journalism and after a brief period as correspondent on a provincial newspaper, he went to London to work as secretary to Jerome K. Jerome [q.v.].
He then joined the staff of Jerome's paper Today , a twopenny weekly, which was founded in 1893 and folded in 1897.
As an author, the name of Ernest Bramah first came to public notice with The Wallet of Kai Lung (1900), the first of his collection of stories told by a wandering Chinaman in the manner of the Arabian Nights' tales and in an elaborate Mandarin style ostensibly of Chinese translated into flowery English language.
J. Hilaire Belloc [q.v.]wrote: ‘These parable-like tales obtain their effect of subtle humour and philosophy by the adaptation of Chinese conventions to the English tongue.’
Other Kai Lung books include Kai Lung's Golden Hours (1922),Kai Lung Unrolls his Mat (1928),The Moon of Much Gladness (1932), and Kai Lung beneath the Mulberry Tree (1940).
In 1914 Bramah began an entirely different set of stories with Max Carrados who, on the dust jacket of the first edition, is described as ‘a detective of a totally new and unexpected type, for he is blind; but the alluring peculiarity of his case is that his blindness is more than counterbalanced by an enormously enhanced perception of the other senses’.
Further books in this series include The Eyes of Max Carrados (1923) and Max Carrados Mysteries (1927).
The Specimen Case (1924) contains stories of both Kai Lung and Max Carrados, the main reason for which Bramah, emerging from his usual seclusion, explains in the preface.
In consequence of the marked contrast between the styles of the two series, some critics had questioned how such stories could all be the work of one author.
Bramah quotes Grant Richards as having enquired in the Times Literary Supplement , ‘Is there really such a person as Ernest Bramah?’ and (Dame) E. Rose Macaulay [q.v.]as having written in the Nation and Athenaeum , ‘The crude stilted Conan Doylish English of the detective stories certainly goes far to bear out the common theory that Ernest Bramah has a literary dual personality.’
‘There is one retort still left,’ writes Bramah, ‘whereby to confound the non-existence and the dualists alike — I can produce both a Kai Lung and a Max Carrados between one pair of covers — and here they are.’
As a hobby Bramah studied numismatics and published A Guide to the Varieties and Rarity of English Regal Copper Coins — Charles II, 1671, to Victoria, 1860 (1929).
He died at his Somerset home 23 June 1942.
[The Times , 29 June 1942; S. P. B. Mais,Some Modern Authors , 1923; Howard Haycraft,Murder for Pleasure , 1942; Stanley J. Kunitz and Howard Haycraft,Twentieth Century Authors , 1942.]
John Goodridge
,(Owen) Alfred (1877–1930), poet and recorder of rural and industrial life, was born in South Marston, Swindon, Wiltshire, 6 February 1877, the fifth of eight surviving children and the youngest of four sons of Elias Lloyd Williams, a decorative woodworker from Conwy, and his wife Elizabeth, daughter of Joshua Hughes, tanner and smallholder, of South Marston.
His father left home when he was three, and his mother took on additional jobs, enabling the children to attend the village school.
At eight he began working part-time on a local farm, and three years later left school to go there full-time.
In 1892 he went to work in the Great Western Railway works in Swindon, principally as a hammer-man, remaining there until 1914.
Williams began studying in his spare time in 1897 and taught himself Latin and Greek, enrolling in a correspondence course at Ruskin Hall, Oxford, in 1900.
He started writing in 1903–4, and by 1907 his poems were appearing in anthologies.
He received the patronage of Lord Edmond Fitzmaurice (E. G. Petty-Fitzmaurice, q.v.) and published several volumes of poetry, notably Songs in Wiltshire (1909),Poems in Wiltshire (1911),Nature and Other Poems (1912), and Cor Cordium (1913).
His best poetry is in his Selected Poems (1926).
In 1914 ill health forced him to leave the railway works, and he took up market gardening.
He volunteered for service in 1916, serving from 1917 to 1919 in India, where he taught himself Sanskrit.
In 1920–1 he and his wife built their own house in South Marston, and the last decade of his life was spent writing and market gardening.
Several awards from the Royal Literary Fund and the Royal Bounty Fund did a little to alleviate their poverty.
Williams's most enduring work, his account of Life in a Railway Factory (1915), is informed by a keen sense of the cruel, alienating regime of the factory.
In his books on folk life —A Wiltshire Village (1912),Villages of the White Horse (1913),Round about the Upper Thames (1922),Folk-Songs of the Upper Thames (1923), and The Banks of Isis , serialized in the North Berkshire Herald in 1925 — he left, as he had hoped to do, ‘a permanent record of the language and activities of the district in which I find myself’.
They show an intense awareness of a fast disappearing way of life.
His translation of Tales from the Panchatantra was published posthumously in 1930.
A shy, self-effacing man, Williams was self-taught, and showed an independent and determined intellectual curiosity.
He had a good ear for language, and was a talented scholar, translator, and lyric poet.
He received a civil list pension in March 1930.
He married his childhood friend Mary Maria, daughter of William Peck, moulder, in 1903.
They had no children.
He died of heart failure 9 April 1930, at home in South Marston, after visiting his dying wife in hospital.
Memorials to him were raised on Liddington Hill in 1938 and on Barbary Down in 1939.
[The Times , 14 and 29 April, and 5 May 1930; Henry Byett,Alfred Williams , 1933; Leonard Clark,Alfred Williams, his Life and Work , 1945; J. B. Jones,Williams of Swindon , 1950; Alfred Williams collection, Swindon Reference Library; information from Joan Jefferies, Friends of Alfred Williams.]
Peter Leach
,William (d. 1739), mason and architect, was the son of John Townesend (d .
1726), a mason of Oxford, and his wife Elizabeth Morrell.
His brothers, George (d .
1719) and John (d .
1742), were also masons, the former practising in the Bristol area and the latter in London; but William, the most successful member of the family, remained in Oxford and became the leading master mason in the town during a particularly active phase in its architectural history.
Alongside its other main protagonists, the amateur architects Dr Henry Aldrich of Christ Church and Dr George Clarke of All Souls [qq.v.], and the professional Nicholas Hawksmoor [q.v.], he was a prominent figure in this development; and the statement of the antiquarian Thomas Hearne [q.v.]in 1720, that he ‘hath a hand in all the Buildings of Oxford, and gets a vast deal of Money that way’, was no exaggeration.
His first major undertakings were the erection of Peckwater quadrangle at Christ Church to the design of Aldrich (1706–14) and the fellows' building and cloister at Corpus Christi College (1706–12); and from then on until his death, occasionally working in partnership with another Oxford mason, Bartholomew Peisley (d .
1727), he was involved in virtually every significant building project in the university.
He also worked elsewhere in the neighbourhood, notably at Radley Hall, Berkshire (1721–5), and as a contractor at Blenheim Palace (1720–39), while other aspects of his business were quarry-working and the production of funerary monuments.
In the building accounts of the Queen's College, Oxford, Townesend is referred to as ‘architecto’ whereas his father, who had worked there previously, was described as ‘lapicidae’, a distinction which reflects the fact that, like others of his kind, he was certainly able to design as well as to build; but the extent to which he did so unaided is not entirely clear, many of the projects in Oxford at this time evidently being the work of more than one mind.
In two cases where he executed designs by Hawksmoor, the Clarendon Building (1712–15) and the north quadrangle of All Souls (1716–35), he had submitted alternative proposals himself; and at Christ Church library (1717–38) he acted as Clarke's architectural amanuensis, drawing out his designs as well as executing them.
More complicated was the situation at Queen's, where designs for the front quad were prepared by Hawksmoor, but the scheme executed by Townesend (1710–21) appears to have been almost entirely the joint work of himself and Clarke; while for the new building at Magdalen, the original design by Edward Holdsworth [q.v.]was revised by Townesend in 1731 under Clarke's direction.
In these circumstances Townesend's own architectural identity is not very clearly defined.
His predominant mode, in the Clarendon Building and All Souls designs and at Queen's, as well as in other works, such as the Christ Church buttery (1722) and his Durham quadrangle range at Trinity College (1728), was a simplified version of the baroque of Hawksmoor and Sir John Vanbrugh [q.v.]; but the fellows' building at Corpus Christi College, of which he may have been the designer as well as the builder, was close to the proto-Palladian manner of the Peckwater quadrangle, while his Radcliffe quadrangle at University College (1717–19)— again devised under Clarke's direction — and his additions at Oriel College (1719–20) were faithful copies of the traditional Jacobean style of the adjoining buildings, the former including a skilfully executed Gothic vault.
In 1688 Townesend married Anne, daughter of Henry Brian, gentleman, of Witney: they had at least eight children but only a son John and a daughter survived their father, the former carrying on the business.
William Townesend was buried at St Giles church, Oxford, 22 September 1739.
[H. M. Colvin,A Biographical Dictionary of British Architects 1600–1840 , 1978, and Unbuilt Oxford , 1983; Rupert Gunnis,Dictionary of British Sculptors 1660–1851 , 1953; W. G. Hiscock, ‘William Townesend, Mason and Architect of Oxford’,Architectural Review , October 1945.]
Brian Inglis
,John William (1875–1949), inventor and philosopher, was born in 1875 in South Africa, the elder son among the three children of General Sir John Hart Dunne, KCB, of Cartron, Roscommon, and his wife Julia Elizabeth, daughter of William R. Chapman of Whitby, Yorkshire.
He was brought up in South Africa, and at the age of six had a serious accident which confined him to bed for three years.
He read a great deal as a child and later said that he read Euclid as easily as an adult reads a novel.
At seventeen he became a pupil on a farm.
After serving with the Imperial Yeomanry in the Boer war he became an aeronautical engineer, using his observation of sea-birds in flight to design a revolutionary type of monoplane with swept-back wings.
The War Office was sufficiently impressed to employ him, with a view to the production of a prototype, in 1906; but the model was not accepted.
Dunne would have been forgotten — except, perhaps, by fly-fishermen; for his first book was a beginners’ guide to the art of the dry fly — if An Experiment with Time (1927) had not enjoyed an immediate and lasting success.
In it he described a succession of his dreams over a period of thirty years, which seemed to show glimpses of the future, and provided a theory of time to account for them.
Among those who were impressed was H. G. Wells [q.v.], who found the book ‘fantastically interesting’.
It was widely praised, even in Nature , which might have been sceptical.
A suggestion that Dunne threw out caught many a reader's fancy: anybody, he argued, could obtain the same results as he had simply by having a pad and a pencil beside the bed and writing down remembered dreams, immediately on waking up.
‘Dunne dreams’ became common colloquial usage for dreams foreshadowing future experiences.
His ‘serialism’, however, the theory he provided to account for them, failed to convince scientists that it fused with the new physics.
Dunne himself went out of his way to insist that his theory was free from any occult taint; but An Experiment with Time , revised and expanded in 1934, was to remain in print for over half a century; and ironically, it won the reputation of doing more to convince the general public of the reality of clairvoyance, in the form of precognition, than all the labours of the psychical researchers whom Dunne so mistrusted.
Dunne belonged to ‘the military section of Britain's old upper class’, as J. B. Priestley [q.v.], who based Time and the Conways (1937) on his interpretation of Dunne's theory, was to recall; ‘he looked and behaved like the old regular officer type crossed with a mathematician and an engineer.’
He was also ‘as far removed from any suggestion of the seer as it was possible to imagine’.
In 1928 he married Cicely Marion Violet Jean, daughter of Geoffrey Cecil Twistleton-Wykeham-Fiennes, eighteenth Baron Saye and Sele, of Broughton Castle, Banbury, Oxfordshire.
They had one son and one daughter.
Dunne died 24 August 1949 in Banbury.
[Recollections of Richard de la Mare in a private interview; J. B. Priestley,Man and Time , 1964, pp. 99, 244–61;The Times , 27 August 1949.]
Eric Midwinter
,Hedley (1905–1943), cricketer, was born in Headingley, Leeds, 18 May 1905, the eldest of three children and only son of Hedley Verity, coal merchant, and his wife Edith Elwick, Sunday-school teacher, both of Headingley.
Hedley Verity went to school locally, and came to the fore as a schoolboy cricketer.
With Wilfred Rhodes [q.v.]ever-present in the Yorkshire XI, Verity played league cricket for Rawdon, Accrington, and Middleton before he became established in the Yorkshire team in 1930.
Throughout the 1930s he emerged as one of the classic left-hand spin bowlers of all time.
Disciplined and naturally dignified, he was a most thoughtful and observant bowler, a little pacier than many left handers, but matching variation with accuracy in exemplary style, and always eager to pit his wits against the best.
In all first-class matches he captured 1,956 wickets at an average of 14.87, the best average for any bowler taking more than 1,500 wickets in the twentieth century.
Of these, 1,558 were taken for Yorkshire, while another 144 came in his forty test appearances.
His most notable international feat was taking fourteen Australian wickets in one day at Lord's in 1934.
In each of his nine full seasons in English cricket he took at least 100 wickets, three times exceeding the 200 mark.
He twice took ten wickets in an innings, and his analysis of ten wickets for ten runs against Nottinghamshire in 1932, including the hat trick, remained a world record.
He took nine wickets in an innings on seven occasions.
This intense phase of remarkable activity was a prime reason why Yorkshire won the county championship seven times in the ten summers Verity played for them.
In 1929 he married Kathleen Alice, daughter of Frederick Metcalfe, sales agent, of Horsforth.
They had two sons.
Serving as a captain with the Green Howards in Catania, Sicily, Verity received chest wounds from which he died, at an Italian prisoner-of-war camp in Caserta, 31 July 1943.
[Wisden Cricketers' Almanack s; Lord's library.]
Sheridan Morley
,Ralph Clifford (1882–1962), actor and farceur, was born 18 March 1882 in Broughton, Salford, the son of Gordon James Lynn, insurance manager, and his wife Janet Thomas.
He was a grand-nephew of the Victorian novelist Eliza Lynn Linton [q.v.].
He made his first stage appearance as an actor at Wigan in The King of Terrors in 1900, taking fourteen more years to make his way into the West End, where he arrived at the Empire Theatre in October 1914 in By Jingo If We Do .
It was already clear that Lynn was to make his career as an eccentric comedian, expert in the slow burn, the double take, and the impromptu remark which would duly be noted by a grateful playwright (Landlady: ‘This writing of yours ain't very clear.’
Lynn: ‘No, I have just eaten some very thick soup’).
The turning-point in Lynn's career came in 1922 when Leslie Henson and Tom Walls [qq.v.]cast him in Tons of Money , a sparkling farce which ran for two years at the Shaftesbury Theatre.
Also in that cast was a young John Robertson Hare [q.v.], and the team of Walls, Hare, and Lynn was thus created, one which was to stay together for the next eleven years.
With their subsequent production,It Pays To Advertise (1924), they moved to the Aldwych Theatre, where they were joined in 1925 by the playwright Ben Travers [q.v.], who was to describe Lynn in his memoirs as ‘the greatest farcical actor I was ever lucky enough to know and watch and work with’.
Over the next decade a succession of ‘Aldwych farces’ would run for at least 200 performances each, and some for many more:A Cuckoo in the Nest (1925),Rookery Nook (1926),Thark (1928), and Plunder (1928) alone occupied the years from 1925 to 1929, and to them all Lynn would bring his own unique brand of wistful stooging: essentially he was the Stan Laurel [q.v.]to the much more bluff Hardy of Tom Walls, but Lynn's timing, notably on staircases and when suddenly finding himself in the wrong room with the wrong people and quite often the wrong name, was a lesson in comic technique for generations of stage actors.
He would make occasional forays into the United States or films, but Lynn's only real home was in Aldwych farces as part of the Travers team which ran triumphantly into the 1930s, and he stayed with them, creating and recreating the role of the silly ass forever working his way out of impossible situations, often armed with nothing more than the famous monocle, a daft grin, and an apparently inexhaustible ability to triumph over adversity by the sheer idiocy of his own imagination.
When all was degenerating into ritual farcical chaos around him, Lynn would remain the essence of sweet reason, achieving an almost transcendental calm and tranquillity partly because he retained an almost permanent inability to grasp the realities around him.
With World War II came one more hit,Is Your Honeymoon Really Necessary?(1944), which Lynn produced and played for more than two years at the Duke of York's Theatre and a further two years on tour.
After the war he rejoined Robertson Hare for two more Ben Travers farces,Outrageous Fortune (1947) and Wild Horses (1952), but though the heyday of the Aldwych farces was long gone, Lynn refused to give in to the changes of theatrical fashion.
On sustained regional tours right through his seventies he would go on playing to smaller but no less loving audiences, having no desire for retirement or inactivity.
His prolific career covered half a century, sixty plays, and more than a dozen films.
He made his last London appearance in 1958.
In 1920 Lynn married Gladys Miles.
They had a son and a daughter, Ann Lynn, who followed her father into the theatre.
Lynn died 8 August 1962.
[Ben Travers,A-Sitting on a Gate, Autobiography , 1978; personal knowledge.]
D G Rowell
,Geoffrey Anketell (1883–1929), priest and poet, was born 27 June 1883 in Leeds, the seventh child in the family of seven sons and two daughters of the Revd William Studdert Kennedy, vicar of St Mary's, Quarry Hill, Leeds, and his second wife Jeanette Anketell.
There were also one son and four daughters of a first marriage.
Educated at Leeds Grammar School, he graduated in classics and divinity at Trinity College, Dublin, in 1904, after which he taught for two years at a school in West Kirby in Liverpool.
Following a year of ordination training at Ripon Clergy College, he was ordained in 1908 to a curacy at Rugby parish church, moving from there in 1912 to be curate at Leeds parish church.
Appointed as vicar of St Paul's, Worcester, in 1914, a year later he became a chaplain to the armed forces and began the wartime ministry among the troops in France and Flanders for which he is most remembered.
His considerable natural gifts as a preacher were combined with a talent for poetry, particularly dialect verse in the manner of the barrack-room ballads of J. Rudyard Kipling [q.v.].
In the carnage and suffering of the trenches his strongly sacramental Christianity was communicated in memorable addresses and in colloquial verse of sometimes powerful simplicity, which brought together the passion of Christ and the doubt, fear, and courage of soldiers caught in the squalid stalemate of the Flanders trenches.
Studdert Kennedy preached a suffering God, Christ the revealer, ‘pierced to the heart by the sorrow of the sword’.
The experience of war made him question both the metaphysical assumption of an impassible God, and the hortatory patriotic moralism of many contemporary churchmen and political leaders.
He could contrast sharply (in Peace Rhymes of a Padre ) the God of glory in Isaiah's vision with the God revealed in the suffering Christ.
God, I hate this splendid vision —
all its splendour is a lie…
And I hate the God of power on
His hellish heavenly throne…
Thou hast bid us seek Thy glory,
in a criminal crucified…
For the very God of Heaven is not
Power, but Power of Love.
A bitter poem from the end of the war saw the statesmen meeting at Versailles to agree to a peace treaty as those who crucified Christ anew.
After the war a number of volumes of his collected poems were published, the most notable being Rough Rhymes of a Padre (1918),Peace Rhymes of a Padre (1920),Songs of Faith and Doubt (1922), and The Unutterable Beauty (1927).
Given the nickname ‘Woodbine Willie’ by the troops, he once described his chaplain's ministry as taking ‘a box of fags in your haversack and great deal of love in your heart’and laughing and joking with those he was called to serve.
‘You can pray with them sometimes; but pray for them always.’
Ministering on the front line under fire he showed conspicuous bravery and was awarded the MC for his tending of the wounded under fire during the attack on the Messines ridge.
He was slightly built and liked to joke in public about his prominent ears and simian features, though contemporaries were much more likely to be arrested by the large and melancholy brown eyes.
Demobilized in 1919 he was appointed a chaplain to the king.
In 1922 he left his Worcester parish to run the church of St Edmund King and Martyr in Lombard Street in the City of London, a non-parochial cure, which left him free for his major postwar work as ‘messenger’ of the Industrial Christian Fellowship, which had come into being in 1920 as a result of the amalgamation of the Christian Social Union and the Navvy Mission Society.
Critical alike of Marxist socialism and capitalism, Studdert Kennedy commanded considerable audiences for his addresses during the ICF's missions and crusades in the years of the depression.
He was sure that his Christianity had political consequences, but that it was religion not political panaceas that met human need.
Archbishop William Temple [q.v.], who described him as ‘the finest priest I have known’, characterized him as evangelical without a trace of Puritanism, and fired by a strong Catholic sacramentalism, with the cross at the heart of it all.
The suffering of war and the suffering of the depression were alike uniquely met by the crucified God.
In 1929 he married Emily, daughter of Alfred Catlow, coal merchant; they had three sons.
It was on an ICF crusade that Kennedy died in Liverpool 8 March 1929.
[J. K. Mozley (ed.),
G. A. Studdert Kennedy, by his Friends , 1929; Roy Fuller, ‘Woodbine Willie’ Lives’in Owls and Artificers , 1971; Gerald Studdert-Kennedy,Dog-Collar Democracy: the Industrial Christian Fellowship, 1919–1929 , 1982; Alan Wilkinson,The Church of England and the First World War , 1978; ‘Woodbine Willie’(centenary assessment) in Church Times , vol. xxiv, part 6, 1983.]
Michael Hurd
,Ivor Bertie (1890–1937), composer and poet, was born at 3 Queen Street, Gloucester, 28 August 1890, the elder son and second in the family of two boys and two girls of David Gurney, proprietor of a small tailoring business, and his wife Florence, daughter of William Lugg, house decorator.
He was educated at the King's School as a chorister of Gloucester Cathedral, then as an articled pupil of the cathedral organist,(Sir) A. Herbert Brewer [q.v.], and finally, on winning a composition scholarship (1911), at the Royal College of Music under Sir Charles Stanford [q.v.].
Though rejected by the army in 1914 on grounds of defective eyesight, Gurney enlisted on 9 February 1915 while still a student and from 25 May 1916 served in France as a private with the 2nd/5th Gloucesters.
He sustained a minor bullet wound on Good Friday 1917 and more serious gas injuries on or about 10 September 1917 during the third battle of Ypres (Passchendaele).
Invalided back to England, he spent time in various war hospitals and, after exhibiting signs of mental instability (including a suicide attempt on 19 June 1918), he was finally discharged in October 1918.
He resumed his studies at the Royal College but was unable to concentrate.
He returned to Gloucester and, failing to find permanent employment, was obliged to live on a small disability pension and the charity of friends and family.
Music and poetry now poured from him, but his behaviour (eccentric before the war) grew increasingly erratic.
Further threats of suicide followed and in September 1922 he was diagnosed as suffering from paranoid schizophrenia and committed to Barnwood House Asylum, Gloucester.
On 21 December 1922 he was transferred to the City of London Mental Hospital, Dartford, Kent, where he remained until his death.
As a composer Gurney found his voice in 1913/14 with the composition of Five Elizabethan Songs .
Although he wrote chamber and orchestral music, songs were his true vocation.
Manuscripts of more than 300 are to be found in the Gurney archive at the Gloucester city public library.
Poetry was a secondary interest that grew only when conditions in the trenches made composition almost impossible.
After the war he pursued both arts with equal fervour.
Gurney's songs began to reach publication from 1920, but it was not until the Oxford University Press issued two volumes of twenty songs in 1938 that his true stature could be appreciated.
Further collections followed in 1952, 1959, and 1979.
These were made possible by the faith and industry of Gurney's friend, the musicologist Marion Scott, who had preserved his manuscripts, and the editorial expertise of the composers Gerald Finzi [q.v.]and Howard Ferguson.
His manuscripts pose formidable ethical and aesthetic problems because so much of his work is uneven, unpolished, and sometimes incoherent.
Similar considerations afflict his poetry, of which over 1,700 items exist in the Gloucester archive.
Two volumes were published during his lifetime:Severn and Somme (1917) and War's Embers (1919); and minor selections appeared in 1954 and 1973, edited by Edmund Blunden [q.v.]and Leonard Clark respectively.
In 1982 the Oxford University Press issued a major selection of some 300 poems, edited by P. J. Kavanagh, and it is on the basis of this volume that his importance as a poet came to be recognized.
Gurney's poems celebrate his love of the Gloucestershire countryside with the same unsentimental vigour as they report on the realities of trench warfare and chart his gradual descent into madness.
His songs are equally forceful and direct, covering a wide range of emotional expression and empathizing with poets of every period, particularly his contemporaries, the Georgians.
In both fields he was an individualist, and in both his successes mark him out as an artist of power and originality.
Gurney died from tuberculosis 26 December 1937 at the City of London Mental Hospital, Dartford, Kent.
He was unmarried.
[Michael Hurd,The Ordeal of Ivor Gurney , 1978; R. K. R. Thornton,Ivor Gurney: Collected Letters , 1991.]
R M Hatton
(1666–1726), mother of George II, was born 25 September 1666, the only surviving child of Georg Wilhelm of the house of Brunswick-Lüneburg and his wife Eléonore Desmiers d'Olbreuse, of a French Huguenot family.
Her father, ruling duke of Celle (exchanged for Hanover which he had governed from 1648) since 1665, was not married to Eléonore at the time of their daughter's birth, but, by military and diplomatic services to the Holy Roman Emperor, he obtained the legitimization of Sophia Dorothea and in 1675 the legal marriage of her parents was permitted.
She was the ‘second ancestress’ of the Hanoverian English dynasty which lasted until 1837.
The vital link — the ‘first ancestress’— was James I's granddaughter, Sophia of the Palatinate [q.v.], who by the Act of the Protestant Succession of June 1701 would have become queen in her own right if she had outlived Queen Anne.
Brought up at a cultivated and tolerant court and doted on as an only child, she became a catch on the German dynastic marriage market.
Her father's duchy would, by a family convention of 1658, be transferred to his youngest brother Ernst August, but she would inherit her father's private fortune.
To forestall rival suitors who might become political enemies, Ernst August and his wife agreed that their eldest son, Georg Ludwig (George Lewis), must marry the girl; Sophia Dorothea's own parents were delighted in view of the English royal connection.
They were married in 1682 and two children were born to them: Georg August (the future George II) in 1683 and a daughter.
Sophia Dorothea enjoyed the huge family circle at the Hanoverian court where she, being good-looking and lively, was a great favourite.
With a son safely born, Georg Ludwig had to participate in campaigns against the Turks in the east and Louis XIV of France as part of the price to be paid, without which Hanover would not have become the ninth electorate of the Holy Roman Empire in 1692.
During his absence Sophia Dorothea carried on a passionate love affair with Graf Philipp Christoph von Königsmarck, an officer in the Hanoverian army; they hoped to marry if Georg Ludwig should be killed in battle.
Plans for their future brought them into political contact with enemies of the ninth electorate which led first to the secret murder of Königsmarck in 1694, with the connivance of Ernst August, and later to Sophia Dorothea's confinement in her father's keeping at the palace of Ahlden, following her divorce from Georg Ludwig in 1694, which carried the rider that she could not remarry.
She never saw her father again, but after Georg Wilhelm's death a certain relaxation took place, her mother being permitted long visits to her court at Ahlden.
In time she was allowed to send letters to her former husband and to her children.
Her approaches were unsuccessful since suspicion of her contacts with Jacobite circles might have endangered Georg Ludwig's position as king of England; and her children when grown up had political considerations of their own which prevented them from responding positively.
She died 23 November 1726 at Ahlden.
[G. Schnath,Geschichte Hannovers im Zeitalter der Neunten Kur und der englischen Sukzession 1674–1714 , 4 vols., 1930–82, and Sophia Dorothea Trilogy , 1968; Ragnhild Hatton,George I, Elector and King , 1978.]
Edward Diestelkamp
,Richard (c. 1798–1881), iron manufacturer and engineer, born c .1798, was the third son of Timothy Turner (died 1822) and his wife Catherine Sisson.
The Turners had long been associated with the ironmongery trade in Dublin.
Richard's great-grandfather was ‘iron smith’ to the Irish House of Commons and Trinity College in the mid-eighteenth century.
Richard inherited from his uncle the family ironmongery business which was located at 4 St Stephens Green.
In 1833 Turner erected large premises called the Hammersmith Iron Works, south of Dublin in Ballsbridge.
During this time he expanded the ironmongery business to include the manufacture of wrought-iron conservatories like those advocated by John Claudius Loudon [q.v.], who invented the first wrought-iron glazing bar in 1816, which was manufactured and later patented in 1818 by W. and D. Bailey of Holborn.
Turner's earliest glasshouses closely follow the curvilinear designs illustrated in Loudon's An Encyclopedia of Gardening (1822, 1824, and subsequent editions).
One of Turner's earliest known wrought-iron conservatories was the range erected in 1836–7 at the vice-regal lodge in Phoenix Park, Dublin.
Over the following four decades, Turner's firm specialized in the manufacture of these buildings and erected many examples throughout Britain, including those at Marlfield, county Tipperary; the wings of the Palm House, Belfast Botanic Gardens, 1839–40; the range at Killakee, county Dublin; the curvilinear range in the National Botanic Gardens, Dublin, 1843–8 and 1868–9; the Winter Garden in the Inner Circle, Regent's Park, London, 1845–6, 1870–1, and 1875–6 (demolished 1932); the range at Haddo House, Aberdeenshire, 1844–5; the Victoria Regia House, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, 1852; and Woodstock, county Kilkenny.
The Palm House at the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, 1844–8, was Turner's greatest achievement.
Designed in collaboration with Decimus Burton [q.v.], it was based on Loudon's ideas for the best form and construction of a glasshouse.
Its scale surpassed all other iron and glass structures at that time and it remains the finest example of a curvilinear wrought-iron and glass conservatory.
Turner's significant contribution was the use of wrought iron, and in particular the adoption of a single rolled wrought-iron ‘I’ section of ‘deck beam’as the primary structural member.
The Palm House was the first building to be erected in this country with a rolled ‘I’ section.
Deck beam had been developed for use in shipbuilding and was patented in 1844 by James Kennedy and Thomas Vernon of Liverpool.
In 1846 Turner patented the use of deck beam for use in buildings and later incorporated different depths of deck beam in other buildings he erected.
The largest structure Turner designed and erected was the station roof at Liverpool's Lime Street station, 1849–50.
It was the largest iron roof-span erected at that time, with arches composed of wrought-iron deck-beam spanning 153 feet 6 inches.
Other station roofs designed by Turner utilizing deck-beam sections were those at Broadstone station, Dublin, 1847; York Road station, Belfast, 1848; and Galway station, 1851.
With his architect son, Thomas, he entered the competition for the building for the Great Exhibition of 1851.
Out of many entries, their design received an honorary mention along with the one submitted by Hector Horeau.
In 1863 Turner's third son, William, assumed control of the Hammersmith Iron Works, but Turner remained involved in the business into the 1870s, in particular over the additions to the Winter Garden at Regent's Park and those to the curvilinear range at the National Botanic Gardens, Dublin.
In 1872 Hammersmith Iron Works were closed and William Turner continued the business from the Oxmantown foundry on the north side of Dublin, until 1888 when the business was closed.
In about 1816 Turner married Jane, daughter of Thomas Goodshaw of Collams Well, Leixlip.
They had four sons and four daughters, as well as three children who died in infancy.
Turner died 31 October 1881.
[E. J. Diestelkamp, ‘The Curvilinear Range at the National Botanic Gardens, Moorea’,Journal of The Irish Garden Plant Society , vol. ix, December 1990;idem , ‘The Design and Building of the Palm House, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew’,Journal of Garden History , vol. ii, no. 3;idem , ‘Richard Turner and the Palm House at Kew Gardens’,Transactions of the Newcomen Society , vol. liv, 1982–3; John Hix, ‘Richard Turner: Glass Master’,Architectural Review , vol. clii, no. 909, November 1972.]
Robin Hamlyn
,Henry (1830–1916), artist, ceramics expert, and collector, was born in London 21 February 1830.
His father's name and occupation are unknown.
When in 1845 his mother, Mary Anne Thomas, married Andrew Wallis, a prosperous London property owner, Henry took his stepfather's surname.
Wallis commenced his training at F. S. Cary's Academy in Bloomsbury.
He was admitted as a probationer in the Royal Academy on 7 January 1848 and enrolled in the painting school there on 31 March 1848.
He also studied in Paris in the atelier of M. G. C. Gleyre and at the Académie des Beaux-Arts, probably some time between 1849 and 1853.
He first exhibited in England at the Royal Manchester Institution in 1853 and in London in February 1854 at the British Institution.
By early 1855 Wallis was acquainted with George Meredith [q.v.].
This led to Meredith posing for the face of the dead poet, Thomas Chatterton [q.v.], in Wallis's painting ‘Chatterton’(Tate Gallery) which was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1856.
This picture made Wallis famous overnight: John Ruskin [q.v.], for example, described it as ‘faultless and wonderful’.
Its continuing fascination for the public owes much to the way in which it is inextricably linked with a real-life ‘romance’: in the summer of 1857, if not before, Wallis and Meredith's wife, Mary Ellen, daughter of Thomas Love Peacock [q.v.], became lovers.
Mary Meredith left her husband, bearing Wallis a son, Harold (‘Felix’) Meredith (later Wallis) in April 1858.
Mary Ellen died in October 1861.
Contact with the melancholy sensibility and radicalism of Gleyre, as well as with the work of French realist painters, led Wallis to paint his masterpiece ‘The Stonebreaker’(Birmingham City Art Gallery), though his direct inspiration was Carlyle's Sartor Resartus .
Wallis's sombre and realistic image of a dead labourer is both pioneering and unique in British art.
‘The Stonebreaker’, exhibited in 1858, consolidated Wallis's reputation as a true Pre-Raphaelite.
However, after his stepfather's death in 1859, when he came into a comfortable inheritance, Wallis never again made the same artistic impact, though he remained an Academy exhibitor until 1877.
He also exhibited with the Old Water Colour Society, of which he became a member in 1880.
An interest in archaeology, ceramics, and Renaissance art took him increasingly abroad and he became a perceptive and quietly passionate writer on these subjects — notably for the Art Journal between 1882 and 1890.
Always interested in contemporary artistic matters, he was also honorary secretary of the committee for the preservation of St Mark's, Venice, between 1882 and 1890.
Wallis's most notable achievement during the period 1885–99 was the publication, in twenty slim volumes, most illustrated by himself, of his researches into Persian, Egyptian, Greek, and Byzantine ceramics.
Wallis was also a discerning collector.
Wallis made a small but highly original contribution to the art and connoisseurship of his time.
For all this, he remains an elusive personality: according to W. M. Rossetti [q.v.], he was ‘a very agreeable companion, of solid character and open mind’.
Wallis never married.
He died 20 December 1916 at his home, 1 Walpole Road, Croydon, and was buried in Highgate cemetery.
[Public Record Office, Wills 1859; Albert van de Put, ‘Henry Wallis 1830–1916’,Faenza , vol. ii, 1917, pp. 33–40; obituary in Burlington Magazine , vol. xxx, 1917, pp. 123–4; Diane Johnson,The True History of the First Mrs Meredith and Other Lesser Lives , 1973;The Pre-Raphaelites , 1984 (Tate Gallery exhibition catalogue).]
Paul Slack
, Sir Andrew (c. 1492–1558), merchant and alderman of London and founder of Tonbridge School, was born the third son of John Judde, gentleman, of Tonbridge, Kent, and his wife Margaret, daughter of Valentine Chiche and grand-niece of Archbishop Henry Chichele [q.v.].
He was apprenticed in 1509 to John Buknell, a skinner of London and merchant of the Staple of Calais, and took up his freedom as a member of the Skinners' Company in 1520 (he was master in 1533 and five times thereafter).
He profited initially from exports of English wool through Calais, and he remained heavily involved there: he was mayor of the Staple in 1552, 1555 (when he entertained King Philip of Spain in the city), and 1558.
But he also had interests in the cloth trade; he dealt in lead, alum, and bullion; he lent money, arranged loans for the Crown, and bought and sold ex-monastic land; he was a promoter of early voyages to Russia and West Africa, and a founder-member of the Russia Company.
It is highly unlikely that he himself travelled to Muscovy and Guinea, as a later epitaph alleged (though he had an elephant's head displayed as a curiosity in his house), but he was certainly one of the richest and most prominent of overseas merchants in early Tudor London.
He was also a public figure of some note, being alderman from 1541 and lord mayor in 1550–1, when he had to deal with the problems caused by dearth and by the 1551 ‘calling down’ of the coinage.
‘Judde's Law’, regulating the estates and marriages of orphan children of freemen of London, was passed during his mayoralty.
He was a member of commercial deputations to the council, one of the City élite who gave nominal assent to the accession of Lady Jane Grey [q.v.]by signing the letters patent of 1553 in her favour, and then one of those organizing the defence of London in 1554 on behalf of Queen Mary against rebels led by Sir Thomas Wyatt [q.v.].
Nothing is known of his religious inclinations, but, like his friend Sir Thomas White [q.v.], he had many charitable interests.
He was treasurer of St Bartholomew's Hospital when it was remodelled in 1547, and surveyor-general of all the London hospitals in 1557–8.
At the end of his mayoralty he founded six almshouses at St Helen's Bishopsgate, with the Skinners as trustees, and in May 1553 he obtained letters patent for the erection of a free school, Tonbridge School, again with the Skinners' Company as trustees.
The founder stressed the importance of instruction in Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, and the school was built by the time of Judde's death and endowed with property worth £60 3s. 8d. a year.
Its first master was John Proctor [q.v.], fellow of All Souls, Chichele's foundation, and author of the account of Wyatt's rebellion which notes Judde's part in the defence of London bridge.
Judde married three times: first, Mary, daughter of Sir Thomas Mirfyn, himself a skinner and lord mayor of London in 1518; second, Agnes, about whom nothing is known; and third, Mary, daughter of Thomas Mathews of Colchester and wealthy widow of another skinner, Thomas Langton.
Three children survived from the first marriage, John, Richard, and Alice, who married Thomas Smith [q.v.], the customs official, and one daughter from the third, Elizabeth, who married Sir William Morgan of Monmouthshire.
Sir Thomas Smith (1558? –1625?, q.v.),
Judde's grandson, was a later benefactor of Tonbridge School.
Judde died 4 September 1558, leaving lands in Kent, Surrey, and Hertfordshire worth £141 p.a. to his widow, with reversion to John and Richard.
He was buried in St Helen's, Bishopsgate, London.
[H. S. Vere-Hodge,Sir Andrew Judde , 1953; T. S. Willan,The Muscovy Merchants of 1555 , 1953; W. K. Jordan, ‘Social Institutions in Kent 1480–1660’,Archaeologia Cantiana , vol. lxxv, 1961; F. Lambarde, ‘Sir Andrew Judde’,Archaeologia Cantiana , vol. xliii, 1931.]
T C Graham
(fl. 1130), artist, was active at the abbey of Bury St Edmunds under abbots Anselm (1121–48) and Ording (1148–56).
Documents written at the abbey record that he worked in several media.
He cast a bell for the newly rebuilt abbey church.
He ‘painted incomparably’ a large Bible, for which he obtained vellum from Ireland.
He ‘carved incomparably’ a cross and figures of the Virgin and St John.
For the west front of the church he made a pair of decorated bronze doors, of which it was judged that ‘as he surpassed all others in other works, in this work he wonderfully surpassed himself.’
Some other works may be his.
A lead seal of c .1150, which portrays an unnamed abbot of Bury, shows the hallmarks of his style.
A wall-painting of c .1160 in the chapel of St Anselm [q.v.]at Canterbury Cathedral, which shows St Paul bitten by a viper on the island of Malta, has been attributed to Hugo, although it may be the work of a follower.
Hugo's career at Bury probably lasted from the late 1120s until the 1150s.
Talbot, the prior, and Hervey, the sacrist, who commissioned Hugo to illuminate the large Bible, held office between c .1125 and c .1136.
Elias, sacrist during most of Ording's abbacy, commissioned the cross, the latest of Hugo's recorded works.
The title of ‘master’, repeatedly applied to Hugo in the Bury Deeds of the Sacrists implies that he was probably not a monk, but a secular artist hired by the abbey.
Hugo's cross may be identifiable as the walrus-ivory cross at the Cloisters in New York.
To this cross a figure of Christ in the Oslo Museum probably belongs.
The first part of the Bible which Hugo illuminated is preserved at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge.
This despoiled manuscript, containing the Old Testament up to the Book of Job, still preserves six large-scale pictures of biblical scenes, a decorative page of script, and forty-one initials.
Hugo's figure style in the Bible derives from the art of the Alexis Master [q.v.], who may have worked at Bury during his career.
Hugo's use of double frames and panelled backgrounds also recalls that master's pictures, but Hugo's palette is richer, and his figures have greater weight and grace.
His ‘damp fold’ technique for rendering draperies derives from Byzantine art, while the curvilinear patterns of his folds show an unprecedented degree of stylization.
The style which he created strongly influenced English art for the remainder of the twelfth century, and found echoes on the Continent.
Whether or not Hugo was a wall-painter, the records of his activities as carver and manuscript painter attest to his versatility.
His surviving work in the Bury Bible shows that he was worthy of the admiration which the written sources accord him.
[C. M. Kauffmann, ‘The Bury Bible’,Journal of the Warburg and Courtauld Institutes , vol. xxix, 1966, pp. 60–81; R. M. Thomson, ‘Early Romanesque Book-Illustration in England: the Dates of the Pierpont Morgan Vitae Sancti Edmundi and the Bury Bible’,Viator , vol. ii, 1971, pp. 211–25; R. M. Thomson, ‘The Date of the Bury Bible Reexamined’,Viator , vol. vi, 1975, pp. 51–8; C. R. Dodwell,The Pictorial Arts of the West , 1991.]
David S Eastwood
,John (1789–1852), political economist and botanist, was born 11 June 1789 in Southwark, and brought up in Tottenham by his maternal grandfather.
He was the son of William Barton and his wife Mary.
A man of independent means, Barton travelled widely, visiting France and Italy and possibly venturing as far afield as Poland and Russia, and pursued interests in economics and botany.
In 1827 he left the Society of Friends, but throughout his life he remained a staunch supporter of Mechanics' Institutes and the Chichester Savings Bank, which he helped to establish.
His A Lecture on the Geography of Plants (1827) shows Barton to have been well read in German scientific literature, notably in A. Humboldt's work on the geographical distribution of plants.
Although he never published the systematic economic treatise which might have established his reputation, Barton's closely argued pamphlets were influential.
His Observations on the Circumstances which Influence the Condition of the Labouring Classes (1817) questioned the linkage by Thomas Malthus [q.v.]of population growth to increasing wage rates, arguing that the likely age of first marriage and thus birth rates were influenced, not by wage rates or poor-relief practices, but by perceived employment prospects which, paradoxically, were best when wages were low.
A rise in wage levels, Barton argued, encouraged employers to invest in labour-saving technology.
In opposition to David Ricardo [q.v.], he maintained that only when circulating capital increased did employment rise: any increase in fixed capital was unlikely to stimulate, and might significantly diminish, the demand for labour.
Barton's pamphlets influenced both Ricardo and Malthus.
In the third edition of his The Principles of Political Economy (1821) Ricardo added a chapter on machinery, conceding that Barton ‘had taken a correct view of some of the effects of an increasing amount of fixed capital on the condition of the labouring classes’, but maintaining that there was a, perhaps imperfect, positive relationship between increases in capital and the demand for labour.
Malthus accepted Barton's contention that any increase in poor relief should be measured, not in nominal terms, but in real monetary terms.
Later Barton became increasingly preoccupied with the effects of overpopulation.
In his An Inquiry into the Causes of the Progressive Depreciation of Agricultural Labour in Modern Times (1820) and A Statement of the Consequences Likely to Ensue from our Growing Excess of Population (1830) Barton argued that only where land was cheap and plentiful would economic growth be maximized and accordingly favoured emigration schemes and colonization of Canada.
He dismissed claims that free trade and cheap food could transform the economy, perceiving instead a tendency to overstock the labour market in industrial areas.
The expansion of capital and population beyond a certain point was ‘a national evil’, creating social problems which could be offset by greater prosperity.
Accordingly Barton favoured the maintenance of agricultural protection.
By 1846 he was deeply worried by the likely effects of free trade on monetary policy, and in two letters to the Standard he argued that, by increasing the demand for imports, free trade would precipitate an outflow of gold and thereby provoke a monetary crisis.
His last pamphlet,The Monetary Crisis of 1847 (1847), offered a brief vindication of this analysis.
In 1811 he married Ann Woodrouffe Smith, and by his second wife, Frances Rickman, he fathered six children.
Barton died in Chichester 10 March 1852.
[J. Barton,Observations on the Circumstances which Influence the Condition of the Labouring Classes (ed. and intro.
J. H. Hollander), 1934; G. Sotiroff, ‘John Barton (1789–1852)’,Economic Journal , vol. lxii, 1952; G. Sotiroff (ed.),
John Barton, Economic Writings , 2 vols., 1962.]
Ian J Gentles
,Katherine (fl. 1641–1653), radical pamphleteer and religious separatist, was the wife of Daniel Chidley, tailor of Shrewsbury, and mother of Samuel Chidley [q.v.].
Between 1616 and 1629 she bore eight children, and with her husband was active in a Shrewsbury conventicle.
Episcopal persecution, however, drove them to flee to the relative anonymity of London at the end of the 1620s.
There Daniel managed to become a haberdasher in 1632; there too they joined other separatists like John Duppa and John Lilburne [q.v.]in their struggle against the bishops.
Shortly after the meeting of the Long Parliament in 1640 Chidley published her first tract,The Justification of the Independent Churches of Christ (1641), a refutation of the arguments of Thomas Edwards [q.v.]for hierarchical, centralized church government, and a biblical defence of congregational and wifely autonomy.
‘It is true,’ she wrote, that the husband ‘hath authority over her in bodily and civill respects, but not to be a lord over her conscience…’
In January 1645 she taunted the Presbyterian polemicist a second time in A New-Yeares-Gift…to Mr. Thomas Edwards .
A refutation of the aspersions he had cast on the personal conduct of the separatists, it concluded with an appeal to her antagonist to ‘receive admonition, though it be from a woman’.
Edwards sneeringly dismissed her as ‘a brasen-faced audacious old woman’.
Whatever her appearance, there is no doubt about her audacity.
Not only did she write boldly about religious questions, she was a zealous evangelist.
Edwards records that she won converts in Stepney, where she also locked horns with the moderate Independent minister William Greenhill [q.v.].
A year later she and her son Samuel travelled to Bury St Edmunds, where they helped found a Congregational church.
Samuel was the more prolific pamphleteer, but according to Edwards, mother and son collaborated closely, ‘the one inditing and the other writing’, and they lived in the same house at least until the end of 1652.
Her husband may have died soon after 1649, for in the early 1650s Katherine appears to have taken over his haberdashery business.
She landed at least two substantial contracts to supply stockings to the parliamentary army in Ireland.
In the late 1640s Chidley and her son flung themselves wholeheartedly into London's radical politics, when she emerged as a leader of Leveller women.
In April 1649 several hundred of them besieged Parliament, demanding the release of the Leveller leaders from prison.
In their second petition, which appears to have been written by Chidley, they justified their political activity on the basis of ‘our creation in the image of God, and of an interest in Christ equal unto men, as also of a proportionable share in the freedoms of this commonwealth.’
In 1653 John Lilburne found himself on trial a second time.
Again Chidley rallied to his defence, organizing a petition to Barebone's Parliament which reportedly garnered over 6,000 female signatures.
In a confrontation at the door of the House of Commons, she and her friends reminded the MPs that ‘they had husbands and friends, and they wore swords to defend the libertys of the people, & c .’
Katherine Chidley may have died soon after this episode, since nothing more is heard of her, whether as religious writer, political activist, or successful woman of business.
[I. Gentles, ‘London Levellers in the English Revolution: the Chidleys and their circle’,Journal of Ecclesiastical History , vol. xxix, 1978, pp. 281–309; D. Ludlow, ‘Katherine Chidley’, in R. L. Greaves and R. Zaller (eds.),
Biographical Dictionary of British Radicals in the Seventeenth Century , 3 vols., 1982–4; Public Record Office, State Papers Domestic.]
Maurice Craig
,Charles Lewis (1761–1833), mineralogist, was born Johann Georg Metzler 6 April 1761 in Augsburg, Bavaria, the eldest surviving son of the six children of George Melchior Metzler, a Protestant tailor, and his wife Sibylla Magdalena Götz.
Intended at first for the church, he was sent to Göttingen, but he soon turned to legal studies and the pursuit of mineralogy under Johann Friedrich Blumenbach.
At this period he had strong literary and theatrical interests.
An amateur composer and librettist, he wrote and performed in operas, and he also wrote a travesty of Hamlet , published in Vienna in 1795.
He edited the Regensburger Theater-Journal from 1784 to 1786.
In 1781 he changed his name to Karl Ludwig Giesecke.
By the late 1780s he was in Vienna, having spent the intervening years in several south German towns and intermittently visiting Bremen.
His connection with Mozart, which he seems to have exaggerated in later life, may have amounted to no more than that they were both Freemasons and involved with Schikaneder's theatre company and that he played the role of a slave in The Magic Flute .
His opera Oberon , with music by P. Wranitzky, was performed and published in Vienna in 1790.
In 1794 he returned to mineralogy, studying at the Freiburg Bergakademie under Abraham Gottlob Werner.
Having collected minerals widely in northern Europe, he finally settled in Copenhagen, where he became a well-known collector, dealer, and tutor in mineralogy.
In 1805 he collected in the Faeroes and in the following year he was commissioned by the Danish government to collect in Greenland, where he passed eight summers and seven winters.
During his absence his house and collections in Copenhagen were destroyed in the British naval bombardment in 1807.
A ship carrying some of his Greenland minerals became a prize-of-war and was taken into Leith where his collection was sold, thus passing into the hands of Scottish collectors.
Giesecke himself arrived in Leith in October 1813 dressed in furs and feathers, his European clothes having perished.
In Edinburgh his portrait (later obtained by the Royal Dublin Society) was painted by (Sir) Henry Raeburn [q.v.].
On 21 January 1814 he was elected professor of mineralogy at the (Royal) Dublin Society, the support of J. L. Foster [q.v.],
Chief Baron Joy, and the Hon.
George Knox winning the post for him despite the presence of such strong candidates as Robert Blakewell and Thomas Weaver [qq.v.].
He learned English in order to deliver the lectures expected of him in his new post.
He had responsibility for the arrangement of the society's large mineral collection (30,000 specimens, including the famed Leskean cabinet) in the newly-acquired premises at Leinster House.
In 1816 he was elected a member of the Royal Irish Academy and made a knight of the Danish Order of Dannebrog, on the strength of which he allowed himself thenceforth to be called ‘Sir Charles’.
In 1817 the Dublin Society struck a gold medal in his honour.
From 1817 until 1819 he was on leave on the Continent where he presented some of his Greenland material to museums in Copenhagen and Vienna.
The mineral Gieseckite was named after him in 1817, but his projected book on Greenland was never completed.
Back in Ireland he continued with his duties at the Society for which he made mineralogical tours of Galway and Mayo (1825), Donegal (1826), Antrim, Down, and Londonderry (1828), and Londonderry and Tyrone (1829).
He died unmarried in Dublin 5 March 1833.
His ethnographical observations in Greenland remained of permanent value.
[MSS in the National Library of Ireland;Annals of Philosophy , 1813, 1st series, p. 218;Dublin University Magazine , vol. iii, 1834, pp. 161, 296;Neue Deutsche Biographie , 1963;Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy , vol. xli, 1933, p. 210, vol. xliii, 1936, p. 291, vol. lxx, 1970, p. 1; K. J. V. Steenstrup in Meddelelser om Groønland , Copenhagen, 1910.]
J D Mollon
,George (1740–1795), glass merchant and colour theorist, was born 18 November 1740 in London, the son of Thomas Palmer and his wife Elizabeth.
The prosperous family firm, established at 118 St Martin's Lane, Westminster, was prominent in the supply and fitting of window glass.
Its speciality was coloured glass, and Thomas Palmer supplied stained glass to Horace Walpole (fourth Earl of Orford, q.v.) for Strawberry Hill.
Practical experience with stained glass must have led George Palmer to consider the nature of colour, and he was the first to put forward the modern theory of colour vision and colour blindness.
In his Theory of Light and Colour (1777), he suggested that the retina of the eye contains three different kinds of particle (elsewhere he speaks of ‘molecules’ or ‘fibres’), each of which is excited by a different kind of light.
‘The complete and uniform motion of these particles produces the sensation of white.’
Colour blindness, he correctly supposed, arose when either one or two of the three types of molecules were non-functional.
He also introduced the idea that different sensory fibres within the normal retina could be selectively fatigued, so as to yield coloured after-images.
He suggested that a residual motion of the fibres was present in the dark, so that true blacks could be seen only in daylight, by comparison with surrounding objects.
He conceived the idea of artificial daylight and gave it practical reality by filtering the light of an Argand oil lamp through blue glass.
Although Palmer's theory of the physics of colour was mistaken (he held there were three discrete forms of light), it is remarkable that this entrepreneur and tradesman came so close to a modern account of the physiology of colour vision.
It remained for an establishment scientist, Thomas Young [q.v.], to suggest in 1802 that the physical variable underlying colour is a continuous one, whereas Palmer's idea of three discrete receptors is correct at the retinal level.
Young may have been exposed to Palmer's ideas while a student of G. C. Lichtenberg in Göttingen.
Although largely unrecognized by the scientific establishment in England, Palmer enjoyed some contemporary recognition on the Continent: his explanation of colour blindness first appears in a secondary account in L. C. Lichtenberg's Magazin für das Neuste aus der Physik in 1781 and was then cited in texts such as J. S. T. Gehler's Physikalisches Wörterbuch , while his first monograph of 1777 (which he issued in translation in Paris in the same year) was extravagantly reviewed in the Journal Encyclopédique .
Perhaps because his ideas were well received in France, but more probably for reasons of business, Palmer was resident in Paris, at 18 rue Meslée, in the period 1785–7.
Watin's Directory gives his business there as the supply of ‘verres colorés adaptés aux verres ordinaires’.
And it was during this period that he published, in fair French, his monograph on artificial daylight (Lettre sur les moyens de produire, la nuit, une lumière pareille à celle du jour , 1785) and his second essay on light and vision (Théorie de la lumière, applicable aux arts, et principalement à la peinture , 1786).
Palmer was a freeman of the Drapers' Company by patrimony and served as a member of the court (1792–5).
He and his wife Sarah had four sons.
He was buried 8 August 1795 in the parish church of Hendon.
[G. Walls, ‘The G. Palmer Story’,Journal of the History of Medicine , vol. xi, 1956; J. Mollon,Actes du 5ème Congrès de l'Association Internationale de la Couleur , vol. i, Paris, 1985; Peter Cunningham (ed.),
Horace Walpole's Letters , 1857–9 (letter to Horace Mann of 6 October 1753); parish records at Westminster City Library; records of the Drapers' Company.]
Mark Goldie
,Roger (c. 1628–1702), Presbyterian minister, historian, and diarist, is of unknown origin and kin.
He was registered as ‘plebeian’ when matriculated at Magdalen Hall, Oxford, in 1651, and as a sizar when he migrated to Catharine Hall, Cambridge, in 1654.
He took his BA in 1656 and MA in 1659.
He was vicar of Duffield, Derbyshire, from 1658 until 1662, when he was ejected under the Act of Uniformity.
For some part of the next three decades he was chaplain in London to Denzil, first Baron Holles of Ifield (whose will he witnessed in 1670), and to Sir John Maynard [qq.v.], both parliamentarian veterans.
Morrice became a moderately wealthy merchant, spending generously on the education of young men for the dissenting ministry.
Morrice's will reveals his friendships.
His pallbearers were senior Presbyterian ministers, including Vincent Alsop, John Howe, Daniel Williams, Edmund Calamy, and Matthew Sylvester [qq.v.].
He was also close to the latitudinarian clergy of the established church: Bishops Edward Fowler, Richard Kidder, and John Moore, and the historian John Strype [qq.v.].
Morrice occasionally surfaces in contemporary comment as a chronicler and collector of manuscripts.
He helped Calamy list the ejectees of 1662, and Strype thanked him for supplying transcripts.
Under the will of Richard Baxter [q.v.],
Morrice was responsible, with Sylvester, for distributing Baxter's library and publishing posthumous works.
Morrice followed Baxter's ‘middle way’, both in the theological retreat from Calvinist orthodoxy, and in pursuit of the ecclesiastical ideal of accommodation with Anglicanism through ‘comprehension’, which entailed a modified episcopacy and leniency over rubrics.
Morrice's importance is twofold.
He left a diary of his own times and a large manuscript collection on Puritan history, housed in Dr Williams' Library, London.
The first is indispensable to historians of later Stuart England, the second to those of Elizabethan Puritanism.
The Entring Book is an account, nearly a million words long, of public affairs from March 1677 until April 1691.
Morrice emerges as self-effacing, astonishingly well-informed, diplomatic, and an astute political barometer.
He was mainly concerned with the fate of Nonconformity, when persecuted, when wooed by James II, and when grudgingly tolerated in 1689.
He recounted secret Privy Council discussions and acted as go-between in Anglican–dissenter negotiations.
Morrice hoped to write the history of Puritanism.
He drafted an outline, but his hope was not fulfilled until the appearance of the History of the Puritans (1732) by Daniel Neal [q.v.].
The documents he provided for Strype helped counterbalance the reliance upon official sources in Strype's histories of Elizabethan archbishops.
Morrice's materials today serve the study of the earliest Presbyterians, particularly John Field (d .
1588, q.v.), whose campaigns for a purer preaching ministry are recorded in his Register , Morrice's luckiest find.
Field was often in trouble for Nonconformity, yet spurned the excesses of the sectaries.
Morrice continued that tradition: in the Entring Book he deplored the opposing zealots, the ‘hierarchists’ and ‘fanatics’, whilst applauding the ‘sober churchmen’and ‘old Puritans’.
Morrice was a last voice of old Puritanism, before permanent denominationalism became unavoidable after 1689.
In 1691 he retired to Leek, Staffordshire.
He died in Hoxton, Middlesex, 17 January 1702, and was buried in Bunhill Fields.
[A. G. Matthews (ed.),
Calamy Revised , 1934, 1988; Albert Peel (ed.),
The Seconde Parte of a Register , 1915; Morrice MSS, Dr Williams' Library, London.]
George W Carpenter
,William (1833–1889), mechanical engineer, was born in Sandford, Oxfordshire, 6 March 1833, one of three sons of William Stroudley, machinist in a local paper-mill, and his wife Anne.
After education at a dame school he worked initially with his father at a paper-mill and then, again with his father, at a Birmingham printing works.
In 1847 he was apprenticed to John Inshaw, who had a small engineering business in Birmingham.
His engineering training continued from 1853 to 1854 under (Sir) Daniel Gooch [q.v.], locomotive superintendent of the Great Western Railway.
He completed his training in 1855 on the Great Northern Railway at Peterborough and became locomotive shed foreman.
In 1861 he was appointed manager of the Cowlairs works of the Edinburgh and Glasgow (later North British) Railway and in 1865 locomotive superintendent of the newly formed Highland Railway at Inverness, where he rebuilt existing locomotives to make them more suitable for use over its heavily graded lines.
In 1870 Stroudley was appointed locomotive and carriage superintendent of the London, Brighton, and South Coast Railway at a time when its locomotives, rolling-stock, and workshops were at a low ebb.
He rapidly set about building new and well-equipped workshops at Brighton and introduced new and more powerful locomotives for main-line and suburban passenger and freight services.
All were of excellent design and construction and of elegant outline, enhanced by their bright yellow livery.
His new passenger carriages were also impressive, with polished mahogany bodies.
He was a pioneer in the introduction of train electric lighting, applied to a Pullman car only two years after the invention of the incandescent lamp by Thomas Edison in 1879.
He was also responsible for the design of marine engines for the LB&SC cross-channel steamers and patented a successful design for paddle-wheels.
Stroudley was an active member of the Institutions of Civil and Mechanical Engineers and in 1884 was awarded the George Stephenson medal and Telford premium for his outstanding paper on ‘The Construction of Locomotive Engines’.
Previously, in 1878, one of his Terrier class 0–6–0 tank locomotives was awarded a gold medal at the Paris exhibition and in 1889 his Gladstone class locomotive of 0–4–2 type received a similar award.
After the exhibition this locomotive took part in high-speed trials with a number of French locomotives.
The locomotive ‘Gladstone’ is preserved in the National Railway Museum, York.
Whilst he was a firm disciplinarian he had the reputation of being scrupulously fair in dealing with his men, by whom he was much respected.
He encouraged their interest and enthusiasm by allocating locomotives to individual drivers, whose names were painted in gold letters in the driving-cab.
He was short-sighted, broad, and stocky, with a dapper appearance.
Stroudley was married twice, firstly about 1860 to an unknown person who died in 1865, and secondly in 1877 to Elise Brewer, from a family engaged in finance.
There were no children.
Stroudley died from pneumonia at the Grand Hotel, St Lazare, Paris, 20 December 1889, following a severe chill after the testing of his locomotive.
He was buried in the extramural cemetery in Brighton, where his wife was also later interred.
[H. J. Campbell Cornwell,William Stroudley, Craftsman of Steam , 1968; C. Hamilton Ellis, ‘Famous Locomotive Engineers’,Locomotive, Railway Carriage and Wagon Review , 15 May 1937;Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers , vol. xcix, 1889–90, pp. 365–72.]
John Culme
,Philip (1746–1827), jeweller and millionaire, was born 15 January and baptized 8 February 1746 in Norton St Philip, near Bath, Somerset, one of the large family of Richard Rundell, victualler or maltster, and his wife Ann Ditcher.
Shortly after his fourteenth birthday, Rundell was apprenticed in Bath on 10 May 1760 to the jeweller William Rogers.
After serving his time he found employment in the late 1760s, probably through the influence of family connections in the City of London, with William Pickett, the retail goldsmith of the Golden Salmon, Ludgate Hill.
The youthful Rundell appears to have shown his aptitude for business so rapidly that within three or four years Pickett, admittedly increasingly preoccupied by aldermanic affairs on his way to becoming lord mayor in 1789, made him a partner.
Rundell was made free of the Drapers' Company by redemption on 15 May 1771.
The firm of Pickett & Rundell survived until February 1786, when Rundell, taking sole charge, agreed to buy Pickett out.
In December the following year the firm's name was altered from Philip Rundell to Rundell & Bridge upon John Bridge [q.v.]becoming the new partner.
Under these two men the concern became pre-eminent in the British goldsmiths' trade.
For nearly forty years they formed what seems to have been the perfect working partnership, each attending to that part of the business to which their very different characters suited them best.
Rundell, hard-working, often irascible, and steadfast in striking a bargain, who was also regarded by London contemporaries as the keenest judge of diamonds, superintended the firm's jewellery and other manufacturing departments.
Bridge, on the other hand, was possessed of an urbanity of manner which proved of the greatest importance, especially in the firm's dealings with George III and other members of the royal family.
About 1798 Rundell arranged to purchase the old-established jewellery business of John Duval, Sons & Co.; by this means Rundell & Bridge became the crown jewellers.
A further change occurred in 1804–5 when the firm's style was altered to Rundell, Bridge & Rundell following the senior partner's nephew, Edmond Waller Rundell (1768? –1857), son of Maria Eliza Rundell [q.v.], being admitted into the business.
By now Rundell's was in a dominant position with many of the finest workshops, including that of Paul Storr [q.v.], and the services of artists such as William Theed, John Flaxman, and Thomas Stothard [qq.v.]at their disposal.
Besides a stock of both new and antique silver, much of Rundell's business depended upon the sale and purchase of precious stones, pearls, jewellery, gold boxes, and objects of  virtue .
By 1812–13 Rundell was furthermore actively engaged in buying a steam engine for a diamond-cutting subsidiary in Spitalfields.
Although never married, Rundell ‘always manifested much pleasure in the enjoyment of female society, for which the comeliness of his person, his conversational powers, and his habitual attentiveness, naturally fitted him.
He was unassuming in his manners, and when relieved from the cares of business, was a cheerful and agreeable companion.
He was fond of music, had a tolerable voice, and sang with taste.’
During the last twenty years of his life, however, he suffered from increasing deafness and the effects of an internal complaint, in consequence of which ‘he withdrew much from society, and lived very retired.’
Other, less charitable accounts of Rundell's character, conduct, and the acquisition of his great personal wealth have survived, the more unpleasant of which, perhaps significantly, were written by former employees.
Rundell retired on 29 September 1823.
Throughout most of his working life he had lived above the shop at 32 Ludgate Hill, although latterly he occupied a house nearby in the Crescent, New Bridge Street, Blackfriars.
He now took up residence in a small house at South Bank, Regent's Park, in order, according to one authority, to be near his medical advisers.
Others claim that this was the abode of Rundell's mistress, Mrs Elizabeth Wartridge.
His health began to deteriorate seriously towards the end of 1826 and he died at South Bank 17 February 1827.
He was buried in Hendon parish churchyard; the grave is marked by a stone tomb erected in his memory by Joseph Neeld junior.
[Memoirs of the late Philip Rundell, Esq.
…by a gentleman many years connected with the firm , 1827;The Annual Biography and Obituary for the Year 1828 , 1828; Shirley Bury, ‘The Lengthening Shadow of Rundell's’, parts 1, 2, and 3,Connoisseur , 1966; Arthur G. Grimwade,London Goldsmiths 1697–1837 , 3rd edn. 1990, pp. 648 and 766; unpublished research into Philip Rundell's family and background by Mrs Sarah Tanner.]
Blake
,Henry , Baron Brooke of Cumnor (1903–1984), Conservative politician, was born in Oxford 9 April 1903, the younger son (there were no daughters and the elder son was killed in action in 1918) of Leonard Leslie Brooke, author and illustrator of the ‘Johnny Crow’ children's books, and his wife Sybil Diana, daughter of the Revd Stopford Augustus Brooke [q.v.].
He was educated at Marlborough College, to which he had a lifelong devotion, and at Balliol College, Oxford, where he captained both the cricket and hockey XIs and where he obtained a first class in classical honour moderations (1924) and second classes in mathematical moderations (1924) and literae humaniores (1926).
Balliol offered him a fellowship in philosophy but he declined.
The master, A. D. Lindsay (later first Baron Lindsay of Birker, q.v.), encouraged him to work for a spell (1927–8) at a Quaker settlement for the unemployed in the Rhondda Valley — an experience which made a deep impression.
After a year on the Economist he became one of the original members of the Conservative Research Department (1930–8) under its first director, Sir G. Joseph Ball [q.v.].
The ‘special areas’ legislation of the prewar national coalition government stemmed partly from a series of unsigned articles —‘Places without a Future’— which he wrote for The Times in 1934.
He was for a short while editor of Truth .
He gained his first knowledge of practical politics as a member of the London county council, and entered Parliament at a by-election in Lewisham West in 1938, retaining the seat till the Conservative débâcle of 1945.
From 1946 to 1948 he was the last deputy chairman of the Southern Railway before nationalization.
In 1950 he returned to Parliament as member for Hampstead till 1966.
In 1954 Sir Winston Churchill appointed him financial secretary to the Treasury under his old Marlborough friend, R. A. Butler (later Baron Butler of Saffron Walden, q.v.).
His headmaster,(Sir) Cyril Norwood [q.v.], had given him two pieces of advice: to answer all letters by return of post, and never to be afraid of unpopularity.
He never was — which was just as well since fate brought him a series of posts whose functions were not calculated to endear him to the public or the party.
In 1957 he entered the cabinet of Harold Macmillan (later first Earl of Stockton) as minister of housing and local government.
His success in eliminating London smog was balanced by the task of implementing the much disliked Rent Act of his predecessor, Duncan Sandys (later Baron Duncan-Sandys).
In October 1961 Macmillan appointed him to the newly invented office of chief secretary to the Treasury, whose unenviable task was to play the role of Scrooge towards popular proposals for public expenditure.
In 1962 he became home secretary.
He had to take a number of decisions in the field of immigration and deportation, which infuriated libertarians.
He seemed to display a certain insensitivity in these cases — an impression enhanced by his somewhat pedantic way of speech.
In 1966 he lost his seat and on the nomination of Harold Wilson (later Baron Wilson of Rievaulx) entered the House of Lords as a life peer.
He spoke frequently and effectively on the Conservative front bench until the progress of Parkinson's disease made it impossible.
In 1983 he wrote a charming book about his father.
Brooke was appointed privy councillor in 1955 and CH in 1964.
He married in 1933 Barbara Muriel, daughter of the Revd Alfred Augustus Mathews, of Great Milton, Llanwern.
She was appointed DBE in 1960 and made a life peer as Baroness Brooke of Ystradfellte in 1964.
She was one of his sponsors at his introduction in the Lords.
They were the first couple in parliamentary history to sit on a front bench together in either House.
They had two sons and two daughters.
The elder son, Peter, became secretary of state for Northern Ireland in 1989, the younger,(Sir) Henry, a High Court judge in 1988.
Brooke died 29 March 1984 at his house in Mildenhall, Wiltshire.
[Private information; personal knowledge.]
Madeleine Davis
,Donald Woods (1896–1971), paediatrician, psychoanalyst, and writer, was born 7 April 1896 in Plymouth, the only son and youngest of three children of (Sir) John Frederick Winnicott, a wholesale merchant and twice mayor of Plymouth, and his wife Elizabeth Martha, daughter of William Woods.
Winnicott was educated at The Leys School, Cambridge, and then at Jesus College, Cambridge, where he gained a third class in part i of the natural sciences tripos in 1917, as a preliminary to qualifying in medicine.
His studies were interrupted during 1917–18 by a period of war service as a surgeon probationer on a destroyer and then resumed at St Bartholomew's Hospital in London where he qualified MRCS, LRCP in 1920.
In 1923 he obtained two consultant posts as children's physician, one at the Queen's Hospital for Children, where for ten years he was in charge of the London county council rheumatic and heart clinic, and the other at Paddington Green Children's Hospital, where he continued to work for nearly forty years.
While still a medical student Winnicott discovered the work of Sigmund Freud and decided that psychoanalysis should become a part of his professional life; thus the year 1923 saw also the beginning of a ten-year training analysis with James Strachey.
In 1926 he came under the supervision of Melanie Klein [q.v.], whose work considerably influenced him.
In 1931 his first book,Clinical Notes on Disorders of Childhood , was published, bringing the insights gained from his psychoanalytic training to bear on issues in the everyday practice of paediatrics.
In the early 1930s he was instrumental in setting up the child department of the Institute of Psychoanalysis.
From 1940 to 1945 Winnicott was psychiatric consultant to the government evacuation scheme in Oxfordshire, and here he became directly involved with children who proved too difficult to place in foster homes, and in the setting up of hostels to house and care for them.
In 1944 he was elected FRCP.
The period from the end of the war until Winnicott's death was one of immense activity and achievement.
In the public sphere he served terms of office as president of the British Psycho-Analytical Society (twice), chairman of the Medical Section of the British Psychological Society, president of the Paediatric Section of the Royal Society of Medicine, and president of the Association for Child Psychology and Psychiatry.
In 1968 he was awarded the James Spence medal of the British Paediatric Association.
By the end of the war Winnicott had left the actual practice of physical paediatrics behind, his outpatient clinic at Paddington Green becoming in effect a department of child psychiatry based on psychodynamic theory and on his particular way of using it.
This attracted observers from all over the world.
In his private practice he had adults in psychoanalysis and some children too, though with children he now concentrated more on the ‘therapeutic consultation’, where he found that a single interview could at times unhitch a developmental hold-up.
His clinical experiences taken together provided the basis for, as well as continuing opportunity to re-evaluate, his theory of early emotional development.
This now emerged in lectures and papers given to a variety of audiences, including doctors, teachers, social workers, and other members of the helping professions, as well as analysts.
These papers form the main part of the fifteen volumes of his writings that have been published.
Winnicott was a subtle and original thinker who did much to give new impetus and direction to Freudian psychology.
In a series of striking phrases he described a theory of emotional development which highlights the role of the ‘ordinary devoted mother’ in providing a facilitating environment as the basis for growth and development and for later emotional stability.
He also explored the way in which separation of the child from the mother leads to playing and ultimately to the capacity for cultural elaboration.
At its best Winnicott's writing is masterly in its combination of lucidity and depth.
His book,The Child, the Family and the Outside World (1964), became a classic in child development.
Winnicott was of slight and spare build, with an angular expressive face that was from early on deeply lined.
His rapport with the children he treated was almost uncanny; and there was in his own nature something of the immediacy and openness of a child, which, coupled with a great sense of fun, helped him to get easily into communication with all sorts of people, and to make friends.
He was also quite good at making enemies by speaking his mind when he thought the subject and audience were worth it.
Winnicott was twice married.
In 1923 he married Alice, a potter.
She was the daughter of John William Taylor, a professor of gynaecology in Birmingham.
They were divorced in 1949, and in 1951 he married Clare Britton, who became director of child-care studies at the Home Office.
She was the daughter of James Nimmo Britton, a minister in the Baptist Church.
There were no children of either marriage.
Winnicott died at home, 87 Chester Square, London, 25 January 1971.
[Clare Winnicott, ‘D. W. W.: A Reflection’ in Between Reality and Fantasy , 1978, ed.
S. A. Grolnick and L. Baskin; private information; personal knowledge.]
Ruth Dudley Edwards
,James (1868–1916), socialist thinker, trade-union organizer, writer, and revolutionary, was born 5 June 1868 in Edinburgh, the youngest of three sons (there were no daughters) of Irish immigrants, John Connolly, manure carter, of Edinburgh, and his wife Mary, daughter of James McGinn, labourer, of Edinburgh.
Brought up in the slums of Cowgate, Connolly left St Patrick's School at ten and became in turn printer's ‘devil’, bakery hand, and tiling-factory worker.
In 1882, falsifying his age and name, he joined the army, serving in Ireland, Scotland, and possibly India and deserting in 1889.
From childhood he read voraciously.
In April 1889 he joined the Socialist League in Dundee, then moved to Edinburgh, where he worked as a carter.
He learned French and German, and applied Marxist theory to his twin preoccupations of Irish nationalism and social inequality.
A member of the Scottish Socialist Federation and the Independent Labour Party, his powerful mind fed off political discussion.
Direct, trenchant writing came naturally, effective public speaking later.
In maturity a commanding figure, as a youth he had difficulty in overcoming physical handicaps that included bow legs, short sight, and a stammer, later cured.
In 1894 he lost his job and failed as a cobbler.
Two years later he moved to Dublin as secretary of the Dublin Socialist Club, out of which, in 1896, he created the Irish Socialist Republican Party to spread his message that socialism and nationalism were complementary and incompatible with sectarianism.
Despite anti-imperialist demonstrations, public meetings, numerous articles and pamphlets, and a newspaper called the Workers' Republic , he won few converts.
Speeches in Britain led in 1902 to an invitation to America on a speaking tour under the auspices of Daniel De Leon's Socialist Labour Party.
On his return to Ireland the party split.
To support his family, which had been living in grinding poverty in a squalid tenement, he had to emigrate in 1903 to the USA.
During seven years in America, he held many jobs, was an activist in socialist, Irish, and Italian circles, a co-founder in 1905 of the syndicalist Industrial Workers of the World, and founder in 1907 of the Irish Socialist Federation and in 1908 of the Harp newspaper.
When he left, after numerous rows with American socialists, though the class struggle was still his main concern, he had developed a new sympathy with cultural and political nationalism, his character had mellowed, and he had matured into a thinker of depth, breadth, and originality, and an orator of force and passion.
Back in Dublin in 1910, he published a masterly pamphlet,Labour, Nationality and Religion , refuting clerical assertions that Catholicism and socialism were incompatible, and Labour in Irish History , a Marxist history of Ireland.
Briefly national organizer of the Socialist Party of Ireland in 1910, in 1911 he became Ulster district organizer of the Irish Transport and General Workers' Union, fighting unsuccessfully to combat sectarianism.
In 1912 he was a founder of the Independent Labour Party of Ireland, forerunner of the Irish Labour Party, and proposed in the Irish Worker a political programme which included proportional representation and women's suffrage.
When in 1913 the Dublin Employers' Federation staged a lock-out to prevent workers joining the ITGWU, Connolly returned to Dublin: poverty defeated the workers in February 1914.
In October James Larkin [q.v.]left Ireland and Connolly became a highly efficient general secretary of the ITGWU, editor of the Irish Worker , and military commander of the Irish Citizen Army.
The total failure of his anti-recruitment drive and the appalling condition of the Dublin poor drove him to join forces with the revolutionary Irish Republican Brotherhood.
His influence was evident in the egalitarian wording of the proclamation declaring an Irish republic, published on Easter Monday 1916.
Commandant-general of the Dublin division, Connolly directed operations in the General Post Office capably and courageously, for the last two days with a shattered ankle.
After the surrender on Saturday 29 April he was courtmartialled on 9 May and shot in Dublin 12 May 1916.
In 1890 he married Lillie Reynolds, a domestic servant from a Protestant Wicklow family, whom he had met in Dublin.
They had one son and six daughters.
[Ruth Dudley Edwards,James Connolly , 1981; C. Desmond Greaves,The Life and Times of James Connolly , 1961; David Howell,A Lost Left : Three Studies in Socialism and Nationalism , 1896; Austen Morgan,James Connolly: a Political Biography , 1988.]
Alan Powers
,Joseph (1889–1956), architect, was born 23 December 1889 at Shraley House, Audley, Staffordshire, the eldest of the three sons and four children of Samuel Emberton, draper, and his wife Annie Amelia, daughter of John Hodgkins, farmer and miller.
He was educated at the Orme Boys' School, Newcastle under Lyme, then articled to the local architects Chapman & Snape.
By studying in the evenings at Burslem Art School, Emberton won a scholarship to the Royal College of Art in 1911 and worked for the London architects Trehearne & Norman, 1913–14.
He served during the war of 1914–18 in the Honourable Artillery Company, first as a gunner in Egypt and later as a trajectory officer in France, being badly wounded in October 1918.
On recovery, in 1918 Emberton joined Sir John Burnet [q.v.]and T. S. Tait, until he established a practice with P. J. Westwood, 1922–6.
They designed kiosks for the British empire exhibition, Wembley (1924), using simple shapes with colourful decoration.
Summit House, Holborn (1925), for Austin Reed Ltd., whose Regent Street shop interiors Westwood and Emberton designed in 1926, shows Burnet and Tait's influence.
Emberton continued to design shops in the fashionable art deco style, for Lotus and Delta shoes and others.
He was selected by Sir Lawrence Weaver [q.v.]to design the advertising exhibition, Olympia, West Kensington (1927), the first such exhibition with a unified style.
Emberton showed the influence of Dutch modern architecture in the façade added to New Empire Hall, Olympia (1930).
The Royal Corinthian Yacht Club, Burnham-on-Crouch, Essex (1931), established his modernist reputation, being the only British building included in the exhibition ‘The International Style’ at the Museum of Modern Art, New York, in 1932.
The functionalist design owed much to Emberton's assistant George Fairweather.
With Universal House, London (1933, demolished), Emberton enveloped a framed structure in glass curtain-walling, intended to rise higher than the original three storeys.
Simpson's shop in Piccadilly, London (1936), was structurally innovative, although the welded plate girders designed by the consulting engineer, Felix Samuely, had to be modified to meet London county council regulations.
The simple façade was enlivened at night by thin coloured neon lights and the interior had elegant shop-fittings and modern furnishings.
It demonstrated the maturity of English modernism and its commercial advantages.
Apart from the HMV shop in Oxford Street, London (1939), and the temporary Soleil pavilion at the Paris 1937 exhibition, Emberton's other main work is the circular casino at the Blackpool Pleasure Beach, Lancashire (1939), where he had already designed the fun house and grand national (1935), showing the  adaptability of modernism to popular entertainment.
The casino, containing restaurants and a flat for the owners, was given holiday spirit with a viewing platform reached by a spiral stair adjoining the entrance.
During the war of 1939–45, Emberton was housing officer to the Ministry of Aircraft Production, architectural adviser on hostels to the Ministry of Works, and consultant to the Ministry of Supply on the design of steel houses.
After 1945 he designed mostly flats in London and developed planning ideas influenced by Le Corbusier.
Emberton's approach was practical rather than theoretical, and enabled him to make elegant and workable buildings for commercial clients.
He was fair-haired and blue-eyed, with great charm of manner.
He loved horses, the birds in his outdoor aviary, and his 1934 Bentley.
He married in 1926 Kathleen Marie, daughter of William Herbert Chantrey, chartered accountant, and had two daughters.
Emberton died at Charing Cross Hospital, London, 20 November 1956.
[Rosemary Ind,Emberton , 1983; private information.]
Partha Mitter
,Ernest Binfield (1861–1934), artist and art teacher, was born 16 September 1861 at 1 Jesse Terrace, Reading, the second son and third child in the family of three sons and two daughters of Charles Richard Havell, professional artist, and his wife Charlotte Amelia Lord.
He was educated at Reading School.
Trained at the Royal College of Art, Paris studios, and in Italy, Havell joined the Madras School of Arts as principal in 1884, a post he held until 1892, when he returned to England.
He won early recognition with his report on Indian industrial arts, thus laying the foundations of his later influential doctrine on the Indian arts.
The revival of traditional handloom weaving initiated by him was later to win the support of M. K. Gandhi [q.v.].
Appointed principal of the Calcutta School of Art and keeper of the Government Art Gallery in 1896, a post he held until 1906, he was responsible for momentous changes in the art-school curriculum which led to the first Indian nationalist art movement, the Bengal School of Painting, under the artist Abanindranath Tagore.
Although a believer in raj paternalism, Havell's aesthetically radical, anti-Renaissance, arts and crafts tenets, and his synthetic vision of architecture as unifying all the different traditional arts of India, helped undermine the primacy of salon art in India, hitherto identified as one of the triumphs of the raj westernization of the subcontinent.
Even though his period in Calcutta was extremely brief, for he was forced to retire in 1906 after a breakdown, he became celebrated in the West and in India for ‘preaching’ the greatness of Indian art with fervour that bordered on fanaticism.
He was largely responsible for its recognition in the West: by his pioneering studies in ancient Indian art, such as Indian Sculpture and Painting (1908) and The Ideals of Indian Art (1911); by encouraging the fledgling Bengal School with sustained writings on its behalf; and finally by helping to found the India Society with (Sir) William Rothenstein [q.v.], for many years the bastion of Indian culture in Europe.
The society was set up in 1910 in the aftermath of the controversy surrounding the disparaging remarks of Sir George Birdwood [q.v.]about Indian art.
Though Havell was away from Britain between 1916 and 1923 as a member of the British legation in Copenhagen, ‘India was his first and remained his only love.’
He plunged headlong into the controversy over the architectural style for New Delhi, urging the imperial government to adopt the Mogul style for its new capital as a gesture of goodwill towards their Indian subjects.
The appointment of Sir Edwin Lutyens [q.v.]as the city's architect put an end to Havell's dream.
None the less the pronounced Indian elements in the otherwise classical design of New Delhi were a tribute to Havell's persistence.
In 1894 he married Lili, daughter of Admiral George Jacobson, of the Danish Royal Navy.
They had one daughter.
Havell died 30 December 1934 in Oxford.
[The Times , 1 January 1935; Partha Mitter,Much Maligned Monsters: History of European Reactions to Indian Art , 1977; information from Lady Sonia Wilson (daughter) and B. Vibert.]
Richard Cust
,Christopher (1594–1632), lawyer and MP, was baptized 28 April 1594, the first son of Thomas Sherland esquire of Milden, Suffolk, and his wife Anne, daughter of Sir Christopher Yelverton [q.v.]of Easton Mauduit, Northamptonshire.
He was educated at Queen's College, Oxford, where he graduated BA in 1610.
He was admitted to Gray's Inn 1 November 1604, was called to the bar 26 June 1617, and became a bencher in 1627.
He represented the borough of Northampton in the Parliaments of 1624, 1625, 1626, and 1628–9.
According to his contemporary biographer, Richard Sibbes [q.v.], the dominant influence on his early years was his uncle, Sir Henry Yelverton [q.v.], who persuaded him to set aside his early inclination to become a divine and pursue his studies in the law.
It was also on his uncle's recommendation that Sherland was appointed recorder of Northampton on 23 June 1623.
During the late 1620s he lived in the town, acting as legal adviser to the corporation and to local gentry families, such as the Drydens and the Knightleys.
He also formed close links with the network of local Puritan ministers, including Thomas Ball [q.v.]of Northampton, Robert Bolton of Weekley, John Dod [q.v.]of Fawsley, and Andrew Perne (1596–1654, q.v.) of Wilby, whom he described in his will as ‘my reverend and pious friends’.
He was amongst those who defaulted over payment of the forced loan at Northampton in 1627.
At a national level, Sherland was closely involved with the leading Puritan opponents of Crown policies.
He was one of the four lawyers amongst the feoffees for impropriations established in 1625, and by his will left £400 to the feoffees ‘for furtherance of the preaching of the gospel’.
He was also a founding member of the Providence Island Company, set up in September 1630; and, in the same month, he joined William Fiennes, first Viscount Saye and Sele, Sir Nathaniel Rich, John Pym [qq.v.], and John Crewe as members of a trust established by Richard Knightley [q.v.]to support John Dod.
He made ‘my good friend’ John Hampden [q.v.]executor of his will.
In the absence of correspondence, the clearest impression of Sherland's attitudes and concerns is provided by his contributions in Parliament, where he was a prominent speaker and committee man.
His main priority was the defence of Calvinist orthodoxy.
Sibbes described him as someone well versed in ‘controverted points of divinity’ and, with the exception of John Pym, no MP in the late 1620s was more vigorous in his efforts to demonstrate the dangers presented by Arminianism.
His first significant speech was in August 1625, when he opposed a grant of subsidies and suggested that proper enforcement of the recusancy laws would provide the king with a more than adequate revenue.
In 1626 he reported to the Commons on the outcome of the York House conference, at which George Villiers, first Duke of Buckingham [q.v.], had declared his support for Arminianism; and when he delivered one of the Commons charges against Buckingham in the Lords he added his own gloss that he was ‘the principal patron of a semi-pelagian, semi-popish faction, dangerous to church and state, lately set on foot among us.’
In 1628, like other leading lawyers, he was much involved in the debates leading to the Petition of Right, but again his main concern was religion.
In the debate on the Remonstrance against Buckingham in June he argued that the Arminians ‘run in string with the papists and flatter greatness to oppress the subject’, thereby making what has been described as a new and crucial intellectual link between alteration of religion and alteration of government.
In 1629 he was again at the forefront of discussions on Arminianism, proposing the Thirty-nine Articles of 1562 as a basic standard of religious orthodoxy and denouncing the evil influence of Arminian advisers close to the king.
Sherland died in February 1632.
He married Jane, daughter of Edward Oglethorpe of Smithfield, London.
He had no surviving children.
He was regarded by Sir John Eliot [q.v.]as one of the ablest and most articulate critics of Charles I's government.
[Richard Sibbes, ‘Christ is best’ in The Saints Cordialls , 1637;Commons Debates ; R. L. Greaves and R. Zaller (eds.),
Biographical Dictionary of British Radicals in the Seventeenth Century , 1984; W. Prest,The Rise of the Barristers , 1986; C. S. R. Russell,Parliaments and English Politics 1621–1629 , 1979; private research.]
J F A Mason
,Samuel (1765–1841), dean of Christ Church, Oxford, was born in Westminster 20 September 1765, the eldest in the family of two daughters and five sons (one of whom died young) of Samuel Smith, headmaster of Westminster School from 1764 to 1788, and his first wife Anna Jackson.
He was a pupil at Westminster School from 1772, and (as captain of the school) matriculated thence at Christ Church in 1782; his college tutors were John Randolph [q.v.]and Phineas Pett, later his canonical colleagues.
Smith himself was for a few years a tutor at Christ Church, but in 1795 he resigned his studentship to become incumbent of Daventry (a Christ Church living), returning to Christ Church as a canon in 1807.
Appointments as sub-dean (1809) and treasurer (1813) suggest that he was early marked out for appointment as dean; this came in 1824, when he succeeded the handsome but incapable C. H. Hall [q.v.], other candidates being Edmund Goodenough, headmaster of Westminster, and Charles LLoyd, another canon of Christ Church.
Smith's wife died in 1825; this loss made him for some time anxious to resign, and may help to account for the relative lack of distinction of his period of office.
Smith has been dismissed as ‘presence of mind Smith’ from his alleged remark on returning without his companion from a disastrous outing on the river: ‘If I had not with great presence of mind hit him on the head with a boathook both would have been drowned,’but the story comes from Reminiscences of Oxford (1st edn. 1900) by William Tuckwell, who in his second edition (1907) consigned it to oblivion; moreover, there was no charge of murder.
As dean, Smith attempted to revert to the practices and manners of Hall's great predecessor Cyril Jackson [q.v.], but he lacked the ability to manage those with whom a dean of Christ Church had to deal.
He was worsted by George IV in a tussle over appointments to studentships; a riot in 1825 led the duke of Wellington to transfer his two eldest sons to Trinity College, Cambridge; and he failed to mobilize chapter and common-room to achieve the desired result in the by-election following the resignation of (Sir) Robert Peel early in 1829, the lead being taken by Charles LLoyd.
The Revd Frederick Oakeley [q.v.], later a convert to Rome, a graduate at Christ Church while Smith was dean, thought him ‘remarkable for nothing but his good nature’ and ‘the most irregular and unpunctual attendant’at college services; however, ‘the moral and religious state of Christ Church…was in a state of progressive improvement’under Smith.
These are tendentious claims: it is clear that men prominent in the political, ecclesiastical, legal, and learned life of later Victorian England were admitted to Christ Church in Smith's day.
Charles Wordsworth came in 1825, W. K. Hamilton in 1826, W. E. Gladstone and (Sir) Robert Phillimore, first baronet, in 1828, H. G. Liddell, Robert Scott, and C. J. (later Earl) Canning in 1829 [qq.v.].
Smith published nothing, and at Christ Church he built nothing.
Smith exchanged the deanery for the ‘golden stall’ at Durham with Thomas Gaisford [q.v.]in 1831.
At Dry Drayton near Cambridge he had succeeded his father as patron and incumbent in 1808, presented his own eldest son Samuel in 1829, and himself for the second time in 1831.
Like his father, Smith was fond of gambling on horses, though with marked lack of success; he shared this propensity with few or no other deans of Christ Church.
In 1803 he married Anne, daughter of William Brady of Arcadia, Jamaica.
They had six sons, one of whom died young and four of whom became Anglican clergymen, and seven daughters.
Smith died 19 January 1841 in Dry Drayton, Cambridgeshire.
[Smith papers at Cambridgeshire Record Office; Christ Church archives; inscriptions at Dry Drayton; W. R. Ward,Victorian Oxford , 1965; L. M. Quiller Couch (ed.),
Reminiscences of Oxford by Oxford Men , Oxford Historical Society, vol. xxii, 1892, pp. 319–31.]
Christopher R Hill
,William (1903–1971), bookmaker, was born in Birmingham 16 July 1903, the second son and fourth of the eleven children (there were also a twin son and daughter who died at birth) of William Hill, journeyman coach-painter, and his wife Lavinia Knight, the daughter of a farmer, who also kept an inn on the border of Warwickshire and Leicestershire.
Hill ran away from school at the age of twelve to work on an uncle's farm.
After a short time working for his father he moved to a tool-making factory in Birmingham, where he took up bookmaking in a small way, by collecting bets on his motor bicycle.
Shortly afterwards he became a more serious bookmaker, but plunged too heavily at first and lost all his capital.
However, he started again in the cheaper rings, and after five years moved to London in 1929.
He started betting at greyhound stadiums, then extended to pony racing at Northolt Park, and in 1934 opened a one-room office in Jermyn Street.
He soon moved to much larger premises in Park Lane, and later to even larger offices at Piccadilly Circus in 1947.
By 1939 he had given up the dogs and the main business was credit betting, though he was still operating at Northolt Park.
In 1944 he produced the first fixed-odds football coupon, and set up a separate football company in 1944.
In 1955 he gave up on-course bookmaking.
In 1960 his great rivals, Ladbrokes, went into the football business, and Hill sued them for infringement of the copyright in his coupon.
The case went to the House of Lords, where Hill won the £1 damages for which he had asked, with costs.
In 1954 he bought, with Lionel Barber, 75 per cent of Holder's Investment Trust, to which he sold his interests between 1955 and 1961 for over £5 million.
So successful was the business that Holder's shares rose from 2s. 10d. in 1956 to £18 10s. in 1960.
This purchase of a ‘shell’ company was the first time that the manoeuvre had been executed and the first time that a bookmaking company had been floated on the Stock Exchange.
Hill loathed the idea of betting shops, which were legalized in 1960, but rivals moved in and he followed in 1966.
In the same year he reluctantly began to take bets on elections.
He did not, as he said on 9 December 1958, when as owner of Be Careful he spoke at the Gimcrack dinner, object to bookmakers paying something towards the racing industry's expenses.
However, as he wrote in the following May, it galled him to be expected to do so and still to be refused admission to the members' enclosures at smart meetings.
Hill's first stud was Whitsbury in Hampshire, which he bought in 1943.
Nimbus was foaled there in 1946, and, having been sold for 5,000 guineas at the yearling sales, won the 1949 Two Thousand Guineas and Derby.
In 1945 he bought Sezincote stud in Gloucestershire, where he stood his stallion Chanteur II, sire of Pinza, winner of the 1953 Derby.
William Hill was a great bookmaker, who had the courage to take enormous bets.
He was an ebullient, sometimes irascible, charming man.
In his latter years he took little day-to-day interest in racing, but was seen as an elder statesman of the turf.
He had become accustomed to great wealth, but he had a social conscience and may even have considered himself a socialist.
In 1923 he married Ivy Burley, a ladies' hairdresser of Smallheath, Birmingham, who survived him.
They had one daughter.
Hill died in Newmarket 15 October 1971.
[The Hill Story , privately published, 1955; Richard Kaye,The Ladbrokes Story , 1969;The Times , 16 October 1971; Christopher R. Hill,Horse Power: the Politics of the Turf , 1988; William Hill Organization press release 4 February 1988; private information.]
David Crouch
, Sir Richard (d. 1248), soldier of fortune and courtier, has obscure origins.
In his earliest appearances he is ‘Richard son of Siward’ indicating English ancestry and the name of a father or earlier progenitor.
It is probable that he was the young man of that name from Farnham in Lower Nithsdale, Yorkshire, accused of homicide late in John's reign, who was arrested but later released into the military household of an unnamed Yorkshire magnate.
A Richard son of Siward appears around 1215 in the retinue of William de Fors, count of Aumale [q.v.], a Yorkshire baron.
With other Aumale followers, Richard Siward (as he was now called) was also retained in the household of William Marshal, second Earl of Pembroke [q.v.], and appeared with him in London in 1216, by which time he had been knighted.
He was later reputed to have played a role in the sea battle against the French off Sandwich in 1217.
He fought again for the count of Aumale in his rebellion at the end of 1220.
Richard escaped the siege of Bytham and for a period of a week or two in February 1221 in the forest of Cliff, Northamptonshire, he held off a royal army.
He surrendered and left the kingdom, but was pardoned in September of that year.
In 1223 Richard was once again in the retinue of William Marshal and followed him over the next few years into Wales, Ireland, and Brittany.
He received manors and rents from the earl.
The Marshal connection brought him into friendship with the Basset family of Headington, Oxfordshire, and High Wycombe in Buckinghamshire, for Gilbert Basset [q.v.]was also a prominent Marshal supporter.
In October 1229 Richard married Philippa, Gilbert's cousin and daughter of Thomas Basset of Headington, weeks after the death of her first husband, Henry, fifth Earl of Warwick.
This was the turning-point of Richard's career, for Philippa brought him control of her share of the lands of Basset of Headington and her handsome dower settlement from the Warwick estates.
The Basset connection brought Richard less profitable consequences in 1233, when Gilbert Basset fell under royal disfavour.
Richard Siward shared in his disgrace, being accused (wrongly) of marrying Philippa without royal licence.
Richard and Gilbert found shelter in Gwent with Richard Marshal, third Earl of Pembroke, who subsequently rebelled against Henry III.
On the earl's behalf Richard led several daring forays out of Netherwent and deep into England.
The most famous of these was in September 1233, when Siward and several score raiders rode across England into Berkshire and pillaged a manor of Peter des Roches, bishop of Winchester [q.v.].
He passed on into Kent and on the return leg of the journey liberated the fugitive Hubert de Burgh [q.v.]from sanctuary in Devizes church, meeting boats at Aust on the Bristol channel which ferried his party back safely to Chepstow.
This and like episodes made Siward's name synonymous with opposition to the obnoxious ‘Poitevin' regime in 1233–4 and accounts for his subsequent fame.
At the conclusion of the Marshal–Basset rebellion in May 1234, Richard Siward was pardoned, appointed to the king's council, and given the temporary keeping of Glamorgan and the castle of Bolsover.
He had fees in Glamorgan from the king or earl marshal and in England from de Burgh.
Alexander II of Scotland [q.v.]gave him the castle and lordship of Kellie, with other lands at Aberdour, county Fife.
However, Richard's career was uneven.
In 1236 he had both the honour of carrying the sceptre at the queen's coronation, and the disgrace of imprisonment through a court cabal.
Surviving this plot, Richard was retained in the royal household and in 1242 served as a banneret with the king's army in Poitou.
It may be that at this time he was retained also by Simon of Montfort, Earl of Leicester [q.v.], who had awarded him a money fee before 1245.
But difficulties began to beset him.
Gilbert Basset died in 1241, and Philippa Basset somehow managed to get a quick divorce from Richard by autumn of the next year.
After this he seems to have retired for a time to his Scottish estates.
In 1244–5 Richard was in the marches of Wales, and received another blow when Richard de Clare, sixth Earl of Gloucester, lord of Glamorgan, had him arrested and confiscated his Glamorgan estates, on the grounds that Richard had sided with a Welsh magnate of the area against the earl.
Richard disputed this before the king in 1247, and was still in pursuit of justice in July 1248.
He died soon after a crippling stroke by the end of the same year.
He left an under-age son, Richard, by Philippa, and an adult bastard, Daniel, to whom he had given lands in Glamorgan before 1245.
[D. M. Stenton (ed.),
Rolls of the Justices in Eyre for Yorkshire in 3 Henry III (1218–19), Selden Society, vol. lvi, 1937, p. 280; H. R. Luard (ed.),
Annales Monastici , 5 vols.
(Rolls Series), 1864–9; Matthew Paris,Chronica majora , 7 vols.
(Rolls Series), 1872–83; Roger of Wendover,Chronica , ed.
H. G. Hewlett, 3 vols.
(Rolls Series), 1886–9; G. E. Cokayne,The Complete Peerage , new edn., vol. xii, pt. 2, 1949; G. T. Clark (ed.),
Cartae et Alia Munimenta quae ad Dominium de Glamorgancia pertinent , 7 vols., 1910.]
Diarmaid MacCulloch
, Sir Thomas (1573–1645), soldier and courtier, was baptized 12 February 1573 in Rushbrooke, Suffolk, the eldest son of Sir Robert Jermyn of Rushbrooke Hall, leading Puritan and county administrator, and his wife Judith, daughter of Sir George Blagg.
Fellow commoner at Emmanuel College, Cambridge, in 1585, he should not be confused with his cousin Thomas Jermyn of Depden, MP for Sudbury in 1589 (died 1617).
In 1585 his father had joined the expedition to the Low Countries of Robert Dudley, Earl of Leicester [q.v.], and Thomas became a military follower of Leicester's stepson Robert Devereux, second Earl of Essex [q.v.].
In September 1591 he was one of twenty-four young men whom Essex knighted in the Rouen expedition.
He was with Essex in his Cadiz expedition in 1596, in Ireland in early 1597, and around the Azores in summer and autumn 1597.
In January 1599 he raised levies in Suffolk for Ireland, and was in Connaught by April; in January 1600 he accompanied Essex to Dublin, although the queen had previously ordered him to stay in England.
After his marriage he lived in Hanworth, Middlesex, but the tragic accidental death of his daughter Elizabeth from eating a piece of bread baited with rat-poison may have impelled his move from Hanworth after 1605.
Jermyn avoided involvement in Essex's abortive 1601 rising.
In March 1604 he was returned MP for Andover; in 1614 he succeeded to Rushbrooke Hall, and, with this new dignity, was elected MP for Suffolk.
From January 1621 until the Long Parliament he was repeatedly returned MP for Bury St Edmunds.
In 1616 he presented William Bedell [q.v.]as rector of Horringer, Suffolk, probably having known him as preacher of St Mary's, Bury St Edmunds; later he was the means of Bedell's promotion to an Irish bishopric.
Court service now replaced his military career.
In July 1616, on the embassy of James, Lord Hay (later first Earl of Carlisle, q.v.) in marriage negotiations between Princess Christina and Prince Charles, he suffered a serious accidental fall which left him in France for some months after the embassy.
In 1623 he was deputy lieutenant in Cambridgeshire, and in 1625, a colonel of the Suffolk regiments defending the coasts.
In July 1628 he became vice-chamberlain to Queen Henrietta Maria, and on 30 March 1629 was unsuccessfully seeking the comptrollership of the household.
On 22 December 1631 he became non-resident governor of Jersey, and through the 1630s sat on several administrative commissions.
In January 1639 he finally achieved his comptrollership of the king's household.
His busyness in seeking profitable office suggests little sympathy for the austere ideals of ‘Thorough’: a privy councillor throughout the decade, he had no scruples in gathering a clutch of reversions for his young sons Thomas and Henry (later first Earl of St Albans, q.v.), which inhibited the king's freedom of appointment in legal, financial, and administrative offices.
The younger Thomas rose through various appointments to become in 1638 groom of the bedchamber to Prince Charles, and Henry became the queen's master of the horse.
The death of the lord lieutenant of Suffolk, Theophilus Howard, second Earl of Suffolk [q.v.], on 3 June 1640, brought Jermyn joint appointment as lord lieutenant with James Howard, the third earl [q.v.]; he succeeded in quelling troop unrest at Beccles and Bungay in July 1640, and during the summer was also appointed deputy lieutenant in Cornwall.
In 1640 he surrendered his comptrollership to Sir Peter Wyche [q.v.], reportedly for £2,000 compensation.
He was returned to the Long Parliament for Bury with his son Thomas; however, in 1642 the younger Thomas openly joined the king at Oxford while Henry fled abroad.
Jermyn showed his alarm at Parliament's proceedings by retiring home, pleading ill health.
The House summoned him to attend in August, and in October Rushbrooke was searched for arms; in mid-November he was again summoned, accused of sending the king money and discouraging the Bury townsmen from contributing on the Propositions.
After offering 100 marks on the Propositions, he was allowed to return home, but soon disabled from sitting.
In January 1644, assessed at £1,000, he pleaded for a mitigation; his lack of money may have been due to personal extravagance at court as much as political troubles.
Jermyn, at home both on the battlefield and at court, is a curiously neat transitional figure between his austere and deeply religious father and his extrovertly Cavalier sons; his friendship with Bedell suggests a mainstream Protestant piety unaffected by the Laudian theological revolution.
He married first in early 1600 Catherine, daughter of William Killegrew of Hanworth, Middlesex, by whom he had one daughter and four sons, including Thomas and Henry; secondly Mary (died 1679), daughter of Edmund Barber of Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk, and widow of Thomas Newton of Edgefield, Norfolk, by whom he had a son and a daughter.
He was buried in Rushbrooke (where his monument remains) 7 January 1645.
[S. H. A. Hervey (ed.),
Rushbrooke Parish Registers 1567 to 1850 with Jermyn and Davers Annals , 1903; J. J. Muskett,Suffolk Manorial Families , 1908, vol. ii, pp. 243–58; G. E. Aylmer,The King's Servants , 1961; P. W. Hasler (ed.),
The House of Commons 1558–1603 , 1981.]
Frances Partridge
,Dora de Houghton (1893–1932), painter, was born in Hereford, 29 March 1893, the second of the two daughters and fourth of the five children of Samuel Carrington, railway engineer, and his wife Charlotte Houghton.
When the family settled in Bedford, Dora went to Bedford High School, whose records show that her skill in drawing was soon noticed.
‘I had an awful childhood,’ she wrote later, probably because she ‘hated’her strict, fussy mother, a former governess.
However, she was devoted to her more unconventional father, who agreed that she should go to art school, and in 1910 she became a student under Henry Tonks [q.v.]at the Slade School of Art.
This new and fertile soil rapidly developed her character and painting style.
Among her fellow-students were John and Paul Nash [qq.v.],
C. R. W. Nevinson [q.v.],
Dorothy Brett, and, most important of all, the gifted young Mark Gertler [q.v.], who fell deeply in love with Dora.
She was an attractive and popular figure with her large blue eyes and shock of thick hair, bobbed in the fashion she had set, as she also did that of using her surname alone.
Lady Ottoline Morrell [q.v.]described her as ‘a wild moorland pony’.
Moreover, her individual sense of fun and fantasy made her an enchanting companion, though a neurotic strain was also apparent.
Carrington worked hard, and with dedication, winning a scholarship.
Her oil-paintings were much influenced by Mark Gertler [q.v.]in their careful, smooth technique, three-dimensioned effect, and dense, rich colour.
Her skill as a draughtsman appears in innumerable witty pen-and-ink illustrations to her letters.
However, her lack of confidence was shown in her reluctance to exhibit or even sign the work she sent to the London Group, where it was seen and admired by André Derain.
When she left the Slade in 1914 she had many new friends.
Virginia and Leonard Woolf [qq.v.]commissioned her woodcuts; Roger Fry [q.v.]sought her help in restoring a Mantegna for Hampton Court; Aldous Huxley [q.v.]put her in a novel.
Her fateful meeting with Lytton Strachey [q.v.]caused a coup de foudre that grew into lifelong love for him, despite his homosexuality.
The pair set up house at Tidmarsh Mill, Pangbourne, and their relationship developed regardless of love affairs on both sides and Carrington's marriage in 1921 to Reginald Sherring Partridge (always called Ralph from 1919 onwards), who joined the ménage.
He was the son of Reginald Partridge, of the Indian Civil Service.
In 1924 Ralph Partridge and Strachey bought Ham Spray House in Wiltshire, where a studio was made for Carrington and a library for Strachey.
This peaceful working life ended in 1931 when Strachey became ill.
He died of cancer in January 1932, leaving his companions grief-stricken.
Carrington never wavered from her suicidal intentions, and despite all efforts to deter her, shot herself in Hungerford 11 March 1932.
She left striking portraits of Lytton Strachey, E. M. Forster [qq.v.],
Gerald Brenan, and others; landscapes, still lifes, and glass pictures, as well as a large number of brilliant and amusing letters.
Her work became much sought after.
[Michael Holroyd,Lytton Strachey , 1967; David Garnett (ed.),
Carrington: Letters and Extracts from her Diaries , 1970; Noel Carrington,Carrington: Paintings, Drawings and Decorations , 1978; Gretchen Gerzina,Carrington: a Life of Dora Carrington , 1989; personal knowledge.]
Auberon Waugh
,Aubrey Nigel Henry Molyneux (1880–1923), politician, diplomat, traveller, and secret agent, was born 3 April 1880 at Highclere Castle, Hampshire, the son of Henry Howard Molyneux Herbert, fourth Earl of Carnarvon [q.v.], secretary of state for the colonies under Lord Derby (1866–7) and Disraeli (1874–8), and lord-lieutenant of Ireland under Lord Salisbury (1885–6), and his second wife Elisabeth Catharine (‘Elsie’), daughter of Henry Howard of Greystoke Castle, Cumberland, his first cousin.
Aubrey was the elder son (there were no daughters) by the second marriage, Lord Carnarvon already having had a son and three daughters by his first.
Although born into a family of great wealth and influence, Herbert suffered an affliction of the eyes from an early age which made him effectively blind for much of his life.
He scraped through the Eton of Dr Edmond Warre [q.v.], under the particular care of Arthur Benson [q.v.], his housemaster, without distinction, but in 1902 gained a first class in modern history at Balliol College, Oxford, where he also made a reputation for himself as a roof-climber, despite his blindness.
On leaving Oxford, he was secured the position of honorary attaché at the embassy in Tokyo in 1902, but never allowed himself to become much interested in Far Eastern affairs.
It was his next appointment in March 1904, to the embassy in Constantinople, which fired his enthusiasm for the Middle East and settled the subsequent course of his brief but eventful life.
He was the model for the eponymous hero of Greenmantle (1916) by John Buchan, first Baron Tweedsmuir [q.v.].
On his marriage in 1910 to Mary Gertrude, only child of John Robert William Vesey, fourth Viscount de Vesci, and his wife Lady Evelyn Charteris, daughter of the tenth Earl of Wemyss, his mother gave him Pixton Park, in Somerset, with 5,000 acres, and a substantial family property in Portofino, Italy.
Lady de Vesci gave them her  splendid London house at 28 Bruton Street, and it was thought he should have a seat in Parliament.
After twice contesting South Somerset in the Conservative interest in 1910, he won in the ‘coupon’ election of 1911 and remained an MP for the rest of his life, for South Somerset until 1918, and then for Yeovil.
Membership of the House of Commons did not interrupt his extensive travelling in the Middle East.
Throughout 1911 his attention was focused almost exclusively on the Balkans, to which he travelled frequently, having many friends among remote inland brigands as well as among the cream of Kemal Atatürk's reformist movement in Constantinople.
His tireless work for the cause of Albanian nationalism was rewarded in 1913 with the first of two enquiries on the point of whether he would be prepared to accept the throne of Albania, if it was formally offered to him.
On this occasion Herbert was quite keen to accept, but H. H. Asquith, later first Earl of Oxford and Asquith (a close family friend), was not encouraging and Sir Edward Grey (later Viscount Grey of Falloden, q.v.), the foreign secretary, was against any British involvement in the Balkan tangle.
The prize this time went to Prince William of Weid, representing the Austrian faction.
He did not last six months.
Herbert was largely responsible for the creation of the modern, independent state of Albania after World War I, championing the rights of the Albanians against the other Balkan states.
On the outbreak of World War I Herbert joined the Irish Guards, despite his near-blindness, by the simple method of buying himself a second lieutenant's uniform and falling in as the regiment boarded ship for France in August 1914.
After being wounded and briefly taken prisoner during the retreat from Mons, he joined the Intelligence Bureau in Cairo, later known as the Arab Bureau, in December 1914 with T. E. Lawrence [q.v.], who became a close friend and ally.
As  liaison officer and interpreter, he took part in the Gallipoli campaign in 1915.
He found that his ready command of French, Italian, German, Turkish, Arabic, Greek, and Albanian, and his personal friendship with many of the key figures in the area, made his presence invaluable to the commander-in-chief, although eyebrows were sometimes raised at his unremittingly pro-Turkish stance.
He spent the rest of the war in intelligence work in Mesopotamia, Salonika, and Italy.
By 1920, although still receiving the Conservative whip in Parliament, Herbert regarded himself as an Independent, formally crossing the floor on the Irish vote on 20 November and thereafter sitting on whichever side he felt inclined.
Effectively he was immersed in Albanian politics, although in February 1921, at the request of Sir Basil Thomson [q.v.]of Scotland Yard's Special Branch, he travelled to Germany for a secret meeting with Talaat, the Turk generally held responsible for the post-war Armenian massacres.
Later that year, in Constantinople, he found himself put under surveillance by British military intelligence, the task being entrusted to his nephew, Henry Herbert, Lord Porchester (later sixth Earl of Carnarvon).
Herbert's eccentricity was to dress as a tramp, and his appearance was further affected by his blindness and by a piebald hair coloration, after an early attack of alopecia.
Herbert and his wife had one son and three daughters, the youngest of whom, Laura, was the wife of Evelyn Waugh [q.v.].
In the last year of his life, Herbert was revisited by the total blindness which had afflicted his earlier years.
In 1923, at a Balliol gaudy, he met his old tutor, A. L. Smith [q.v.], now the master, who advised him that the best cure for blindness was to have the teeth extracted.
Following this advice, Herbert developed blood poisoning and died 23 September 1923 at his London home in Bruton Street.
[Desmond MacCarthy,A Memoir , 1924; Aubrey Herbert,Mons, Anzac, and Kut , 1919 (reprinted 1930 with introduction by Desmond MacCarthy); Aubrey Herbert,Ben Kendim, a Record of Eastern Travel , 1924; Margaret FitzHerbert,The Man who was Greenmantle , 1983; personal knowledge.]
Joan Thirsk
,John (c. 1582– c. 1635), tobacco grower and projector, came of ancient gentry stock.
Richard Stratford of Farmcote, in Guiting Power parish, Gloucestershire, having been the king's painter, was granted arms in 1484.
Earlier family members included Robert Stratford, bishop of Chichester, and John Stratford, archbishop of Canterbury [qq.v.].
John Stratford, the tobacco grower, was the seventh son of John Stratford and his wife Margaret, daughter of William Tracy of Toddington and Stanway.
John and Margaret had eight sons and one daughter, and in their early years lived at Paynes Place, Bushley.
Their son became a London salter, being apprenticed to Peter Robinson, and marrying his daughter Joan.
There were a son and three daughters of this marriage.
Stratford traded first in Cheshire cheese and woollen hose, sent from the country by Robinson's chapmen, but then switched to rough flax, linen yarn, wheat, and rye, bought from Eastland (Baltic) merchants in exchange for English broadcloth.
He entered into partnership with John Hopkins, a fellow apprentice, who also married one of Robinson's daughters.
When, through a second marriage, Hopkins became a kinsman of one Vickares, a wool-draper, Hopkins took over the broadcloth trade, and Stratford concentrated on the flax trade, in partnership with three others, Ralph, his brother, Thomas Lane, married to a third daughter of Robinson, and Humphrey Thornbury.
They prospered and employed many poor in and near London to dress flax, until the Netherlanders brought in dressed flax.
Then business diminished, and the partners persuaded Stratford to live off his Prescott estate in Gloucestershire.
He began to grow tobacco, raising some capital from Abraham Burrell, but Henry Somerscales was his main partner, for Somerscales had learned in Holland how to cultivate tobacco, and took responsibility for the sale of the matured crop.
Each lease of land involved separate partnerships, usually sharing the costs and profits equally.
Lessees included Thomas Lorenge of Cleeve and John Ligon of Beauchamp Court, Worcestershire, each being promised inflated rents of £5 and more per acre for four years.
Stratford employed many poor, spending £1,400 on labour in one year, and taking trouble to conceal planting procedures from prying eyes.
The first crop was sown in February 1619, on 100 acres, but a proclamation banned tobacco growing on 30 December.
Stratford attempted to cancel his leases, and much litigation followed, but he failed to escape his obligations, and became deeply indebted.
At the same time he was engaged with his brother Ralph in soap-boiling in London, and dealt in tallow, potash, soap-ash, and oil.
An appeal to the Privy Council in 1623 prompted their recommendation that his creditors forebear, for one year, later extended, to press for payment.
He paid off some debts in sheep, and by growing flax at Winchcombe and Cockbury on forty acres, employing 800 poor.
He also experimented with linen manufacture.
He urged flax and hemp growing as a state policy, and more ploughing of pasture to make work.
A lawsuit implies that Stratford was still living in 1634.
[Information from G. H. Stratford; Public Record Office, State Papers Domestic;Acts of the Privy Council ; lawsuits in Chancery, Court of Requests, Court of Exchequer; J. Thirsk,Economic Policy and Projects , 1978.]
Michael S Moss
,William Henry (1862–1944), whisky distiller, was born 19 June 1862 in Gowanside, Carluke, Lanarkshire, the youngest son of John Ross, tenant farmer, and his wife Euphemia Forrest.
A year later the family moved to a farm near South Queensferry outside Edinburgh.
After attending the local school Ross went to George Watson's College in Edinburgh.
Leaving school at fifteen, he went to work as a clerk at the Grassmarket, Edinburgh, branch of the City of Glasgow Bank.
When this collapsed in 1878, he got a post as a junior clerk with the Distillers Company Limited, which had been formed a year earlier by six of the largest Lowland patent distillers to rationalize production.
Through hard work and attendance at night school to learn bookkeeping, he quickly gained promotion, becoming accountant and cashier in 1884 and company secretary in 1889.
He was appointed general manager in 1897, and managing director in 1900.
When the large whisky-blending house of W. and G. Pattison collapsed fraudulently the following year he tried and failed to arrange a rescue package, but DCL did provide financial help to firms unwittingly caught up in the crash.
After 1900 the whisky trade slipped into deep recession, exacerbated by the ‘what is whisky?’ debate between the pot malt distillers and the patent distillers.
Ross organized the patent distillers' campaign and was largely responsible for their victory before the royal commission on whisky that reported in 1909.
In the meantime he had been pursuing a policy of rationalizing the trade by buying patent and grain distillery businesses that were in difficulty, collaborating closely with the large blending houses.
He displayed considerable skill in matching supply to the much-reduced demand by working the plant at below capacity.
From the 1909 budget and throughout World War I the government was antagonistic to whisky, imposing large duty increases and restrictions.
Ross became the unofficial leader of the whole trade, working hard to ensure survival.
Scottish Malt Distillers was formed under his chairmanship in 1914 to acquire five Lowland pot distilleries.
He was appointed OBE for his services during World War I when he acted as intermediary between the government and the distillers for the supply of alcohol for munition purposes.
After the war, with the anti-drink lobby gaining ground worldwide, he led the campaign to restructure the industry and diversify DCL into other activities, particularly the production of industrial alcohol.
His crowning achievement was the ‘big amalgamation’ of 1925 which brought DCL together with the three largest blending houses, John Walker & Sons, James Buchanan & Co., and John Dewar & Sons.
Ross was appointed chairman of the enlarged company.
Other amalgamations followed.
He was also concerned to develop the international market for whisky, making several sales tours overseas.
It was on one of these to Australia in 1929 that his sight was severely damaged in an accident.
He fought hard to overcome his disability and established the W. H. Ross Foundation for the Study and Prevention of Blindness in Edinburgh in 1935.
He retired from DCL in that year.
In 1888 he married Annie Gilmore, daughter of David Dalglish, cotton-mill manager.
They had two sons and one daughter.
Increasingly infirm, he married as his second wife his nurse, Florence Ridley, and when she died married her successor, Gladys Murdoch.
Ross died 22 August 1944 in Edinburgh.
[The Times , 24 August 1944; Ross Wilson,Scotch: the Formative Years , 1970; A. Slaven and S. Checkland (eds.),
Dictionary of Scottish Business Biography , vol. ii, 1990.]
Colin Cohen
,Thomas Harry (1813–1870), paper-maker, was born in Limehouse, London, 19 September 1813, the youngest in the family of two sons and three daughters of John Saunders, hoop bender, and his wife Mary.
Very little is known about his early life.
He seems to have entered the paper-making trade in the late 1830s at a boom time and eventually owned six paper-mills in Kent and Buckinghamshire, branching out from the family businesses of coal and timber merchants and, especially, seed crushing.
His first partnership in a paper-mill was in 1840 in Hawley, south of Dartford on the Darent.
His mills had a reputation for supplying everything from newsprint (for The Times in the 1850s and 1860s) to security paper, in which he built up a huge export business to Europe, the British empire, and South America for stamps and banknotes (his customers included almost all the best-known banks).
His name is first found in the watermark of a postage stamp for Barbados as early as 1840.
The quality of his paper is confirmed by the fact that he exhibited, and won some dozen prize medals at international exhibitions from 1851 onwards, though not at the more parochial trade shows.
In the run up to the Great Exhibition of 1851 he produced sample sheets with a watermarked light and shade portrait of Queen Victoria: later these exquisite watermarks became part of his stock-in-trade and were described as a ‘degree of perfection…the quintessence of the papermaking craft’.
More prosaically it was predicted that they could ‘form a valuable addition to bank note paper for the prevention of forgery’.
His business expanded entirely by acquisition.
One of his mills was probably the largest in the country by the 1880s, though it seems not to have been a paper-mill when he acquired it.
He rebuilt the Phoenix mill in Dartford as one of the major industrial buildings in the south-east of England.
During his career he created an ‘immense, flourishing and progressive business’ of six mills with some eighteen hand making vats and three paper machines, while still leaving time for his substantial charitable activities.
On the national scene he was twice in small deputations to the prime minister, the third Viscount Palmerston, during the 1860s controversy about the abolition of paper duties and the continuing import duties on rags.
His evidence to the parliamentary select committee revealed that he was not one of those who believed that straw could ever be an adequate substitute for rags.
In 1862, with his mill manager, he took out a patent on an improved way of drying machine-made paper and of regulating the supply of pulp to the paper machine.
He was an active Nonconformist of Baptist tendencies and employed a metropolitan missionary to preach indoors and out.
With his family, he was a strong supporter of the Shaftesbury Society (though this did not stop his widow owning a pub next to one of the mills).
He was also a member of the Royal Society of Arts.
In 1844 he married Mary, daughter of Thomas Bold Marchant of Brenchley in Kent.
There were no children.
Saunders died 5 February 1870 in Dartford Heath, following a debilitating stroke two years earlier which had put an end to his trade activities.
[Dartford Chronicle , 12 February 1870;The Paper Mills Directory , 1859 onwards; T. H. Saunders,Illustrations of the British Paper Manufacture , 1855; management letter-books of The Times ,Times archives.]