

Charles Sebag-Montefiore
,Henry (1705–1785), banker and creator of the gardens at Stourhead, was born 7 July 1705, the elder son (there were no daughters) of Henry Hoare and his wife Jane, daughter of Sir William Benson of Bromley.
His grandfather Sir Richard Hoare [q.v.]was the founder of Hoare's Bank and lord mayor of London in 1712.
His father, Henry Hoare I, bought the Stourhead estate in 1717 and employed Colen Campbell to build the new house, which was completed in 1724.
Henry Hoare II, known in the family as ‘Henry the Magnificent’, was a partner in the family bank for almost sixty years from 1726 until his death.
Astute and prudent, he managed the affairs of the bank through hazards of the eighteenth century with sound judgement, achieving good profits and an excellent reputation.
He went to live at Stourhead after his mother's death in 1742, and over the next forty years he became a discriminating collector and patron of the arts, laying the foundations of an important library, but above all he transformed the landscape at Stourhead, creating the lake and the classical temples, which so vividly recall a Claudian idyll.
The gardens of Stourhead are historically important as an early example of the union of art and nature, which became known as ‘le jardin anglais’.
In about 1744, shortly after the death of his second wife, Hoare dammed the Stour to create the lake in the gardens and called upon Henry Flitcroft [q.v.]to design the temples around it.
Flitcroft worked at Stourhead for some twenty years: the temple of Flora was built c .1745, but the best-known building is the Pantheon of 1753–4, which recalls the painting by Claude Lorrain, ‘Aeneas at Delos’(National Gallery, London).
Henry Hoare II started the picture collection at Stourhead: he patronized John Wootton, Samuel Woodforde, and his namesake, William Hoare [qq.v.]of Bath (no relation).
Among his old masters were two pictures by Nicolas Poussin, a double portrait by Carlo Maratta, and pictures by Rembrandt, Gaspard Dughet, and Claude-Joseph Vernet.
He commissioned ‘Caesar and Cleopatra’ from Anton Raffael Mengs in 1758.
Some of the pictures were sold at the Stourhead heirlooms sale at Christie's in 1883.
The sculptor John Rysbrack [q.v.]was associated with Stourhead from 1744 to his death in 1770.
His best-known work for Stourhead, ‘Hercules’(1756), is in the Pantheon at Stourhead, together with his ‘Flora’(1761).
The terracotta model for the figure of Hercules was bequeathed to Hoare in Rysbrack's will.
Hoare married firstly in 1726 Anne, daughter of Samuel Masham, first Baron Masham [q.v.]: she died without surviving issue in 1727.
In 1728 he married Susan (died 1743), the daughter of Stephen Colt, and from this marriage he had a son (died 1752) and two daughters.
His younger daughter Anne married her first cousin (Sir) Richard Hoare, first baronet: their son, Sir Richard Colt Hoare, second baronet [q.v.], inherited Stourhead from his grandfather.
This grandson recalled his grandfather as ‘tall, comely in his person, elegant in his manners and address and well versed in literature’.
Hoare was concerned that his grandson, upon succeeding to Stourhead, should relinquish all connection with the bank, because of his fears that the ‘great National Debt must sooner or later be our ruin: if any public calamity happen, Stourhead should not be threatened’.
This separation of ownership caused much distress to the family at the time.
Hoare himself moved to a villa on Clapham Common, built for him by Flitcroft, where he died 8 September 1785.
He was buried at Stourhead.
[Archives of C. Hoare & Co.; Kenneth Woodbridge,Landscape and Antiquity: Aspects of English Culture at Stourhead 1718–1838 , 1970; National Trust guidebooks, including Kenneth Woodbridge,The Stourhead Landscape , 1971.]
A C Howe
,Joseph (1787–1845), shipowner, was born in Stepney 9 December 1787, the younger son (there were also four daughters) of Samuel Somes, victualler, waterman, coal merchant, and shipowner, of East London, and his wife Sarah Green, the daughter of a coal-meter.
Apprenticed to his father as a lighterman, and sent to sea at the age of fifteen, Somes's early experience was in the coal and coastal trades.
At the age of twenty-one he became a captain of his father's ships and remained at sea until 1818, acquiring a worldwide knowledge of shipping and navigation.
The death of Somes's father in 1816 left him as partner with his elder brother Samuel in what was by then a prosperous family shipping firm.
This firm continued to prosper during the more difficult postwar years, and by the time of Samuel's death in 1829 was operating extensively as owner, charterer (especially for the East India Company), sailmaker, and chandler.
It was under Somes's sole ownership in the 1830s that the firm rose to become the largest in England.
Somes seized the opportunity offered by the breakup of the fleet of the East India Company to purchase a number of its best ships, for example,Lowther Castle and Earl of Balcarres .
His ships sailed primarily to the East Indies but entered vigorously into the newly opening trade of Australasia, including whaling, sailing more rarely to Africa and the Americas, and occasionally to the Baltic.
By 1842 the Somes shipping empire, that of the largest private shipowner in the world, embraced about forty ships registered at Lloyd's.
Somes specialized in chartering ships to the government for the transport of convicts, stores, and troops.
Somes's prominence and wealth led him to develop an interest in the colonies, and he invested in the Western Australian Company, the North American Colonization Society of Ireland, and, above all, the New Zealand Company.
Somes joined the latter company when it was refounded in 1838, sold to it its first ship,Tory (sent to New Zealand in 1839 with a shipload of settlers without government permission), and became governor of the company in 1840.
As governor, Somes was the figurehead for an aggressive and ruthless campaign aimed at securing government recognition for the New Zealand Company.
This onslaught won financial concessions but not the decisive part in the colonization of New Zealand which the company sought.
Somes entered the House of Commons as Conservative MP for Dartmouth in December 1844.
He was obliged to transfer the ownership of his ships to his nephews in order, narrowly, to avoid disqualification as a government contractor.
His political aims were unclear, and his closest allies believed that in 1845 he was about to betray the company, which was in a state of virtual collapse at the time of Somes's death.
Somes was well known on the Stock Exchange and at Lloyd's, and was one of the originators of the new Lloyd's Register of Shipping in 1834.
He was also active within the General Shipowners' Society.
Often called to give evidence before government enquiries, he was a stout defender of the part played by the Navigation Acts and mercantile marine in the prosperity and defence of the nation.
In 1811 Somes married Mary Ann, daughter of Thomas Daplyn of Stepney.
They had one surviving daughter.
Secondly, in 1837, Somes married Maria (died 1911), daughter of Charles Saxton.
She was the sister of both the Revd Charles Waring Saxton, an early migrant to New Zealand, and of Somes's solicitor, Edward Saxton.
Somes died 25 June 1845 at his home, New Grove, Mile End Road, London.
He was worth £434,000.
[Colyer-Fergusson papers, Kent Archives Office; Horace Fildes notebooks, Victoria University of Wellington; Dartmouth election petition,Parliamentary Papers , vol. xii, 1845;The Times , 26 June and 3 July 1845; P. Burns,Fatal Success: a History of the New Zealand Company , 1989.]
Michael De-la-Noy
,Charles Hamilton (1895–1915), poet, was born in Aberdeen 19 May 1895, the elder twin son and third surviving child in the family of two sons and two daughters of William Ritchie Sorley [q.v.], professor of moral philosophy at Aberdeen University, and his wife Janetta Colquhoun Smith.
When Sorley was five his father was appointed Knightbridge professor of moral philosophy at Cambridge University and elected a fellow of King's College, and from then on Sorley was brought up in Cambridge, where until he was nine he was taught at home by his mother.
From 1906 to 1908, with his twin brother Kenneth, Sorley attended King's College Choir School as a day-boy, and it was here, at the age of ten, that he wrote a publishable poem ‘The Tempest’, in form and content a clear portent of his adult work.
Compulsory regular attendance at services in King's College chapel may account for numerous biblical references in later poems; Sorley was deeply religious in the philosophical sense but always remained out of tune with conventional belief.
When he was thirteen, despite an erratic academic performance at King's, Sorley gained an open scholarship to Marlborough College, where he developed two abiding sensual passions, for food and cross-country running.
His poetry began to appear in the Marlburian in 1912, influenced by John Masefield [q.v.]and by the Wiltshire downs, with their irresistible evocation of the past.
Impending death was an early subject, and one of his most accomplished schoolboy poems is ‘The River’, based on an actual suicide.
In his last year at Marlborough Sorley won the senior Farrar prize for English literature and language, the Buchanan prize for public reading, and a scholarship to University College, Oxford.
It was decided that before going up to Oxford, which in fact he never did, he should spend time with a German family in Mecklenburg and three months studying at the university in Jena, where he attended lectures on philosophy and political economy and made many close friends among German Jews.
Hence his stay on the Continent strongly influenced the ambivalent feelings he was to entertain towards the war, reflected so strikingly in his poetry.
He had rashly embarked on a walking tour in the Moselle region when war was declared, and he spent the night of 2 August 1914 in prison at Trier.
Although Sorley was to make light of the experience, he had been in considerable danger.
On his release he made his way back to England through Belgium, sailing from Antwerp in the hastily requisitioned Montrose .
Sorley was deeply divided in his loyalties, but, believing the war to be an evil necessity, he immediately enlisted and received a commission in the 7th battalion of the Suffolk Regiment.
He was promoted first lieutenant in November 1914 and captain nine months later.
He arrived in France with his battalion on 30 May 1915, having told his mother, ‘I do wish people would not deceive themselves by talk of a just war.
There is no such thing as a just war.
What we are doing is casting out Satan by Satan.’
He served for several months in the trenches around Ploegsteert, and displayed considerable courage in saving the lives of two men.
When his battalion moved south to take part in the battle of Loos, Sorley commanded an attack on two trenches known as the Hairpin, south of the Hohenzollern redoubt, and was killed by a sniper 13 October 1915.
He was buried near the spot where he fell.
He was twenty.
A posthumous collection,Marlborough and Other Poems , was published in 1916 and went into six editions in the first year.
Robert Graves [q.v.]pronounced Charles Sorley ‘one of the three poets of importance killed during the war’, rating him alongside Wilfred Owen [q.v.].
Sorley is certainly remarkable for rejecting the prevailing enthusiasm for war so early on, and for forecasting, through a mixture of irony and pity, the horrors of Flanders before ever he reached the front.
Typical of his best work, much of which he had no opportunity to revise, are ‘Barbury Camp’, written at Marlborough, ‘The Song of the Ungirt Runners’, and his last poem, ‘When you see Millions of the Mouthless Dead’, scribbled in pencil and discovered in his kitbag after he had been killed.
His parents published a collection of his letters in 1919,The Letters of Charles Sorley , which the Manchester Guardian thought ‘contained the first mature impressions of a nature which was all vigour and radiance, a boy who may be said to have had a genius for truth’.
His collected poems appeared in 1985.
[Times Literary Supplement , 28 October 1915;Friends' Quarterly Examiner , 1937; T. B. Swann,The Ungirt Runner , 1965; Jean Moorcroft Wilson,Charles Hamilton Sorley: a Biography , 1985.]
Michael E Moody
or ,Stephen (1564– c. 1635), Nonconformist author, editor, translator, and publisher, was baptized 29 October 1564 in Thornham Magna, Suffolk, the elder son and second of three surviving children of Thomas Offwood the younger, yeoman farmer, and his wife Anne.
By 1586 Offwood had become active in Suffolk Puritan circles, attending fortnightly conventicles held by Simon Harleston, a former Marian exile, and, after Harleston's death in 1591, moving towards more radical Separatist positions.
In 1602 legal troubles stemming from his separation and the illness of one of his children caused him to seek refuge in Amsterdam, where he became a successful merchant and innkeeper.
There he joined the ‘Ancient’ Separatist congregation of Francis Johnson [q.v.], and he remained a member until 1610, when it split into two parts — one led by Johnson and the other by Henry Ainsworth [q.v.].
Offwood sided with the Ainsworthians until 1617, when he was excommunicated for quarrelling with Thomas Stafford, another church member who was seeking to marry Offwood's daughter, Susanna.
Although his family remained Ainsworthians, Offwood subsequently joined the Dutch Reformed Church, and there he stayed until 18 April 1629, when he moved to the English Reformed Church of Amsterdam — a congregation affiliated with the Dutch Reformed Church, pastored by John Paget [q.v.]and composed of a combination of ex-Separatists and Puritans.
Offwood quickly became a leader of the ex-Separatist faction.
This group's views increasingly tended towards the emerging Congregationalist conception of church polity, whereas Paget and the rest remained strongly attached to the Reformed position.
In the conflicts that followed, Offwood and his party tried and failed to get Thomas Hooker and later John Davenport [qq.v.]named co-pastor of the church.
By 1635 these failures, together with his acquaintance with Congregationalist thinkers and his own Bible study, apparently led Offwood to reject the Reformed Church and embrace Congregationalism.
Offwood's publishing projects reflected his political and religious interests.
He translated, reprinted, or edited works, adding prefaces and postscripts of his own, which he signed simply ‘S.O.’.
In conjunction with English printers in Amsterdam, he mostly reprinted anti-Catholic and anti-Spanish books during the 1620s.
These included An Oration or Speech…unto the…
Princes of Christendom , to which he attached a partially translated work of his own entitled An Adioynder (1624),A Relation of Sundry Particular Wicked Plots…of the Spaniards (1624), and A Second Part of Spanish Practises (1624).
In the 1630s his attention shifted to religious topics.
He published The Originall of Popish Idolatrie in 1630, and he brought out another work of his own,An Advertisement to Ihon Delecluse, and Henry May the Elder in 1632.
This latter work denounced the Amsterdam Separatists for their exclusiveness and intolerance.
In 1633 he acted as publisher for A Fresh Suit against Human Ceremonies in Gods Worship by William Ames [q.v.], and another work entitled The Opinion…concerning Bowing at the Name , or Naming, of Jesus .
His final effort was the publishing in 1635 of Four Sermons by John Forbes [q.v.].
Offwood's religious activism gave him a widespread reputation as a leading layman in Amsterdam's English religious community, and he was widely suspected of playing a key role in the production of many other Nonconformist religious tracts.
He may have done so, but conclusive evidence for this wider publishing role is lacking.
He married Francis (sic ) Coleman on 11 January 1590.
They had at least three children — two sons, who died in infancy, and one daughter, Susanna, who married Thomas Stafford in 1627.
[Parish records of Thornham Magna, East Suffolk Record Office, Ipswich; Norwich consistory court wills, 101 Bunne, Norfolk County Record Office, Norwich; Stephen Offwood,Advertisement , 1632; Consistory register of the English Reformed Church of Amsterdam, Gemeente Archief, Amsterdam; Michael E. Moody, ‘Trials and Travels of a Nonconformist Layman: the Spiritual Odyssey of Stephen Offwood (1564– ca .1635)’,Church History , June 1982.]
H F Oxbury
,William Tufnell (1864–1927), novelist, was born 2 July 1864 in Châteauroux, Indre, France, the eldest son of William Le Queux, a Frenchman, and his English wife.
He was educated privately in London, and as a young man studied art in Paris.
He soon decided that he would never be a successful artist and set out on foot to tour France and Germany and contribute articles to newspapers and magazines, including The Times .
Having settled in London in his early twenties he edited Gossip and Piccadilly , and in 1891–3 was foreign editor of the Globe .
While he was in Paris he had been encouraged by Émile Zola to write novels, and in 1891 he published Guilty Bonds , a melodramatic story of conspiracy in Russia; this was banned in that country, but it was the first of over 130 novels and biographies concerned with murder, espionage, and the occult.
During 1907 Le Queux travelled throughout West Africa, the Balkans, and Turkey, and acquired an intimate knowledge of the activities of the secret services in the countries through which he passed in Europe.
In 1908 he visited the Arctic, and in 1909 Sudan.
In the course of his travels he became convinced that Germany was a dangerous threat to the British Empire.
As early as 1899 he wrote on this theme in England's Peril , and in 1906 in The Invasio n of 1910 he forecast World War I with the approbation and collaboration of the first Earl Roberts [q.v.].
In the following year he published An Observer in the Near East , and in 1911–12 returned to journalism as correspondent for the Daily Mirror covering the Balkan war.
He continued to take a keen interest in anything connected with espionage, and in 1915 published German Spies in England .
Le Queux reached the height of his popularity in the 1920s, during which he wrote on Landru, the multiple murderer in France, Rasputin, the sinister influence at the court of the tsar of Russia, and a number of other books including Things I Know about Kings, Celebrities and Crooks (1923),Hidden Hands (1925),Blackmailed (1927), and The Chameleon (1927).
His novels were praised by the first Earl of Balfour, and were said to have been the favourite reading of Queen Alexandra.
His characters were of the Mata Hari type, and he was expert at revealing secrets of which nobody else was aware.
Throughout the years when he was living in London, Le Queux, together with his friend George R. Sims [q.v.], attended every murder trial of note, but crime was not the only interest that attracted his attention.
Since his youth he had studied all forms of low life in both Paris and London.
As early as 1897 he had written A Madonna of the Music Halls .
In his later years he became a student of Egyptology, and was also a connoisseur who amassed a fine collection of medieval manuscripts and monastic seals.
He claimed to have been consulted by more than one European government about his knowledge of espionage and he certainly made the most of his sense of melodrama, during his later years always carrying a revolver.
Le Queux was also one of the earliest amateur radio broadcasters; he was a member of the Institute of Radio Engineers and president of the Wireless Experimental Association.
During his last years he lived in Switzerland, and his novel Hidden Hands was set in that country.
He received honours from Italy, Serbia, Montenegro, and the republic of San Marino, of which for a time he was consul in London.
He died, unmarried, in Knocke, Belgium, 13 October 1927.
[The Times , 14 October 1927; G. Donald K. McCormick,Who's Who in Spy Fiction , 1977; Norman St Barbe Sladen,The Real Le Queux , 1938; Chris Steinbrunner and Otto Penzler (eds.),
Encyclopaedia of Mystery and Detection , 1976.]
Ronald M Birse
,Peter (1850–1918), locomotive engineer, was born 13 August 1850 in Polmont, Stirlingshire, the son of George Drummond, who was at the time a permanent-way inspector on that section of the North British Railway, and his wife Christina Thomson.
In the earlier stages of his career he followed his brother Dugald [q.v.], ten years his senior and a much more forceful character, to Brighton and then back to Cowlairs and St Rollox in Glasgow.
Even much later when he was a locomotive superintendent in his own right, he was clearly influenced by his brother's designs.
When Peter was still quite young the family moved to Maryhill in the north of Glasgow, where he served an apprenticeship with Forrest & Barr, general engineers and millwrights.
He then joined his brother at the Brighton works of the London, Brighton and South Coast Railway from 1871 to 1875, working under the direction of William Stroudley [q.v.], after which the two brothers moved to the North British Railway works at Cowlairs and in 1882 to the neighbouring works at St Rollox of the Caledonian Railway, where Peter was appointed assistant locomotive engineer and works manager.
In 1896 he became locomotive superintendent of the Highland Railway in Inverness in succession to David Jones, whose engines were generally reliable and well liked.
Tactfully, he designed a 4–6–0 express passenger locomotive that owed more than a little to Jones's influence, and it was very successful on the demanding gradients of the Perth–Inverness line.
Fifty similar engines were subsequently delivered to the French railways.
He accepted an offer in 1912 from the Glasgow and South Western Railway to become their locomotive superintendent in Kilmarnock, where he immediately made sweeping changes to their previous design practices which were neither popular nor generally successful.
In time, however, he introduced modifications which overcame most of the problems, and his engines became quite well liked by their drivers and firemen.
He was elected a member of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers in 1898.
He married Mary Philipps, but details of his family are not known.
He took a keen interest in the education of his men and in their improvement societies.
He died in Kilmarnock 30 June 1918.
[Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers , vol. x, 1918, pp. 449–50; C. Highet,Scottish Locomotive History, 1831–1923 , 1970.]
D A Simmons
,(Jean) Jacob (1740–1821), inventor of the first means of manufacturing artificial mineral waters on a commercial scale, was born in Witzenhausen, Germany, and baptized in the Liebfrauen church 16 March 1740, the son of Conrad Schweppe, a peasant.
His parents thought him too delicate for a life in agriculture and allowed a travelling tinker to take charge of him when he was eleven or twelve years old.
Revealing exceptional dexterity, he progressed rapidly to employment with a silversmith and then a bijoutier .
As a young man he moved to Geneva, where he was first an apprentice and then ‘maître’ bijoutier .
Schweppe was an enthusiastic amateur scientist, studying the published works of chemists of different nations, including Joseph Priestley [q.v.].
Around 1780 he began developing an apparatus for making artificial mineral waters equalling or exceeding the quality of natural spa waters, and was the first person to use a force pump to carbonate under pressure.
When satisfied with his progress he gave the products away to any whom the doctors thought would benefit from them.
Demand grew and eventually, with reluctance, he was persuaded to accept payment, thus, by 1783, establishing a commercial enterprise.
His method of production passed into history as the ‘Geneva system’, and its principles were still in use in Europe a century later.
Schweppe went to London in January 1792 with an introduction from Professor M. A. Pictet of Geneva.
He established his first factory in Drury Lane.
His waters were drunk for their health-giving properties and as refreshing beverages, sometimes mixed with syrup or wine.
Their high carbonation attracted the interest of medical doctors and Erasmus Darwin [q.v.]specifically recommended Schweppe's waters in his treatise Zoonomia (1794–6).
The business grew and prospered to make Schweppe's name celebrated for mineral waters throughout the world.
About 1802 Schweppe retired to his country house in Bouchet, a hamlet close to Geneva.
There he occupied himself in agriculture, gardening, and mechanics.
Skilled in the art of clock-making, he constructed, in his eightieth year, a detailed and intricate orrery to replace one which displeased him by the ticking of its wheels.
Two contemporary diarists recorded their impressions of Schweppe.
Charles de Constant, cousin of the more famous Benjamin, French writer and politician, said of him in 1816, ‘his great age, his white hair, contrast strongly with his vivacity and his energy; he has an originality of expression and a fire which belong only to genius.’
Gilbert Elliot, second Earl of Minto [q.v.], while staying in Geneva in 1821, recorded an account of Schweppe given him by François Hubert, the blind Swiss naturalist, an old friend of Schweppe in Bouchet.
Hubert described him as a man of very great genius and originality; a man of learning but also of much modesty and simplicity of character.
Schweppe had at that time suffered an apoplectic attack from which he died 18 November 1821, at his home (Les Petits Crêts) in Bouchet, Petit Saconnex, Geneva.
In 1767 he had married Eléonore Roget.
They had nine children but only one, a daughter Nicolarde, called Colette, survived beyond infancy.
[State archives, Geneva; National Library of Scotland, Edinburgh.]
George W Carpenter
,William Robert (1840–1917), railway signalling engineer, was born 15 June 1840 at 11 Grosvenor Street, Westminster, London, the eldest in the family of two sons and one daughter of George Sykes, builder, and his wife Mary Burden.
His father died when he was thirteen.
He was educated at Bluecoat School, London.
In 1854 he began training in the workshops of the Electric Telegraph Co. and four years later transferred to their central London headquarters.
In 1860 he left this company and joined Charles Shepherd of Leadenhall Street, the chronometer and horological instrument-maker and inventor of the electrical clocks used by the Royal Observatory.
In 1863 he joined the London, Chatham and Dover Railway, taking charge of maintenance of their telegraph instruments, clocks, and watches under the chief engineer for telegraphs and electric lighting.
Within two years he had designed and installed electrical repeater devices, indicating to signalmen the position of semaphore signal arms which were outside their range of vision; an automatic device recording on tape the bell-code communications between signal-boxes; and the first track circuiting in which the presence of a train on a section of track was indicated electrically in the signal cabin.
In 1872 he introduced at Victoria on the Metropolitan District Railway an automatic train-protection system whereby a red lens positioned in front of a white signal light was raised above it on actuation from an electrical contact only when the section ahead was clear.
This system was also used later by the Metropolitaine in Paris.
In 1875 Sykes achieved one of the greatest advances in railway safety in operation with his ‘lock and block’ system.
In this the mechanical signals were interlocked with electrical block instruments in the signal cabins.
A train was authorized to enter the succeeding section only when this was not occupied by another train.
Thus the signalman was prevented from inadvertently releasing signals for a second train to enter before the first was clear.
This system overcame the risks of human error which had been the cause of serious accidents.
The Board of Trade repeatedly advocated the use of ‘lock and block’ in its accident reports.
Sykes's system, which was also used for interlocking railway swing bridges across rivers, was applied widely in Britain and in the USA, Russia, and Japan.
A later development was the combination of track circuiting, in which an electrical circuit is completed by the wheels of a train passing over a section of track, with ‘lock and block’ so that the electric-block instruments were controlled by the trains themselves and thus safety was doubly assured.
Electrically activated signals worked by small switches and interlocked with the points they controlled were first introduced by Sykes at Penge in 1875 and were the forerunner of large electro-mechanical signalling systems in which electrically actuated signals controlled by small slides were introduced, with lever-controlled points actuated by rodding.
Sykes was also responsible for many other signalling and safety devices, including depression or fouling bars interlocked with signals, thus providing valuable protection against these inadvertently being set to allow the passage of a train if other trains were obstructing its path.
In 1899 the London, Chatham and Dover and the South Eastern Railways were brought under the operational control of a joint managing committee and Sykes was appointed consulting electrical engineer to the new organization, in which capacity he continued until his death, having served the same railway for fifty-four years.
Sykes obtained awards for his signalling and railway safety inventions at many international exhibitions, notably at Paris in 1881; Crystal Palace in 1882, 1892, and 1893; Antwerp in 1894, and Brussels in 1897.
Sykes married Eliza Church, from county Cork.
They had two daughters and four sons, one of whom (also an inventor) died relatively young and three of whom became engineers.
Sykes died 2 October 1917 in Whitstable, Kent.
[Engineer , vol. cxxiv, 12 October 1917;Railway Magazine , vol. xli, November 1917;The Electrical Trades Directory , 1898; private information.]
David G Chandler
,Henry (1773–1812), major-general, was born 15 July 1773 at Longwood near Winchester, the youngest of the four sons (there were also four daughters) of William Mackinnon, scion of an ancient Scottish family, and his wife Louisa, daughter of James Vernon.
He was educated at the military college of Tournay in Languedoc.
In his youth, while his family was living in the Dauphiné, he reputedly knew Napoleon Bonaparte, who courted his sister.
On 31 May 1790 he was commissioned into the 43rd Foot, but transferred into the Coldstream Guards three years later.
He first saw active service under Frederick Augustus, Duke of York [q.v.], in Flanders in 1794, and in 1798 was brigade major to Major-General (Sir) George Nugent [q.v.]during the 1798 Irish rebellion.
In 1801 he participated in the expedition to Egypt, and served in Hanover in 1805 and at the taking of Copenhagen two years later.
Thereafter he saw distinguished service in the Peninsular war in Portugal from 1809 under Sir Arthur Wellesley (later first Duke of Wellington, q.v.).
After participating in the Talavera campaign, he was put in command of the 2nd brigade of the 3rd division from October 1809, and on 25 October he was gazetted a colonel.
More distinguished service in Portugal ensued, including some at Bussaco (1810), but he became sick in late June 1811 and was absent from his unit until 31 October.
On New Year's day 1812 he was promoted major-general, and led his brigade with great courage during the bitter winter siege of Ciudad Rodrigo.
At the storming of this fortress on 19 January he was blown up at the head of his brigade when a French magazine exploded, killing 108 men.
His blackened body was recovered and buried by his nephew, Daniel MacKinnon [q.v.], who was serving in the Coldstream Guards.
Wellington wrote in his dispatch: ‘Major-General Mackinnon was unfortunately blown up by the accidental explosion of one of the enemy's expense magazines, close to the breach.’
Major-General (Sir) Thomas Picton [q.v.]wrote on 25 January that he was ‘a most gallant, intelligent officer and estimable man.’
A monument to him was erected in St Paul's Cathedral.
He married Catherine, daughter of Sir John Call, first baronet [q.v.], military engineer.
They had two sons, George and Donald, who both joined the army.
[R. Southey,History of the Peninsular War , 1827;Gentleman's Magazine , part i, 1812, p. 267; H. J. Rose,A New General Biographical Dictionary , vol. ix, 1857; papers of Brigadier Peter Young.]
Elizabeth Malcolm
, Sir Andrew (1837–1914), inspector-general of the Royal Irish Constabulary, was born in Galway town, Ireland, 26 September 1837, the only son and third of the four children (the others of whom died in childhood or adolescence) of John Reed, land agent, and his wife Mary, daughter of John Adamson of Moate, county Westmeath.
His mother died when he was three and his father remarried.
He attended dame school and Erasmus Smith's School in Galway and at sixteen he was earning his living as a tutor.
In 1856 he won a science scholarship, which enabled him to enter Queen's College, Galway, from which he obtained an LLB.
In 1859 he passed the examination for entry into the Irish constabulary as an officer cadet and went to Dublin to train at the force's depot in Phoenix Park.
Having completed all his examinations in four months, instead of the usual six, he was appointed to the rank of sub-inspector and, in that capacity, between 1860 and 1868 he served in counties Tipperary, Donegal, and Kilkenny, and in Belfast.
Late in 1868 he was invited by Colonel John Stewart Wood, the inspector-general of the RIC, to become his private secretary.
He filled this position for eleven years, first under Wood, and then from 1876 under his successor, Lieutenant-Colonel George Hillier.
During these years he found time to study law and in 1873 was called to the Irish bar.
At Wood's request, he also substantially revised the RIC manual, first issued in 1866, and produced his own The Irish Constable's Guide , which was to become the Irish policeman's Bible.
In 1879 he passed the examination for county inspector and was appointed to Donegal.
With the spread of the land war to that county in 1880, he found his duties increasingly onerous and dangerous.
In June 1881 he was recalled to Dublin and put in charge of the RIC's crime division, with the task of both preventing and solving politically inspired crime.
He was thus closely involved in investigating many of the spectacular crimes of the period, notably the Fenian bombing campaign of the early 1880s, the Phoenix Park murders of May 1882, and the Maamtrasna massacre of August 1882.
In the wake of Hillier's retirement in 1882, he was appointed assistant inspector-general and in 1884 he became one of the country's four new divisional magistrates, with his headquarters in Athlone.
In August 1885 he was selected, over the heads of two more senior officers, to be the RIC's new inspector-general.
He served in the position till his retirement in August 1900, the year he was appointed CVO.
He was knighted in 1889 and appointed KCB in 1897.
He was the only inspector-general without a military background; the only one to rise through the ranks from a cadetship; and the only one with academic and legal training.
He thus put less emphasis on military drill and weapons training and more on the mastering of the legal and technical aspects of police duties.
He encouraged promotion through examination rather than seniority.
His attempts to turn RIC men from soldiers into policemen may have been appropriate in the largely peaceful Ireland of the 1890s, but when the RIC was called upon in 1919 to resume its military character in order to defeat the IRA it was to prove unequal to the task.
In 1867 he married Elizabeth Mary (died 1913), only daughter of Hamilton Lyster of Croghan House, Birr, King's county (Offaly).
They had one son and three daughters.
Their son, Captain Hamilton Lyster Reed of the Royal Artillery, won the VC at the battle of Colenso in 1899.
Reed died at his home in Ailesbury Road, Donnybrook, Dublin, 7 November 1914, having spent much of his retirement travelling in Europe and America.
[Sir Andrew Reed, ‘Recollections of my Life’, unpublished memoir, 1911, in the possession of Reed's grandson; information from relatives.]
Richard J Grace
,William (1784–1843), physician and merchant, was born 24 February 1784 at Broadholm, a farm near Lochmaben, Dumfriesshire, the younger son and fourth of five children of Andrew Jardine, farmer.
Educated in medicine at the University of Edinburgh, he obtained a diploma from the Royal College of Surgeons, Edinburgh, in March 1802.
In that same month Jardine secured a position with the East India Company as ship's surgeon's mate aboard HCS Brunswick , bound for India.
Captured by the French and shipwrecked in 1805, Jardine was repatriated that autumn and returned to EIC service as ship's surgeon.
‘Privilege tonnage’, a benefit accorded ships' officers, allowed him a measure of cargo space for private trade.
When profits from such trade far surpassed his wages as ship's surgeon, his career interests shifted.
Returning from Canton in May 1817, Jardine gave up medicine for commerce, which he learned from Thomas Weeding, a London merchant and EIC agent.
He sailed for Bombay in 1818 and in succeeding years travelled between Bombay and Canton, as supercargo on the Sarah , of which he was co-owner.
At Bombay in 1820, he met a fellow Scot,(Sir) James Matheson [q.v.], who was speculating in the opium trade.
In time their names would identify the biggest British trading concern in the Far East.
From 1822 until 1839 Jardine was resident in China.
At Canton his early success, as commercial agent for opium merchants in India, led to his association with Magniac & Company, and by 1826 he was controlling that firm's Canton operations.
Shortly thereafter Matheson joined him, and in 1832 the firm was reconstituted as Jardine Matheson & Company.
By 1834 Jardine Matheson was regularly operating beyond the traditional British trade with the Hong merchants of Canton, speculating in smuggled opium and piece-goods along the coast.
Peking ordered the opium importers to be expelled in 1836, but Jardine, the most influential British figure at Canton, refused to leave.
The pressure intensified and opium sales were at a standstill by 1838 when Lin Tse-hsu was appointed imperial commissioner in Canton.
Shortly before Lin's arrival, Jardine retired from Canton, in January 1839, intending a leisurely trip home via Bombay and Suez.
But startling news awaited him at Naples.
Lin had confiscated 20,000 cases of British-owned opium, worth $9 million (Chinese).
Jardine hastened to London, arriving early in September, and immediately prepared to press the foreign secretary, H. J. Temple, third Viscount Palmerston [q.v.], for a forceful response to Lin's actions.
His consultations with Palmerston began late that month and extended into 1840.
He advised a military and naval action involving seizure of one or more Chinese islands for British commerce.
Then a negotiation could be conducted along the lines ‘You take my opium — I take your Islands in return — we are therefore Quits,— & thenceforth if you please let us live in friendly Communion and good fellowship’(Jardine to Palmerston, 5 December 1839).
During the period of the first Opium war (1840–2) Jardine pursued banking and insurance in London, and successfully stood for election in 1841 as the Whig candidate for Ashburton (Devon).
In the Commons he seldom spoke, but in 1842, after the Treaty of Nanking had secured Hong Kong and opened five new ‘treaty ports’, Palmerston, who had relied heavily on his advice, credited him with a major role in the success of British policy toward China.
He embodied a complex amalgam of shrewd political judgement, raw business ‘savvy’, and philanthropic inclinations (he contributed to the Morrison Education Society for free education in Chinese and English for Chinese youths and he provided money for medical treatment for poor Chinese).
Among the Chinese he was known as the ‘iron-headed rat’, referring to an incident at Canton when he was struck on the head by a club and shrugged off the attack.
His stern personality and disdain for idleness were reflected in his practice of keeping only one chair in his office, on which he sat while visitors stood.
Jardine saw opium as the only source of ready Chinese currency, with which to trade in silk, tea, and other items.
In 1830 he described the opium trade as ‘the safest and most gentlemanlike speculation I am aware of’, and later argued that it was Chinese buyers, rather than British merchants, who were doing the smuggling.
He told a parliamentary committee in 1840 that once the money was received and the Chinese buyer got his opium from the ships offshore, then it was the buyer's business what became of the opium.
He never married.
Upon returning to London he joined the Oriental Club and resided at Upper Belgrave Street, where he died 27 February 1843.
[Parliamentary Papers , 1840; A. R. Williamson,Eastern Traders (privately published, no date); Maggie Keswick (ed.),
The Thistle and the Jade , 1982; John K. Fairbank,Trade and Diplomacy on the China Coast, 1842–1854 , 1964; Jardine letters in Cambridge University Library.]
Aaron Klug
,Rosalind Elsie (1920–1958), crystallographer, was born 25 July 1920 in London, the elder daughter and second of the family of five children of Ellis Franklin, merchant banker, and his wife Muriel Waley.
Both parents came from long-established Anglo-Jewish families.
Rosalind was educated at St Paul's Girls' School and at Newnham College, Cambridge, where she received a first class in part i (1940) of the natural sciences tripos and a second in part ii (division I) in 1941.
Wartime constraints directed Franklin's Ph.D.
to an industrial problem with the Coal Utilization Research Association.
In 1947 she moved to the Laboratoire Central des Services Chemiques de l'État in Paris, where, in a series of beautifully executed investigations using X-ray diffraction techniques, she discovered the fundamental distinction between carbons that turn into graphite on heating and those that do not, and related this difference to the chemical constituents of the material from which the chars were made.
These results later proved to be highly relevant for the development of the industrially important carbon fibres.
In 1950 she was invited by (Sir) John Randall [q.v.]to build up an X-ray diffraction laboratory at King's College, London, to study the structure of deoxyribonucleic acid.
Work on DNA at King's had been begun by M. H. F. Wilkins, with his research student R. G. Gosling.
Franklin was asked by Randall to undertake a systematic X-ray study of DNA fibres, and Gosling was placed under her supervision.
Unfortunately, Randall left ambiguous the respective roles of Wilkins and Franklin, and this later led to dissension about the demarcation of the DNA research at King's, but a letter of his to Franklin in 1950 makes it clear that on ‘the experimental X-ray effort there would be for the moment only yourself and Gosling’.
Within the first year Franklin transformed the state of the field.
She produced much better X-ray patterns, and, by introducing methods to control and vary the water content of the specimens, she was able to show that the DNA molecule could exist in two forms (A and B), and to define conditions for the transition between them.
In May 1952 she obtained the superb patterns of the B form which now grace the textbooks, and which J. D. Watson saw early in 1953.
Inspection of this helical pattern, together with the distribution in December 1953 of a report by Franklin of her work, gave crucial information to Watson and Francis Crick for the final building of their DNA model in February–March 1953.
Despite her discovery of the simpler B pattern, Franklin's attention was at first directed to the more crystalline A form; but by March 1953 she had carried the quantitive analysis of the B form patterns to the point where the paths of the backbone chains were determined, and she wrote up her work in a typescript dated 17 March — one day before news of the Watson and Crick structure reached King's.
The draft contains all the essentials of her later paper (with Gosling) in Nature in April, which, together with one by Wilkins and his colleagues, accompanied Crick and Watson's paper announcing their model for the structure of DNA.
In Franklin's draft, she had deduced that the phosphate groups of the backbone lay on the outside, and the bases on the inside, of the double helix; and her notebooks show that she had already formed the notion of base interchangeability.
The step from this to the specific base pairing postulated by Crick and Watson is a large one, but there is little doubt that she was poised to make it.
The notebooks also show that she had grasped that the A form contained two strands running in opposite directions, but she had not then understood the exact relation between the A and B forms.
Later, she and Gosling were able to demonstrate conclusively what this relation was, and to provide the first analytical demonstration of the correctness of the Watson–Crick model.
In mid-March 1953 Franklin moved to Birkbeck College, London, at the invitation of J. D. Bernal [q.v.], to work on virus structure.
She first confirmed Watson's hypothesis that in the tobacco mosaic virus small protein sub-units were arranged in a helical fashion.
Then, in the last four years of her life, working with a small devoted group of students and collaborators, she succeeded in obtaining spectacular X-ray patterns of the virus that allowed her to determine the precise helical geometry of the protein sub-units, and, above all, to show that the ribonucleic acid (RNA) of the virus — the carrier of the genetic information, and hence the infectivity — formed a long single chain embedded deeply within the protein framework.
The impression sometimes given in writing or film in which Franklin figures was of an absolutely dedicated woman.
This was only part of her character.
She was single-minded and uncompromising in her work, so that she sometimes provoked exasperation among her colleagues, a feeling immediately tempered by the admiration they felt.
But she was not austere: she had a sense of fun, and was a woman of wide culture, at home in several European countries and the USA.
She loved travel, took walking and cycling holidays abroad, and was a good mountain climber.
Franklin died of cancer 20 March 1958 in London, having been initially struck by the disease in 1956.
She was cut off tragically at the height of her powers, but she had already made her mark: a crucial contribution to one of the most important discoveries of the twentieth century, and work on two major biological problems and the techniques for solving them, that helped lay the foundations of structural molecular biology.
She was unmarried.
[J. D. Watson,The Double Helix , 1968; Aaron Klug in Nature , vol. ccix, 1968, pp. 808–10, 843–4, and vol. ccxlviii, 1974, pp. 787–8; A. Sayre,Rosalind Franklin and DNA , 1978; H. F. Judson,The Eighth Day of Creation: the Makers of the Revolution in Biology , 1979; working notebooks; private information; personal knowledge.]
J A Gere
,Paul Ayshford , fourth Baron Methuen (1886–1974), painter, landowner, and zoologist, was born 29 September 1886 at Corsham, near Bath, the eldest child in the family of three sons and two daughters of Colonel (later Field-Marshal) Paul (later third Baron) Methuen [q.v.], and his second wife Mary Ethel, CBE, daughter of William Ayshford Sanford of Nynehead Court.
From Eton he went to New College, Oxford, to read natural sciences (zoology) and engineering, receiving a second class in 1910.
His father had links with South Africa, and from 1910 to 1914 he worked as assistant at the Transvaal Museum in Pretoria.
His interest in zoology was lifelong: he later refused the chair of zoology in a South African university only because he felt committed to the preservation of Corsham.
In works of reference he described himself as ‘painter and zoologist’.
In World War I he served first with the Royal Wiltshire Yeomanry and then with his father's regiment, the Scots Guards.
From 1924 until 1932, when he succeeded to the peerage, he made use of his scientific training as livestock officer, and later marketing officer, in the Ministry of Agriculture.
The inspection of slaughterhouses which was one of his duties converted him permanently to vegetarianism.
He had been taught drawing at Eton by ‘Sammy’ and Sidney Evans, of the long-established dynasty of drawing masters, and in Oxford at the Ruskin School and by the Slade professor (Sir) Charles Holmes [q.v.], but he was over forty before his individual style was formed.
In 1927 he responded to an advertisement from Walter Sickert [q.v.]soliciting pupils.
The master's conduct of his small class was so casual that it soon drifted away, but his influence on this pupil was decisive.
The sombre, restrained tonality of Methuen's paintings, the rough, broken touch, and the emphasis on contour in the rendering of architecture obviously come from Sickert, but the artistic personality that he developed was quite distinctive.
He had a strong feeling for architecture, as for natural history, and his preferred subjects were urban views and outdoor scenes with buildings, animals, and plants, notably the magnolias and orchids which he cultivated at Corsham.
In these the sensitivity of the artist is combined with the exact observation of the scientist.
In 1939 he rejoined his regiment and served on the staff as a captain until 1944, when he was transferred to the procurement and fine arts branch formed to protect historic buildings and works of art at risk during the invasion of the Continent.
He was posted to northern France, and in 1952 published an account of his activities (which extended to French Flanders, Belgium, and Holland) in Normandy Diary , a book of permanent value to the antiquarian and architectural historian, and one that can be read with pleasure by the non-specialist as an engaging but unconscious self-portrait.
The chief preoccupation of Methuen's later years, apart from his painting, and one for which he denied himself many luxuries, was the restoration, maintenance, and improvement of Corsham Court, the family seat, and of the collection of pictures which hung in the magnificent gallery built and furnished for them in the 1760s.
He bought back as many as possible of those that his father had sold, and added a few more; in 1971 he published a useful short account of the history of the collection, together with a handlist based on the latest critical opinion; and he designed, and had woven in Spain, a carpet for the gallery, a room seventy-two feet long, with a pattern repeating the intricate stucco-work of the ceiling.
Methuen was a good-looking man, tall and fair, with a ruddy complexion.
His distinguished presence was enhanced by a certain absent-mindedness about the way he wore his clothes.
A peer who practises one of the arts inevitably risks being labelled a dilettante, but Methuen overcame the handicap of his rank and was accepted as a serious professional artist.
In 1951 he was elected ARA and in 1959 RA.
For more than thirty years he was president of the Royal West of England Academy in Bristol.
He was a trustee of the National Gallery (1938–45) and of the Tate Gallery (1940–5), and an FSA and an honorary FRIBA.
In 1915 he married Eleanor (‘Norah’)(died 1958), daughter of William James Hennessy, landscape painter, of Rudgwick, Sussex.
They had one son, who died at birth.
Methuen died in Bath 7 January 1974 and his brother Anthony Paul (born 1891) succeeded to the peerage.
[The Times , 8 January 1974; E. Croft-Murray, in catalogue of retrospective exhibition at the Fieldborne Gallery, London, May–June 1973; J. Pope-Hennessy and E. Croft-Murray in catalogue of memorial exhibition, ibid., May–June 1975; private information; personal knowledge.]
Helen Miller
,William (c. 1497–1552), clothier, of Malmesbury, was born c .1497, probably the son of a weaver of North Nibley, Gloucestershire.
From obscure origins he rose to be the best-known Wiltshire clothier of his day, famous in the 1540s for his use of the buildings of Malmesbury Abbey as industrial workshops.
Well before the dissolution of the monasteries Stumpe had settled in Malmesbury; by 1524 he was one of the town's richest inhabitants.
He was elected MP for Malmesbury in 1529, and again in 1547, and may well have served in intervening Parliaments for which the names of the members for Malmesbury are unknown.
In 1536, when the court of augmentations was established to deal with the lands acquired by the Crown through the dissolution of the smaller monasteries, Stumpe was appointed a receiver for north Wales, with a generous travelling allowance besides his salary of £20 p.a.
In 1538 he was named a justice of the peace for Wiltshire, an appointment he retained until his death, and in March 1539, during an invasion scare, he helped to muster able men in Malmesbury and elsewhere in the county.
On the surrender of the abbey to the king's commissioners in December 1539, the buildings assigned ‘to remain undefaced’ were given into the custody of its former steward, Sir Edward Baynton, but all those ‘deemed to be superfluous’were committed to Stumpe as Baynton's deputy: they included the church, cloister, chapter house, dormitory, frater, and infirmary.
Stumpe was instrumental in saving the nave of the church for use by the townspeople as their parish church.
In 1541 Thomas Cranmer [q.v.]issued a licence for the conversion, which ensured the survival of at least part of the great abbey.
Indirectly, the town probably also gained from Stumpe's decision to install broad looms in other parts of the buildings.
John Leland [q.v.], visiting Malmesbury in the early 1540s, reported that 3,000 cloths were being made there every year.
(The city of Oxford in 1546 negotiated with Stumpe for a similar use of Osney Abbey, hoping to provide work for 2,000 people, but nothing came of this project.)
Finally, in 1544 Stumpe consolidated his interest in the property by paying over £1,500 for a royal grant to himself and his heirs of the whole site of the abbey.
By the end of the decade he was living in a new house built within the precinct.
Stumpe was married three times.
His first wife was Joyce, daughter of James Berkeley of Bradley, Gloucestershire; there were two sons of the marriage, the elder born in 1519.
He married secondly, in or after 1533, Tibbilda, widow of William Billing, and thirdly, in 1551, Katherine, widow of Richard Mody, who survived him with the infant son of the marriage.
Stumpe was named sheriff of Wiltshire in November 1551, but died 22 July 1552, during his term of office.
His second son succeeded him as a clothier, his eldest son, Sir James, having already moved into the ranks of the landed gentry.
[S. T. Bindoff,The House of Commons 1509–1558 , 1982;Wiltshire Archaeological Magazine , vol. xxxviii, 1913–14;Wiltshire Notes and Queries , vol. viii, 1914–16.]
T C Graham
(fl. 1230–1260), manuscript artist, The artist's signature W. de Brail' appears in two illustrated manuscripts of the mid-thirteenth century.
W. de Brail' is almost certainly identifiable as the William de Brailes named in five Oxford property deeds of c .1230–60.
Although the documents do not specify William's trade, one deed names him as witness along with three illuminators, three bookbinders, and a parchment-maker.
He lived in Catte Street, approximately on the present site of All Souls College chapel, within the area around St Mary's church where the Oxford book trade was concentrated.
Differences of style within the manuscripts containing the signature show that W. de Brail' worked with several other artists.
Art historians conclude that William de Brailes headed a workshop of manuscript artists based at his tenement in Catte Street.
His name implies that he came originally from Upper or Lower Brailes (Warwickshire), near Shipston-on-Stour.
His signature in the manuscripts accompanies a depiction of a tonsured figure who does not wear the habit of any religious order.
William was probably a clerk in minor orders.
One of the Oxford documents mentions that he had a wife, Celena.
William and his assistants decorated about a dozen surviving manuscripts.
These include several Bibles; a psalter; sets of illustrated leaves which probably originally belonged to two psalters; and the earliest surviving fully illustrated English Book of Hours.
The decoration of this group of manuscripts comprises full-page pictures mostly of Old and New Testament scenes, historiated and ornamental initials, and colourful line-fillers which occasionally include representations of animals, birds, and fish.
Characteristic of the workshop are long ornamental extensions to the initials.
The extensions occupy the borders and frame the accompanying text.
The figure style of the workshop is vigorous if somewhat coarse.
Colours are subdued, with dark and light blue, brown, and pink predominating.
William also decorated one page of a psalter possibly made in London, and may therefore have spent part of his career away from Oxford.
Paintings of four apostles and an angel on the vault of the chapter house of Christ Church Cathedral, Oxford, are in his style.
These may show that he occasionally worked as a wall-painter, or at least supplied designs for wall-paintings.
William de Brailes and his workshop exemplify a significant development in later medieval book production.
In the thirteenth century the decoration of manuscripts was passing out of the hands of the religious houses to artists grouped together within the towns and working for patrons both lay and ecclesiastical.
The William de Brailes workshop in Oxford is the first workshop to which a name and a definite location can be assigned, and whose products can be identified.
[Sydney C. Cockerell,The Work of W. de Brailes , 1930; G. Pollard, ‘William de Brailles’,Bodleian Library Record , vol. v, 1954–6, pp. 202–9; M. Rickert,Painting in Britain: the Middle Ages , 2nd edn., 1965; N. Morgan,Early Gothic Manuscripts , vol. i, 1982.]
Willem D Hackmann
,John (c. 1659–1723), optical instrument-maker to George I and the Royal Society, was born c .1659, the son of Thomas Marshall, a cordwainer (shoemaker) in Covent Garden.
He was apprenticed on 13 November 1673 to John Dunnell (or Dunning), a freeman of the Turners' Company.
Dunnell made the wooden and pasteboard parts of scientific instruments, especially of telescope tubes, at his establishment in Charing Cross; he was employed by Robert Hooke and John Flamsteed [qq.v.].
John Aubrey [q.v.]may have lodged with him for a time.
Dunnell was probably associated in business with Smethwick, a glass-grinder (not to be confused, according to Hooke, with Francis Smethwick, FRS), who made the lenses for Dunnell's instruments.
Marshall may well have learned his speciality of lens-making from Smethwick.
Marshall became a freeman of the Turners' Company on 2 December 1685.
He may also have been a member of the Spectaclemakers' Company.
In 1688 his address was the ‘Three Keys’ in Ivy Street, and from 1693 until his death, the ‘Sign of the Archimedes and Spectacles’in Ludgate Street, London, opposite the west end of St Paul's Cathedral.
His rival, the highly skilled lens-maker John Yarwell, lived next door.
By the end of the century Marshall had an outstanding reputation as a telescope- and microscope-maker.
The typical Marshall microscope had gold stamps to decorate the tube and a fine focus, but did not have a substage mirror, which was introduced by Edmund Culpeper [q.v.]at about the time of Marshall's death.
Marshall boasted on his trade card that he was ‘the inventor of true Spectacle Grinding & the only person that has, or ever has had, the Approbation of the Royal Society’.
This testimonial was given by Edmund Halley [q.v.]in a letter written ‘By the command of the Royal Society’ in 1693: ‘I have, by Order of the Royal Society seen and examined the method used by Mr John Marshall, for grinding glasses, and find that he performs the said work with greater ease and certainty, than hitherto has been practised, by means of an invention, which I take to be his own, and new, and whereby he is enabled to make a great number of Optick-Glasses, at one time, and all exactly alike, which having been reported to the Royal Society, they were pleased to approve thereof, as an Invention of Great Use, and Highly to deserve Incouragement.’
To Marshall's great chagrin his competitors quickly adopted his method of lens-grinding, as he had no patent for his invention.
This prompted Marshall to add a note to his trade card: ‘There are several Persons who pretend to have the Approbation of the ROYAL SOCIETY; but none has, or ever had it, but myself; as my letter can testifie.’
Among his apprentices was Francis Hauksbee the elder [q.v.], the maker of air pumps and pioneer of electrical experiments.
Marshall died 20 January 1723.
According to the Weekly Journal he was succeeded by his son-in-law, John Smith.
[E. G. R. Taylor,The Mathematical Practitioners of Tudor & Stuart England , 1954, p. 280; M. A. Crawforth, ‘Evidence from Trade Cards for the Scientific Instrument Industry’,Annals of Science , vol. xlii, 1985; information from Dr Gloria Clifton of Project Simon (national archive of data about instrument-makers).]
Ronald M Birse
,Herbert Akroyd (1864–1927), mechanical engineer and inventor of the hot-bulb oil engine, was born in Halifax, Yorkshire, 28 January 1864.
His father, Charles Stuart, was born in Paisley, near Glasgow, and by 1858 was working as a pattern-maker in Halifax; his mother, Ann Ackroyd (the given spelling of his middle name), was the daughter of Jonathan Ackroyd, a worsted cloth weaver of Luddenden near Halifax.
Herbert was the second of their six children, and at the age of twelve was sent to St Bartholomew's Grammar School in Newbury, Berkshire.
Shortly afterwards the family moved to Fenny Stratford, where his father had acquired the Bletchley ironworks, manufacturing steam engines and boilers.
On leaving school Herbert joined his father as an engineering apprentice, and also worked for a time in the mechanical engineering laboratories of the City and Guilds Technical College in Finchley, London.
His father had installed a Spiel petroleum engine to drive some of the machinery in his workshops, and Herbert was inspired to work on the problem of developing an internal-combustion engine that would run on heavier (and safer) grades of fuel oil.
He took out his first two engine patents in 1886, and having progressively improved the design to give more complete combustion and avoid pre-ignition, in 1890 he was granted two patents for a hot-bulb oil engine, two years before Rudolf Diesel's first English patent for his compression-ignition oil engine.
A small number of Stuart's engines had already been built and tested in Bletchley by 1890, on one occasion by the chief engineer of Richard Hornsby & Sons of Grantham, who soon afterwards became the sole licensees, manufacturers, and developers of the Hornsby–Akroyd oil engine.
It was very simple, efficient, and reliable in operation, with the minor disadvantage that the vaporizer required preheating for a few minutes before the engine could be started; when running, it retained sufficient heat to ignite the injected fuel.
Essentially slow-running and of limited horsepower, the majority of the many thousands of engines made by Hornsby between 1892 and 1922 were used as stationary engines for agricultural and general workshop purposes.
They were also used to power the first oil-engined tractor and the first practical oil-engined locomotive, both in 1896.
A 20-hp Hornsby–Akroyd engine powered the world's first caterpillar tractor in 1905, but later attempts to match the development of the high-speed diesel engine were unsuccessful.
Akroyd Stuart was elected a member of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers in 1901, but a few years previously he had emigrated to Australia, where he involved himself in the design and manufacture of the Akroyd patent down-draught gas producer.
He evidently resented the fact that the name ‘diesel’ had come to be applied to virtually every type of oil engine, hot-bulb (ignition) as well as compression-ignition, and in 1923 he asked the Institution to declare that henceforth the word ‘diesel’should only be used to describe oil engines operating on the compression-ignition principle, hot-bulb engines to be known as ‘akroyds’.
The Institution, however, did not feel able to recommend such a change after the word ‘diesel’ had been in universal use for so long.
Akroyd Stuart died in Claremont, Western Australia, 19 February 1927, a disappointed if not embittered man, and in his will directed that all his papers should be burned.
His body was brought home and buried in the Akroyd cemetery, Halifax.
[Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers , May 1927, p. 577;Transactions of the Newcomen Society , vol. xlviii, 1976–7, pp. 103–10; personal communication from R. S. Fitzgerald.]
John S Creasey
,John (1778–1868), of Denwick, agricultural engineer and a pioneer of the reaping machine, was born in High Buston, Warkworth, Northumberland, 25 January 1778, the second child in the family of five sons (one died in infancy) and four daughters of Robert Common of High Buston, a millwright and cartwright from a family of skilled mechanics and his wife (probably Jane Wilson of Alnwick).
Common followed his father's profession and assisted Henry Ogle, a schoolteacher of Newham, in improving a reaping-machine design about 1803.
His plans, from which two models were made, substituted a clipping or shearing action for Ogle's rotary one.
In 1811 a full-size version was demonstrated secretly at night and appeared to ‘answer well’.
In 1812 a model of this was sent to the Society of Arts by Hugh, Earl Percy (later third Duke of Northumberland, q.v.), but it made no award of its reaping-machine premium as the invention was ‘incomplete’ without proper trials.
A second full-size machine, with a reel to bring the standing corn to the knives, and rollers to deliver the cut corn to the ground, was demonstrated in 1812 before witnesses.
Common decided to discontinue further experiments because of the trouble and cost and passed the patterns to Thomas Brown and his son, iron-founders of Alnwick, who emigrated to New York State with them in 1824.
In 1851 Common claimed that imported McCormick machines he saw were ‘exactly like the one I had made 40 years before’.
His supporters subsequently asserted that the Browns had passed Common's patterns to McCormick, but there is no evidence that the American, working in an isolated part of Virginia from 1831, ever encountered them before his reaper improvements of ten years later.
Common's achievement was to demonstrate a reaping machine that foreshadowed McCormick's, employing a reciprocating action of the knives.
But he failed to persevere with his invention; nor was the era of relatively abundant labour supply and of machine-breaking propitious for its development, whereas McCormick perfected his reaper at a time favourable to its adoption by farmers in North America and Europe.
Common gained recognition for later inventions, including a Society of Arts silver medal for a double-drill turnip-sower of 1818.
He married Mary, daughter of John Leithead of Widdrington, in 1804.
Two of their five sons and one of their four daughters died in infancy.
He continued as an agricultural machine maker and a cartwright for the Northumberland estate until an advanced age and died at his home in Denwick, near Alnwick, 28 June 1868.
[Alnwick Journal , 15 August 1859, 15 August 1860, and July 1868; R. F. J. Common,The History of the Invention of the Reaping Machine , 1907; W. T. Hutchinson,Cyrus Hall McCormick: Seed-Time, 1809–1856 , 1930;Transactions of the Society of Arts , vol. xxxvi, 1819;Journal of the Society of Arts , vol. xxvi, 1877–8; Duke of Northumberland's collection of MSS, Alnwick Castle; parish register copies, Northumberland Record Office.]
N G Coley
,Holbrook (1813–1909), chemical manufacturer, was born 5 March 1813 in Wavertree, near Liverpool, the eldest son (there was also at least one daughter) of Roger Gaskell, manager of the commercial branch of a Warrington sailcloth firm, and his wife and cousin Anne Hunter.
Educated at a private school in Norton near Sheffield, Gaskell was apprenticed as a clerk to Yates & Cox, Liverpool iron merchants and nail-makers, in 1827.
In 1836 he joined James Nasmyth [q.v.]as a partner with responsibility for commercial and financial operations at the Bridgewater foundry at Patricroft near Manchester.
Gaskell's business acumen placed Nasmyth, Gaskell & Co. among the leading engineering firms in Britain, but in June 1850 ill health forced him to retire.
In June 1855, his health restored, he entered into a second partnership, this time with Henry Deacon [q.v.], industrial chemist and former apprentice of Nasmyth.
At first Gaskell supported Deacon's plans to manufacture alkali by the new Solvay process, but later persuaded him for financial reasons to employ the older Leblanc method.
In the 1860s Gaskell, Deacon & Co. was among the largest and most successful chemical works in Widnes, owing to Gaskell's commercial management and Deacon's method of recovering chlorine for bleaching-powder manufacture.
Gaskell was actively involved with the firm until the 1870s, after which he remained a director until November 1890, when it was absorbed into the United Alkali Co.
He was then appointed to a vice-presidency in recognition of his services to chemical industry.
Gaskell had wide interests in the north-west.
Inspired by a sense of private and public duty, he served as a magistrate in Widnes for many years.
In politics he was an active Liberal, and after 1886, Liberal Unionist, a member of the Liverpool Reform Club, and a supporter of radical causes, including the extension of the franchise.
Interested in education, he donated nearly £6,000 towards the endowment of a chair of botany and the provision of chemistry laboratories at University College, Liverpool.
He presented Widnes with public baths in 1889 and supported convalescent homes in Heswall and Southport.
He was a proprietor of the Liverpool Daily and Weekly Post and Echo and became chairman when the Daily Post and Liverpool Mercury amalgamated in 1904.
An art connoisseur, Gaskell owned one of the finest collections of paintings in the north of England, including works by J. M. W. Turner and John Constable [qq.v.].
The collection was loaned to the Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool, in 1885.
In 1841 Gaskell married Frances Ann, daughter of Henry Bellhouse, of Victoria Park, Greenhayes, Manchester.
They had three sons and three daughters.
All three sons became partners in the family firm; one of them (Holbrook, born 1878), a director of ICI, was knighted in 1942.
The physiologist Walter Holbrook Gaskell [q.v.]was his nephew.
Holbrook Gaskell died in Woolton Wood near Liverpool 8 March 1909.
[D. J. Jeremy (ed.),
Dictionary of Business Biography , 1984;Liverpool Weekly Post , 10 March 1909; D. W. F. Hardie and R. Dickinson, ‘Gaskell Deacon 1853–1953)’, ICI Ltd.,General Chemical Division News , August 1953; D. W. F. Hardie,A History of the Chemical Industry in Widnes , 1950.]
Jose Harris
,Marion (1881–1932), first Labour party woman organizer, was born 29 October 1881 in Melbourne, the youngest in the family of three sons and four daughters of Phillip David Phillips, an Australian-born Jewish lawyer, and his wife Rose Asher, from New Zealand.
She was educated at the Presbyterian Ladies' College, Ormond College, and Melbourne University, where she studied philosophy and history (BA 1903).
She came to England in 1904 to study at the London School of Economics, where she wrote a doctoral thesis on the development of New South Wales, gaining a D.Sc.
(Econ.).
From 1905 to 1909 she was employed first by Sidney and Beatrice Webb [qq.v.]and then by the royal commission on the poor laws as a research assistant on enquiries into public health, poor-law medical relief, and the treatment of destitute children.
She became a member of the non-militant wing of the women's suffrage movement, the Fabian Society, and the Women's Labour League.
In 1912 she was active in the Fabian reform committee, which annoyed the older generation of Fabians by trying to forge closer and more exclusive links between the Fabians and the Labour party.
In 1912 she was elected as a Labour councillor in the London borough of Kensington, where she pressed for public provision of baby clinics, school meals, improved council housing, employment schemes, and prohibition of sweated labour.
From 1913 to 1918 she was secretary of the Women's Labour League, and strongly defended the need for separate women's political organizations, at least until women had acquired political experience and maturity comparable with that of men.
During the war she was a member of the consumers' council of the Ministry of Food and of the Central Committee on Women's Training and Employment.
In 1917–18 she served on the committee on post-war reconstruction, where she frequently clashed with Beatrice Webb.
In 1918 she became the chief woman officer of the Labour party, in which role she was particularly active in pressing for improved working-class housing estates to include community centres with nurseries, restaurants, libraries, concert halls, and home-help services, all of which she saw as not merely desirable in themselves but essential for the emancipation of working-class housewives.
She became a member of the advisory committee of London magistrates, and editor of Labour Woman .
She was small and dark, with rimless spectacles, and became matronly in middle age.
Throughout her career she was known for her powerful and abrasive manner: what Beatrice Webb described as her ‘shrewd and capable but contentious’ style, her ‘insolently critical attitude towards all persons and institutions’, and her ‘sharp satirical tongue’.
These stood her in good stead as a borough councillor and labour organizer, but proved to be much less effective in national politics.
She was elected Labour MP for Sunderland in 1929, but, like many other women parliamentarians of the period, found it hard to break in to the House of Commons debates.
She was defeated when she stood as a National Labour candidate in 1931.
She was unmarried.
She died 23 January 1932 in hospital in Westminster.
[Patricia Hollis,Ladies Elect , 1987; N. and J. Mackenzie (eds.),
The Diary of Beatrice Webb , vols. ii and iii, 1984 and 1985; J. M. Bellamy and J. Saville (eds.),
Dictionary of Labour Biography , vol. v, 1979.]
A T Q Stewart
,William Brooke (1906–1946), Fascist and wartime broadcaster in English from Nazi Germany, was born in Brooklyn, New York, 24 April 1906, the eldest of three sons (there were no daughters) of Michael Francis Joyce, an Irish Catholic building contractor from county Mayo who emigrated to the United States, and his wife Gertrude Emily Brooke, the daughter of a doctor of Irish Protestant descent living in Shaw, Lancashire.
The Joyces returned to Ireland in 1909, and William was brought up a Roman Catholic and educated at a Jesuit college where he excelled in Latin, French, and German.
The Joyces were staunchly British, and, like many loyalists, felt betrayed by the Irish treaty of 1921.
Two days after its signing, Joyce went to England and joined the army, but was discharged when it was discovered that he was only sixteen.
An ardent patriot, he drifted into right-wing political movements, and in 1924, in an affray with communists in the East End of London, he received a deep razor-slash on the right side of his face, which left a permanent scar.
He first came to prominence as a speaker when he joined the British Union of Fascists, founded by Sir Oswald Mosley [q.v.], after some years at Birkbeck College where he obtained a first-class honours degree in English, and he helped to found a National Socialist party in London.
In 1933 he took out a British passport, falsely claiming his place of birth as Galway, Ireland.
He had by this time divorced his first wife.
He renewed his passport in August 1939, and travelled with his second wife to Berlin, where (not without difficulty) he pursued Josef Goebbels's propaganda ministry to employ him as an editor and announcer for radio broadcasts in English.
Joyce's drawling nasal delivery (the result of a broken nose in his schooldays) attracted widespread interest in Britain, where no restrictions were placed on listening to enemy broadcasts, and he was quickly dubbed ‘Lord Haw-Haw’, a kind of malign Bertie Wooster (see Sir P. G. Wodehouse, q.v.), whose opinions were a subject only for entertainment.
The authorities were disconcerted, however, when the broadcasts provoked an extraordinary wave of rumours, mostly concerned with town clocks, and suggesting that German spies were everywhere.
In 1944 Adolf Hitler awarded him the cross of war merit, first class.
He was shot in the thigh while trying to avoid arrest at the Danish frontier in May 1945, and tried for treason in London in September.
Although he was an American citizen, the prosecution argued that by taking a British passport he owed allegiance to the Crown.
He was found guilty and sentenced to death, and, after his appeal to the House of Lords was rejected, he was hanged at Wandsworth prison 3 January 1946.
In 1927 he married Hazel Kathleen Barr.
They were divorced in 1937 and in the same year he married Margaret Cairns White, daughter of a Lancashire textile-warehouse manager of Irish descent.
There were two daughters of the first marriage and no children of the second.
[John A. Cole,Lord Haw-Haw — and William Joyce: the Full Story , 1964; John W. Hall (ed.),
The Trial of William Joyce , 1946.]
Sidney C Hutchison
, GEORGE EDWARD (1853–1933), sculptor, was born 2 March 1853, the youngest of six sons of the Revd Nugent Wade, rector of St Anne's church, Soho, and later canon of Bristol.
He was educated at Charterhouse (1863–5) and later in Switzerland, becoming an intelligent scholar and good linguist with keen interests in cricket, fishing, and shooting.
However, while reading for the bar, his health broke down and, following a period of recuperation in Italy and without formal art training, he took up painting and an art patron, Sir Coutts Lindsay, provided him with a studio in London.
Then in his mid-thirties and not entirely happy with his pictures, he turned to sculpture and was almost immediately successful with work in the round.
His first exhibits at the Royal Academy were, in 1889, a bronze bust of Lt.-Col. Myles Sandys, MP; in 1890 a terracotta bust of his father; most popular, a terracotta statuette of a Grenadier Guard, of which a copy in bronze was purchased by Queen Victoria and one hundred others by the regiment; and the bronze statuette ‘Il Penseroso’(one of a pair) which was also sold in large numbers.
George Wade then took over the studio of Sir J. Edgar Boehm [q.v.]and in 1891 his bust of I. J. Paderewski was so appreciated that 500 reproductions of it were ordered for the American market alone.
Throughout his career he continued with a series of busts of well-known personalities, such as W. E. Gladstone, Lord Suffield, and General William Booth [q.v.]of the Salvation Army, and appealing statuettes, such as‘Aphrodite’, ‘The Dancer’, and ‘St George and the Dragon’, but more of his time was taken up with monumental sculpture, such as the colossal bronze statue of the Duke of Connaught [q.v.]for Hong Kong, those of Queen Victoria for Allahabad and Colombo, Sir William Rose Mansfield, first Baron Sandhurst [q.v.]for Bombay, a Cameron highlander for Inverness, and Sir John A. MacDonald [q.v.]for the Canadian cities of Montreal, Hamilton, and Kingston.
One of his largest commissions was the Boer war memorial in Pietermaritzburg, a composition in marble and bronze surmounted by a winged figure, and he produced, among others, statues of King Edward VII and Queen Alexandra, the equestrian statues of the maharajah, Sir Chandra Shamshere Yung, for Nepal and the first Earl Haig [q.v.]for the esplanade outside Edinburgh Castle, and a children's fountain for the Women's World Temperance Association, a replica of which was placed in the Temple Gardens, London.
With so many commitments it is understandable that he ceased rather early in his career to show his work in public exhibitions, but he still found time to pursue other interests.
In the early days of aviation he made designs for aeroplanes and, later in life, he took up golf and planned houses for himself and his friends in Berkshire.
The popularity of Wade's sculpture was probably due not only to the fact that it was always comprehensible but that it was both ennobling and restrained in equal measure.
In portraiture he obtained at the same time a good likeness, much appreciated by the sitters and their families, and, in these works and in his more fanciful subjects, he engendered feelings of respect and admiration.
It might be argued by some that his approach was too prosaic, but it would perhaps be more true to say that he cloaked classical ideals in the trappings of his own environment.
In 1869 he married Isabella Mary Josephine (‘Ella’), daughter of Lieutenant-General John Mackenzie Macintyre, Royal Artillery, of Fortrose, Ross-shire.
They had two daughters.
His last major work was a war memorial in Stourbridge, unveiled in 1931, and he died 5 February 1933, at home in Hyde Park Street, London.
[The Times , 6 February 1933; private information from Elmira Wade (daughter).]
P J Marshall
,Laurence (c. 1713–1786), chairman of the East India Company, is thought to have been the illegitimate son of Philip O'Sullivan of county Cork in Ireland.
Nothing is known of his life until he went to India.
By 1739 he is recorded as a private merchant in the East India Company's settlement of Bombay.
He was appointed to the Company's service in 1741.
For the next twelve years he held various administrative posts in Bombay.
Having accumulated a comfortable fortune, he returned to Britain in 1753 with his wife Elizabeth Owen, whom he had married in 1739, and with at least one surviving child, his son Stephen.
Although Sulivan bought an estate at Ponsbourne in Hertfordshire, he spent most of his time in London, living for many years in a house in Queen's Square.
In 1755 he was elected to the court of directors of the East India Company.
From then until his death some thirty years later, except for an interval of six years between 1772 and 1778, Sulivan was more or less continuously a director.
He had three spells as chairman and three as deputy chairman.
At such times his domination of the Company was virtually complete.
Even when he was not formally responsible for them, the Company's affairs were the main interest of his life.
His concern for the Company led him to seek seats in Parliament, which he held from 1762 to 1774.
At any time in the eighteenth century management of the East India Company's complex concerns was a formidable task, but the years from the 1750s to the 1780s were a period of tumultuous upheavals for the Company.
Its directors had to sustain wars in Asia, try to devise means of governing newly conquered Indian provinces, and cope with the demands of the national government and of Parliament for an ever greater measure of control over the Company.
The difficulties which the directors faced were greatly exacerbated by constantly recurring struggles for power within the Company itself.
To gain and maintain his hold over the Company Sulivan had to become a formidable politician and he inevitably made many enemies.
These tended to portray him as being concerned with little more than his own power.
There can, however, be no doubt that Sulivan was devoted to what he considered to be the Company's interests and to finding appropriate solutions to the unprecedented problems facing it.
Sulivan later wrote that his power over the Company had been ‘absolute’ from 1757 to 1763.
During that period he had co-operated closely with the government in the war against the French and in the subsequent peace.
In 1763, however, his authority over the Company was challenged by Robert, Baron Clive [q.v.], the conqueror of Bengal.
Their antagonism, which had much more to do with a clash of temperaments than with deep issues of principle, convulsed the Company and drew national political factions into supporting one side or the other.
In 1764 Sulivan was worsted.
He staged a counter-attack which brought him back into power in 1769, but at the price of a financial disaster from which he never recovered; money was borrowed to buy shares with which to create votes for the election of directors at a time when the value of the Company's stock collapsed.
In the early 1770s Sulivan promoted the career of Warren Hastings [q.v.]as a reforming governor of Bengal, but he was unable to prevent a major loss of the Company's autonomy when the government took powers over it in the Regulating Act of 1773.
The government of Lord North, which he had opposed in 1773, encouraged Sulivan to take on the management of the Company yet again in 1780.
He was engaged in a new round of organizing the Company's war effort and parrying political threats to it virtually until the time of his death.
By then his beloved Company had survived and had even acquired an imperial role, which Sulivan had never envisaged.
The price of survival had, however, involved a cession of power to the government, which Sulivan deplored.
In a letter to his son of 1778 Sulivan described himself as having once been ‘wild, dissipated and favorite with both sexes’.
After his marriage he had reformed, filling the day with unremitting attention to business and spending ‘almost every evening of my life with my family’.
In twenty-five years he had not been ‘ten times in a tavern, eight times in a coffee house’.
The happiness he believed that he enjoyed he attributed to ‘method, regularity and constantly measuring our whole time in habitual but commendable pursuits’.
He died, probably in London, 21 February 1786.
[Sulivan MSS in the Bodleian Library, Oxford; L. S. Sutherland,The East India Company in Eighteenth-Century Politics , 1952; G. K. McGilvary, ‘The Early Life and Career of Laurence Sulivan’, M.Litt. thesis (1979) for the University of Edinburgh.]
Jose Harris
,Rachel Conn (‘Ray’)(1887–1940), feminist, was born 4 June 1887 in London, the elder daughter (there were no sons) of (Benjamin) Francis (Conn) Costelloe, a barrister and Progressive member of the London county council, and his wife Mary Pearsall Smith, a member of the distinguished Philadelphia Quaker family, and sister of (Lloyd) Logan Pearsall Smith [q.v.], writer.
Ray and her sister were baptized Catholics, but after their mother's elopement in 1891 with Bernhard Berenson, the art critic, they were brought up by their Quaker grandmother, Hannah Tatum Whitall Smith.
Ray was educated at Kensington High School and Newnham College, Cambridge, where she received a third class in part i of the mathematics tripos (1908).
Following a year at Bryn Mawr College, Philadelphia, she attended lectures on electrical engineering at Oxford University in 1910.
As an undergraduate she wrote a novel,The World at Eighteen (1907), and she became actively involved in the constitutional wing of the women's suffrage movement, led by (Dame) Millicent Fawcett [q.v.].
In 1909 she was introduced to the Strachey family.
In 1911 she married Oliver Strachey (died 1960), later cryptographer and intelligence officer, brother of G. Lytton Strachey [q.v.], thirteen years her senior, divorced, and recently returned from administering Indian railways.
He was the son of Sir Richard Strachey [q.v.], lieutenant-general.
They had a son and a daughter.
Oliver's sister, Philippa (‘Pippa’), became her lifelong collaborator on many feminist issues.
Both were active in the London Society for Women's Suffrage, Ray becoming its parliamentary secretary in 1915.
During World War I she became involved in organizing war work for women, and after the war became a leading promoter of professional employment for women, a founder of the Women's Employment Federation, and first chairman (1930–9) of the Cambridge University women's employment board.
Her Careers and Openings for Women (1935) was both a practical handbook and a sociological survey of the female labour market.
She also pursued a political career, acted for a time as secretary to (Viscountess) Nancy Astor [q.v.], and stood unsuccessfully as an Independent parliamentary candidate for Brentford and Chiswick in 1918, 1922, and 1923.
In 1928 she published the first general history of the women's suffrage movement,The Cause , and in 1931 Millicent Garrett Fawcett .
These books played a part in establishing a sense of historical continuity in the feminist movement, and they helped to rescue the constitutionalist women's suffrage movement from the oblivion to which it was in danger of being consigned by the more flamboyant reputation of Emmeline Pankhurst [q.v.].
Ray Strachey died 16 July 1941 in London.
[Ray Strachey,The Cause , 1928 (1978 edn. with preface by Barbara Strachey); Barbara Strachey,Remarkable Relations: the Story of the Pearsall Smith Family , 1980; Brian Harrison,Prudent Revolutionaries , 1987.]
A R A Hobson
,James (‘Julian’)(1912–1964), writer, was born 7 July 1912 at 18 Whitworth Road, Norwood, Croydon, as James McLaren Ross.
(‘Julian’ and the hyphenated surname were adopted before his first marriage.)
He was the younger son and youngest of three children of John Lambden Ross, described as ‘of independent means’ on the birth certificate, who was of mixed Scottish and Latin American blood, born in Havana, and his wife Gertrude Mary Pollok, who had been born in Calcutta, the daughter of a colonel in the Indian Army.
He was educated in France, the family having moved to the Bouches-du-Rhône when he was about nine.
His command of argot acquired in these years was impressively demonstrated in translations of Raymond Queneau (1950) and Georges Simenon (1955).
By 1935 he had returned to England and in the following year married an actress, eight years older than himself, Elsie Elizabeth Mary Gott, a marriage celebrated, since he had been baptized into the Roman Catholic Church, in St James's, Spanish Place.
She was the daughter of Joseph Barraclough Gott, civil engineer.
The marriage lasted only six months.
By the late 1930s any money he may have received from his father had come to an end.
He took a job selling vacuum cleaners, an experience used in his novel Of Love and Hunger (1947), afterwards becoming unemployed.
He had been writing short stories and inventing film scripts since his childhood but it was not until 1940 that one was accepted for publication by Cyril Connolly [q.v.]in Horizon .
‘A Bit of a Smash in Madras’, told in the words of an English employee of a company in the east, had all the best qualities of his prose: pace, realism (Connolly was amazed to learn that he had never been in India), exact rendering of the spoken word.
(He had been influenced by Ernest Hemingway and others in ‘trying to create a completely English equivalent to the American vernacular’.)
At a time when new young writers were in keen demand the story had an instant success.
(Sir) Rupert Hart-Davis, then a director of Jonathan Cape, wrote offering to publish a volume of short stories.
In July 1940 Maclaren-Ross was called up and joined the Essex Regiment, later transferring to the Suffolks.
He never rose above the rank of lance-corporal, but a posting as an orderly room clerk on the east coast gave him leisure to write short stories of army life, published in Horizon and other periodicals.
His military career ended with a sentence of twenty-eight days' detention for absence without leave.
He was discharged in August 1943 and dedicated his first volume of short stories (The Stuff to Give the Troops , 1944) to Hart-Davis, by then adjutant of the 6th battalion Coldstream Guards, who had saved him from a court martial.
For a time he collaborated with Dylan Thomas [q.v.]on scripts for documentary films for the Ministry of Information, afterwards reverting to freelance writing.
By 1947 three collections of short stories and two short novels had been published.
Thereafter financial stress obliged him to concentrate increasingly on short pieces.
He preferred to work by night, producing his manuscripts in a small even hand ready for the printer.
The day was devoted to a round of the pubs and clubs of Soho, the Wheatsheaf, the Highlander, the Scala restaurant, later the Mandrake Club.
Nearly six feet tall, with dark hair brushed backwards, dressed in a light suit (white corduroy at one period), a teddy-bear coat, and scuffed suede shoes, carrying a malacca cane with a gold knob when affluent, otherwise silver, he was a conspicuous figure in these haunts: ‘a dangerous dandy’, the New Zealand author Dan Davin, described him, ‘one of an army of one’.
The character of X. Trapnel, for which he served as model, in Anthony Powell's A Dance to the Music of Time (12 vols., 1951–75) gives an impression of the persona he created for himself.
He was a sound critic, with a phenomenal knowledge of twentieth-century novels and films; he contributed reviews to the Times Literary Supplement and other papers, and parodies to Punch (collected in The Funny Bone , 1956).
A first volume of autobiography (The Weeping and the Laughter ) appeared in 1953.
But he was unable to renew the sources of his inspiration and his last novels were failures.
His last years were ravaged by financial crises.
He died suddenly of a heart attack in St Charles Hospital, Kensington, 3 November 1964.
After the failure of his first marriage, in 1958 he married Mollie Bella (‘Diana’), daughter of George Vincent Sturgeon, schoolmaster, and the niece of Leonard Woolf [q.v.].
They had one son.
[J. Maclaren-Ross,The Weeping and the Laughter , 1953, and Memoirs of the Forties , 1965; D. M. Davin,Closing Times , 1975; Anthony Powell,The Strangers all are Gone , 1982; Rupert Hart-Davis,Power of Chance , 1991.]
Trevor I Williams
,Hamilton Young (1858–1899), industrial chemist, was born 11 September 1858 in Brooklyn, New York, the second of three sons (there were no daughters) of Samuel Castner and his wife Julia.
His early education is unknown, but he attended the Brooklyn Polytechnic Institute before enrolling in 1875 in Columbia University School of Mines.
He left after three years without a degree, not from any lack of ability but because he selected from the course only those subjects — analytical and applied chemistry — which appealed to him.
In 1879 he and his elder brother E. B. Castner set up as consulting chemists in New York.
The consultancy prospered, but some chemical processes which he developed were not successful commercially.
About 1884 he sold his share and turned his attention to devising an improved process for manufacturing aluminium, a metal whose unique properties could not then be adequately utilized because of its high cost.
The route to aluminium at that time was by reducing aluminium chloride with sodium.
The metal was inevitably expensive, however, because sodium then cost fourteen shillings a pound.
Castner devised a process, involving the reduction of caustic soda with carbon, by which the cost could be reduced to less than one shilling a pound.
He failed to interest American industrialists and in 1886 came to England, thereafter the centre of his working life.
There he aroused the interest of the Webster Crown Metal Company of Solihull, manufacturing small quantities of aluminium at a cost of £3 a pound.
Substantiation of Castner's claim led to the formation in 1887 of the Aluminium Company.
Potential annual output was 100,000 pounds.
After initial difficulties, they succeeded in producing aluminium of high purity but in 1889 the process was rendered obsolete by the advent of a much cheaper electrochemical process invented independently in France and the USA.
With characteristic resource Castner developed new uses for his cheap sodium, his only asset.
From it he manufactured sodium peroxide, a valuable bleaching agent, especially for straw hats; and sodium cyanide for the booming gold-mining industry, particularly in South Africa.
The now misnamed Aluminium Company flourished, and it was difficult to keep pace with the demand for sodium.
In 1890 Castner devised a new process for its manufacture, based on the electrolytic decomposition of caustic soda.
Difficulties arose because of the relative impurity of even the best available caustic soda, and this led to his greatest success — a process for manufacturing very pure caustic soda by the electrolysis of brine in a rocking cell containing mercury.
Valuable by-products were chlorine (yielding bleaching powder for the textile and paper trades) and hydrogen.
On seeking to patent his process, Castner discovered that a similar patent had been lodged in Germany by Karl Kellner and made over to the powerful Solvay Company in Belgium.
To avoid expensive litigation, the two companies combined in 1895 to form the Castner–Kellner Alkali Company, with large works in Runcorn.
Castner's originality brought him little public acclaim, for the chemical industry was such that its products were largely the raw materials of other industries.
Nevertheless, he ranked high among the pioneers of twentieth-century chemical technology.
His life was clouded from the 1880s by the onset of tuberculosis, which led him to spend his winters in Florida.
In spite of this, he had a remarkable record of achievement when he died 11 October 1899, at Saranac Lake, New York state.
He was unmarried.
[Alexander Fleck, ‘The Life and Work of Hamilton Young Castner’,Chemistry and Industry , 23 August 1947, pp. 515–21; T. I. Williams,Fifty Years of Progress, the Castner–Kellner Alkali Company 1895–1945 , 1947,(portrait).]
J R Bracken
, Sir Ralph Lilley (1888–1983), scholar and academic administrator, was born 5 October 1888 in Charlton, London, the second of the three sons and third of the four children of George Turner, schoolmaster, of Cambridge, and his wife Bertha, daughter of William Eaden Lilley.
He was educated at the Perse School and at Christ's College, Cambridge (senior scholar).
He obtained first classes in the classical tripos (parts i and ii, 1909 and 1911) and the Oriental languages tripos (1910); was awarded the Brotherton memorial Sanskrit prize; and was elected a fellow of Christ's (1912).
In 1913 he entered the Indian educational service as lecturer at Queen's College, Benares.
From 1915 to 1919 he served in Palestine and India with the 2nd/3rd Queen Alexandra's Own Gurkha Rifles; he was wounded, awarded the MC, and twice mentioned in dispatches.
From 1920 to 1922 he was professor of Indian linguistics at Benares Hindu University.
In 1922 he was elected to the chair of Sanskrit in the University of London (at the School of Oriental Studies), which he occupied until the age of retirement in 1954.
He wrote many important articles (later republished as Collected Papers, 1912–1973 , 1975), and A Comparative and Etymological Dictionary of the Nepali Language (1931), meanwhile steadily accumulating the vast collection of word slips on which his later lexicographical work was based.
In 1942 he was elected a fellow of the British Academy.
These achievements were the more remarkable because from 1937 to 1957 Turner was also director of the School of Oriental and African Studies (as it became in 1938) with heavy administrative responsibilities.
The early years of his tenure saw the creation under Ida Ward [q.v.]of the first department of the languages and cultures of Africa in a British university, and the successful negotiation of the school's removal from the City of London to Bloomsbury.
After the outbreak of war, his frequent warnings that the forces were seriously under-provided with personnel trained in key Asian languages went unheeded until Japan attacked, when the school was called upon to train many hundreds of young servicemen (including some Americans) in Chinese and Japanese for intelligence work in eastern theatres of war.
Meanwhile, Turner was looking ahead to the postwar period.
Largely through his patient, persistent advocacy, the government of (Sir) Winston Churchill appointed in 1944 the Scarbrough commission, which, on the basis of evidence he submitted and marshalled, recommended a great expansion of the provision in British universities for the study of the languages, history, and cultures of Asia and Africa, and development of the school as the main centre.
The government of C. R. (later Earl) Attlee accepted the recommendations; Turner's second decade as director was devoted primarily to implementing them, recruiting and training young scholars, including many whose interest had been aroused during war service in Asia or Africa, and building up strong academic departments.
Self-effacing and reserved, he was nevertheless a resolute, wise and farsighted leader, universally respected and trusted.
By 1957 the school was the pre-eminent institution in Europe in its fields of study.
It had been a great directorship.
Thereafter, he began to write A Comparative Dictionary of the Indo-Aryan Languages (1966), followed (1969) by indexes (by Lady Turner) and a phonetic analysis (1971).
As an outstanding event in the history of Indian linguistic studies, it placed Turner alongside Sir William Jones and Sir George Grierson [qq.v.].
He continued working until a week before his death and left virtually complete a large volume of addenda (published posthumously in 1985).
Turner was knighted in 1950.
His many honours included the Nepalese Order of Gorkha Dakshina Bahu, honorary doctorates of the universities of London, Benares, Santiniketan, Kathmandu, and Ceylon; and honorary fellowships of Christ's College (Cambridge), the School of Oriental and African Studies, and Deccan College (Poona).
He rendered great services to the Royal Asiatic Society (president 1952–5, gold medallist 1953) and the Philological Society (treasurer 1931–62, president 1939–43).
In 1920 he married Dorothy Rivers (died 1972), daughter of William Howard Goulty, solicitor.
They had one son and three daughters.
Turner died at home in Bishop's Stortford 22 April 1983.
A portrait by Leonard Boden hangs in the School of Oriental and African Studies.
[Archives and annual reports of the School of Oriental and African Studies; obituary by J. C. Wright and C. D. Cowan in Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies , vol. xlvii, part 3, 1984; private information; personal knowledge.]
Harold Watt
,Karl (1902–1966), founder of the Camphill Movement, was born 25 September 1902 in Vienna, the only child of Aron Ber (Adolf) König, shoe-shop owner, of Vienna, and his wife Bertha Fischer, whose father was a dressmaker in Iglau, Austria.
He was educated at secondary school in Vienna and at the University of Vienna, where he graduated in medicine in 1927.
His medical special interests had been embryology, paediatrics, and homoeopathy.
These, combined with a particular interest in curative education for children with mental and physical handicaps, he developed over the next eleven years in the course of attachments to children's hospitals and homes in Austria, Switzerland, and Silesia (in Germany at that time), and, by 1936, in private practice in Vienna.
Following the Nazi annexation of Austria in 1938, he went to London, then to north-east Scotland.
When war broke out he had to endure four months' internment as an enemy alien.
In late 1940 he established at the estate of Camphill, near Aberdeen, Scotland, a small residential school for children in need of special care.
He was joined there by a succession of members of a group of young Viennese associates, fellow exiles from Europe, who were attracted by König's vision of therapeutic residential communities where children with learning difficulties and behaviour problems arising from organic disorders and emotional disturbances could receive a broad education to the fullest extent their individual capabilities would allow, within a caring, sharing, self-governing, Christian ‘family’ setting.
König had from student days interested himself deeply in the life and works of Rudolf Steiner (1861–1925), the Austrian philosopher and founder of anthroposophy.
Steiner's insights into the nature of human handicap, within his concept of the true spiritual nature of all men, inspired König and his unremunerated co-workers to plan practical implementation of many novel concepts of teaching, learning, and healing for young people with handicaps — up to the age of about nineteen.
But König's interest in schools spread predictably to provision for handicapped people beyond school age.
By 1955 he had founded, on an estate at Botton in Yorkshire, the first of many Camphill village communities, with emphasis again on the importance of the individual, on living with total dignity in ‘family’ households, on the provision of workshops for the making of marketable goods, and on cultural, artistic, and spiritual activities in generous measure.
That both kinds of Camphill therapeutic communities, schools and villages, increased in number in several countries both in and after König's lifetime — by 1987 there were over seventy centres in eighteen countries — is testimony to their success in answering a need, albeit continuously in pioneering mode and therefore not without mistakes; testimony also to the founder's vision, dynamic personality, and restless energy.
König was small in stature, could be testy, and was impatient of any blocking of his plans.
He had massive difficulties to overcome, concerned with funding, the medical profession, and not least the rough reception he got in wartime in what, in a letter written two weeks before he died, he called the ‘human desert in the North of Scotland’.
But in all his face-to-face contacts with the handicapped — and with worried parents — he radiated a great warmth of strong, friendly reassurance.
The many lectures he gave throughout his life were delivered, noteless, in an attractive broken English that spellbound his audiences.
In 1963 he received the gold medal of the Tutzinger star at Tutzing, Germany.
He married in 1929 Tilla, daughter of Ludwig Maasberg, cloth merchant of Gnadenfrei, Silesia.
They had two sons and two daughters.
König died in Überlingen, Lake Constance, Germany, 27 March 1966.
[The Times , 31 March and 4 April 1966; Anke Weihs,Fragments from the Story of Camphill , 1976; Cornelius Pietzner (ed.),
A Candle on the Hill: Images of Camphill Life , with foreword by Sir Laurens van der Post, 1990; information from members of the Camphill Movement and others; personal knowledge.]
Paul Brand
(c. 1235–1296), judge, was probably born in or before 1235 in Shropshire, perhaps at Hopton Castle, which his family had held since at least the mid-twelfth century as major knightly tenants of the honour of Clun.
He was the son of another Walter de Hopton and his wife Joan.
The first office he is known to have held (in 1256) was the purely local one of coroner and in 1258 he was one of the four Shropshire knights appointed to investigate grievances in the same county under the Provisions of Oxford.
In 1267–8 he held the rather more responsible local post of sheriff of the twin counties of Shropshire and Staffordshire.
His first appointment as a royal justice came at the end of Henry III's reign.
In 1272 he acted as a justice of the general eyre in Herefordshire, Staffordshire, and Shropshire.
In 1274 he is to be found acting as a baron of the Exchequer.
Later the same year he was appointed a justice of King's Bench.
Hopton left King's Bench in 1278 to become one of the justices of a court newly established after the treaty of Aberconway to deal with litigation from Wales and the Welsh marches.
He soon become senior justice of this court.
After the completion of the Edwardian conquest of Wales the legal system was recast and Hopton ceased to be involved in Welsh legal affairs.
In 1284 Edward I appointed him to a commission sent to Ireland to audit accounts there.
Hopton had participated in late 1278 and early 1279 in two eyres of the ‘southern’ circuit of the general eyre.
He rejoined the same circuit in 1285 part-way through the visitation of Essex and remained on the circuit till eyres were suspended in 1289.
Like most of his judicial colleagues, he was also appointed in 1285 to a vacation assize circuit and acted as a gaol delivery justice.
In February 1290 he received appointment as one of two commissioners to hear complaints against the king's officials in London, but later the same month was himself convicted with his colleagues in the 1286 Norfolk eyre of judicial misconduct for failing to take appropriate action on two presentments made at the eyre.
Initially the king was unsympathetic to Hopton's petition, claiming that at the material time he had not been acting as a justice owing to a bureaucratic muddle over his appointment, but by December 1290 he had agreed that the money Hopton had already paid towards his fine should count instead towards a fine he had made to secure the wardship of the lands of his late wife.
Hopton received no further judicial or administrative appointments from the king.
By an unknown first wife Hopton was the father of a son and heir also named Walter.
His second wife was Maud, the daughter of William Pantulf [q.v.], who by the time of her second marriage to Walter (in 1282 or 1283) was sole heiress to the Shropshire barony of Wem.
He had no issue by this second marriage.
Hopton was still alive and engaged in litigation in Michaelmas term 1295 but dead by 28 September 1296.
[James Conway Davies (ed.),
The Welsh Assize Roll, 1277–1284 , Board of Celtic Studies, University of Wales, History and Law Series, no. vii, 1940, pp. 100–10; British Library Additional Roll 14987; Public Record Office, JUST 1/743, m. 2.]
Anne Laurence
,Martha (1624–1665/7), Quaker, was born in Mere, Somerset, and baptized 28 January 1624, the daughter of George and Elizabeth Calvert.
Her elder brother Giles (1612–1663) became well known in the 1650s as a printer of Quaker literature.
She herself married the printer Thomas Simmonds, son of Matthew Simmonds, who published many Independent writings in the 1640s.
They may have had some children.
By the early 1640s she had moved to London and begun a religious quest in pursuit of whose ends she became involved with the first Quakers in 1654.
By 1655 she was travelling around preaching.
She was gaoled in Colchester in December 1655, having walked through the town barefoot in the frost, clad in sackcloth and ashes.
During this period her message became increasingly apocalyptic and she disrupted public meetings and religious gatherings, acquiring a following of several women and arousing the antagonism of the Quaker leaders, who tried unsuccessfully to restrain her.
In early 1656 she secured a considerable degree of influence over James Nayler [q.v.], whose works were published first by Calvert and then by Thomas Simmonds.
Martha Simmonds and her companions vested in Nayler their apocalyptic hopes and accompanied him into Bristol in October 1656, leading his horse while they cried ‘Holy, holy, holy’.
The whole company was arrested and held and then transferred to gaol in London, where Nayler was tried.
The women were released and Martha Simmonds took a job as nurse to Oliver Cromwell's sister, by which means she secured Nayler's release.
During 1657 they continued to act as a disruptive element, Martha Simmonds being seen as their leader, but by 1658 she was reconciled with the main Quaker movement.
She died in 1665 or 1667.
[M. Simmonds,A Lamentation for the Lost Sheep , 1655; R. L. Greaves and R. Zaller,Biographical Dictionary of British Radicals , 1982; A. Crawford et al.
(eds.),
The Europa Biographical Dictionary of British Women , 1983; K. L. Carroll, ‘Martha Simmonds, a Quaker Enigma’,Journal of the Friends' Historical Society , vol. liii, 1972.]
Alec Hyatt King
,Eric Walter (1888–1959), music critic and lexicographer, was born 20 August 1888 in Berne, the only son and elder child of Frederick Walter Blom, bookseller and amateur singer of Danish origin, and his wife Anna Elise Rosalie Wenger.
He was educated privately, and was always very reticent about his early years: he seems to have been largely self-taught in music.
Blom settled in England shortly before the war of 1914–18, and after working for two music publishers — Breitkopf & Härtel in Berne and J. & W. Chester in London — began to make his name in 1919 as a writer of programme notes for the Promenade Concerts.
His flair and knowledge led to his becoming London music critic of the Manchester Guardian in 1923; an appointment to the Birmingham Post followed in 1931; and from 1949 onwards he worked as music critic of the Observer .
In all three tenures, Blom showed a wide range of musical sympathies and balanced judgements, and wrote with fine style and sensitivity.
Of his dozen books,Mozart (1935) was by far the most successful.
Written with insight and affection for the Master Musicians series (of which he was editor), it remained in print for over fifty years.
Blom's fluent command of languages was invaluable in his work as a lexicographer.
His Everyman's Dictionary of Music (1946) revealed his gift for the systematic organization of a large quantity of material.
Its success led at once to his appointment as editor of the fifth edition of Grove's Dictionary of Music and Musicians , a task which occupied him until 1954.
The fourth edition of Grove appeared in 1940, comprising a revision of the five volumes of the third edition of 1927, with a sixth, supplementary, volume.
But clearly, by the late 1940s, an entirely new approach was required, and Blom was given a free hand to bring everything as up to date as possible.
Of the eight million or more words to which the nine-volume fifth edition ultimately amounted, over half were entirely new articles or replacements of old ones, and nearly all else was revised.
Though some of the original contributions by Sir George Grove [q.v.]were still retained, Blom was able to take account of the huge expansion of musical scholarship and history that had occurred during the preceding quarter of a century.
In addition to planning and editing, he read the entire Dictionary in proof, a prodigious task for one man.
The result was the crown of his life's work and his lasting monument.
In 1950, because of pressure of work on Grove , Blom gave up the important editorship of Music & Letters , which he had held since 1937.
He resumed it in 1954 and continued as editor until his death.
In this capacity, his wisdom and tolerance gave much encouragement to young writers.
Blom was a man of sterling character — modest, kindly, humorous, hospitable, and friendly: he hated pretentiousness in any form.
In 1955 he was appointed CBE and was awarded a D.Litt. by the University of Birmingham.
He married in 1923 Marjory Spencer (died 1952), the daughter of a London photographer.
There were a son and daughter of the marriage: the daughter married the humorous writer Paul Jennings.
Blom died in London 11 April 1959.
[Stanley Sadie (ed.),
The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians , 1980; information from Celia Jennings (daughter); personal knowledge.]
Peter Turvey
,Peter William (1851–1892), engineer, was born 8 November 1851 in Roundhay, Leeds, Yorkshire, the second of three sons and third of five children of Obadiah Willans, woollen manufacturer, of Leeds, and his wife Elizabeth, daughter of Henry Tetley, farmer, of Topcliffe, Yorkshire.
His early childhood was spent in Leeds; after a period at a dame school he went to Leeds Grammar School at the age of ten, leaving in 1867 to become an apprentice with the engineering firm of Carrett & Marshall of Hunslet, Leeds.
He then moved to London in 1872, joining John Penn & Sons, a leading marine-engine builder, as a draughtsman.
Whilst at Penn's he designed a high-speed steam engine which had all its working parts totally enclosed and splash-lubricated, a radical departure from contemporary practice.
As Penn's were not prepared to develop Willans's engines, he first formed a partnership to license other manufacturers, and then in 1876 joined Hunter & English of Bow, London, to develop and market the engine for marine use.
However, boat builders were reluctant to install such novel machinery.
Willans left Hunter & English and in 1880 went into partnership with Mark Robinson and founded the Ferry Works, Thames Ditton, Surrey, to build both engines and boats.
The rise of the electricity industry created a new market for his engines, which proved so well suited to driving dynamos that by the time of his death over half the country's electrical power was generated by them.
During this time Willans improved his designs and adopted advanced manufacturing techniques, pioneering the rapid assembly of engines from standardized, interchangeable components.
He also conducted extensive tests on his engines, which demonstrated their high efficiency and gained him a reputation as a highly scientific engineer.
Willans was a heavily built man with a satirical sense of humour, whose chief recreations were skating and fishing.
Although staunchly against trade unionists after a strike in 1889, he introduced profit-sharing schemes for his workforce.
He was awarded the Institution of Civil Engineers' Telford medal in 1885, and was elected a member in 1886.
In 1888 he was also awarded their Watt medal for his paper on ‘Economy Trials of a Non-condensing Steam Engine’.
He died 23 May 1892 at his home in Frimley, Surrey, after being thrown from his dog-cart whilst driving to Brookwood station.
He married in 1880 and had at least three children.
[‘Peter William Willans’,Minutes of Proceedings, Institution of Civil Engineers , vol. cxl, 1893; K. W. Willans, ‘Peter William Willans 1851–1892’,Transactions of the Newcomen Society , vol. xxviii, 1951–2; Charles Singer et al .
(eds.),
A History of Technology , vol. v, 1958; B. A. Lavell, ‘Ferry Works, Thames Ditton’, 1986.]
Mark Goldie
,Jonas (c. 1642–1710), Anglican divine and critic of the philosopher John Locke [q.v.], was born about 1642, the son of Jonas Proost, pastor successively of the Dutch Calvinist congregations in Colchester and London.
Oxford weaned Proast from Puritanism.
He matriculated at Queen's College in 1659, graduated BA in 1663, and MA, from Gloucester Hall, in 1666.
He incorporated MA of Cambridge in 1670.
Thereafter he remained in Oxford, as chaplain of Queen's, and from 1677 of All Souls.
In 1688 occurred the signal event of his career, his expulsion from All Souls.
The warden, Leopold Finch, was one of James II's Tory collaborators.
In April 1688 he stood for election to the Camden chair of history, but was beaten by his High Church rival, Henry Dodwell [q.v.], whose canvasser Proast was.
Enraged at his chaplain's disloyalty, Finch  peremptorily sacked him.
Proast turned to Archbishop William Sancroft [q.v.], the college's visitor.
Sancroft would willingly have challenged the Crown on Proast's behalf, but the Revolution intervened.
Proast also stoutly defended the Church against popery in two unpublished tracts, ‘A Brief Defence of the Society of St Mary Magdalen College’, and ‘The Case of Reading the Declaration for Liberty of Conscience’.
Proast dithered over accepting the oaths of allegiance to William and Mary.
More importantly, he hated the Toleration Act and attacked John Locke's Letter Concerning Toleration .
It became imperative for the new latitudinarian archbishops to avoid countenancing the view that the Revolution was a victory for the intolerant Anglicanism of Sancroft's and Proast's type.
Archbishop John Tillotson [q.v.]was, complained the Jacobite antiquary Thomas Hearne [q.v.], ‘very dilatory in doing [Proast]justice’.
Proast was restored in 1692, but did not secure arrears of stipend, and the case dragged on until 1698, in the reign of Archbishop Thomas Tenison [q.v.].
Proast's friends found preferment for him: in 1692 as ecclesiastical law officer for Berkshire, and in 1698 archdeacon of Berkshire, which he remained until his death.
Proast's only published works were three tracts against Locke:The Argument of the Letter Concerning Toleration Briefly Considered (1690),A Third Letter Concerning Toleration (1691), and (confusingly)A Second Letter to the Author of the Three Letters Concerning Toleration (1704).
Locke's Second (1690), enormous Third (1692), and unfinished Fourth (1704)Letters are replies.
In them Locke buttressed Tillotson's position, and assaulted the Oxonian High Church citadel.
The debate concerned the efficacy of coercion on behalf of‘true religion’.
Proast argued astutely, drawing upon St Augustine's arguments against the Donatists.
He conceded that the mind cannot directly be forced to assent to a proposition, but held that penal laws can break the weight of intellectual prepossession.
Thus coercion is indirectly efficacious in altering people's disposition to search for truth, and consequently the godly magistrate should use force.
Locke's friends commended him for demolishing Proast's ecclesiastical regime as effectively as he had the absolutist civil polity of Sir Robert Filmer [q.v.].
Proast died in Oxford, unmarried, 18 April 1710, and was buried in St Mary Magdalen church.
Hearne thought him ‘a truly honest, wise man, and a good scholar, but reserved in his conversation’.
Tenison judged him ‘full of an evil spirit’— understandably, since Proast told him that ‘justice forsook Lambeth when Archbishop Sancroft removed from thence.’
[M. Goldie, in J. Walsh, C. Haydon, and S. Taylor (eds.),
From Toleration to Tractarianism: the Church of England, 1689–1833 , 1992, and sources cited there.]
Marianne Elliott
,William (1763–1843), Ulster businessman and radical, was baptized in Belfast 6 June 1763, the sixth child in the family of five sons and two daughters of Roberts Simms, merchant and tanner, and his wife Elizabeth Stevenson of Belfast.
With his elder brother, Robert Simms [q.v.], he owned a tan-yard in Belfast, a paper-mill in Ballyclare, and a flour-mill in Crumlin.
He was a member of the Third Presbyterian Congregation in Rosemary Street, a noted reformer in the 1780s, one of the founders and secretary of the Society of United Irishmen in 1791, and a proprietor of its newspaper, the Northern Star .
William's house, ‘The Grove’ on the Shore Road in Belfast, became one of the Society's meeting-places, and with his brother he subscribed heavily to the Society's finances.
In May 1794 he was tried and acquitted of publishing a seditious address in the Northern Star , and remained a proprietor of the newspaper until its suppression in May 1797.
William Simms is overshadowed by his brother Robert, but he too was a dedicated revolutionary.
Indeed, some thought him more active than Robert, but escaping notice as ‘more artful and cunning’.
He was detained in Newgate prison in Dublin in 1797, but he appears to have taken little part in the 1798 rebellion and was not among the state prisoners incarcerated after its suppression.
He does not figure in the history by R. R. Madden [q.v.],
The United Irishmen, their Lives and Times (1843–6), and has been neglected in consequence.
Although the government continued to think him dangerous — and there are signs that he may have remained in the revamped United Irish movement during his brother's imprisonment — in 1803 he advised Thomas Russell [q.v.]against rebellion and there is no evidence of treasonable activity thereafter.
Simms was married, with a son and four daughters, all of whom died before the age of ten.
He was named one of the managers of the Belfast Academical Institution in 1810.
He died at his Belfast home 2 August 1843, and was buried in Knockbreda.
[Marianne Elliott,Partners in Revolution: the United Irishmen and France , 1982;The Life of Theobald Wolfe Tone , ed. by his son William T. W. Tone, 2 vols., 1826; Henry Joy,Historical Collections relative to the Town of Belfast , 1817; Presbyterian Historical Society of Ireland, Belfast: baptismal and marriage records of the Third Presbyterian Congregation; George Benn,A History of the Town of Belfast , 1877.]
David S Katz
,Isaac (d. 1699), Hebrew scholar and bibliophile, was born in Spain and taken at an early age to Hamburg.
By 1660 he had completed rabbinical studies and by his own account sought the ‘wisdom of medicine’ at the University of Leiden.
Isaac and his brother Jacob [q.v.]clubbed together to produce Hebrew books for the Christian market, and thereby became acquainted with some of the most eminent Christian Hebraists of the day.
Having been approached by Adam Boreel, who with John Dury and Samuel Hartlib [qq.v.]in England hoped to persuade a learned Jew to translate the Mishnah (the Hebraic core of the Talmud) into Latin, Isaac Abendana arrived in Oxford on 3 June 1662 and presented himself to Edward Pococke [q.v.]and other prominent Hebraists there.
Yet it was John Lightfoot [q.v.], the Christian Hebraist at Cambridge, who secured an academic position for Abendana, and from 1663 until 1667 he was on the payroll of Trinity College, Cambridge, working on his translation of the Mishnah.
He seems to have left Trinity in less than friendly circumstances, possibly because his bookselling came to overwhelm his scholarly duties, but by 1669 he was once again with a proper position, this time as an employee of the university itself.
By the time of his final payment in 1676, Isaac Abendana had completed translating the Mishnah into Latin, nearly thirty years after the project first began to be discussed in the Hartlib circle, although his labours were never published.
Accordingly he left Cambridge and moved to Oxford, spending much of the period between 1681 and 1685 in London, where his brother Jacob was leader of the Sephardi community.
From 1689 Isaac served as lecturer in Hebrew at Magdalen College, Oxford, a position he held until his death ten years later.
During his Oxford years, Isaac Abendana became known as a resident authority on all matters Jewish and the chief purveyor of Hebrew books, a situation he consolidated by inventing the Oxford diary, which in his original form included not only information relevant to university men but also a yearly essay on some aspect of Jewish religion and culture.
These essays made the almanacs widely sought after even when their immediate practical use had passed, and they were later published in book form.
Isaac Abendana ‘having lighted his Pipe, fell down dead’ 17 July 1699 while visiting his friend Arthur Charlett [q.v.], master of University College, and a merchant Jew passing through the town conveyed the body to London for burial, putting an end to a thirty-seven-year Oxbridge career during which time he had a virtual monopoly on Hebrew studies there.
[D. S. Katz, ‘The Abendana Brothers and the Christian Hebraists of Seventeenth-Century England’,Journal of Ecclesiastical History , vol. xl, 1989, pp. 28–52; I. Abrahams, ‘Isaac Abendana's Cambridge Mishnah and Oxford Calendars’,Transactions of the Jewish Historical Society of England , vol. viii, 1918, pp. 98–121.]
Howard Temperley
,George (1801–1847), Gold Coast administrator, was born in Keith, Banffshire, 24 February 1801, the second son and fifth child in the family of four daughters and three sons of the Revd James Maclean and his first wife Elizabeth Tod.
Nothing is known of his education or early years beyond the fact that from 1815 to 1817 he served as an ensign in the 27th Foot and subsequently in the 91st Foot, from which he was obliged to retire on account of ill health in 1821.
In 1826, all other attempts to resume his military career having failed, he obtained a lieutenancy in the Royal African Colonial Corps.
Shortly after his arrival in West Africa he was assigned to a delegation for negotiating peace terms with the kingdom of Ashanti.
While thus engaged he met a group of Gold Coast traders to whom the British government, eager to disentangle itself from the political strife of the region, was in the process of handing over its installations.
They were sufficiently impressed by his abilities to request in 1829 that he be relieved of his military duties and appointed president of the council of government on the Gold Coast.
The council itself proved a largely inactive body, with the result that from 1829 to 1844 he was able, thanks to his personal authority, to become the chief administrator, lawmaker, and, indeed, virtual ruler of the Gold Coast.
His principal achievement during these years was to create an alliance of small coastal tribes to offset the military might of the inland Ashanti.
The tiny force under his command, less than 200 African regulars and part-time militia, scarcely sufficed to garrison the forts.
However, by adept diplomacy, he was able to impose a form of pax Britannica on what had hitherto been a turbulent part of Africa and thereby maintain the conditions best suited for fostering trade.
While in England on furlough in 1838 he married the poetess Letitia Landon (L. E. L., q.v.), the daughter of John Landon, a partner in Adair's army agency in Pall Mall.
This improbable match and Letitia's sudden death (15 October 1838) shortly after arriving at Cape Coast Castle gave rise to much gossip and speculation on the part of her literary friends, who represented Maclean as an ogre.
It was even claimed that she had been poisoned by an African wife by whom Maclean was credited with having had several children.
However, there is no evidence of any such prior attachment on his part.
What the evidence does show is that he was genuinely fond of his new wife and that she probably died of a heart attack.
Maclean himself is described by E. G. L. Bulwer-Lytton (later Baron Lytton, q.v.), who gave the bride away, as ‘a dry, reserved hard-headed Scotchman, of indefatigable activity.’
The form of personal rule which Maclean established inevitably gave rise to claims that he was, if not actually involved in slave-trading and slave-holding, insufficiently energetic in combating them.
What more he could have done is hard to see.
Nevertheless these suspicions resulted in his being removed from his position as president in 1844 and given the post of judicial assessor, which meant, in effect, becoming second-in-command to a governor appointed by the Colonial Office.
The results were not happy.
Maclean, perhaps fortunately, did not live long enough to witness the collapse of the system he had built up.
He died of dysentery in Cape Coast 22 May 1847.
[G. E. Metcalfe,Maclean of the Gold Coast , 1962.]
Paul Laxton
,John (1704? –1762), land surveyor, cartographer, and garden designer, was born in France, one of four children of a Huguenot family which settled in Geneva after fleeing France.
He probably went to England in 1709, though his life before his publishing career began in 1734 is obscure.
He always remained in close touch with the French Protestant community in London and many of his works have bilingual titles.
Between 1734 and 1740 he published plans and views of gardens, mostly around London and including the royal parks and gardens at Richmond (1734), Kensington (1736), and Windsor (1738).
His brother Bartholomew was a horticulturist and landscape gardener in Walham Green, Fulham.
From the late 1730s he began to develop a more ambitious career in cartography.
His works reflect his travels; as he gained commissions as an estate surveyor he would use the opportunity to survey for county maps and town plans.
In addition to original surveys his business in London maintained a steady production of general maps and atlases, notably plans of foreign towns, including Paris and Rome.
It is this breadth of output which established his reputation as one of the most prolific and innovative map-makers of the eighteenth century.
His survey of London was planned with George Vertue [q.v.], surveyed from 1738, engraved by John Pine, and published in twenty-four sheets in 1746.
It was the outstanding plan of the capital in the eighteenth century.
He also published large-scale plans of other towns based on original surveys (Bristol 1743, Exeter 1744, Shrewsbury 1746, Dublin 1756, Kilkenny 1758, and Cork 1760).
His six county surveys (Shropshire 1752, Middlesex 1754, Armagh 1760, Dublin 1760, Berkshire 1761, Surrey 1768: projected surveys of Kent, Oxfordshire, and Buckinghamshire came to nothing) were innovative in their portrayal of land use and vegetation.
His distinctive contribution was to apply the conventions of estate and garden plans to county maps.
His estate surveys included the Barnard lands in Shropshire (1746–8) and the earl of Kildare's estates (1755–60).
Rocque lived in Great Windmill Street on the edge of the French quarter in Soho until 1743, in Piccadilly opposite Green Park until 1749, and in Whitehall until a fire on 7 November 1750 destroyed his possessions.
After purchasing new stock in Paris he re-established his business in 1751 in the Strand, at the centre of the London map trade.
There he remained at three successive addresses until his death.
From 1751 Rocque styled himself chorographer or topographer to the prince of Wales and from 1760 to the king, but his modest means came chiefly from print selling and, in common with many of his trade, his cartographic projects were often financially precarious and consequently protracted.
‘The French school of Rocque’(as it was called in the nineteenth century) earned an outstanding reputation in Irish cartography, but his chief memorials are his county maps and, above all, his plans of London and Dublin.
The latter so impressed George II that he had it hung on the walls of his apartment, and it was being printed as late as 1821.
Rocque died 27 January 1762.
His widow Mary Ann carried on the business with the assistance of her late husband's associates, including Pierre André, who with John Chapman began a large-scale map of Essex ‘for Mrs. Rocque’.
[J. H. Andrews, ‘The French School of Dublin Land Surveyors’,Irish Geography , vol. v, 1967;idem ,Two Maps of Dublin and its Surroundings by John Rocque , 1977; Ralph Hyde,The A to Z of Georgian London , 1981; Paul Laxton,John Rocque's Map of Berkshire 1761 , 1973; H. Philips, ‘John Rocque's Career’,London Topographical Record , vol. xx, 1952; J. Varley, ‘John Rocque.
Engraver, Surveyor, Cartographer and Map-seller’,Imago Mundi , vol. v, 1948.]
Richard J Howarth
, Sir Harold John (1882–1956), soldier and surveyor, was born 29 July 1882 in Haileybury, Hertfordshire, the youngest son of the Revd Henry Couchman, assistant master of Haileybury College, and his wife Mary Jane Pooley.
He was educated at Haileybury and the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich.
He was commissioned in the Royal Engineers in August 1900.
He was transferred to India in 1902 and appointed to the geodetic branch of the Survey of India in 1906.
His initial duties were to assist with fieldwork for the magnetic survey of India and by the 1908–9 field season he was in charge of operations in south-west India.
He subsequently took part in the regional gravity surveys of Burma (1910–11) and southern and central India (1912–14).
By 1914 he had been appointed deputy superintendent at Dehra Dun.
He took the principal part in the synthesis and interpretation of all the gravity observations made in India over the period 1908–13 and made an excellent attempt to interpret these data in the light of evidence recently reported by the American geodesist, J. F. Hayford, as a result of similar surveys in the United States.
In both cases, regional gravity anomalies were found to occur, associated with the depression of dense rocks forming the Earth's mantle by the less dense roots of major mountain chains.
In the spring of 1914 Couchman was transferred to the headquarters office of the Survey in Calcutta.
He was recalled to active military duty in October 1914.
Couchman was promoted to lieutenant, 1903; captain, 1910; major, 1916; and acting lieutenant-colonel, 1917–19.
Between September 1915 and November 1918 he served in the 21st, 39th, and 47th divisions of the Royal Engineers in France and Belgium, and fought in the battle of Pilckem ridge in 1917.
Wounded in action, he was twice mentioned in dispatches, was awarded the MC (June 1916), and was appointed to the DSO (June 1918).
He returned to the Survey in 1919 and, with the exception of a period as deputy master, security printing (1926–9), he spent the rest of his career with the Survey.
He was director in Shillong, Simla, and Calcutta; then in 1933 he was appointed surveyor-general and held this position until his retirement in 1937.
He was promoted to lieutenant-colonel in 1930 and brigadier in 1933, and he was knighted in 1937.
He was a keen tennis player and won the doubles in the 1923 army lawn-tennis championships.
In 1925 he married Evelyn Beatrice, the divorced wife of Robert Henry Thomas and youngest daughter of Colonel William Lewis Clinton Baddeley, a retired military officer.
They had no children.
Couchman died 30 November 1956 in London.
[R. H. Phillmore,Historical Records of the Survey of India , vol. ii, 1950; H. L. Pritchard (ed.),
History of the Corps of Royal Engineers , 1952;The Times , 3 December 1956.]
Jeremy MacClancy
,William Halse Rivers (1864–1922), psychologist and anthropologist, was born 12 March 1864 in Luton, near Chatham, Kent, the eldest in the family of two sons and two daughters of Henry Frederick Rivers, curate, and his wife Elizabeth Hunt.
He was educated at Tonbridge School and at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London.
When he received the BM and MRCS in 1886, he was the youngest medical graduate in the history of the hospital.
He became MD in 1889 and FRCP in 1899.
After working in London hospitals for seven years, in 1897 he became university lecturer in psychology at Cambridge, and in 1902 he was elected a fellow of St John's College.
In 1907 he was appointed to the newly established lectureship of physiology and experimental psychology and made director of the university's new psychology laboratory, the first of its kind in Great Britain.
Rivers was interested in the relation between mind and body.
His most famous experiment was conducted between 1903 and 1907 in collaboration with the Cambridge neurologist,(Sir) Henry Head [q.v.].
Head severed two of the cutaneous nerves in his left forearm and sutured the ends together.
He and Rivers then spent four years mapping the recovery of sensory perception in Head's arm.
His slightly later work on the influence of alcohol and caffeine on fatigue was also one of the first experiments to rely on a ‘double-blind procedure’.
In 1898, on the Torres Straits expedition, he performed some of the first experiments in cross-cultural psychology and also developed the genealogical method as a key to the study of social organization.
He then spent several months among the Toda people of south-west India.
The resulting monograph,The Todas (1906), set new standards of ethnological accuracy.
In the following years he began to propound diffusionism, the doctrine that cultural traits were not independently invented but carried from one area to another.
His two-volume The History of Melanesian Society (1914) presented a diffusionist thesis for the development of culture in the south-west Pacific.
During the war of 1914–18 he worked with the Royal Army Medical Corps as a psychiatrist in hospitals, including Craiglockhart, for shell-shocked soldiers.
Because of this experience he came to champion the cause of psychiatry and of a high-minded version of socialism.
His postwar writings drew his previous interests together, as he developed ideas on the nature of instinct, the interpretation of dreams, and the relationship of myth and dream.
In 1922 he became the Labour candidate for the University of London constituency, but he died before the election.
Rivers played a fundamental role in the establishment of both experimental psychology and social anthropology as academic disciplines in Great Britain.
His pre-war writings were crucial for steering anthropology away from interpretations based on evolution to ones based on the functioning structure of the contemporary society.
His turn to diffusionism, however, was generally seen as a misguided shift towards a method of interpretation that relied too heavily on conjecture.
Rivers was a shy, reticent man hampered by a stammer.
He led a rather monastic, reclusive lifestyle and displayed a complete disregard for personal gain.
In the years after the war, however, he became much more outgoing and sociable, and he welcomed opportunities for public speaking.
The officers under his care (who included Siegfried Sassoon, q.v.) remembered him as a patient and deeply sympathetic man.
In 1908 he was made a fellow of the Royal Society and was awarded the society's gold medal in 1914.
He was president of the anthropological section of the British Association for the Advancement of Science in 1911, of the Folklore Society in 1921, and of the Royal Anthropological Institute in 1921–2.
The universities of Manchester, St Andrews, and Cambridge awarded him honorary degrees in 1919.
He died unmarried 4 June 1922 in Cambridge.
[R. Slobodin,W. H. R. Rivers , 1978; I. Langham,The Building of British Social Anthropology , 1981.]
Sheridan Morley
,Ronald Charles (1891–1958), actor and film star, was born in Richmond, Surrey, 9 February 1891, the second son and fourth child in the family of two sons and three daughters of Charles Colman, a silk merchant, and his wife Marjory Read Fraser.
He was educated at a boarding school in Littlehampton, but had to leave abruptly at the age of sixteen for financial reasons when his father died suddenly of pneumonia.
He started work as a clerk in the British Steamship Company, in the City, and joined the London Scottish Regionals as a territorial soldier in 1909.
Colman's regiment was the first of the territorials to serve with the regular army in France after the outbreak of World War I, and he was severely wounded by shrapnel in the leg, acquiring the limp which he was to spend much of the remainder of his life and career attempting, often in considerable pain, to conceal from audiences and cameras alike.
Invalided out of the army in 1915, Colman began to take up the acting career which had fascinated him since amateur dramatics in childhood.
He made his début with Lena Ashwell [q.v.]at the London Coliseum in 1916, playing a black-faced herald in a short sketch called The Maharani of Arakan by (Sir) Rabindranath Tagore [q.v.]and was soon after that taken by (Dame) Gladys Cooper [q.v.]into her Playhouse company for minor roles, which Miss Cooper considered he played ‘with amiable but remarkable clumsiness’.
Very soon, however, his natural good looks were recognized by a film producer, and by 1919 he had appeared in three short silent dramas, despite a casting card reading ‘does not screen well’.
From 1920 he made regular appearances on Broadway and on tour in America, finally achieving fame in 1921 as the temple priest in The Green Goddess with George Arliss [q.v.].
Colman started his American screen career in 1923 with Lillian Gish in The White Sister , and three years later played in one of the classics of the silent era,Beau Geste (1926).
But it was with the coming of sound, in 1929, that Colman's Hollywood career really came into its own: the producer Sam Goldwyn was the first to realize the magic of that infinitely poetic, English voice, and put him under a long-term contract which was to last virtually the whole of the rest of his life.
Colman's film credits are a roll-call of Hollywood movies at their prewar and most Anglophile best:Bulldog Drummond (1929),Raffles (1930),Cynara (1932),Clive of India (1935),A Tale of Two Cities (1935),Under Two Flags (1936),Lost Horizon (1937), and The Prisoner of Zenda (1937), all establishing Colman as one of the richest and most reliable of the Hollywood raj, the man on whom a whole later generation of expatriates, led by David Niven [q.v.], modelled themselves and their officer-and-gentlemanly acting careers.
Colman's wartime and postwar work before the camera was less distinguished, though he did win an Oscar in 1947 for an uncharacteristically highly charged dramatic role in A Double Life before moving on to a lucrative second career in American radio and television, playing the professor in Halls of Ivy (1950–2), a series he also produced and owned.
Colman's last screen appearances were a fleeting one in Michael Todd's all-star Around the World in 80 Days (1956) and finally in The Story of Mankind (1957).
But these were the only two films he had made in seven years, and there could have been little doubt that his particular tradition of uniformed, clenched, period Englishmen had become unfashionable in America with the coming of the new realist cinema immediately after the war.
In 1919 he married the actress Thelma Raye.
This marriage was dissolved in 1933, and in 1938 he married Benita Hume, also an actress.
There was one daughter from this second marriage.
Colman died 19 May 1958 in Santa Barbara, California.
The Times called him ‘the most complete gentleman of the cinema’.
[Hollywood records; Juliet Benita Colman,Ronald Colman: a Very Private Person , 1975;The Times , 20 May 1958; personal knowledge.]
Douglas Gray
,Nicholas (fl. 1300), Franciscan preacher and writer, In spite of his large literary output, very little information about his life survives.
He himself says that he was ‘del ordre de freres menours’, and that he was ‘ordenours’, which probably means that he had the right to administer absolution (a right much sought after by the mendicants).
It has been suggested that he belonged to the Bozon family of Norfolk, and that he may had studied at Oxford.
It is likely that he belonged to the friary in Nottingham (he refers to the rivers Trent and Derwent as if they are familiar to him).
He writes in Anglo-Norman, but sometimes quotes a proverb or a pithy saying in English, and sometimes uses an English word (like wapentak ).
Works attributed to him (either by himself or by scribes) include allegories in verse (such as the Char d'Orgueil , or the Passion , in which Christ is a lover-knight who, wearing the arms of his squire Adam, fights Belial in order to rescue his beloved, Mankind), several poems on the Virgin Mary, a number of saints' lives in verse, some lively sermons in verse, and the Plainte d'Amour , a powerful satire on corruption, which may well have been inspired by the Bull Exivi de paradiso (1312).
The best-known, however, is the Contes moralisés (probably written after 1320), a collection of prose stories and exempla illustrating some moral point, which were perhaps intended to be used in sermons.
It includes animal fables, contemporary anecdotes, and material drawn from bestiaries or natural history.
The stories are told in a vivid and direct manner, and show a curiosity about the world and human behaviour and a practical and down-to-earth attitude.
[A. Thomas,Histoire littéraire de la France , vol. xxxvi, 1924, pp. 400–24; M. A. Klenke,Dictionnaire des lettres françaises: le moyen âge , 1964, p. 549; M. D. Legge,Anglo-Norman in the Cloisters , 1950, pp. 85–9, and Anglo-Norman Literature and its Background , 1963, pp. 229–32; P. Meyer and L. Toulmin Smith (eds.),
Contes moralisés , 1889.]
Sandra Raphael
,Robert (c. 1674–1756), nurseryman, established his Kensington nursery soon after 1700 near Hyde Park Gate and Kensington Gore, on the west of what became Gloucester Road.
Like Christopher Gray [q.v.], he bought some of the plants collected at Fulham Palace by Henry Compton, bishop of London [q.v.], after the bishop's death in 1713, and by 1724 his stock was rich enough for some of his exotic trees and shrubs, including the moss rose, to be listed by Philip Miller [q.v.]in his Gardeners and Florists Dictionary (1724).
Furber was also one of the Society of Gardeners led by Miller which published the first part of its Catalogus Plantarum in 1730, but by then he had issued two catalogues of his own, one of English and foreign trees, the other of ‘the Best and Choicest Fruit Trees’(both in 1727).
About 1720 Furber had published an engraving of a tulip tree, a magnolia (then considered another species of tulip tree), and a silk cotton tree, all from the garden of Thomas Herbert, eighth Earl of Pembroke [q.v.], and presumably supplied by the nurseryman, who prefaced his tree catalogue with a pleased account of his success in propagating the tulip tree, ‘notwithstanding some Writers have thought it difficult’.
Furber's pictorial catalogues collected as Twelve Months of Flowers , a dozen plates based on paintings by Peter Casteels [q.v.], were issued plain or coloured, the main series in 1730, with a thirteenth plate, containing subscribers' names within a border of flowers, following in 1732.
So popular were these annotated flower-pieces, engraved by Henry Fletcher [q.v.], that they were frequently copied at the time, and later reprints kept them in circulation.
Smaller versions, engraved by James Smith, were used to illustrate The Flower-garden Display'd (1732) with descriptions of the flowers probably written by Richard Bradley [q.v.], and another set of small copies was issued by John Bowles in 1749 as Flora .
A similar series of Twelve Plates with Figures of Fruit was published in 1732, again based on Casteels's paintings, illustrating fruit in season month by month, and in 1733 Furber's A Short Introduction to Gardening appeared, ‘Being several Useful Catalogues of Fruits and Flowers’ introduced to supplement the large plates and help his customers ‘in furnishing their Gardens and their Tables’.
The preface reminds its readers of the contents of Furber's nursery, as well as his own satisfaction with his work: ‘Gardening is the Employment Providence has allotted me; and it happily falls out to be a Business the most suitable of all others to my Genius and Inclination.
I have spent my Years in collecting, cultivating and improving all the different Kinds of Trees, Plants, Fruits, and Flowers, that I could possibly obtain; and in doing this, have spared neither Cost nor Pains.
With intent to make the Love of Gardening more general, and the understanding of it more easy, I have from time to time published Catalogues, containing large Variety of Trees, Plants, Fruits, and Flowers, both Foreign and Domestic, cultivated by me for Sale.’
Furber was an overseer of the poor in the parish of St Mary Abbots, Kensington, in 1718, and a churchwarden in 1725–6 and 1736–7.
He was buried at St Mary Abbots 1 September 1756.
He left his Kensington house to his wife, formerly Mary Everton, whom he had married about 1706, and a legacy to their son William, who had been apprenticed to Philip Miller in 1722.
Most of his other property was left to John Williamson, who worked with Furber during his later years and took over the Kensington nursery, which was maintained by a succession of gardeners until the late 1840s.
[John Harvey,Early Gardening Catalogues , 1972, pp. xi, 14–15, and Early Nurserymen , 1974, p. 78; Blanche Henrey,British Botanical and Horticultural Literature before 1800 , vol. ii, 1975, pp. 341–8; E. J. Willson,West London Nursery Gardens , 1982, pp. 27–8.]
Gerald Suster
,Edward Alexander (‘Aleister’)(1875–1947), writer, better known by his chosen name of Aleister Crowley (1898), was born 12 October 1875 in Leamington Spa, the only son and elder child (the daughter died in infancy) of Edward Crowley, evangelist and wealthy retired brewer of Crowley's Ales, and his wife Emily Bertha Bishop, who came from a Devonshire and Somerset family.
Both parents were committed members of the Plymouth Brethren.
After unhappy periods at Cambridge Plymouth Brethren preparatory school and at Malvern College, he was educated by private tutors, interspersed with periods of instruction at Tonbridge and at King's College, London, before attending Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1895 to study chemistry.
There he won a half-blue in chess, and left in 1898 without taking a degree.
At this time, his principal interests in life were mountaineering, poetry, and magick, his favoured term for varieties of religious experience.
His doubted claims to have been the greatest mountaineer of his generation have foundation in fact, despite the hostility which existed between him and the English Alpine Club.
Few have surpassed his climbs on Beachy Head's treacherous chalk cliffs (1893–5).
He was a pioneer of guideless Alpine ascents, which included the Eiger.
With his partner Oscar Eckenstein, inventor of the crampon, he claimed the majority of available world mountaineering records in 1900, particularly those for pace uphill at high altitude, and these claims have not been convincingly refuted.
The Eckenstein–Crowley expedition of 1902 to K2, the first attempt upon the world's second highest mountain, reached a height unsurpassed for over two decades.
This was also true of the tragic Crowley expedition to the world's third highest mountain, Kinchinjunga, in 1905.
His poetry, from Aceldama (1898) via The Collected Works (3 vols., 1905–7) until Olla (1947), has consistently aroused extremes of praise and blame from critics.
Despite the fact that connoisseurs applauded and collected his sumptuously produced, privately printed editions in terms of the designer's art, his work became unfashionable after 1918, and appreciation was marred by the poet's increasingly vilified personal reputation.
Crowley's principal concerns, however, consisted of his researches into ways of accelerating human evolution through increasing human intelligence by techniques of concentrating the mind one-pointedly, stimulating the central nervous system, and maximizing and mapping hitherto unexplored regions of the brain.
This initially led him to ceremonial magick and London's Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn (1898), members of which included W. B. Yeats, Arthur Machen [qq.v.], and its leader, S. L. Mathers; and to yoga with the former Golden Dawn member Allan Bennett, later Bhikku Anada Metteya, who brought Theravada (Hinayana) Buddhism to Great Britain.
Crowley summarized his learning and practice in The Equinox (vol. i, 10 numbers, 1909–13) under the motto: ‘The Method of Science: the Aim of Religion’.
He circled the globe (1900–3), winning also a reputation as an explorer and big-game hunter.
Crowley regarded the most important event of his life as being his ‘reception’ in April 1904 of The Book of the Law , a prose poem which he believed to have been dictated to him by ‘a praeter-human intelligence’.
He did not accept it until 1909 when he became its proclaimed prophet.
Its principal commandment, ‘Do what thou wilt shall be the whole of the Law’, to him meant not vulgar hedonism but the honest and honourable fulfilment of a person's deepest potential.
Unfortunately, these concerns led to a campaign of vilification in the press and Crowley was called the ‘wickedest man in the world’(1923) on account of his endeavour to express his ideas at Cefalu, Sicily (1920–3).
Even though he had attempted to make a propagandist contribution to the British war effort in 1915–17, he was slandered as a traitor.
He spent the years 1914–19 in America and wrote ludicrous, counter-productive, pro-German propaganda for The Fatherland .
He was not prosecuted when he returned to England in 1919 and insisted that he had been employed by British Naval Intelligence.
He subsequently travelled in France, Italy, Spain, China, Portugal, India, Sri Lanka, Russia, Scandinavia, North Africa, and Germany.
Crowley was colourful, eccentric, flamboyant, and deliberately shocking, always a keen adventurer and womanizer.
In 1903 he married Rose Edith, daughter of the Revd Frederick Festus Kelly and sister of his Cambridge contemporary and friend,(Sir) Gerald Kelly [q.v.].
They had three daughters, the first of whom died in 1906.
Crowley's wife divorced him on grounds of admitted adultery in 1910.
In 1929, in Berlin, he married Maria Teresa de Miramar, of Nicaragua.
A mutually agreed separation subsequently ensued.
Although excoriated and ignored, Crowley died 1 December 1947 in comfortable circumstances at ‘Netherwood’, Hastings, a country house turned residential hotel, and was cremated in Brighton 5 December.
[The Yorke Collection, Warburg Institute, University of London, and private conversation with Gerald Yorke; Israel Regardie,The Eye in the Triangle , 1970; C. R. Cammell,Aleister Crowley: the Man: the Mage: the Poet , 1951; Gerald Suster,The Legacy of the Beast , 1988; John Symonds,The King of the Shadow Realm , 1989.]
Jon Tetsuro Sumida
,Arthur Joseph Hungerford (1866–1937), pioneer of naval gunnery, was born 13 September 1866 in Southwater, Sussex, the eighth child and sixth son in the family of eight sons and two daughters of John Hungerford Pollen [q.v.], artist and author, a Tractarian who had followed (Cardinal) J. H. Newman [q.v.]into the Roman Catholic Church, and his wife Maria Margaret, daughter of the Revd John Charles Laprimaudaye.
He was educated at the Oratory School, Birmingham (1878–84) and read history at Trinity College, Oxford (1884–8), gaining a second class in modern history in 1888.
Pollen entered Lincoln's Inn in 1893, and in 1895 stood unsuccessfully as a Liberal for Walthamstow.
In 1898 he married Maud, daughter of Joseph Lawrence (later baronet), a prominent Conservative MP and chairman of the Linotype Company.
They had a daughter who died at the age of four in 1905 and two sons.
Pollen became managing director of the Linotype Company in 1898, and proved himself to be both a shrewd businessman and an intelligent technical innovator.
Pollen became interested in the problem of naval rangefinding after witnessing gunnery practice at sea in 1900.
Following several years of development work and unsuccessful but nevertheless promising trials in late 1905 and early 1906, he won the support of John (later first Earl) Jellicoe,(Sir) Percy Scott, and Sir John (later first Baron) Fisher [qq.v.], which resulted in the establishment of an agreement to perfect the civilian inventor's ideas for a mechanical system of using observed ranges and bearings to calculate firing solutions for naval artillery that would take account of the relative motion of the firing ship and target.
Pollen's efforts were obstructed, however, by an influential faction of naval officers that included (Sir) Reginald H. S. Bacon,(Sir) Arthur Knyvet Wilson, and (Sir) Frederic C. Dreyer [qq.v.].
Thus, although Pollen's instruments were capable of greatly improving the gunnery of the Royal Navy, they were for the most part rejected because of political controversy, technical confusion, faulty tactical analysis, and financial considerations, and a much inferior and derivative system that had been put forward by Dreyer was adopted instead.
Pollen's instruments in their final forms were in themselves significant scientific and technical achievements — the incorporation of a differential analyser in his gunnery computer (known as the Argo clock), for example, anticipated by nearly twenty years the work in this important area of both D. R. Hartree [q.v.]and Vannevar Bush.
Before World War I his privately circulated papers on technology, tactics, and strategy were read in influential naval and political circles.
Battle experience largely validated Pollen's technical and tactical views, and key members of his pre-war design team were thus charged with the development of the Royal Navy's post-war fire-control systems.
In 1925, moreover, the royal commission on awards to inventors ordered that £30,000 be paid to Pollen for his contributions to the Dreyer system, which before the war had incorporated — albeit imperfectly — elements of the Argo clock without his knowledge or permission.
During the war Pollen was Britain's leading naval journalist, writing for Land and Water and lecturing widely.
In addition to his many contributions to newspapers and journals, Pollen wrote a popular general account of the war at sea,The Navy in Battle (1918).
In 1917 he achieved great success in America as an unofficial representative of British interests.
After the war Pollen returned to business, serving on the board of the Birmingham Small Arms Company and again as managing director of the Linotype Company.
Pollen was also vice-president of the council of the Federation of British Industries, chairman of the British Commonwealth Union, and in the last years of his life took an active role in the development of English Catholicism as chairman of the Tablet .
Pollen was a handsome man whose exceptional intellect and engaging manners attracted the friendship of many prominent figures in the navy, business, academia, the arts, and sport.
His favourite pastimes were shooting and golf.
Pollen died 28 January 1937 at his home at 238 St James Court, Buckingham Gate, in London.
[Anthony Pollen (son),The Great Gunnery Scandal , 1980; J. T. Sumida (ed.),
The Pollen Papers , 1984;idem ,In Defence of Naval Supremacy , 1989; private information.]
Jose Harris
,Helen (1860–1925), social reformer and theorist, was born 10 February 1860 in Manchester, the youngest daughter and fifth child in the family of five sons and four daughters of the Revd John Dendy, who had been a Nonconformist minister, and then became a businessman in Manchester, and his wife Sarah Beard, daughter of a Unitarian minister.
She was educated at home by a German governess; then, after keeping house for her brothers, in 1886 she went to Newnham College, Cambridge, where she and another were the first women to gain first-class honours in the Cambridge moral sciences tripos in 1889.
She specialized in political economy.
She then moved to London, joined the Charity Organization Society, and became organizer and district secretary of the Shoreditch branch.
She was also active in the London Ethical Society, where she met the philosopher Bernard Bosanquet [q.v.](died 1923), whom she married in 1895.
He was the son of the Revd Robert William Bosanquet of Rock.
Helen Bosanquet took no more paid employment, but was active as a theorist and publicist for the COS, as a translator of German philosophy and sociology, and as a collaborator with her husband.
In 1902 she had a much-publicized exchange of views with Benjamin Seebohm Rowntree [q.v.]on the extent and causes of primary poverty.
In 1905 she was appointed a member of the royal commission on the poor laws, where she defended the role of organized private charity against the bureaucratic socialism of Mrs Beatrice Webb [q.v.]; she is believed to have drafted many sections of the majority report.
In 1909 she became editor of the Charity Organisation Review , and in 1914 she published a history of the previous half-century of charitable work in London,Social Work in London 1869–1912 .
She was influential in defining the syllabus of the COS's school of sociology, founded in 1903, which was absorbed into the London School of Economics in 1912.
It was she who insisted that charitable visiting should be grounded in formal training, and that social workers needed education in history, sociology, and economics, as well as professional skills.
That two-tier emphasis remained a characteristic of British training for social work.
Her major writings were:Rich and Poor (1896),The Standard of Life and Other Studies (1898),The Strength of the People (1902), and The Family (1906).
Beneath their discursiveness, these books exhibit a coherent social theory: the way to social progress lay in the rational wills of individuals, and true philanthropy consisted in supporting and strengthening that rational will rather than in the mechanical relief of poverty.
‘The one fundamental cure for poverty is to make the poorer wage-earners more efficient in the widest sense of the term — more efficient as producers, as consumers, and in all the relations of life.’
She and her husband lived for most of their married life in Oxshott, Surrey, moving later to Golders Green.
They had no children.
In later life she suffered much from ill health, and lived largely in retirement.
In 1924 she published a short memoir of her husband.
Mrs Bosanquet's Newnham nicknames —‘Tone-Raiser’ and ‘Aunt Dendy’— suggest a certain old-fashioned high-mindedness of manner.
Her work was in eclipse for most of the twentieth century, partly because of the disparaging account of her in Beatrice Webb's diaries (‘the little woman’), and partly because of her association with a subsequently discredited school of ‘social economics’.
She was, however, a major figure in the development of the theory and practice of British social work.
She died 7 April 1925 in Golders Green.
[H. McLachlan,Records of a Family, 1800–1933: Pioneers in Education, Social Service and Liberal Religion , 1935; A. M. McBriar,An Edwardian Mixed Doubles: the Bosanquets versus the Webbs , 1987;International Journal of Ethics ,passim ;Charity Organization Review ,passim .]
K R Webb
,Raphael (1849–1915), applied organic chemist, was born 19 July 1849 in Islington, London, the only son of Samuel Meldola and grandson of Raphael Meldola [q.v.], who had been haham (chief rabbi) to the London Sephardi community.
He was educated at private schools in Kew and Maida Vale, and in 1866 entered the Royal College of Chemistry, presided over by Dr Edward Frankland.
After two years he received the certificate of the college for proficiency in chemistry.
From 1868 until 1871 he was assistant to Dr John Stenhouse [q.v.], assayer to the Royal Mint.
He then entered industrial chemistry at Williams, Thomas, & Dower, colour manufacturers in Brentford.
In 1877 he joined the laboratories of Brooke, Simpson, & Spiller at the Atlas works, Hackney Wick, manufacturers of coal-tar colours, remaining there until 1885.
During this period Meldola discovered the first oxazine dyestuff (Meldola's blue), and also the first alkali green (viridine).
In 1883 he brought out alkali blue XG, which became important in cotton dyeing.
At this time he was described as a small, trim, wiry figure of somewhat severe appearance, but with a whimsical sense of humour and ready wit.
In 1885 Meldola became professor of chemistry at Finsbury Technical College.
He was one of the original fellows of the Institute of Chemistry (founded in 1877) and ultimately became its president (1912–15).
In 1886 he was elected FRS although he had no academic degree until 1910, when he delivered the Herbert Spencer lecture at Oxford and the university conferred on him an honorary D.Sc.
During the next year he received an honorary LLD from St Andrews, and in 1913 the Royal Society awarded him the Davy medal.
As secretary of the Entomological Society (1876–80) he had become very friendly with Charles Darwin [q.v.].
Meldola himself was much interested in protective colouring and mimicry of moths.
During his first twenty years at Finsbury, Meldola published more than 250 papers and reports, and during his presidency of the Institute of Chemistry he did much work for the development of all aspects of its activities.
In 1915 he became chairman of the advisory council of British Dyes Ltd.
He also served on the advisory council set up under an order in council of 28 July 1915, for the ‘organization and development of scientific and industrial research’.
This reflected the gross previous neglect of industrial scientific research in Britain.
Meldola was, by now, an ailing and weary man, overcome by excessive worry and work for the growing war effort.
In 1886 Meldola married Ella Frederica, daughter of Dr Maurice Davis.
He died suddenly 16 November 1915 and was buried in the Sephardi Jewish cemetery at Hendon.
The Meldola medal of the Institute of Chemistry is named after him.
[E. B. Poulton in Proceedings of the Royal Society , series A, vol. xciii, 1916–17, pp. xxxii–xxxvii; James Marchant (ed.),
Raphael Meldola , 1916 (including a bibliography of his publications); K. R. Webb in Chemistry in Britain , vol. xiii, no. 9, September 1977, pp. 345–8.]
Andrea L Broomfield
,Harriet Hardy (1807–1858), philosopher and women's rights activist, was born 10 October 1807 in Walworth, south of London, one of two daughters and five sons of Thomas Hardy, surgeon, and his wife Harriet Hurst of Walworth.
Writing poetry was her early interest, and her education was done mainly at home.
In 1826 she married John Taylor, a prosperous dry-salter and wholesale druggist in Mark Lane, the son of John Taylor, who followed the same occupation.
They had two sons and a daughter.
John Taylor introduced Harriet to leading members of the Unitarian religious movement, and shortly thereafter she began writing articles for the Unitarian magazine,Monthly Repository .
During this time she was introduced to John Stuart Mill [q.v.], the Utilitarian philosopher, with whom she began a long-term unconventional platonic relationship.
Very much an advocate for women's equal rights, especially in education and suffrage, Harriet Taylor began writing her most important works after meeting Mill.
Much of their scholarship was carried out mutually, with Mill attributing to her a key chapter in his Principles of Political Economy , entitled ‘On the Probable Future of the Labouring Classes’(1848), in which she argued that the working classes must receive a thorough education in order to contribute to the country's economic and social progress.
Her most important essay, ‘The Enfranchisement of Women’(1851), published under Mill's name in the Westminster Review , follows in the same vein as her chapter in Principles of Political Economy , but is devoted solely to women's rights.
In it Taylor defends ideas that Mill himself found too radical; primarily, that women should have access to the same professions as men, and that they should not be forced to inhabit ‘separate spheres’.
As Harriet Taylor was devoting the majority of her time to working with Mill, John Taylor had in the meantime been diagnosed as having cancer.
Perhaps out of guilt, Harriet discontinued her writing and stopped seeing Mill, with whom she had dined alone twice a week, in order to nurse her husband.
He died in 1849, one year after his diagnosis, and Harriet married Mill in 1851.
Mill, the son of James Mill [q.v.], philosopher, who had strongly disapproved of the connection, became estranged from his family after the marriage.
There were no children.
Harriet Taylor's theories made a major impact on Mill, and led to their mutual conception and drafting of On Liberty (1859).
After they had completed all but the final revisions on the work, Harriet, whose health had always been poor, became extremely ill.
While on their way to the south of France to spend the winter, she developed a severe congestion of her lungs and died in Avignon 11 March 1858.
[F. A. Hayek,John Stuart Mill and Harriet Taylor: their Correspondence and Subsequent Marriage , 1951; J. S. Mill and Harriet Taylor,Essays on Sex Equality , ed.
Alice S. Rossi, 1970.]
M C Buck
or  (c. 1275–1352), bishop and ecclesiastical politician, was born in the parish of St Leonard's, Hythe, around 1275.
In 1307 he became chaplain to Bishop Wouldham of Rochester.
On the resignation of John of Greenstreet in May 1314 he became prior of Rochester.
Rivals procured a visit from the archbishop of Canterbury to the chapter, but they failed to overturn his appointment.
Following Wouldham's death, the monks of Rochester elected Hamo as bishop on 18 March 1317.
On 19 March Pope John XXII reserved the see for John of Puzzuoli, chaplain of Edward II's queen, Isabella [q.v.].
The contest between the two candidates was first fought out before cardinals Gaucelin and Luke in England, but in 1318 the case was revoked to the Roman curia at Avignon, where Hamo was himself constrained to go in early 1319.
His biographer attributes the protracted proceedings there to Hamo's unwillingness to bribe the cardinals (although it is clear that he retained at least Cardinal William Testa at the curia ), as well as to the proliferation of other candidates with royal support.
His election was confirmed in July 1319 and he was consecrated at Avignon on 26 August.
By the end of the year he had obtained livery of his spiritualities and temporalities, although a protracted and bitter dispute ensued for over a year with Archbishop Walter Reynolds [q.v.]over the sums Hamo claimed as due to him for vacancy, during which the see of Rochester had been in the archbishop's hands.
During this time he was desperately pressed with debts and with the payment of his common service of 1,450 florins to the Roman curia , which he effected by February 1321.
Nothing in his episcopate matches the activity surrounding his election.
His natural caution kept him on the political sidelines, although he was well placed to know what was going on at the highest level, as the ‘Historia Roffensis’, written by a clerk in his entourage, demonstrates.
He excused himself from diplomatic assignments on the grounds of (often genuine) ill health and the poverty of his bishopric, and spent much time improving episcopal residences, especially at Halling and Trottiscliffe.
He appears sympathetic to the regime of Edward II's last years and clearly distrusted the baronial opposition in 1321.
In 1326 he advised the king against an attempt to divorce his wife and was especially commended by him to Hugh le Despenser the younger [q.v.].
Caught in London during the revolution of that year, he refused to join either John de Stratford, bishop of Winchester [q.v.], or the archbishop of Canterbury in embassies to Queen Isabella, and fled to Rochester.
He was one of four prelates who refused to do fealty to Edward III in January 1327, although he took part in the new king's coronation in February.
He is said to have affirmed his support for the new fourth clause of the coronation oath at this time.
He soon made his peace with the new regime, meeting the queen and the young king when they went on pilgrimage to Canterbury in Lent 1327.
He refused to join Archbishop Simon Meopham [q.v.]in his precipitate support for the opposition to the Mortimer regime.
In June 1329 he was urged by Roger de Mortimer, first Earl of March [q.v.], to serve on the council, but refused.
In Lent 1330 he opposed the grant of clerical taxation to the crown.
He might have become treasurer in 1332 but for his reluctance to buy the office.
In 1333 he rallied the men of the Cinque ports to defend the country during Edward III's absence in Scotland and through the early stages of the Hundred Years' War was inevitably caught up in coastal defence.
But he firmly eschewed political involvement and devoted his time to his diocese and to building.
The new bell-tower at Rochester Cathedral was raised under his auspices.
He clashed with the monks of Rochester on several occasions, and in Meopham's visitation of 1329 was accused of not preaching and of being impatient and irascible.
But he supported Meopham in 1332 when the other prelates appealed to the Roman curia .
In 1333 he made a rare journey abroad to deliver the new archbishop, John Stratford, his pallium.
From 1331 to 1336 he carried on a bitter dispute with Bishop William de Ayreminne of Norwich [q.v.].
Illness prompted his resignation of the bishopric shortly before his death in May 1352.
He was succeeded by John de Sheppey [q.v.], whom he had himself chosen as prior in 1333.
[British Library, Cotton MS Faustina B.V. (‘Historia Roffensis’); C. Johnson (ed.),
The Register of Hamo de Hethe, Bishop of Rochester, 1319–52 , 2 vols., Canterbury and York Society, 1948.]
Jose Harris
,Helena Maria Lucy (1864–1939), suffragist, was born in Munich, Bavaria, in 1864, the only daughter of Oswald Adalbert Sickert, a commercial artist of Danish origin (who became a German by virtue of the Prussian invasion of Schleswig-Holstein), and his wife Eleanor Louisa Moravia Henry, the illegitimate daughter of a professional dancer and a fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge.
She had three brothers, of whom the eldest was Walter Sickert [q.v.], the artist.
In 1868 the Sickerts moved to England and settled first in Bedford, and then in Notting Hill, where they were part of an artistic and literary circle that included the families of William Morris and (Sir) Edward Burne-Jones, and later Oscar Wilde [qq.v.]
Helena was educated at a French boarding-school in Neuville, and then at Notting Hill High School.
In 1882 she went to Girton College, Cambridge, where she studied with Henry Sidgwick, Alfred Marshall [qq.v.], and Neville Keynes.
She gained second-class honours in the moral sciences tripos (1885).
In 1885 she was appointed lecturer in psychology at Westfield College, London.
In 1888 she married Frederick Tertius Swanwick (d .
1931), a Cambridge wrangler and lecturer in mathematics at Owens College, Manchester (later to become Manchester University).
He was the son of Thomas Swanwick, a Manchester merchant from a Unitarian family.
There were no children of the marriage.
Helena Swanwick became a close friend of C. P. Scott [q.v.]and his wife Rachel, and over the next eighteen years wrote and reviewed regularly for the Manchester Guardian on domestic and feminist subjects and gardening.
Her first book,The Small Town Garden , was published in 1907.
She also did voluntary work in a girls' club, which brought her into contact with the local women's trade union council, the Women's Co-operative Guild, and ultimately the Labour party.
Through them she met Emmeline Pankhurst [q.v.]and her daughters, and became involved in the women's suffrage movement.
However, she found the physical force tactics employed by the Pankhursts unacceptable, and in 1905 joined the North of England Suffrage Society, which was affiliated to the National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies.
In 1908 she addressed 150 mass meetings in all parts of Britain, and in 1909–14 was editor of the suffragist newspaper, the Common Cause .
In 1914 she resigned from the paper because of differences with her colleagues over the issue of war, and became a member of the executive committee of the Union of Democratic Control, founded by E. D. Morel [q.v.]to campaign against secret diplomacy.
From 1915 to 1922 she was chairman of the Women's International League for Peace, which aimed to harness feminism to the peace movement; and throughout World War I she campaigned for a negotiated peace and the establishment of an international peace-keeping organization.
She was highly critical, however, of the terms under which the League of Nations was set up in 1919, partly because the League was permitted the use of force and economic sanctions, and partly because it was committed to supporting the Versailles settlement, which she regarded from the start as an unjust and unstable peace.
In 1923–4 she campaigned against the French invasion of the Ruhr.
She published a history of the UDC,Builders of Peace (1924), and from 1925 to 1928 was editor of the UDC journal,Foreign Affairs , which she aimed to make a more popular and widely read journal.
Through its columns she continually attacked the ‘war guilt’ clause of the Versailles treaty, denounced the Locarno treaty, and argued that the new phenomenon of aerial bombardment had made any form of war an intolerable option, however ‘just’its cause.
In 1924 and again in 1928–31 she was a member of the British empire delegation to the League of Nations assembly.
In 1930 Helena Swanwick was appointed CH.
Throughout the 1930s she was an increasingly isolated figure.
Her stance was one of non-interventionism and isolationism.
She outlined her ideas in her autobiography,I Have Been Young (1935).
But her differences with other peace campaigners were reinforced by the rise of Nazism, and by her publication of Collective Insecurity (1937) and The Roots of Peace (1938).
These books defended Adolf Hitler's foreign policies as no different from those of other imperialists, and argued for the development of a federal Europe, with communal control of all vital strategic areas.
Her proposals confirmed her separation from all sections of British politics.
She committed suicide 16 November 1939 at Satis, Boulters Lane, Maidenhead, after the outbreak of World War II.
[Martin Ceadel,Pacifism in Britain 1914–1945: the Defining of a Faith , 1980; H. M. Swanwick,Builders of Peace.
Being Ten Years' History of the Union of Democratic Control , 1924, and I Have been Young , 1935.]